TWIN RESEARCH IN TUBERCULOSIS"
By BARBARA SIMONDS, M.A., M.B.

as a clinical entity since the time of
the Greeks. Before Koch’s discovery
of the tubercle bacillus, however, various
theories were put forward to explain its
etiology, but the most widely held view
was that tuberculosis was caused by an inherited constitutional predisposition. Thus
Hippocrates in the 4th century B.C. considered that tuberculosis affects people with
a “‘smooth skin, blue eyes and of leucophlegmatic habit, with shoulders projecting
like wings.”” The English physician Richard
Morton, while recognizing the infectious
nature of tuberculosis, also wrote in 1689
“An Hereditary Disposition from the Parents
does very often bring on Consumption of the
Lungs...”

With the discovery of the tubercle bacillus
by Koch the problem of the etiology of
tuberculosis appeared to have been solved
and efforts were directed to eliminating the
disease by an attack on the bacillus. It soon
became clear, however, that in natural
infection the mere presence of the bacillus is
not always sufficient to produce disease;
virtually 100 per cent of an industrial
community are infected with the tubercle
bacillus by the age of twenty, but few of
them develop manifest clinical disease.

"Tas a sical ex has been recognized

Factors affecting the development of
Tuberculosis

Many factors have since been shown to
affect the development of tuberculosis;
factors such as the dose of bacillus and
particularly the capacity of the individual
to resist infection. This resistance to infection may be an acquired capacity, for
example, acquired as a result of previous
infection with the bacillus, or resistance to
infection may be an inherited capacity. The

* Paper read at a Members’ Meeting of the Eugenics
Society on January 16th, 1957.

role that individual inherited resistance or
susceptibility plays in the development of.
tuberculosis is still in doubt. It is possible
that heredity plays little or no part in the

development of tuberculosis and if this is

the case it is important that the measures
to prevent tuberculosis are directed in the
right direction. On the other hand, tuberculosis may be an example of a disease in
which it is impossible to distinguish the
separate parts played by heredity and
environment. Whatever the role of heredity
in tuberculosis the part played by environment in the development of the disease is
of considerable, if not paramount, importance.

The role of heredity in tuberculosis has
been investigated mainly by the study of
families and more recently by twin studies.
Indirect evidence of heredity factors has
been obtained from the apparently different
racial reactions to tuberculosis and by the
study of animal populations artificially infected with the tubercle bacillus. It is
impossible to discuss here the findings of
these many investigations. I would just
like to mention some of the advantages of
twin studies over family studies. Family
studies usually rely on the patients having
a detailed knowledge of their immediate
ancestors and relatives, a knowledge that
may be absent or inaccurate. Even if
accurate information is obtained in family
studies, it is difficult to separate the role of
infection and heredity. For example, a child
may develop tuberculosis many years after
one of his parents has died from the disease.
This could be explained either by heredity
or by infection in early life which has lain
dormant for some time because of the
chronicity of tuberculous disease.

It is also invalid to compare some relationship groups, e.g. children and consorts
of tuberculous patients. The children are

usually exposed to tuberculosis prior to the

25

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, April, 1957. 49, 1.
26 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

development of an acquired immunity,
whereas consorts are exposed in adult life.

Twin Studies

The study of tuberculosis in twins removes
many of these difficulties. Both partners of
a twin pair can be examined and the presence
or absence of tuberculosis can be established.
The morbidity rate of tuberculosis in the
co-twins of monozygotic and dizygotic twins
with tuberculosis can then be compared. A
large study of this nature was first undertaken by Diehl and von Verschuer?? in
Germany. In 1936 they published the case
histories of eighty monozygotic and 125
dizygotic twin pairs. In each twin pair one
twin had been reported to them as a case of
tuberculosis diagnosed at a chest clinic or
sanatorium. They found that 65 per cent
of the monozygotic co-twins and approximately 25 per cent of the dizygotic co-twins
had a similar tuberculous history to that of
their twin.

Kallman and Reisner® carried out an investigation in New York and New York State
and -published their results in 1943. They
enlarged the study to include the siblings,
parents and consorts of the twin index cases.
They reported on seventy-eight monozygotic
and 230 dizygotic twin pairs and their
families, in which the index case had reinfection tuberculosis. They found that the
tuberculous morbidity in the co-twins of
monozygotic index cases was 61°5 per cent
and in the co-twins of dizygotic index cases
was 18-3 per cent. The rate for full siblings
was 18-9 per cent, i.e. the rate for dizygotic
co-twins and siblings was very similar while
that for monozygotic co-twins was higher.
From their work, Kallman and Reisner
concluded: ‘‘ The analysis of the morbidity
distribution in the sibship groups indicates
that resistance to tuberculosis is modified
by a heredo-constitutional mechanism which
seems to be multi-factorial in its genetic
nature.” | . .

The use of twins in a study of heredity
mainly relies on the assumption that if both
partners of monozygotic twin pairs are
affected more frequently than both partners
of dizygotic twin pairs, then there may be

assumed to be some hereditary influence on
the disease.

This assumption is, however, unjustified
if certain hazards are not avoided. The
following are, I consider, the main ways in
which errors may be introduced into this
type of investigation.

1. By a failure to discover every patient
who is a twin, and suffering from tuberculosis, in the hospitals and clinics from which
the twin sample is obtained.

2. By incorrectly diagnosing the zygocity
of the twins. |

3. By ignoring other factors which may
account for the difference in the morbidity
rate in the monozygotic co-twins from the
dizygotic co-twins. For example, in tuberculosis it is known that contact with
tuberculosis considerably increases the
possibility of contracting the disease. A
pair of dizygotic twins living fifty miles
apart may rarely see each other, a pair of
monozygotic twins living 150 miles apart
may visit each other more frequently and
be more affectionate when they meet. Such
factors are difficult to measure quantitatively, but they must be remembered when
assessing the results.

Mistakes in the diagnosis of zygocity are
probably not frequent. It is preferable to
have a category of twins of doubtful zygocity, but by examining the blood groups
these twins of doubtful zygocity will be a
very small percentage of the total twins.
Using similarity methods it is possible to
classify many twin pairs as dizygotic. Other
pairs will be thought to be monozygotic on
similarity methods and this will be confirmed
by doing full blood grouping and finding
that all their blood groups are the same. It
is now possible, using calculations published
by Smith and Penrose’, to find the
probability of these pairs being monozygotic
using their blood groups alone. Some twin
pairs on examination will be thought to be
probably dizygotic but possibly monozygotic. If these are then found to have some
different blood group they must be dizygotic.

‘If they have the same blood groups through
out, further studies, such as finger printing,
po. TWIN RESEARCH IN TUBERCULOSIS 27

can be done further to ascertain their

zygocity.
- To return to the first hazard I mentioned,

that is, the failure to collect all the twins. —

This has, I think, probably produced more
errors in twin research in tuberculosis than
any other. There is no doubt that all twin
studies endeavour to obtain an unselected
sample of twins, but the criteria by which
the nature of these twin samples are judged
are not always sufficiently stringent.

In examining twin samples two methods
may be used to decide whether they are an
unselected group.

1. The twin sample can be analysed to
see if the number of monozygotic twins in it,
is similar to the expected number of monozygotic twins in any population of twins.

2. The twin sample can be compared
with the population from which it is drawn
to see if the total number of twins in it is
similar to the expected number of twins
in a general population. The expected number of living twins in the population is
estimated by taking the number of twin
births and correcting for their increased
stillbirth rate and neo-natal death rate.
There should be approximately 2 per cent
of twins in the population.

Though the first of these two methods is
useful I do not think that on its own it is
an adequate method of judging the representative nature of the twin sample.

The Prophit Survey

I would like to illustrate this point from

the work done under the auspices of the.

Prophit Committee. At first the twins were
collected by relying on chest physicians
reporting all newly diagnosed patients who
were twins. By checking the number of
twins reported with the notification rates
for tuberculosis it soon became apparent
that many twins were not being reported.
The method of collection was then improved
by arranging a more direct contact with
fewer clinics and by finding out the number of
new patients in each clinic who were diagnosed as suffering from tuberculosis during
the time that twins were being collected.
In this way 116 twin index cases were found

from a total of 7,633 patients. This is 1°5
per cent and is still less than the expected
number. :

It was decided that the only way of
obtaining all the twins in a given population
was to make certain that every patient in
the population was asked if they were a twin.
Chest physicians in various parts of England
co-operated; the full register of tuberculous
patients was obtained and each patient was
written to directly asking them if they
were a twin. Replies were received from
21,251 patients, i.e. 97-3 per cent of those
asked. Of these 405 are twins (I-gI per
cent). This is very close to the expected 2
per cent.

Thus, in the Prophit Survey three distinct
groups of twins have been collected.

A. Twins collected from an unknown
population. |

B. Twins collected from a population
in which the number of twins found is 1°5
per cent.

C. Twins collected from a population
in which the number of twins found is 1-9
per cent.

Quite different results are found in these
various groups.

TABLE I
Both with
Total No. of Tuberculosis
Twins Twin Pairs %Mono- %& DizyInvestigated zygotic gotic
From an unknown
population A. 43 50 172
From population
giving I°5 per
cent of twins B. 73 20 29°2
From population
giving IQ per
cent of twins C. 202 29°6 12°8

From Table 1 it is seen that those
twins known to be from an inadequate
sample (Group A) show a considerably
higher incidence of tuberculosis in the cotwins of the monozygotic index cases than
in the co-twins of the dizygotic index cases.
In the intermediate group (Group B) the
morbidity is higher in the dizygotic co-twins.
In the last group (Group C) there is a higher
morbidity rate in the monozygotic co-twins.
28 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

These findings can be explained by assuming that in Group A the figures are incorrect
because nearly all the monozygotic twin
pairs who both have tuberculosis are found
and some of the twins in the other three
categories are not found, i.e. monozygotic
twins where only one has tuberculosis, and
dizygotic twins where both or only one have
tuberculosis. In Group B it is possible that
the missing 0:5 per cent of twins are mainly
dizygotic twins, only one of whom has
tuberculosis and thus the percentage of
dizygotic twins both of whom have tuberculosis will be apparently increased. The
only group which I consider gives correct
results is Group C and therefore I will confine my further discussion to this group.

When questioned, 405 patients with
tuberculosis said that they were twins. These
twin index cases were collected from
various boroughs in London, and from
Luton, Suffolk, Birmingham, Warwickshire,
Gloucestershire and Oxfordshire.

Further inquiries were made concerning
the fate of the co-twins with the results
shown in Table 2

TABLE 2
Fate of Co-twin

Died before 12 months old IIo

 

Died exact age unknown we - 25
Died from tuberculosis 12

Died after 1 year from non- -tuberculous
causes .. . . .. . 31
Alive 227
TOTAL 405

Of the co-twins who died from a nontuberculous cause after the age of one year,
four died after the index case had contracted
tuberculosis. These, together with the twelve
co-twins who died from tuberculosis and
the co-twins who are alive, are the useful
twins to analyse. These 243 index cases are
divided as shown in Table 3.

 

TABLE 3
Untraceable .. © 16
Died before information
collected .. es we 3
Non-tuberculous fa ae 3
Followed up .. - .. ax 221
TOTAL 243

The 221 index cases about whom information has been gathered come from 208 twin
pairs as in thirteen pairs both twin partners
are index cases. Table 4 shows the sex and.
zygocity of these 208 twin pairs.

TABLE 4
Index Oppo- Same Sexed Uni- Doubt- Total
Cases _—_ site Binovular ovular ful
Sexed
Female 52 43 33 4 132
Male 27 26 21 2 76
TOTAL 79 69 54 6 208

There are six pairs of doubtful zygocity,
either because it proved impossible to complete the investigations or because the co-twin
died before the index case was interviewed
and it was not possible to come to a definite
conclusion with the information available.
These have been omitted from the tables
which follow. If the number of opposite
sexed twins is taken from the number of
same sexed twins, this leaves the number
of twins one would expect to be monozygotic. From the above figures one would
expect fifty monozygotic twins whereas
fifty-four were found. The fifty-four monozygotic twin index cases in this sample are
26 per cent of the total which is about the
expected figure in a random sample of twins.

If these twin pairs are classified according
to whether both twin partners have tuberculosis or not the results shown in Table 5
are obtained.

TABLE 5
Monozygotic Dizygotic
Both with tuberculosis 16 19
29:6% 12*8%
One with tuberculosis. . -. 38 29°
70°4% 87:2%

These results show that more than twice
the percentage of monozygotic co-twins
compared with dizygotic co-twins have
some form of tuberculosis.

Further Analysis

Before any conclusions can be drawn from
this result the twin sample must be analysed
further.
TWIN RESEARCH

The monozygotic twin index cases and the
dizygotic twin index cases must be examined
to see if they are comparable for age, sex,
type of tuberculosis and contact with tuberculosis. Perhaps the most important single
factor is the type of tuberculosis which the
index case contracts. If tuberculosis is contracted in childhood, a primary infection
results which is usually localised and clears
up completely; it may be a glandular infection alone or it may be associated with a
pulmonary infection. Later in life the commonest form of tuberculosis is pulmonary,
and solely in order to distinguish it from
primary tuberculosis, I shall refer to it as
phthisis. However, tuberculosis affects
many parts of the body apart from the lungs
and these can be classified together as nonpulmonary tuberculosis. Of the 202 twin
pairs the index case has phthisis in 152 cases.
These 152 twin pairs have been analysed
separately and classified into those pairs
where only one has phthisis and those where
both partners have phthisis. These results
are given in Table 6.

TABLE 6
Monozygotic Dizygotic
Both with phthisis .. II 13
26:38% 11°5%
One with phthisis .. 30 8
— -73°2% 88-5%

The percentage of monozygotic co-twins
with phthisis (26:8 per cent) is a little
lower than the percentage of monozygotic
co-twins with all forms of tuberculosis (29-6
per cent) and the same applies to the dizygotic co-twins (11-5 per cent and 12:8
per cent). This might be expected as for
various reasons it is commoner for both
partners of a twin pair to have primary
tuberculosis than it is for both of them to
have phthisis.

In the monozygotic twin pairs the co-twins
have all forms of tuberculosis 2°31 times
more frequently than the dizygotic co-twins;
and the monozygotic co-twins have phthisis
2°33 times more frequently than the dizygotic co-twins. That is, both types of twins
maintain their pattern of behaviour whatever type of tuberculosis they are suffering
from.

IN TUBERCULOSIS | 29

In the monozygotic group forty-one of the
fifty-four twin index cases have. phthisis
(75°9 per cent) and in the dizygotic group
111 of the 148 twin index cases have phthisis
(75-0 per cent), i.e. the two groups are
similar.

Exposure to Tuberculosis

Thus, so far it has been shown that in this
group of 202 twin pairs the rate of tuberculosis in the monozygotic co-twins is over
twice that in the dizygotic co-twins. Before
this finding can be ascribed to an hereditary
factor it is important to see if other factors
can explain this difference. The only one.
which will be dealt with here is exposure to
a known source of tuberculous infection.

Of the 148 binovular co-twins fifty-six,
or 37°8 per cent give a history of exposure
to tuberculosis. Of the fifty-four uniovular
co-twins twenty-one, or 38-9 per cent give a
history of exposure. Thus the co-twins have
almost the same history of exposure and the
different rates of tuberculosis in the co-twins
cannot be explained by an increased exposure rate in the monozygotic co-twins.

It has been suggested! by Kallman and
Reisner that a history of exposure in the
monozygotic co-twins makes little difference
to the rate of tuberculosis in the co-twin;
ie. that monozygotic co-twins are likely to
develop tuberculosis whether or not they
have a history of exposure.

The results from the Prophit series are
illustrated in Figure 1.

This shows that there is a considerable
difference in the tuberculosis rate in both
the monozygotic and dizygotic co-twins
depending on their exposure to tuberculosis.
This difference is particularly marked, in
the monozygotic co-twins. In other words, a
monozygotic co-twin exposed to tuberculosis is considerably more likely to develop
tuberculosis than either an unexposed monozygotic co-twin or an exposed dizygotic
co-twin. If a monozygotic twin develops
tuberculosis his twin has a 48 per cent
chance of developing tuberculosis if exposed
but only a I9 per cent chance if unexposed.

As has been mentioned earlier, the amount
of exposure to tuberculosis is difficult to
30 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

So MONOZYGOTIC DIZYGOTIC
60 CO-TWINS CO-TWINS
40
20

 

[_] EXPOSED TO TUBERCULOSIS
MJ NOT EXPOSED TO TUBERCULOSIS

FIGURE I

The rate of tuberculosis in the co-twins with
and without exposure to tuberculosis.

measure quantitatively. Twins have been
classified as being in contact with tuberculosis only when they have been living in the
same house as a patient known to have
phthisis. Many people may come into close
contact with the disease without being aware
of the fact. Whether or not the twins were
living together at the time of diagnosis is
therefore a check on the history of exposure.

Figure 2 illustrates the number of co-twins
who developed tuberculosis while living
with or living apart from their twin.

Thus fourteen out of thirty-four (41 per
cent) of the monozygotic co-twins living
with the index case developed tuberculosis,
whereas only twelve out of seventy-five (16
per cent) of the dizygotic co-twins living
with the index case developed the disease.
The rates for the twins living apart is similar
in the monozygotic and dizygotic (10 per
cent and 9-6 per cent respectively) co-twins.

This series of twins therefore suggests
that monozygotic co-twins are more likely
to develop tuberculosis than dizygotic cotwins, but that contact with tuberculosis
and living with their twin greatly increases
this risk.

So MONOZYGOTIC

DIZYGOTIC

60 CO-TWINS CO-TWINS
40
20
oO

 

[_] LIVING TOGETHER
MB LIVING § APART

FIGURE 2

The rate of tuberculosis in the co-twins
living with and apart from their twins.

It is interesting to note that it is possible
for a monozygotic co-twin to live with his
twin and to be exposed to tuberculosis either
from his twin, or from an outside source, or
from both, and still remain healthy. Nine
monozygotic co-twins who have lived in
these circumstances have remained healthy
and nine have developed tuberculosis.

It is, of course, possible that some of the
co-twins who are at present healthy will
develop tuberculosis in the future. However,
for the monozygotic pairs the average time
between the diagnosis of the index case and
the knowledge that the co-twin is healthy is
6-0 years. The average time between the
diagnosis of tuberculosis in the twins when
they both have tuberculosis is 4-4 years.
It is therefore unlikely that any future cases
of tuberculosis will affect the figures to any
great extent.

Twin Pairs in which Both Twins have
Tuberculosis
So far I have discussed the probability of
a co-twin developing tuberculosis if their
twin has tuberculosis. A rather different
aspect of the problem is the question: if
TWIN RESEARCH IN TUBERCULOSIS. oO 31

both twins have tuberculosis, do they react
in a similar way to the disease? If it is found
that both partners of a monozygotic pair
have the same type of tuberculosis more

frequently than both partners of a dizygotic’

pair it would be evidence that the patient’s
reaction to a tuberculous infection has some
hereditary element.

The body’s reaction to a tuberculosis infection can conveniently be divided into
two aspects. .

1. The anatomical site or sites of the

disease which results from infection.

2. The clinical development of the infection, i.e. whether the patient recovers, develops chronic disease, or
dies. The clinical development of the
disease is, of course, modified by
treatment.

If the site of tuberculosis in the monozygotic twin pairs is examined: in fourteen
out of sixteen pairs in which both twins had
tuberculosis the disease was in the same
site; in the nineteen dizygotic pairs in which
both twins had tuberculosis eighteen had
the disease in the same site. Pulmonary
tuberculosis has been taken as one site and
not divided into the two lungs or lobes of
lungs. Thus both twins have tuberculosis
in the same site in most of both the monozygotic and dizygotic pairs.

The ability of the patient to recover from
tuberculosis is shown in Table 7.

TABLE 7
Monozygotic Dizygotic
Similar outcome 12 12
., 75% 63°1%
Dissimilar out- 4 7
come 25% 36°8%

In the monozygotic pairs 75 per cent
behave similarly and in the dizygotic pairs
63 per cent behave similarly. Thus the
monozygotic pairs do show a slightly higher
percentage of twin pairs who behave in a
similar manner.

These results, of course, need more detailed
analysis because of the effects of treatment,
particularly antibiotics.

It is realized that the number of twins
who both have tuberculosis is small and few

conclusions can be drawn from these figures.
They are presented as they do not show the
striking difference between monozygotic and
dizygotic co-twins which might have been
expected from previous studies.

This paper is only meant to give some
indication of the results expected from the
Prophit Series of twins. Much vital information has been omitted. For example, the
data on the families of the twins has not been
given at all, and the twins themselves have
only been analysed under broad headings.

The results so far, however, do show that
the tuberculosis rates in all the co-twins is
lower than in previous studies, and that the
difference in the rate of monozygotic co-twins
and dizygotic co-twins, though appreciable,
is not as great as in previous studies.

hese results may be interpreted in different ways. The difference between the
monozygotic and dizygotic twins suggests
that there is some individual inherited resistance to tuberculosis. However, if this
inherited resistance plays any great part in
the development of tuberculosis it is remarkable that over 50 per cent of monozyfotic co-twins exposed to tuberculosis
failed to develop the disease. This can only
be explained on differences in the exposure
and in other features of the environment
which it has not been possible to measure.

To me, the results indicate that the attack
on the tubercle bacillus, i.e. early case finding
in tuberculosis and the prevention of the
spread of infection, remain the most important factors in the campaign against tuberculosis. This is, I think, encouraging because
while recognizing individual variations in
resistance to tuberculosis, it does not mean
that some people are born who will almost
certainly contract the disease. Given protection from the bacillus and good environmental conditions, anyone can remain free
from tuberculosis, including the co-twins of
monozygotic twins who already have tuberculosis. |

Acknowledgments

I would like to thank the officers and
members of the Prophit Committee, under
32 ' THE EUGENICS REVIEW

whose auspices this study is being carried
out, for initiating the study and also for
their helpful advice and criticism throughout. I would also like to thank Dr: Lawler
of the Galton Laboratory who examined all
the blood samples. Without the help of
the chest physicians in many parts of the
country, too numerous to mention by name,
it would have been impossible to even
contemplate the work. They have suffered
considerable disorganization of their clinics
in order that this work might be carried out
and I thank them most sincerely. Finally to

the twins who have most willingly cooperated in the survey, I extend my gratitude.

REFERENCES
1. Diehl, K. and. von Verschuer, O. (1933).
Zwillingstuberkulose. Jena, Gustav Fischer.
2. Diehl, K. and von Verschuer, O. (1936). Der

Erbeinfiuss bet dev Tuberkulose. Jena, Gustav
Fischer.

3. Kallman, F. J. and Reisner, D. (1943). Twin
Studies and Genetic Variations in Resistance to
Tuberculosis. J. Heved., 34, 293-301.

4. Maynard Smith, S. and Penrose, L. S. (1955).
Ann. human -Genet., 19, 273-289.
