THE RHYTHM METHOD: TWO INDIAN
EXPERIMENTS. II

By C. P. BLACKER

In the first of these articles, which appeared
in the July 1955 number of the EUGENICS
REVIEW, the following subjects were discussed:
the importance 1n the world, which contains
about 430 million Roman Catholics, of the
rhythm method; the background of the two
experiments which were requested by the Indian
Government and organized by the World Health
Organization; three adaptations of the rhythm
method ; and the findings of the first of the two
experiments which was carried out in the rural
area of Ramanagaram, in Mysore.

In thts article, the second of the two expenments—that conducted in the (urban) area of
New Delhi—is summarized, and the rhythm
method ts critically assessed, from the standpoints of tis practicability and effectiveness,
in the light of the findings of both experiments.

The Lodi Experiment: Differences from
Ramanagaram

Compared to the Ramanagaram experiment that conducted at Lodi, a suburb of
New Delhi, was simple. The main differences
in design were the following :

There was no control population comparable to the sixteen control villages at
Ramanagaram ; no household survey was
attempted ; only wives were interviewed,
though somewhat unsuccessful efforts were
made to induce husbands to accompany
their wives to the clinic; there was no
travelling by the workers since the experimental population lived in a large block of
buildings ; the work was centralized in a
clinic (of which there was no counterpart
at Ramanagaram) where women were interviewed and physically examined and where a
better rapport could be established than in
the home ; the educational standard of the
couples was much higher than at Ramanagaram ; the instruction or observation stage,

163

which lasted six months at Ramanagaram,
was reduced to three months at Lodi;
and the staff, in which over fifty people were
at one time or another employed at Ramanagaram, here consisted of eight persons who
required little preliminary training.

But a difficulty, almost unknown at
Ramanagaram, confronted the workers at
Lodi: a relatively sophisticated population
was already well acquainted with other
birth control methods than the rhythm.
Hence in estimating the value of this method,
allowances had to be made for the fact that,
after receiving instruction in the rhythm,
many of the women resorted either alternatively or at the same time to other
methods. Indeed the inquiry disclosed that
the simultaneous use of the rhythm and
another method protected the woman against
pregnancy better than did the rhythm
method alone.

The report gives full particulars of all
these features of the experiment upon which
but brief comments are here appropriate.

Housing conditions. Lodi colony is a
housing unit built by the Government of
India. It is occupied by Government
servants who live in three types of apartments: the largest contains three rooms, a
bath and a kitchen, and the smallest one
room. The intermediate type (known as
the B Blocks) wherein the experimental
population lived, contains two rooms, a
bath and a kitchen. The rental values are
determined by the salary scales of the
occupants, whose monthly incomes ranged
from Rupees 250 to 400.

Experimental population. All areas of
India were represented. A sub-sample of
nearly 400 couples, classified by language,
contained 57 per cent who spoke Punjabi
and 30 per cent Hindustani. Speakers of
164

Bengali, Sindhi, Tamil and other south
Indian languages were represented.

Educational standards were high. Of a
sample of 265 couples, who when the experiment was wound up, were active in the
experiment, no less that 262 of the husbands
and 127 of the wives had matriculated or
been to college; an additional 100 wives
had received primary education. (In the
Ramanagaram experiment but 19 per. cent
of the husbands and 2 per cent of the wives
could read.)

Clinic Organization and Rhythm Advice.
The Family Planning Centre or clinic,
which was opened on July 15th, 1952, was
appropriately situated at the back of a
Maternity and Child Welfare Centre. A
lady doctor was in charge. We are told that
she “interviewed each patient, gave each
patient elementary instructions on the nature
and functionings of her reproductive organs,
calculated individual rhythms, made pelvic
examinations, and gave patients such general
advice, both medical and personal, as
varying situations required.”’ There were
seven people on the staff apart from the
doctor: these were three social workers
(one a man), a nurse, a-health visitor, a
technical assistant (male) and a clerk typist.

The assignment of ‘‘ baby days ”’ depended
on the number of cycles of which onset
dates (i.e. the dates of the onset of menstruation) were reported. The practice apparently
followed at Ramanagaram of. giving no
advice for the first three months (during
which many women became pregnant and
others lost interest) was not here followed.
If, at the first visit (after a single onset), a
woman protested that total abstinence was
impossible for herself and her husband, she
was told that she would be fairly safe, provided that her menses were reasonably
regular, if coitus took place only during the
seven days preceding the next expected onset.
Or if the couple had previously been using
another method (coitus interruptus and the
condom were the most commonly used)
she was told that she could continue to use
that method. At later visits, when further
onset days were reported, the rhythm advice
was revised, the number of “ baby days ”

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

being if possible reduced. Menstrual calehdars were issued. No mention is made of the
beads which, at Ramanagaram, were offered
to every woman. In the apparently total
absence of illiteracy, they were presumably
not necessary. We are told that agreeably
cordial relations developed between the
clinic staff and the visiting wives.

Previous Use of Other Methods. An
attitude survey was conducted in the
women’s homes at Lodi as at Ramanagaram. This clearly demonstrated that the
idea of birth control was already familiar
to the urban population of Lodi. Thus of
1,274 couples covered by the survey, no
less than 443 (34 per cent) declared that they
had previously used a birth control method.
Much the most frequently employed of these
methods was the condom; this was said to
have been used by about 180 (41 per cent) of
these 433 couples. About seventy-five couples
(17 per cent) had previously used the rhythm
method. It is perhaps surprising that only
about fifty (11 per cent) said that they had
used coitus interruptus, and only eighteen
(4 per cent) the diaphragm or cap.

But we are told in the report that the
question of the previous use of birth control
methods was again broached when the
woman visited the clinic. There the rapport
was better than in the home, where the
attitude survey was conducted. (In the
home, children and others could sometimes
overhear what was said in the interview.)
A larger proportion of women admitted
during the clinic interview than in the
attitude survey that they had previously
used other methods of birth control. Thus
the figures above given, though rather
surprisingly large, especially for the use of
the condom, may well underrate the previous
use of other methods, especially of coitus
interruptus.

The Lodi Figures

The following figures, which are here set
out in the-same form as those for the Ramanagaram and Bannikuppe experiments, are
I think, approximately correct. They do not.
come out entirely clearly from the account.
A complication more characteristic of Lodi
THE RHYTHM METHOD—PART II

than of the other two places is the way in
which women who had been dropped from the
list of “‘ active cases”’ revisited the clinic
and were reinstated on the active list.
The compactness of the area of experiment
and the presence of a clinic at the centre
doubtless contributed to these vicissitudes.

Number of Couples included in Attitude Survey
—1,274. Number of Couples, among the 1,274
who were willing to learn a method of birth control—
598.

(Particulars are given about 369 of the
remaining 376 couples who did not wish to
learn such a method. These women are classifiable in. groups. More than half of the 369,
namely, 191 couples, wanted more children. Two
of the other groups had no equivalents in
Ramanagaram, namely, sixty-five couples who
were already using a method with which they
were satisfied, and eighteen couples where the
women had been sterilized. Thirty-three couples
said that they had no need of a method since there
was a sufficient interval between their pregnancies; twenty-three couples thought they could not
conceive, being too old or ill; and twenty-two
did not believe in birth control.

Number of women, among the 898 ‘‘ willing to
learn’’ couples, who reported menses—558.

This number of women reporting menses—
558 out of 898 ‘‘ willing to learn’’ couples—
represents a proportion (62 per cent) which
is double that in either Ramanagaram (30
per cent) or Bannikuppe (28 per cent). This pronounced difference is not discussed in the report.
Of the remaining 360 women among the 898
couples, 174 (19 per cent) reported that they
were pregnant— a higher proportion than at
Ramanagaram (12 per cent); and 186 (21 per
cent) were neither pregnant nor menstruating—
a much lower proportion than at Ramanagaram
(38 per cent).

Number of women, among the 558, to whom
rhythm advice was given in the course of the
experiment—254.

(The reasons why the remaining 304 of the
558 women who reported menses’ were
‘“‘ dropped ”’ (i.e. not given rhythm advice) are
not clearly tabulated. The reasons may not have
been ascertained, in.all 304 women. But the
reasons for which a sub-sample of a hundred
of these 304 wome were.“ dropped ”’ are given
in a table. Preference for another method and
“no faith in rhythm method ”’ were declared
by over half these 100 women.)

Number of women, among the 254, as to whom
months of exposure to conception are known,
different contraceptive measures being used (these
women co-operated up till January rst, 1954)—
231.

165

Number of women, among the 231, who used the
rhythm method only—27.

Thus the whittling down of numbers was
as drastic in the Lodi as in the Ramanagaram experiment, where the regular users
of the rhythm method were finally reduced
to thirty-nine. But of the 231 Lodi women,
among whom the twenty-seven regular
users of the rhythm method are included,
the other 204 (unlike the Ramanagaram
women) adopted other measures or combinations of measures. Some of the 204 used
other methods (mostly coitus interruptus
and the condom) ; some used no method or
used a method irregularly; and some combined the rhythm method with others. This
last group comprised ninety women (three
times as numerous as the regular users of
rhythm) who were better served by their
combination of methods than were the
twenty-seven by the sole and regular use of
rhythm. The latter experienced three pregnancies in 159 months of exposure which
gives the number of months of exposure
per conception as fifty-three. The former
(who combined the rhythm with other

.methods) experienced nine pregnancies in

642 months of exposure which gives a
corresponding figure of seventy-one. (Those
of the above-mentioned non-users of regular
rhythm who employed other methods, and
those who used no methods or other methods
irregularly, fared less well than the regular
users of rhythm. The figures for months of
exposure of these two groups were thirty-six
and twenty-four, which compare unfavourably with that of fifty-three for the regular
users of rhythm.)

Acceptability and Effectiveness
The outcome of the Lodi experiment can be 
_summed up from the standpoints of accept
ability and effectiveness, though the number
of women, and also the number of months
of exposure, are disappointingly small—
so small that no firm conclusion can be
drawn. From the standpoint of acceptability,
it seems that, of 231 women who were
taught the rhythm method, only twentyseven (II per cent) used it regularly, the
remaining 89 per cent preferring other
166

‘methods or no methods. From the standpoint of effectiveness (reliability) it seems
that the regular use of the rhythm method is

less effective in the ratio of fifty-three to

seventy-one than the combination of the
rhythm with other methods. The figure of
fifty-three for Lodi is intermediate between
those of 35 and 110 for Ramanagaram where
the failure to confirm four suspected conceptions made it impossible to be more
precise.

It was mentioned in the first of these
articles that, in the rural area of Ramanagaram, women who used no birth control
experienced about twenty months of exposure to risk of conception per pregnancy; in
other words, after the end of lactation, it
took them on average about twenty months
to conceive again. The figure of fifty-three
months for the regular users of rhythm at
Lodi implies a near trebling of the basic
period of twenty months. This result
suggests that the regular use of rhythm,
while far from ideal as a method of family
planning, is definitely better than no method.

The Omnibus Rule

_A small experiment with the “ omnibus
rule,’ which has been described above,
involving 402 households, is summarised in
the Report. (The “rule” calls for fifteen
days abstinence from the 8th to the 22nd
day inclusive.) The experiment was undertaken near Lodi at Aliganj which, we are
told, is a colony of sweepers and peons who
were completely illiterate but who held
“ very orthodox views.’”’ We are told that

¢

among them the idea of planned parenthood |

was quite unfamiliar. ““ The question ‘ Do
you wish to have more children?’ seems
rather funny to them and some are so
amused by it that they cannot control their
laughter for minutes together. They have
the firm belief that no earthly power can
interfere with nature and what is destined
must happen.”’

The figures, which do not emerge entirely
clearly, appear to be as follows :

Number of households visited 402

Schedules filled : a 220

Number of couples, among the 220,
wanting to learn a method .. 122

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Number of women, among the 122, who
were given the Omnibus Rule . 39

There are no reports of the outcome of its
use. It seems to be the view of the WHO
organizer, and of some 150 persons who were
being trained as social organizers by the
Community Development Administration of
India, to whom she explained the matter,
that the omnibus rule should be “ vigorously
pressed ’’’ and that it was “suitable for
mass teaching.”’ But against this view is
the concluding paragraph of the report on
the Aliganj experiment: “ This work in
Aliganj has been in progress for so short a
time that it is impossible to draw a final

‘conclusion. It now appears, however, that

few couples will adopt the omnibus rule
because of the long period of abstinence
which is required.”” We are therefore left

‘in some doubt as to how far this method is

thought to be suitable and worth pursuing.

Conclusions

It will be recalled that the Ramanagaram
and Lodi studies had, as their aim, three
measurements—of the acceptability of the
rhythm method, of its effectiveness in
reducing pregnancies in those who follow it,
and (limited to Ramanagaram) of its effectiveness in reducing the birth rate of the
community.

We are now in a position to consider what
answers the two inquiries gave to these three
questions.

Acceptability

The term “acceptability ’’ has in this
context two different meanings. The measure
of the first (a) is how far the rhythm method
is practicable by, or deemed appropriate
for, and therefore taught to, a group of
women who wish to use a method; the
measure of the second (b) is how far the
method is found satisfactory, and is used
regularly in the manner taught, by a group
of women who have begun to use it.

In what follows, the small Bannikuppe and
Aliganj experiments will not be considered.
Attention is only given to the Ramanagaram
and Lodi experiments. It appears that the
proportions of women in the above two
THE RHYTHM METHOD—PART II

categories (a) and (b) differ rather conspicuously in the two experiments.

Ramanagaram per cent
(a) Of 811 “ willing to learn ’’ women,
the rhythm was taught to 112 14
(bo) Of these 112 women, 41 followed
the method regularly 37
Or 5 per cent of the 811 “willing .
to learn ’’ women.
Lodi
(a) Of 898 “‘ willing to learn ’’ women,
the rhythm was taught to 254 28
(bo) Of these 254 women, 27 were

known (when the experiment was
closed), to be following the method
regularly as taught Il
Or 3 per cent of the 898 “‘ willing to
learn ’’ women.

(Of the Lodi women, another 90 who had been
taught the rhythm were combining it with
another method. I have not included these in the
(b) figure above because it was not part of the
instructions that other methods should be used
at the same time as the rhythm, and the fact
that this was done suggests that the exclusive
use of the rhythm was “ unacceptable”’ to
these women. The report tells us that 7:5
per cent (not 3 per cent as above given) of the
898 “ willing to learn ’’ women were known to
be following the method regularly at the end
of March 1954. But I do not understand how
this figure is reached and the relevant data
are not given.)

It will be seen that the proportions of
“willing to learn’’ women to whom the
rhythm was taught (groups (a) above) was
twice as large in the urban population of
Lodi as in the rural population of Ramanagaram (28 compared to 14 per cent); but
that the proportion of women who, having
been taught the rhythm, followed it regularly
according to the prescribed method (groups
(b) above), was more than three times
higher in Ramanagaram than in Lodi
(37 against II per cent).

The first difference (between the two
(a) groups) was doubtless caused in large
part by the more ambitious but less practicable design of the Ramanagaram experi
ment according to which a long “ observa- 
tion period ” of three months was required
before rhythm advice was given. Many
women became pregnant or dropped out
during this period. The difficulties of this
requirement have been discussed above.
The second difference (between the two

167

(6) groups) is clearly due in large part to the
relative sophistication of the Lodi women
compared to the others. Many of the former
were familiar with other birth control
methods before the experiment began;
and many continued to use them after they
had been taught the rhythm method.

The question of the acceptability of the
rhythm method can now be summed up,
taking both experiments together. Of 1,709
women in both experiments who expressed
willingness to learn the rhythm, sixtyeight or 4 per cent were following it regularly
at the end of the short period (less than two
years) during which the relevant part of the
experiment lasted. The rhythm method was
thus inapplicable to, or unacceptable by,
over 95 per cent of “willing to learn”
women.

This conclusion is scarcely favourable to
the rhythm method.

Effectiveness

Owing to the high degree of impracticability and unacceptability of the method,
the number of regular users of rhythm—
sixty-eight in both experiments—is so small
that no definite conclusion can be drawn.
But a tentative assessment, albeit based on
meagre data, is possible. |

Effectiveness is here measured in terms of
the number of months exposure to the risk
of conception per pregnancy—in other words
the number of months which elapse between
the first onset of menstruation after a
pregnancy (some might prefer to calculate
from the end of lactation) to the next
pregnancy. It was established that, in the
general population of Ramanagaram, where
methods of family planning were scarcely
known but where abortions were not uncommon, the months of exposure averaged about
twenty. The more effective the method, the
larger the figure.

For the twenty-seven regular users of the
rhythm method in Lodi, this figure was
fifty-three—a little less than three times the
number of months of freedom from pregnancy
supposedly experienced by an unprotected
Indian rural population. The Ramanagaram
experiment produced no definite figure
168

because of a failure to confirm four suspected
pregnancies; but it seems reasonable to
suppose that it would not have been widely
dissimilar from the Lodi figure of fifty-three
months.

Judging from this figure, the rhythm
method is moderately effective. In the
Lodi experiment it seems not to be as
effective as was a combination of the rhythm
which other birth control methods, to which
combination more than three times as
many women resorted as used the rhythm

method solely and regularly in the prescribed |

manner. Nevertheless, the rhythm method
seems to measure up better in effectiveness
than it does in acceptability—though the
numbers on which the calculations for
effectiveness are based are disappointingly
small. |

Effectiveness in Ramanagaram of the Rhythm
Method in Reducing the Birth Rate of the

Community

This question is mainly of interest because
it reflects the spirit of optimism in which the
experiment was planned. —

Of thirty-nine (among forty-one) regular
users of rhythm, two definite pregnancies
and 221 months of exposure to pregnancy
are recorded. On the generous supposition
that, if they had used no method, these
thirty-nine women would have borne twelve
instead of two children, the effect on the
birth rate in the fourteen villages would have
been scarcely perceptible. It was above
mentioned that the birth rate in these
villages fluctuated by: nine points between
1951 and 1953. Assuming a constant population of about 7,500 for the fourteen
experimental villages (which figure is given
in the Report*), births would have numbered
about 340 in 1951 (when the birth rate is
said to have been forty-five per thousand)
and over 400 in 1953 (birth rate given as
fifty-four per thousand). Hence the rhythm
method, if followed regularly by but 5 per
cent of the sexually active population,
would have but small effects on the number

* The figure of 7,564 is given in Volume 1, p.8, no date

being specified. In Volume 11, p. 47, a larger figure of
8,740 is given for 1953.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of births and could have had little to do
with the recorded fluctuations of the birth
rate from year to year. Indeed, the figure
of 5 per cent (of users of the rhythm method)
would be smaller if, instead of being derived
from the 811 “ willing to learn’’ women,
of whom forty-one used the rhythm regularly,
it was based on the larger figure of 1,301
couples with wives under forty, who were
recorded in the initial household survey.
The Attitude Survey, it will be recalled,
showed that a quarter of these couples did
not wish to learn a method. But perhaps the
matter can be approached ‘more simply.
We are told (Vol. 1, p. 7) that the family
planning study was officially begun in
Ramanagaram during May 1952 and (p. 49)
that the report was written in March 1954.
The report gives figures for the birth rate
in the fourteen experimental villages of
Ramanagaram from 1950 to 1953. The birth
rate rose during the years 1951-1953 in a
manner which scarcely suggests that efforts
to familiarize the population with the
rhythm method produced noteworthy results.
The birth rate during these three years was

_as follows: 195I—45:0; 1952—50°0; 1953—

54°0.

If the Ramanagaram findings are a
reliable guide, it can be confidently said
that the routine rhythm method as there
taught will have no perceptible effects on
the birth rate of the rural population of
India unless it can be simplified and somehow made more generally acceptable.

Views of Authors of Report on Shortcomings
of Rhythm Method

But the difficulties and defects, for the
purpose in view, of the rhythm method are
perhaps best conveyed by the words of the
report itself. ‘‘ A number of problems,” we
are told, ““ were presented . . . which have
persisted without a solution.’’ These problems arise from hesitation by the couples,
irregularity of cycles, difficulties of abstinence, and difficulties in maintaining contact
by visits. The report says:

(1) Quite a few couples vacillated for months

between wanting to learn the method and
not wanting to learn it.
THE RHYTHM METHOD—PART II .

(2) When the cycles of some of the women who
had received the instructions became too
irregular for a rhythm revision, the couples,
failing to heed the cautions of the worker,
and refusing to surrender the cards of beads,
continued to follow the old rhythm.

(3) A number of couples have had great difficulty in abstaining the long period of baby
days advised during the instruction stage,
and either abandoned the method, or failed
to follow it regularly.

(4) The inability of the workers to contact
a couple on schedule often meant that the
“baby days’’ would begin before the
rhythm was given or revised. In many cases,
coitus had taken place during the ‘ baby
days.”’

Yet another difficulty is worth quoting—
a subjective difficulty felt by the workers
in the experiment :

The field workers, fully appreciative of the
genuine and urgent desires of many couples to
avoid unwanted pregnancies, have felt a deep
moral responsibility for the outcome of the
application of the method. Consequently,
realizing the limitations of the rhythm method,
they found it difficult at times to conduct the
study with objectivity.

The Report includes a summary of
findings and recommendations. Among the
points made in the summary is the following:

Whereas this study has been devoted to the
examination of the rhythm method, at no time
have the limitations of the method been ignored.
In terms of eligibility alone, the method is of
no value to a large number of couples who have
need for it, i.e. couples with the wife in the
early menarche, or approaching menopause,
or nursing a young child. At these times the
cycles tend to be too irregular for the confident
use of the method.

Among the recommendations submitted
by the authors of the Report is the following :

The limitations of the rhythm method should
be fully appreciated. Couples who, because of
the women’s irregular cycles, are ineligible for
the rhythm method, and couples who are unable
or unwilling to apply it, are among those who
might be encouraged to use another family
planning method. Hence it would seem
appropriate to initiate studies in the acceptability
and effectiveness of other family planning
methods.

Value of the Two Experiments : Miscellaneous
Comments

To many it may appear that the results of

169

the two experiments were disappointing.
Indeed, the abruptness with which they were
terminated suggests that this view was
taken by the sponsors of the experiments.

The two volumes, moreover, contain
evidence that the haste with which the two
experiments were closed was matched by the
haste with which the two volumes were
published. Many passages suggest that what
was written as an interim report was
hurriedly published, without appropriate
revisions, as a final report. Thus one of the
recommendations (Vol. 1, p. 82) is that “‘ both
studies should be continued preferably for
another year ’’ ; and we are told (p. 70) that
“at the end of another year... the volume
of data should be substantially larger and
should be given more detailed analysis
than has been feasible hitherto.”’ It is also.
said that “‘ only after the termination of the
study will it be possible to determine
whether the birth rate in the experimental
area was reduced.” (p. 50).

The disappointing conclusions as to the
practicability of the rhythm method and the
meagre conclusions as to its effectiveness,
coupled with the haste with which the
experiments were terminated and the two
volumes published, might lead some to form
the opinion that the whole project misfired
and failed. But this would be a superficial
and unjust view. Information of great
value was obtained and it is much to be
hoped that, far from being disappointed with
the outcome of their labours, Dr. Stone, Dr.
Chandrasekaran, Dr. Wahlund, Mrs. Taylor
and Miss Snyder, together with the workers
they trained, will duly appreciate how large
is the debt we owe to them. The workers at
Ramanagaram especially, who had the

-ampler, more exacting and more difficult

task, deserve our gratitude.

Perhaps the most important conclusion
emerging from the two inquiries is that there
exists a greater demand than was expected
for information on family planning ; that is
to say that the principle of family planning
was found to be widely acceptable. The
following remarks are made in comment on
the Lodi Attitude Survey :

During the first month the WHO field workers
170 *

were in India, the non-technical people with

whom they talked almost unanimously pre- |

dicted that any suggestion of family planning
would be rejected, especially by the village
people. The comments ranged all the way
from ‘‘ people will never understand what you
are talking about” to “‘ they will stone you
out of the village if you suggest such a thing.”
It seemed to be generally assumed that family
planning was opposed to their religious beliefs.

The discrepancy between these statements
and the findings of the investigation was
striking. .

It is then pointed out that the principle
of family planning was favoured by 75
per cent of the women interviewed in the
two experiments ; and that this proportion
is ‘‘ three times the 25 per cent required by
the draft plan.’”’ This is a noteworthy finding
which fully justified the conduct of Attitude
Surveys in both experiments. It suggests
that, so to speak, the soil is ready ; what is
needed is the appropriate seed to plant in the
soil. Of Lodi we are told that the need is
“more for information about what family
planning methods are available and desirable,
and about where family planning services
can be found rather than for motivating for
family planning.’ Indeed, there were but
‘‘2 per cent of the total interviewed whose
reasons appear to reflect a traditional or
religious bias against family planning.”’

Another valuable lesson relates to the
design of the Ramanagaram experiment.
If the design of any social experiment is
too ambitious, the statistical requirements
being too rigorous, the project runs the
risk of foundering on the human plane.
The goose refuses to lay the golden egg.
Dr. Chandrasekaran was doubtless fully
aware of this awkward possibility. But in
view of the rather searching nature of the
questions posed by the Indian Government
which sponsored the inquiries—one of the
questions related to ‘the effectiveness of
the rhythm method in reducing the birth
rate of the community ’’—he had no alternative but to draw up a statistically sound
plan. The result, however, was that the
ambitiously conceived “control experiment ”’ involving sixteen villages at Ramanagaram seems to have yielded little;
and that the decision to keep_ the

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

experime ntal population under observation
for three months before giving them rhythm
advice resulted in serious lapses (through
unwanted pregnancies and waning interest)
among couples who might otherwise have
co-operated. The workers themselves seem
to have become aware of the impracticably
exacting requirements of the Ramanagaram
experiment, and all will sympathise with
how, “ realising the limitations of the rhythm
method, they found it difficult at times to
conduct the study with objectivity.”” The
reader of the report gains the impression
that interest in the practical possibilities of
the simple One Cycle and Omnibus Rules
increased with the progress of the two main
experiments—that it grew as awareness
developed of the general unacceptability of
the routine method. Criticisms from statisticians (to which doctors are extremely
sensitive) are notoriously risked if social
inquiries are not designed as rigorously as
laboratory experiments; but enlightened
statisticians appreciate the inferiority of
human beings to laboratory animals as
subjects for experiment, and they temper
their requirements accordingly.

A criticism sometimes made of the rhythm
method (mentioned at the beginning of this
article) is that, in accordance with physiological expectations, most women are sexually
readier during the “baby days” than
during the “safe days’”’ and that the
method is therefore contrary to nature.
This matter is difficult to test, and no attempt
to test it was made in the two experiments.

Much is heard today of the possibilities
of an oral method of contraception—most
conveniently a pill to be taken by the women
on each onset day; such an oral method,
without impairing health or sexual spontaneity and without affecting subsequent
fecundity or the well-being of later-born
children,. would prevent conception in the
ensuing cycle. Do these two social experiments throw light on the acceptability of
such an oral method to Indian women ?

It is possible that the familiarity of rural
women with abortifacient medicines would
make it easy to introduce to them the
principle of an oral method of regulating
THE RHYTHM METHOD—PART II

pregnancy, different though the two procedures are. The
tried to obtain information about abortions,
but without much success. We are told that
‘“‘a number of women have said _ that
“medicine can be had from itinerant vendors
or from someone in Ramanagaram’”’ ;
and that “‘although the knowledge about
abortions is widespread, the villagers are
unwilling to divulge the information.’”’ The
report gives a list of home remedies which
were reported as abortifacients. A verbatim
conversation between a worker concerned
to promote the use of the “ omnibus rule ”’
and a woman of Aliganj is reported :

Chent: I have got three sons and three daughters.
I do not want any more children. But in
what way can you help me? The number
which is destined for me must be born.

Worker: Yes, I know that, but still we can make
some efforts and see if we can help ourselves.

Client: Will you give me some medicine? If so,
I won’t be able to pay you. My husband
will get annoyed if he comes to know that
I buy medicine for this purpose.

The implication seems to be that the
woman would have accepted a medicine
provided that it was supplied free of charge.

The Ramanagaram experiment brought
vividly to light the extreme difficulty of
teaching the rhythm method to a mainly
illiterate and uneducated population and of
testing its effectiveness in such a population.
But it is conceivable that the same method
might come better out of another kind of
experiment. If, as part of a programme of
preparation for marriage, young men and
girls were taught enough physiology to
familiarize them with the principle of the
rhythm method, so that they embarked on
marriage equipped with the requisite knowledge, many of the pitfalls encountered
at Ramanagaram would be circumvented.
But two considerable difficulties would
nevertheless remain. They are that the
menstrual cycle is apt to be irregular at both
the menarche and menopause (the beginning
and the end of reproductive life) so that the
assigned ‘‘ baby days’ would then have to
be numerous ; and that abstinence is apt to
be more difficult in the early than in the

Ramanagaram workers.

a7t

middle or late years of marriage. A paper
by Dr. Chandrasekaran was above quoted
which contained the statement that the
number of days abstinence practised for
religious reasons varied from two to 120 in
Ramanagaram and from one to seventy-nine
at Lodi. A woman with a consistently
regular cycle or twenty-nine days would have
eight “‘ baby days’ a month and therefore
just under a hundred sych days a year
during which abstinence would be necessary.
A variable cycle, imposing fourteen ‘‘ baby
days ’’ per month, could demand an aggregate
period of abstinence of half a year. About
the same span (six months) of abstinence in
the year is also required by the One Cycle
and Omnibus Rules. How many couples,
and of what ages, would find this period of
abstinence practicable? These are important
questions which call for further inquiry.

Another important aspect of the rhythm
method is the degree to which irregularities
of the cycle are influenced by emotional
experiences. How far, for example, could
the physical and emotional stimulus of
coitus, especially intense in girls and young

women, cause ovulation to take place earlier

than it would otherwise do? In many
mammals ovulation is geared to coitus. How
far do women vary in such physiological
reactiveness ? Reactiveness of this kind may
exist in small and as yet unsuspected degrees
in most women ; in some, especially during
their early nubile years, it may be greater
than in others. Such women would be
relatively insecure from the risk of pregnancy
during the post-menstrual or “early safe
days ”’ when coitus might expedite ovulation.
Light might be thrown on this possibility
if, in a large-scale investigation, which
covered women of different ages, it were
found that more unwanted pregnancies
occurred among the younger women from
intercourse between the end of menstruation
and the first of the calculated “ baby days ”’
(the “‘early safe days’’) than from intercourse between the last of these days and
the next onset day (the “late safe days ’’).

How far could emotional experiences of an
opposite kind—perhaps of an alarming or
depressive character—cause ovulation to be
172

delayed? Can two ovulations, such as
result in dizygotic twins, take place at
different times in the cycle, one of them
perhaps occurring after the last of the
supposed “baby days’’? Postponements
of ovulation from whatever cause result in
an unsuspected increase in the number of
“baby days’? and (in the absence of
pregnancy) in the postponement of the next
onset day. How many unwanted pregnancies
resulting from “ failures’’ of the rhythm
method (regularly followed) are attributable
to conceptions occurring abnormally early
and abnormally late in the cycle? There
might be a difference in the age distributions of the two types of failure ; they might
also be linked to the presence in certain
women of indentifiable psychological or
typological features, Would the discovery
of asimple test which fixed the date of ovulation make the method more reliable? Such
a test would accurately date and delimit
the ‘‘late safe days’’ before the onset.

But it might not help much to demarcate

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the ‘early safe days’’ which follow the
end of menstruation. If ovulation were
delayed, the woman would be uncertain
of her position.

There is still much to be learned from
a large enough sample of couples who would
keep careful calendars and scrupulously
abstain during the prescribed “‘ baby days.”’
It is to be hoped that further experiments
designed to elucidate some of these problems
will be carried out among women in India
and other countries who, for religious or
other reasons, prefer the rhythm method
to others.

The main conclusion which I hope will
be drawn from this article is that the Indian
Government have put us all in their debt
by sponsoring these two experiments and
that, despite their abrupt termination, the

effort has been thoroughly worth while.

I am deeply indebted to Mrs. Avabai
Wadia for her kindness in critically reading
these articles in typescript.
