370 EUGENICS REVIEW.

Hamilton, Cosmo. A Plea for the Younger Generation. London.
Chatto and Windus; 1913; price 2s. 6d. net; pp. 63.
A RHETORICAL plea for direct teaching of sex knowledge with a religious
basis and without the use of biological analogies. It is embellished with
some well-told though slightly irrelevant anecdotes, and marred by the
ignorant misrepresentation of eugenics and by a curious display of
rancour against science and’ scientists.
EDGAR SCHUSTER.

Pearson, Kari, F.R.S., Nettleship, E., F.R.C.S., F.R.S., and Usher,
H., M.B., B.C. A Monograph on Albinism in Man.
(Drapers’ Company Research Memoirs: Biometric Series,
No. IX.). London. Dulau and Co.; 1913. Part II., price
30s. net; Text pp. xii. + 265-524, and Atlas Plates a-w, and
aa—nyr. Part IV., price 21s. net; Text pp. 136 + xxili.,
Atlas Plates I.-LIX.
THOSE who had the opportunity of reading the first instalment of this
monograph will welcome the appearance of the second and fourth parts
which have now been issued. In the first chapter of Part II. (the seventh
of the whole monograph) the albinotic eye in man is described. The
authors define perfect or complete albinism of the eye “as existing in
those cases where the eye structures are entirely devoid of pigment.” It
can only be determined by an exhaustive microscopical examination, and
there appears to be no certainty that it is ever met with in human beings
as “only a very few albinotic eyes have hitherto been examined: microscopically, and in all of these either the albinism or the examination was
incomplete.” The few microscopical investigations which have been
made are carefully described, and then the characters of the living
albinotic eye are discussed. Some of the most interesting points referred
to are the increase of pigmentation which appears to occur with age, and
the nature and incidence of visual defects. Nystagmus or the rhythmical
oscillation of the eyeballs is almost always present in albinos, and of the
refractive errors a high degree of hypermetropia and astigmatism are
far commoner than among normal persons. The poor sight which generally characterises the albino appears, however, to be due principally, not
to these defects, but to the absence or deficiency of retinal pigment.

Albinotic hair in man and the lower animals forms the subject of
Chapter VIII. Much research has been necesary to collect the material
on which this section of the work is based, and so complex are the results
obtained that it is difficult to reduce them to any tolerably simple formula.
The colouring matter of the hair occurs in two forms, either diffused
through the fibrille of the hair like a dye, or as distinct granules of
pigment lying between them. The authors consider the absence of this
granular pigment as the distinctive mark of complete albinism of the
hair. This view leads, however, to some apparent anomalies of classification, because many yellow and reddish hairs are without granular pigment
and must thus be considered completely albinotic, while hair which is
absolutely snow-white may contain a few pigment granules and be thus
excluded from this class. The general conclusion to be drawn is that
albinism, both of the hair and of the eyes, occurs in varying degrees,
and a simple binary classification of human beings into albinos and
normally pigmented persons cannot properly be made. The further
conclusion may be drawn that for the purpose of making a complete
study of the inheritance of pigmentation naked eye obervations on the
living subject are hardly sufficient.

The investigations of the albinotic eye in animals, which are described
in Chapter IX., were made necessary by the dearth of observations in
human beings; they show that almost any grade of albinism of the eye
may occur. The seasonal variation of winter white animals, which is
discussed in Chapter X., is also a relevant subject of study as tending
