THE LEGALIZATION
OF VOLUNTARY EUGENICAL
STERILIZATION.

By Harry H. Laucutin, Carnegie Institution of Washington.

1. If eugenical sterilization is to be based primarily on longtime eugenic, rather than on passing economic or other considerations,
and is to be protected against abuse, it would seem that the voluntary
factor, while it might well be encouraged, should receive some sort of
social control. In most of the American laws, this control has been
based on the theory that each case of sterilization is wrought with
such important consequences to the family and to the state that it is
deemed necessary to permit or to demand such an operation only as
the result of court procedure. Such procedure involves initiative and
investigation by the state; and the order for sterilization is given
only after it is found that the particular individual is a potential
parent of socially inadequate offspring. In these laws the subject or
the subject’s family may or may not initiate the procedure, and such
persons may or may not acquiesce in its findings and order. Of course,
in voluntary cases, the procedure is much simplified. In respect to
the voluntary and compulsory elements and to court procedure, the
sterilization laws resemble the statutes on commitment of the insane
and feebleminded to custodial institutions. In its more fundamental
and long-time aspects, sterilization is fully as important as segregation.

2. Ifthe legal right to destroy the reproductive mechanism were
given surgeons and physicians on the voluntary and uncontrolled
application of individuals, without the limitation of therapeutic or
medical necessity, it is probable that the right would, in many cases,
be abused. To prevent its coming into vogue, it should, like the
destruction of prenatal life through criminal abortion, be regulated
by the laws which govern surgical operations, which forbid operations
for abortion, except for therapeutic reasons. There needs to be some
restraint upon both the individual and the surgeon.
VOLUNTARY EUGENICAL STERILIZATION. 13

8. The authority of the state should not be exercised in a restrictive way only. Its responsibility should be used to prevent the
destruction of valuable germ-plasm, and, at the same time, it should
command the destruction of degenerate hereditary lines.

4. TABULAR STATEMENT OF SOUND RELATIONS AMONG THE POLICIES

OF SEGREGATION, STERILIZATION, AND BrirTH CONTROL, FOR

CACOGENIC PERSONS.

 

   

Classes which should | Segregation, Steriliz-| Responsibility | Sterilization

      
    
   
     
     
       
     
      
  

 
  
     
 

not reproduce. ation or Birth Con- | for initiative compulsory
trol. to prevent or
reproduction. Voluntary.
1. Very lowest de- | Physiologically in- | None. Neither.
fectives and degen-| capable of reproducerates. tion, therefore sterilization not necessary; but segregation necessary to
care for the individual.
2. Medium grade de- If physiologically | State. Compulsory,
fectives and de- | capable of reproduc- if not
generates. tion, should be ster- segregated .

      
 

ilized, if not segregated. Should, of
course be segregated.
In fact, many are not
segregated.

 
    
 
   
     
 

If physiologically
capable of reproduction, should be sterilized, if not segregated. Socially and
economically many
can maintain a selfsupporting existence
especially under
social guidance. All
are a menace to hereditary quality of
future generations.
Not many are, in
fact, segregated.

8. ‘*Border-line’’ defectives and degenerates.

Compulsory,
if not
segregated.

 
         
       
 
      
 
     
 
   
   
   
   
   
   
      
   
  

   
     
   
   

    
   
  
  
  

4. Persons individually capable, but
severely handicapped from hereditary defectiveness, or carryin
defective heredite
ary qualities
which do not
show in the individual.

Principally
voluntary ;
compulsory
only as last
resort.

Primarily, the
individual subject; secondarily, the state.

If physiologically
capable of reproduction, voluntary birth
control or voluntary _ sterilization
should be given an

opportunity to prevent reproduction.
In cases in which
these fail, the state
should find some
way to exercise its
responsibility to prevent reproduction.

      
   
        
       
       
     
      
 
   
   
14 EUGENICS REVIEW.

5. State regulation of eugenical sterilization may range, at one
extreme, from complete non-regulation, in which case the matter would
be entirely one of volition with the individual, to the other extreme,
in which the state would take a hand in the matter, and would forbid
‘sexual sterilization by surgical or medical means for ends other than
therapeutic, except for eugenical purposes, and then, in each case,
only in consequence of a court order which would be preceded by judicial inquiry and expert demonstration of the fact of cacogenic make-up.
In the more rigid control, the state provides proper executive and judicial authority and mandatory procedure. It provides also
appropriate punishment in case of violation of the law. |

6. The question arises whether, between these two extremes,
there might not be a medium policy which would permit, but would
not compel, eugenical sterilization under certain cacogenic conditions, not necessarily demonstrated by court procedure, but made
evident by certain less rigid procedure. In such latter cases,
the legal initiative would, of course, rest with the individual whom it
is proposed to sterilize, or with the family or guardian of such person.
Even in such cases it would seem that there should be some safeguard,
in simplified procedure required by law, which would minimize any
possible abuse of the policy, and which would legalize sexual sterilization only after the application of certain criteria of eugenical benefit.
The purpose of such a law would be to authorize and to enable the
sexual sterilization of persons proven cacogenic, and would thus tend
to prevent reproduction of persons potentially inadequate or defective.
At the same time the law should prevent the sterilization of persons
who possess hereditary qualities which are of value in the citizenry
-of the state. .

In the regulation of voluntary eugenical sterilization, three steps
might well be required by law: |

First: a statement duly signed and sworn by the particular subject, or, if the latter is under age or incompetent, by the subject’s
parent or guardian, to the effect that it is the belief of the person
making the statement that the particular subject possesses hereditary
qualities, the propagation of which would tend to lower the inborn
hereditary standards of the nation.

Second: before such surgeon would be legally authorized to proceed with the operation, he should be in possession of a second
paper duly signed and sworn by a licensed physician, or by a trained
biologist with a degree of M.S., D.Sc., or Ph.D., to the effect that
the signer, having investigated the hereditary qualities of the particular
subject, has found that such subject possesses hereditary qualities,
the propagation of which would, in the opinion of the signer, tend to
‘lower the inborn hereditary standards of the nation. In possession of
these two statements, the surgeon would be permitted to proceed with
the actual operation for sexual sterilization.

The third paper should be the return of the surgeon. It should be
properly signed and sworn, and should state the nature and date of the
operation, should name the person on whom it was performed, and
should state the surgical and physiological outcome of the operation.
VOLUNTARY EUGENICAL STERILIZATION. 15

The surgeon should be required to file these three papers with the
Registrar of Vital Statistics, or other specifically named officer.

7. Drart oF PROPOSED STATUTE PROVIDING FOR VOLUNTARY
EUGENICAL STERILIZATION.

With the view to establishing the legal status of voluntary eugenical sterilization, to assure its direction along eugenical lines, and to
prevent its abuse, the following draft of this portion of a eugenical
sterilization statute (which, of course, would have to be recast to fit
the legislative practice of the particular state or nation) is suggested :

Section 1. The sexual sterilization of persons by surgical or medical means is
hereby prohibited except (a) for therapeutic purposes, as governed by the laws of
STITT TT TE TT in reference to medical and surgical practice, or (b)
for eugenical purposes in accordance with the procedure in voluntary eugenical
sterilization as herein prescribed.

Section 2. The voluntary eugenical sterilization of any person shall be authorized by the state of ........... cece wee e ec enee » provided that each proposed
case be initiated and executed in accordance with the three provisions as follows:

Provision 1. Procedure in each case of voluntary eugenical sterilization shall
be initiated by the subject, if the latter is of sound mind and over eighteen years
of age, or by the subject’s parent or guardian if the subject is under eighteen years
of age, or, regardless of age, is of unsound mind, provided that such initiation shall
take the form of a duly signed and sworn statement that the initiator believes that
the hereditary qualities of the particular subject are such that reproduction by the
particular subject would tend to lower the hereditary standards of the nation.

Provision 2. In addition to such statement by the subject, or the subject’s
parent of guardian, there shall be required a second statement duly signed and
sworn by a duly licensed physician, or by a biologist with a degree of M.S., D.Sc.,
or Ph.D., to the effect that such expert has investigated the individual and family
histories of the particular subject, and has found that, in his opinion, reproduction
by the particular subject would tend to lower the hereditary standards of the nation,
provided that such opinion shall be accompanied by a digest of the evidence
upon which such opinion is based. In the possession of these two statements,
it shall be lawful for any duly licensed surgeon to proceed with the specifically
named sexually sterilizing operation on the particular subject, at the time and
place and in the manner directed by the initiator. . | .

‘Provision 8. After the performance of each such operation, the surgeon who
performs it shall, within thirty days, file with the Registrar of Vital Statistics
{or other officer) the two sworn statements herein required, under which he made the
operation ; and in addition, said surgeon shall file with the said Registrar of Vital
Statistics (or other officer), a statement duly signed and sworn by the said surgeon,
in which he shall name the person on whom the operation was performed, shall
describe the nature of the operation, shall give its date and place, and shall state
its surgical and physiological outcome.

Section 3. Any surgeon or other person who-shall perform or attempt to
perform an operation of sexual sterilization on any person, except as herein provided, shall be guilty of felony (or misdemeanor) and, upon conviction therefor,
shall be punished by a fine of not more than .............. pounds, or imprisonment for not more than ............ months, or both ; provided that any surgeon
or other person who shall perform or attempt to perform an operation of sexual
sterilization as herein contemplated, and who, within thirty days thereof, fails to
file with the Registrar of Vital Statistics of .............. , (or other officer) the
three duly signed and sworn papers herein provided, to wit (1) the consent of the
subject or of the subject’s parent or guardian, (2) the opinion of the expert on the
matter of hereditary inadequacy, and (8) the return of the surgeon in reference to
the fact and outcome of the operation, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon
conviction therefor, shall be punished by a fine of not more than ............
pounds, or imprisonment of not more than ............ months, or both; provided that any. person not a duly licensed. surgeon who shall cause or attempt to
cause the sexua sterilization of ary person shall, be guilty of attempting topractice surgery without a license. :
16 EUGENICS REVIEW.

8. LrecAL Forms Waica Wou.p Compiy WirH LEGAL AUTHORITY
TO PERFORM VOLUNTARY EUGENICAL STERLIZATION, AS CONTEMPLATED IN THE ACCOMPANYING DRAFT OF A PROPOSED STATUTE.

The three following named papers duly signed and sworn, must
be filed with the Registrar of Vital Statistics of ...............0 000.
(or other specifically named officer), by the surgeon who performs
the particular operation :
(1) The consent of the subject, or of the subject’s parent or
guardian ;
(2) The findings of the expert in the matter of hereditary inadequacy; and
(3) The return of the surgeon in reference to the fact and outcome
of the particular operation.

LEGAL PERMISSION TO PERFORM VOLUNTARY EUGENICAL STERILIZATION.
1. Consent of Subject, (in case subject is of sound mind and of
legal age).

In the matter of legal authority for
the voluntary sexual sterilization of

ONE .. ccc c cece ce eee e cece ee eeeee ,
GE wwemnnmnmen mesma saaees » aS prescribed by Chapter .... of the Laws
OE eo ew ma we ww

WHEREAS, in accordance with Chapter .... of the Laws of
ccc ccc cece een c eee » TL, cceeccccscececcccses, & YeSident of
coemennsmadbhhwbh sei eaies , of legal age and of sound mind, having

duly investigated the matter, believe that my hereditary qualities are
such that, if they were perpetuated in my offspring, would produce
children who, because of hereditary defectiveness, would tend to lower
the hereditary standards of the nation; THEREFORE, in accord
ance with this finding, I, .............. cece ccc cece hereby
register my consent tO ....... cece cece ce ccences , a duly licensed
SUPPCON OF .acsvcsuswwsecrweswuemsuse , to perform upon my person,
the surgical operation known as ...........eeceeeees , for the pur
pose of causing sexual sterility, providing that such operation shall
be of the minimum radicalness necessary to effect sexual sterility, and
that it shall be conducted in accordance with the best surgical practice,
at such time and place and in such manner as I may direct.

_ Subscribed and sworn to before Me. ..........ce cece ceccccceves 9.
a Justice of the Peace of ........ cece cece ec eeee , this ........... se
day of .........cc cece evens 19....
VOLUNTARY: EUGENICAL STERILIZATION. 17

LEGAL PERMISSION TO PERFORM -VOLUNTARY EUGENICAL STERILIZAs&s TION. os

la. Consent of the Subject’s Parent or, Guardian, (in case the
subject is of unsound mind, of feeble intelligence, or is under age.)

In the matter of legal authority for
the voluntary sexual sterilization of
(1)
) as pre
Of . occ ccc ccc wc ccc ccc cece eens

WHEREAS, in accordance with Chapter .... of the Laws of
PUTePeTTITeTrriirrr pT, 1.2... eee eeeeeeeeeey the parent (or legal
guardian) Of ¢,00.ccscewerensmeun the latter being of unsound mind
(or of feeble intelligence, or under age), having duly investigated the
matter, believe that the hereditary qualities of the subject ..........
Sea eeNR ES EEE , are such that, if they were perpetuated in his (or her)
offspring, would produce children who, because of hereditary defectiveness, would tend to lower the hereditary standards of the nation;
THEREFORE, in accordance with this finding, I hereby register my
Consent tO .....cccec eee eeceenees , a duly licensed surgeon of
OTeTTiTrrrrti tit tte , to perform upon the person of the subject,
SEH EAS OS HRN CUN EBERT E RRS , the surgical operation known as ....
es ee ee , for the purpose of causing sexual sterility, providing that such operation shall be of the minimum radicalness necessary to effect sexual sterility, and that it shall be conducted in accorance with the best surgical practice, at such time and place and in
such manner as I may direct.

eoaeesveeseeeeeseseeseseeveseeeseeveeeeeveeeeseseeeee 8 02 ee &

(Signature of Subject’s parent* or legal guardian)

Subscribed and sworn to before Me .........cccccccccccrccces »a
Justice of the Peace of ........ ccc eee e cece ens , this ...... cece eee
day of .......seees ou ESKEeS 19.6200»

2. Finpincs oF Expert (a licensed physician, or a trained
biologist with a degree of M.S., D.Sc., or Ph.D. )

In the matter of legal anthonity for
the voluntary sexual sterilization of

Of... eee eee eee ee cece eeens as pre
e@oeoe7ereeeveeseeveeeeeeseeseeeeeeeeeeveeeeeee

WHEREAS, in accordance with the request of ................

fof OF gaqes canes mesme msm eeees we , the parent or guardian of ......
eee een e ee eeeees ), I have duly investigated the personal and

 

*Signature of either parent sufficient.
18 | EUGENICS REVIEW.

hereditary qualities of the subject, ...............0000. , in accordance with Chapter ...., of the Laws of................... », and
believe that reproduction by the said ................000. » would

result in offspring who, because of hereditary defectiveness, would
tend to lower the hereditary standard of the nation; I THEREFORE
recommend the sexual sterilization of the said ................008.
and in confirmation of this finding, I submit the following pedigreeANALYSIS: 6... cee eee ete ee ee ee eee eee tee ee ee ee ence eeens

(Signature of expert investigator) (Degree).
Subscribed and sworn to before Me ..........cccceccccecccces
a Justice of the Peace of ......... 00... ccc eee wees , this..........
day Of 5 csccaesecewaswe , 19....

8. RETURN OF SURGEON.

In the matter of legal authority for
the voluntary sexual sterilization of

ONE 2. eee eee cece eee e rere eee eees :
OL wcemeemeseieessseease , as prescribed by Chapter of the Laws
00)

WHEREAS, in accordance with the due legal request of ......
een tR EGER EERE EASED (or of the parent or guardian of ..............
ans us seueeeeee), and the legally rendered opinion of one............

..++.., &@ duly licensed physician (or biologist with the
degree ‘of M. S., D.Sec., or Ph.D.), to the effect that the said ..:...
Camseeumedausmenos , is a person whose hereditary endowment is such

that reproduction by said person would result in offspring who,
because of hereditary defectiveness, would tend to lower the hereditary
standards of the nation, both in accordance with Chapter ...., of the

Laws of 2.0.6... . ccc eee ee eee , THEREFORE, I, a surgeon duly
licensed by ............ TITiTe , did, in accordance with the aforesaid
law, on the ..............-- day of meee ewe e eee ee eeeee 19....

perform the operation of ..............0 0c ewes on said ..........
Bb isons eases eens ees wesw hospital; and I herewith give an account
of the surgical and physiological outcome of said operation: ......

eoeeeneveeeeeeeevneeee eee ef ec eee eee sFeeveeeeeeeereeseeeeeeeseeeeseeeeeeeeeae

eeeensneevesveereeeneneveeesveee eee ee eo wee ee Oh hl Oh Ohh Ohh Ohh Ohh Oh HO HOC OO hh hm oO Oo oO eo wm wm ewe we ee ow

oeeeeeeeeseeeeeveeeeeeeeoeere ere epeeeew eee

(Signature of Surgeon) . .

Subscribed and sworn to before 00 :
a Justice of the Peace of ............. ccc eee , this..............
day of ........... aeM sae 19....
