THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Barnett, S. A. Instinct and Intelligence. The Science of Behaviour in Animals and Man.
London, 1967. MacGibbon & Kee. Pp. 250. Price 45s.

THE SUB-TITLE of this book suggests that there are two questions one should ask about it.
The first is how far does it meet the requirements of someone interested in knowing something of the scientific study of animal behaviour, and the second is how far does it succeed
in showing the extent to which such study can illuminate the mechanisms of human
behaviour?

This is a wide-ranging work divided into four sections, the first of which introduces the
problems posed by the observed phenomena of animal behaviour, and goes on to deal in a
simple way with the nervous system and sense organs. There is a comparative survey of
nervous systems found in different phyla which is necessarily confined to simple description,
mostly of a morphological nature. It is nevertheless indicative of the range of levels of
organization to be found.

The second section is concerned with a discussion of the behaviour shown in a wide
variety of situations. The two chapters on movement include a discussion of orientation
mechanisms such as kineses and taxes, as well as the behaviour shown in homing and
migration. Exploration and the effect of the animal’s internal state on its movement about
the environment are also discussed. Three chapters are concerned with social behaviour.
They include notes on the territorial behaviour of a wide range of animals, the organization
within groups in socially living species and the behaviour patterns used to maintain this
organization. There is a section on the effects of high population density on the individuals
involved and a discussion of the implications for the regulation of population densities.
Social insect communities are described at some length. The courtship and parental behaviour of fish, birds and mammals is touched on, with an introduction to the experimental
work on physiological mechanisms behind this behaviour. Finally there is a chapter on
communication which describes the kinds of signals used in different modalities, and discusses the evolution of such signals.

The third section comes more to grips with mechanisms of behaviour. The author
discusses the fact that behavioural traits can be inherited, and thus acted on by selection, and
devotes a fair amount of space to the development of behaviour, stressing the importance
of the environment in interacting with genetic effects. The mechanisms involved in starting
and stopping activities are also discussed and the concept of ‘‘drive” introduced. Barnett
then goes on to discuss the modification of behaviour in the individual, by learning.

In the last section comes a more speculative discussion of the sources of human behaviour and the description in some detail of the behaviour of gorillas and chimpanzees as
known from recent field studies of these species. Finally there is a brief introduction to the
problems of such concepts as ‘‘consciousness” and ‘‘mind”’ in their relationship to the
scientific study of animal behaviour.

Firstly, how far does this book introduce the layman to the subject? The style of
writing makes it admirably clear and easy to read. It includes a wide range of topics and
many of the major issues are touched on. Examples are drawn from all the main phyla
and the problem of identifying animals to the layman has been met by the liberal use of
popular names. Each chapter is provided with a short list of references to enable the reader
to pursue the points raised. However, as with the examples used in the text, much that is
important in the way of experimental work has been omitted. Nevertheless access is given
to a wide field of literature by providing references to a good range of books and review
articles, many of which are recent.

The process of selection has been carried a little far, particularly in the case of the
description of the effects of early deprivation on rhesus monkey infants. Other workers

182
REVIEWS OF BOOKS

have not found such drastic effects as those described by the author quoted, although
Barnett’s point remains valid, namely that early environment is important to the development of behaviour. The matter of the specific signals used by the mother to recall her infant
is also in dispute among workers in this field. Despite this, however, the book as a whole
remains a good up-to-date introduction for the layman to a subject in which he is often
misled by popular literature.

Secondly, how far does this book go towards equating the behaviour of animals and
humans? Wherever possible, relevant observations on the behaviour of man are included
and commented on. Barnett’s approach is a very valuable one because he emphasizes
especially the cases where man is not comparable with animals as well as pointing out the
similarities. Here again popular literature tends to be misleading. There are cases of the
same word being used in relation to animals and humans but with different meanings, and
the author is not being over-fussy when he draws attention to the lack of comparability
between the two cases. He points out that not only should one be cautious in interpreting
from animals to humans, but also vice versa, and again this is a useful warning.

The chapter ‘‘Sources of human behaviour” is perhaps a little misleading. The sources
referred to are evolutionary, and Barnett himself admits gorillas and chimpanzees are not
human ancestors. Perhaps a more useful approach would have been to examine the physiological sources in more detail and depth.

The claim of the dust cover that “‘this book is a fundamental new study of the ways in
which animals and men behave” is something of an exaggeration, but the author’s comments on both human and animal behaviour are well worth reading, both by biology
students at about the level of the sixth form, and by the layman.

Y. SPENCER -BOOTH

BIOLOGY

Kalmus, H. (Editor). Regulation and Control in Living Systems. London and New York,
1966. Wiley. Pp. viii + 468. Price 90s.

WHEN WIENER produced his Cybernetics in 1948, the exciting new subject promised much
in the advancement of understanding of biological control systems by application of two
difficult branches of mathematics, concerned with (a) statistical analysis of information
flow, (6) mathematical analysis of automatically regulating systems containing feedback
loops. Twenty years after, although there have been a few spectacular examples of analysis,
we still have essentially no change in the position, expressed as follows.

There are many biological systems which are clearly examples of information flow, as
in nervous systems, or of feedback arcs, as in homeostasis and population control. Biologists
continue to use commonsense and simple experimental analysis (thereby not utilizing much
of the vast potential data), and do not use the advanced mathematical techniques. For
example in Chapter 2 of this symposium we find a clear account of the use of Laplace
transforms in the analysis of transfer functions of feedback systems; this method has been
well known for thirty years but as yet there are almost no examples of its application to any
biological system. The exceptions, concerned with the human eye, are analyses conducted by
engineers, often with surprisingly few biologically significant results, and in the example
analysed in most detail, human eye movement, “‘the analysis of this kind of system is beyond
the scope of this book”. In fact, the chapters written by biologists on cellular regulation
(Lewis), circadian rhythms (Kalmus), endocrine systems (Brown-Grant), plant growth (Bell),
animal development (Newth), honeybee colonies (Free), insect mimicry (Blest) and animal
populations (Wynne-Edwards) are non-mathematical reviews in which self-regulating

183
