AN INTERNATIONAL UNION OF FAMILY
ORGANIZATIONS*

By ROBERT BOUDET

Paris, France

HE most effective international rela
tionships are not necessarily those

which are either the most obvious or
the most spectacular. The failure of the
League of Nations has often been attributed
to Hitler ; yet it was in fact the ignorance
and the fickleness of world public opinion
which played the decisive role in the collapse
of the League as an instrument for the
preservation of peace. The League, however,
did not fail in many of its enterprises. It
inaugurated abiding work which today is
being sustained and extended by such bodies
as the International Labour Organization,
UNESCO, the United Nations Economic
and Social Council. Those bodies are seeking
to further the well-being of those underdeveloped countries which the more privileged peoples are no longer prepared to
leave in ignorance and misery. If such work
as this proceeds unobtrusively, that does not
mean that it is unimportant. The visit to
Central Africa of a specialist in the coritrol
of epidemic disease might attract little public
attention ; yet such an event could be more
significant, in its implications for human
welfare, than the international sports and
athletic contests, or even some of the
diplomatic meetings and conferences, which
are so loudly acclaimed in the columns of
the world press.

It is a sign of the times that a multiplicity
of new international organizations, both
statutory and voluntary, have sprung up
since the last world war. Nearly all instruments of political, economic, and _ social
activity have today their international links.
And this trend is not, as some sceptics would
like to suggest, merely a fashion, a cult. It
is an inexorable necessity, an inevitable
manifestation of life in the modern world.
It is a logical closing of ranks in their own
defence on the part of men crushed by the

* See page 7.

upheavals and disasters which have followed
in the wake of war. Confronted with the
perplexities of the present hour, only two
courses of action are open to us—to multiply
the means and the opportunities to build
solidarity among mankind; or to resign
ourselves to founder in anarchy and chaos.

In such a situation as this, it would be
monstrous if the interests of the family were
the only ones not to be incorporated in the
current pattern of internationalism. There
are of course those who will contend that
family affairs are essentially private affairs,
and that for this reason they have no proper
place in legal or political planning. Indeed,
it has been implied, if not declared, that to
marshal families in their mutual defence
would be to divert them from their true.
function and purpose. All this might be
relevant enough in a world of saints and
angels. But in the kind of world in which
families must live today, the appropriate
riposte, both at the national and at the
international level, is: “‘ If you don’t take
charge of politics, politics will take charge
of you.”

United action in the interests of the family
is therefore as appropriate and necessary today as was united action on the part of the
workers when they took up the struggle for
what they believed to be their rights. The
nineteenth century saw the principle of cooperation develop, under the pressure of
necessity, as a central factor in the life of
nations. There is today an equivalent
necessity for families to emerge from their
isolation, from the refuge of their secluded
intimacy, and to unite in the quest of their
legitimate rights and goals. An inescapable
necessity makes families from Cape Town
and San Francisco one with families in
Belgium, in France, in Germany ; for in the
modern world the way of life of South African
and American families reacts, sometimes with

34
AN INTERNATIONAL UNION OF FAMILY ORGANIZATIONS 35

startling immediacy, upon the way of life
of European families, and vice _ versa.
Menaced more and more by the incursions
into its privacy of the State or the machine ;
happy. indeed when it can escape total
strangulation by the mighty forces pressing
upon its life: the family everywhere today
struggles grimly for the preservation of its
essential responsibilities and its essential
liberties.
* * *

The International Union of Family Organizations was ostensibly created when representatives of twenty-seven nations met in
conference in Paris in the summer of 1947.
But its real origin lies in the social changes
of our time, in the new needs born of war
sufferings, in the deeper understanding of
the root causes of most of our personal problems and social evils. The Union was born
in an hour when the family was more and
more clearly being recognized as the ‘“ basic
social unit ” (to use a phrase dear to the
Anglo-Saxon heart !), and therefore as a
necessary and important subject for scientific
and sociological study and research. We
have witnessed in recent years the inauguration of an impressive programme of investigation, instituted by both private and public
institutions, into the conditions of family
living and the problems of family relationships. One result of this awakened interest
has been the increasing political recognition
of the family in a number of countries,
indicated by the provision of new social
services, and the enactment of new laws,
designed to foster the well-being of the family
unit. For all this growing concern the International Union of Family Organizations
seemed to offer a natural and necessary
centre of focus and direction. Its objective
was to represent family interests and family
needs on a world scale ; and to do so in the
closest possible co-operation with other
international organizations in allied fields.

It is significant that at the Paris conference
the representative of the United Nations
expressed full accord with the aspirations
which found expression there. The readiness
of official bodies to associate themselves with
the work of the Union has indicated that

they see clearly the need to encourage and
support a single co-ordinating organization
which, transcending unavoidable differences
of opinion between private organizations,
and rising above the divergent standpoints
of official and private bodies, aims at drawing
all who seek to serve the best interests of the
family into a common fellowship. .

The International Union comprises at the
present time 137 organizations and a number
of individual correspondents representing
twenty-eight nations in five continents.
These organizations display a remarkable
diversity. They include the following—
associations of families and of parents
(Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, France,
Great Britain, Greece, Italy, Luxembourg,
The Netherlands, Peru, Switzerland) ; institutions for the study of the family (Italy,
U.S.A.) ; institutions for demographic research (Finland, France, Italy, Sweden) ;
organizations for family service, marriage
preparation and counselling (Australia,
Canada, Great Britain, Italy, U.S.A.) ; societies for social welfare, social biology, eugenics,
sex education (Great Britain, Switzerland,
U.S.A.); parent-teacher organizations
(Belgium, Canada, France, Italy) ; bodies
for the promotion of family grants and
allowances (Belgium, France) ; government
departments with direct responsibility for
the family, such as the Ministry of Public
Health and of the Family (Belgium), the
Ministry of Public Health and of Population
(France), the Ministry of Social Affairs
(Egypt), the Institute of Social Insurance
(Greece), the Federal Office of Social Insurance (Switzerland), etc.

It is possible to classify this welter of
organizations clearly and accurately by
dividing them into three categories—associations made up of families acting together ;
organizations concerned with service to or
study of the family; and government
departments or public bodies charged with
the care of families in the community concerned. At the present time, it is particularly important to bring together, in mutual
understanding and co-operation, the associations of families which are to be found everywhere in the Latin countries and the family
36 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

welfare organizations which are more
characteristic of Anglo-Saxon culture. The
International Union, by the diffusion of
information and the fostering of contacts,
can do much to clarify the exact nature and
scope of the problems which all these organizations are alike seeking to solve. It may be
feared that a task so comprehensive will
result in a very diffuse programme. Yet the
very existence of the Union, and the fact
that it has addressed itself to this task, is
already making possible a development of
understanding between the nations which
could not have been achieved—or not nearly
so quickly—otherwise. It is this fact, and
this possibility, which provide the supreme
justification for the International Union’s
existence.

The aim of the Union, then, is to link up
all organizations throughout the world,
irrespective of race and creed, which are
working for the welfare of the family; to
work for the welfare of all social classes and
to strengthen the sense of solidarity between
families the world over; and to create and
encourage a spirit of friendship among
families for the purpose of bringing about
a lasting peace.

As part of its plan for co-ordination and
documentation, the union collects and distributes general information concerning
activities of interest to families in all countries, and on problems inherent in family
life. These are embodied in the various
sections of the surveys which the Union is
making—family structure : social and economic structure: psychological problems of
married life: childhood problems: the
family and social life: family organizations
within the nation and their relation to the
State: economic problems of the family:
biological problems in relation to the family :
the family and social diseases : demographic
problems. The Paris office of the Union
receives numerous publications from many
countries, goes through them, and makes a
card index of the material so as to put
it at the disposal of its members. The
quarterly review Familles dans le Monde
seeks to provide a channel for liaison and
information.

What progress has the Union made in its
brief existence? In 1948, its first general
assembly was held in Geneva. Besides
transacting official business, it held study
sessions on the theme ‘“‘ Juvenile Delinquency
as a Family Responsibility.”” In 1949, the
General Council met in Rome, where the
Italian committee of the Union extended
its hospitality and organized a highly successful conference. The president of the Italian
Council of Ministers, and several of the
Ministers themselves, participated in that
part of the conference which studied the
various means employed to assure to families
adequate clothing, housing, education, vacations, leisure and financial resources.
Sessions were devoted also to emotional
security in the family and to the psychological problems of married people. Those
who shared in these gatherings will not soon
forget the reception given by the municipality of Rome at the Capitol, and the audience
with His Holiness Pope Pius XII and his
important message.

In 1950 Finland invited the Union to hold
its General Council in Helsinki. For the first
time, a special conference for representatives of government organizations was convened. Despite the international crisis
created by the outbreak of war in Korea,
fifteen governments were represented at
Helsinki, sharing their experience in the field
of effective State action for the alleviation
of economic stress within the family. Simultaneously a conference was held for representatives of voluntary organizations, which
included a study tour in Denmark and
Sweden. This trip included visits to children’s homes, homes for old people, model
dwellings, social centres and the like; and
discussions with specialists and officials. |

In 1951 Belgium undertook to act as host
to the Union and its General Assembly. It
was with delight that this invitation was
accepted, for much of the early enthusiasm
for the setting up of the Union, and a good
measure of the support given to it, have come
from that country. Belgium has family
associations of exceptional vigour, and its
Government puts strong emphasis upon
family welfare.
AN INTERNATIONAL UNION OF FAMILY ORGANIZATIONS 37

The Union arranged in Brussels, a further
conference of government experts to study
the financing of family housing. The Helsinki conference revealed a strong desire for
a comparative study of the experiences
gained by various governments in their
attempts to promote family welfare. In a
number of countries today, and particularly
in the new countries recently established in
the East and in South America, statutory
instruments have been brought into being
expressly to promote the well-being of the
family ; while in all countries more or less
specialized governmental bodies are today
studying family problems of one kind or
another—living standards, working mothers,
housing, divorce and the like. The International Union, if it is to carry out its task,
must be in close and continuous contact
with these plans and activities ; for not only
should the voluntary organizations know
what official policies are being formulated,
but government agencies also can learn much
about the real needs and aspirations of
families from those who are serving the
family through unofficial channels. In September 1952 a conference of the Union will
be held at Oxford when the subject for
discussion will be ‘‘ The Stability of the
Family,” in particular from the psychological
and educational standpoints.

In addition to the meetings of its General
Assembly every third year, and of its General
Council every year ; in addition also to the
international study conferences open to all,
the Union has judged it desirable to convene
special meetings, some on a regional basis,
some confined to participants falling within
particular categories. For example, in March
1951 a meeting was held at Versailles,
expressly for the study of family associations
—their structure, their growth and development, the services they render, their relationship to existing public bodies. Nine countries
were represented at this meeting, and in the
relatively intimate fellowship which was
possible at such a gathering, discussion was
particularly stimulating and productive.

In the future, the Union plans to promote
further specialized meetings similar to the
one held in Versailles. It hopes also to link

up by correspondence the groups of experts
whom it proposes to invite to its forthcoming conferences. For instance, there are
indications that economists, sociologists and
psychologists who are interested in family
problems are not always closely associated
with the activities of the family movements
and associations. Indeed, sometimes they
are scarcely even aware of their existence !
Yet these movements could contribute much
to the work of the thinkers and the experts,
while on their side the movements can and
must profit from the activities and researches
of scientists and experts. Closer relationships between the men of thought and the
men of action are more necessary than ever
in our modern world with its rapid and
complex developments. This is particularly
true in the field of the family, which marshals
the contributions of men and women with
such a rich diversity of gifts.

All who work for the family should be
linked by a sense of common purpose. Little
by little, to the extent which its still limited
means make possible, the Union is striving
to unfold to its members, to those who have
influence in the international sphere, and to
world public opinion how vast and farreaching are the implications of family life
and its problems. Those problems extend
into the province of sociology, of economics,
of biology, of demography and even of
political science. At the same time, the
Union seeks to encourage family welfare
organizations, and families themselves, to
face and discharge the responsibilities which
confront them. The existence of problem
families, of children deprived of proper
opportunities, of situations which result day
by day in the further encroachment of the
State upon private life and family life—
these things are a challenge to the Union
to strive for a restored equilibrium which
will maintain the family group’s essential
autonomy.

Social security meets a vital need today.
It has taken its place as a central feature in
the broad development of modern society.
It tends to create in the life of the nation—
and today among groups of nations—a
strong solidarity which is not always fully
38 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

appreciated. Yet at the same time social
security carries within itself a menace to
personal and family responsibility to which
we need to be continuously alert. Are we
to be, in the end, mere numbered units which
the State promises to take under its care, in
return for services rendered—including procreation ? Or shall we remain still individuals
free to choose our destiny, to take risks, to
found families and to raise children in a
world more amicable and better organized,
a world which holds inviolate the autonomy
of hearth and home?

Even psychology and psychiatry, which
by their discoveries have contributed so
much to modern life, and which rightly used
can render us such great services, must not
be allowed to take the place of parental
responsibility in guiding children to make
wise choices and responsible decisions. In
the past, admittedly, parents exercised too
much power in deciding the course of their
children’s lives. They chose for them their
way of life, their work, even their mates.

Readers of the
EUGENICS REVIEW

will be interested in the

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL of SEXOLOGY

This Journal, with Editorial Boards in more
than twenty different countries (ranging
from Australia to America, Sweden to China,
Israel to Czechoslovakia, and Germany to
Spain), provides the only really international
medium for the exchange of news and views
and the publication of original work on human
relations in sex and marriage.

The standing of the Journal may be

gauged from its Editorial Board for the
British Isles (Mr. Clifford Allen, M.pD., M.R.C.S.,

M.R.c.P.; Mr. Ambrose E. Appelbe, M.a.,
LL.B.; Dr. Eustace Chesser; Mr. Alec
Craig; Professor F. A. E. Crew, M.D., D.sc.,
F.R.S.; Dr. E. Elkan, M.D., L.R.c.P.; and
Mr. Kenneth Walker, M.D., B.CH., F.R.C.S. ;
with Mr. Cyril Bibby, M.a., M.SC., F.L.s., as
Editor).

Medical Practitioners, Lawyers, Teachers,
Biologists, Social Workers, Clergymen and
others interested are invited to apply for a
specimen copy and details of subscription
rates to the British Agents: A. Vernon
Keith & Co., Napier House, 24/27 High
Holborn, London, W.C.1.

 

Yet we would be little better off if, by relinquishing these powers, parents merely found
themselves supplanted by an all-powerful
corps of school-teachers, doctors, counsellors
and psycho-therapists !

In a world of mass movements, of rising
and falling empires, of unlimited material
power, there is a great need to enhance, and
if need be to recover, the dignity of the
individual man and woman. Healthy family
life can breathe the living soul into the new
patterns of human society which are emerging all over the world. If they will give
themselves to the full exercise of their
responsibilities, the families of today can
preserve human values in this impersonal
scientific age. And, in a world where the
former separations of distance are rapidly
being eliminated, the increasing solidarity
of good families can generate an humane,
kindly, community spirit, and thus lay the
foundations of that durable peace the true
value and urgent importance of which all
home-lovers understand so well.

Annals of Eugenics

A Journal of Human Genetics
Edited by L. S. PENROSE

Vol. XVI. Part 4. May 1952

Further data on genetics of microcythaemia or
thalassaemia minor and Cooley's disease or
thalassaemia major.—I. Bianco, G. MONTALENTI, E. SrtvesTRONI, M. SINIscALco.

Body weight at different ages and heights.—
W. F. Kesey.

Blood groups in Jews from the Yemen.—A.

' Brzezmsxi, J. Gurevircu, D. HeErmont,
G. MUNDEL.

A statistical study of human _twinning.—
Norma McARTHUR.

Blood agglutinogens of the Méexicans.—C.
ARTEAGA, M. S. Matién, A. V. Brozco,
Exrena L. UGALDo.

Simple tests for bimodality and bitangentiality.

. B. S. HaLpane.

Birth weight and length of gestation of twins,
together with maternal age, parity, and
survival.—Mary N. Karn.

Data on the genetics of birth weight.—L. S.
PENROSE.

Subscription price, 57s. net per volume
Single issues 15s., plus postage
CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS
Bentley House, 200 Euston Rd., London, N.W.!

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLIV, No. 1
