THE PRIMROSE PATH"

Some Aspects of the Population Problem

By A. S. PARKES, M.A., Se.D., F.R.S.
National Institute for Medical Research, Mill Hill, London, N.W.7

HE Galton Lecture commemorates
| one of our great men of science. It
has been given annually, apart from
wartime interruptions, since 1914. The list
of Galton lecturers includes some of the
outstanding personalities of their day, not
least of all our President. I need say no more
to indicate my appreciation of the honour
of being invited to give this lecture.

Galton, himself a notable example of —

hereditary genius, was deeply interested in
human quality. The Eugenics Soctety was
founded, with Galton’s active help, to foster
knowledge of, and promote interest in, all
factors concerned in the improvement of
the race. I need not apologize, therefore, for
having chosen as my subject certain rather
general aspects of the population problem
which have of late been much in the public
eye. I speak as a biologist, but ethical,
moral and humanitarian considerations are
inseparable from the problems discussed.
I have no coherent thesis, and nothing very
new to say. I shall raise numerous questions
without being able to answer any of them.
My object is to convey to a rather different
circle than is normally interested in such
matters a sense of the urgency and seriousness of these questions.

Six years ago the Government of the day
appointed a Royal Commission to examine
the trends of population in this country and
to make recommendations. The Commission
was supported by three expert committees,
on one of which I had the privilege to serve.
The Report of the Commission was issued
last year ; the papers of the Commission are
only just beginning to come out, and anything I say now is said without knowledge
of what may appear in most of them.

® The Galton Lecture delivered before the Eugentcs
Society on February 17th, 1950.

The Commission’s Report is the result of
some years of work and thought by a ‘most
able group of people, but so far it has evoked
no reaction from the Government, and it
does not seem likely that its recommendations will be implemented in the near future.
As Galton pointed out years ago, official
action in this field can move but little ahead
of informed public opinion, and it is to be
hoped, therefore, that the Report will have

‘a very wide circulation. Only by a wide

appreciation of the problems can changes
be brought about, and time is not on our
side. We ere dallying with the three Furies
of retribution, and the path is becoming
stony.

The first Fury is the growth of world
population in relation to food supply, the
second the ageing of the population, and the
third the hidden process of unnatural selection which is at present going on.

Size of Population

More than a hundred years ago Malthus
called attention to the danger of the world
becoming over-populated in relation to
resources, and thereby earned an undeserved
reputation as a false prophet of disaster.
It is well known that population increased
enormously in almost every country in the
world during the nineteenth century. Accurate figures are necessarily not available,
but Carr-Saunders estimates the population
of the world as 728 million in the year 1750
and 1,608 million in the year 1900. It 1s
thought to be well above 2,000 million at
the present time. The trend in Great
Britain is naturally of particular interest to
us. Estimates suggest a population of about
14 million at the time of the Domesday
survey twenty years after the Norman conquest, of 24 million in the fourteenth century,
THE PRIMROSE PATH 9

six million in the seventeenth century, and
in 1801, when the first decennial census was
made, the population was a little over
ten million. By 1861 it had more than
doubled, and by 1941 it had more than
doubled again.

In the course of this rapid growth the
population greatly exceeded the indigenous
food supply and came to rely to an ominous
degree on imported foodstuffs. This purchase of food from abroad was, of course,
made possible by the fact that Great Britain
had a flying start in the industrialization
of the world and could exchange its surplus
manufactured goods for food. Industrialization of the country meant the concentration of much of the population into large
towns, and to the masses of townsfolk thus
created, food was something which was
bought in a shop, and price was the most
important thing about it. There could be
little realization of the fact that the existence
of mankind depended entirely on the production of vegetable matter by the interaction of plant life with soil, sun and water.
Even modern man has not yet succeeded in
doing much damage to the sun (though he
may have altered its effects considerably),
but he has reduced his water supplies by the
destruction of cover, and in the newly
settled countries he has committed wholesale robbery of the accumulated fertility
of the ages. In North America, particularly, agriculture in the nineteenth century
consisted of mining rather than of farming,
one piece of land being worked out and
left derelict as the tidal wave of exploitation passed over. And so was provided the
food for the rapidly growing industrial
populations. In Great Britain, to sustain
our growing population, we imported the
richness of virgin land and flushed it down
our sewers into the sea. This kind of thing
can only happen once, and in the greater
part of the new countries, as in the old ones,
above a low basic level, no.more can now
be got out of the soil than is put into it.
Even among the remarkable achievements of
modern science there is as yet no indication
that this principle is likely to be upset
in the near future. Advances in technology

will, no doubt, increase output per acre,
but the process of development is bound to
be slow, especially the reclamation of manmade deserts.

In the meantime, world population continues to increase. The following quotation
is taken from the Report on the State of
Food and Agriculture, issued in 1948 by
F.A.O.U.N. under the dynamic inspiration of
Lord Boyd Orr. ‘‘ There can be no misunderstanding or belittling of the dimensions of the
production problem. Population is expanding at the rate of 1 to 2 per cent according
to continent. Agricultural output has expanded in one country, under exceptionally
favourable circumstances, at 3 per cent per
annum over a decade, but in many others
the increase has been negligible or non-existent.’”’ In other words, on the whole, food
supplies are increasing barely as fast as
population, so that unless great efforts are
made present standards of living will not be
maintained, let alone improved. We in this
country who for so long have depended on
food from abroad may well find that it is
no longer available, even if there are no
economic difficulties. Thus, we might have
to consider the theory, so emphatically
advocated by William Vogt in the Road to
Survival, that the size of populations should
be geared to the capacity of their land to
carry them. At least, as pointed out by Dr.
G. C. L. Bertram, we should arrive at a clear
idea of optimal size of population in relation
to resources and circumstances.

It is in the light of considerations such as
these that the trends of population in this
country, examined in great detail by the
Commission, are of prime importance. According to present tendencies, the population
of Great Britain will continue to increase in
numbers for about another twenty-five years.
Estimates of what will happen after that
depend on several factors, which can only

be guessed at. Any violent changes in num
bers, however, would involve marked altera
tions in present tendencies, of which there is

as yet no sign. The most extreme projection

ventured upon by the Commission is that if

family size falls to 80 per cent of that for

couples married 1927-1938, even though morB
10 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

tality continues to decline, the population will
fall below 30 million by 2047. The trends of
world population are not easy to estimate,
but short of some major upheaval it seems
likely that the human: race will continue to
increase in total numbers.

Factors Affecting Size of Population

Changes in size of a population are determined by three very obvious factors, birthrate, death-rate and migration. It is with
the first and second of these that I want to
deal. I need say little about birth-rate, which
has been discussed at great length in the
last few years, and of which the salient
facts are well known. Whether in terms of
births per 1,000, which means very little,
or in terms of augmenting or replacing the
population, it fell continuously from 1870
to 1938, except for a temporary rise after
the first war. In the 1930s it was definitely
below replacement level. During the recent
war it rose markedly, probably above replacement level, to reach a peak in 1947.
At the present time it is probably hovering
round replacement level. Tendencies in the
immediate future will be most interesting
and most important. The Commission was
able to obtain little evidence of any significant fall in reproductive capacity ; the continuous decline in the birth-rate over sixty
years or more was clearly due to an increasing
disinclination to have large families, coupled
with an increasing knowledge of how to avoid
them. The Family Limitation Survey
carried out by the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, and published as
Paper No. 1 of the Commission, found that
women using birth control increased from
18 per cent of those married in 1900-1909 to
66 per cent of those married in 1935-1939.
It would appear, therefore, that a considerable fall in the birth-rate took place before
the use of birth control became at all general.
Whatever the explanation of this may be, it
is clear that increasing knowledge of contraceptives, together with their increasing
effectiveness, and increasing conditioning
to their use, will decrease the number of
unwanted children. It is important, therefore, to know why people do or do not want

children. The report on Family Limitation,
in dealing with reasons for using or not using
birth control, is most illuminating on this
subject. The analysis is too detailed to
summarize here; but it may be noted that
among reasons for using birth control
the ties and loss of freedom occasioned by
having children, and the difficulties of obtaining domestic assistance, occupied an insignificant place. The most frequently given reasons varied with age and social class. The
most frequent reason for mot using birth
control was that the woman wanted a
family and did not mind how many or how
quickly they came. The reasons why people
want a family would make a fascinating
study. Very few, I imagine, could honestly
say that they do so because they are sure that
their offspring will be glad to have been
born. What the children think about it all
is not usually considered very carefully.
Modern parents may be more objective in
this matter than their predecessors; certainly they are apt to regard as fair comment
the retort “I didn’t ask to be born,” which
so infuriated Victorian parents. But, for
the most part, parents consider themselves
mainly in wanting a family ; they have an
urge to satisfy—an urge derived from
parental instinct or the pressure of tradition ;
they may have a name or a family tree which
they are proud to perpetuate; they may
want the slight social prestige which goes
with a family, or, less frequently than in
the past, they may regard a family as a
long-term economic asset. The strength of
the urge to have children may be judged
from the length to which infertile couples
will go to have a child, from endless minor
manipulations to artificial insemination. We
come thus to the curious paradox that
parents may make great efforts and prolonged sacrifices for children produced for
essentially egotistical motives.

Most people, then, clearly need no urging
to have some children. The best form of
encouragement that can be offered to them
is to remove the economic and social disadvantages of doing so. It is good to know
that the Commission devoted much time and
thought to this problem. And here I can
THE PRIMROSE PATH II

interject an idea which I find interesting,
and draw attention to the comparative
backwardness of biological science in certain
directions. Man can fly round the world in
three days, can raise the most complicated
economic systems and can take atoms
apart, but to propagate himself he must
still make love and have babies in the oldfashioned way, just like any other mammal.
And, according to present knowledge, if

he doesn’t the race will peter out, no matter

how many atoms he splits. I say “‘ according
to present knowledge.’’ Some twenty years
ago a popular novelist made a reckless excursion into biological fiction and painted an
extravagant picture of ‘‘ ectogenesis’’, propagation outside the body. Fiction is the
right word. To the best of my belief, prolonged experiments have so far failed to effect
fertilisation of the mammalian egg outside
‘the body. Eggs removed from rabbits after
fertilization have been cultured satisfactorily
for a few days. Probably the same could be
done for human material if it were available.
At the other end of the scale, premature
babies weighing about 2$1b. after five months’
gestation have been successfully reared in
incubators. There is thus a huge gap to
bridge, over some of the most complex
processes known to biology, before ‘* ectogenesis’ turns from a dream into a nightmare, and there is no sign whatever that the
gap will be bridged in the visible future.
Most of us hope that it will never be bridged.
There are already enough sad examples of
what happens when technology outruns
intelligence. There is, however, one slightly
gruesome possibility much nearer at hand.
Artificial insemination is now a common and
very useful technique with certain animals.
It is also known to be effective in man.
Researches arising out of the artificial insemination work suggest that it may soon be
possible to store spermatozoa in such a way
that they will survive in a functional state
for years, and that it will be possible to
arrange for an animal to beget offspring long
after its death. Little imagination is needed
to visualize the complications which would
follow the application of such a discovery to
man or the use to which it could be put by a

nation contemplating atomic war, which
might lead to male sterility on a large scale.
This work, in which I happen to be actively
engaged, provides yet another example
of the scientist happily pursuing a fascinating line of research without worrying very
much as to the ultimate desirability of his
discoveries.

We must turn now to the other side of the
picture and examine wastage of population.
In the past, deaths from disease, famine and
violence proved a very effective check on
the growth of population. The Commission,
for example, point out that in earlier times,
in Great Britain, the birth-rate was_probably
high but usually exceeded the death-rate
only in good years. As a result, population
grew but slowly. All this has changed in
the last century. Between 1841 and 1938
the expectation of life at birth rose from
40 years to 60 years, and the huge growth of
population over this period was due at
least in part to increasing longevity. To a
varied extent the same thing was happening
all over the world. The administrator has
done much to stop people killing each other
casually, and the medical scientist pursues
his avocation of preventing and curing
disease, with almost complete disregard
of what will happen to the people, and the
children of the people, whose lives he has
saved. Vogt’s question “ Is there any kindness in keeping people from dying of malaria
so that they can die more slowly of starvation?’”’ is unduly devastating, and is
certainly not one that I should wish to press
while we are the guests of the Royal Society
of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene. There
can, however, be no doubt that the medical
scientist has incurred a tremendous responsibility by the decisive contributions
he has made, and is likely to make in the near
future, to the growth of world population.
In the more highly developed countries the
process is well advanced ; in backward ones
it is only beginning. If the process goes as
far among the coloured peoples of the world
as it has already gone among the whites there
will be some spectacular happenings in the
next 100 years. To those who believe that
pressure of population is ultimately the chief
12 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

cause of war, the activities of the administrator and the medical scientist must at best
seem rather double-edged. Certainly, the
idea of large numbers of scientists working
to advance the means of saving life, while
large numbers of other scientists are feverishly employed in perfecting methods of mass
killing, to deal with the effects of the work
of the first group, is enough to make one
despair of human reason. The high priests of
atomic weapons and bacterial warfare may
well improve the efficiency of methods of
killing people beyond all recognition, but
up to date the tendency has been the other
way. The military technician has latterly
made killing so inefficient in relation to effort,
and so expensive in relation to resources,
as to be almost prohibitive. The number of
man-hours required and the average cost of
killing a combatant by military means in the
last war must have been quite fantastic. The
comparative inefficiency of war in reducing
directly the size of populations is emphasised
in a most interesting paper by Dr. Richardson.* Richardson seriates what he calls fatal
quarrels in the world between 1820 and 1945
according to the number of deaths caused
by each incident. He uses the term “ fatal
quarrels ’’ to cover everything from murders
to world wars—(in passing ] may say that I
regard this as a notable example of the broad
flexible outlook). The remarkable thing
about the results is that murders ranked
next to world wars in their contribution
to total deaths by violence. Small wars
contributed much less to the total. Richardson calculated that deaths from violence
over the period considered made up only
1°6 per cent of the total death-rate. If we
assume that deaths from uncomplicated
senility are not very numerous, the relative
contribution of disease and of violence to
the death-rate is rather remarkable. It must,
however, be remembered that war removes
selectively young male adults, and, under a
voluntary system, selectively virile young
males. The ultimate effect on the population
may thus be far greater than is indicated
by the contribution of war casualties to the
death-rate, far greater, in fact, than any

* See p. 25.

numbers can show. Who can say to what
extent we have suffered by the loss in World
War I, of the flower of the generation now
between fifty and sixty-five years old ?

Composition of Population

I have now rambled over some aspects of
total population and the factors that influence it. I turn now to composition of the
population, which is usually considered in
relation to age and sex. I need say little
about the latter. More males are born than
females, but in the past differential mortality
more than abolished the excess during childhood, and there was an excess of females of
marriageable age. This excess of females was,
of course, increased by war, notably World
War I. Under these conditions the social
system, taken at its face value, condemned
a substantial proportion of young women to
childlessness or even to celibacy. Men being
what they are, it is difficult to believe that
this state of affairs achieved any very
useful form of selection, and it is most satisfactory to know that the steady decline in
child mortality between the wars, by decreasing the relative wastage of males, has
abolished the excess of females of marriageable age. In 1891, according to the Commission’s Report, there was an excess of 403,000
females at ages 20 to 34. For some years after
World War I the excess was much greater.
In 1947, however, in spite of World War II,
the excess of females at these ages was down
to 27,000. The process continues, and may
have some interesting consequences. Thirty
years ago males had a slight scarcity value
and with it a theoretical range of choice ;
the time is coming when the female will be
able to exercise the choice—in theory as
well as in fact. It will be interesting to see
what she does with it.

The most important change, however,
in the composition of the population in the.
last half-century is in age distribution.
The increase in the expectation of life in the
last 100 years, together with the decrease
in the birth-rate, has had some remarkable
effects. This topic has now become rather
hackneyed, but it is of fundamental importance to society and is specially relevant
THE PRIMROSE PATH 13

to any discussion of reducing total population by discouraging propagation. In times
of steady birth-rate and steady death-rate
there will be a decreasing number of people
at each successive age group. Where the
rates are both high the decrease will be
fairly sharp and most of the population
will be youngish people; this was the
position in Great Britain in 1891. Where
both the birth-rate and the death-rate are
low, the centre of gravity of the age distribution will be much higher and there will be
many more old people in relation to the
younger ones. During a change-over from
the first state to the second the situation
will be complicated by survival into the days
of low birth-rate of a lot of old people born
in the days of high birth-rate. This is the
present position, and it will continue to
develop along similar lines for another
twenty years or more. According to the
Commission’s Report, people over 65 formed
4.8 per cent of the population in 1801,
10.4 per cent in 1947, and will be 16 per
cent in 1977. Thereafter the situation will
stabilise somewhat unless the birth-rate or
the death-rate falls appreciably. Some of
the economic consequences of this change
can be indicated very easily. It is estimated
that in 1946 there were 15 pensioners per
100 contributors but that in 1970 there will
be 32 pensioners per 100 contributors.

Such an increase, other things being
equal, must reduce the standard of living
either of the contributors or of the pensioners.
Is there a way out of this economic dilemma ?
Short of some fantastic happening, the age
distribution of adults in the next twentyfive years is already settled within narrow
margins and cannot be altered ; the ratio of
adult consumers to producers is therefore
bound to rise. Can production per man-hour
be increased correspondingly ? This is another question which I cannot answer.

Conversely, is it reasonable to expect
people to work beyond the present retiring
age? Here several interesting points arise.
If the expectation of life has risen by twenty
years, is a man or woman, aged 65 as mentally
and physically fit as one aged 45 was in
1870? The answer is probably no, because

seventy years ago there must have been a
considerable tendency for people to be swept
off in their prime by diseases, and so on,
which can now be overcome. On the other
hand, we are developing much more rational
ideas about what constitutes ageing, and we
realise that the age at which anyone becomes
too old for a job depends partly on the person
and partly on the job. A fighter pilot, for
instance, may be too old for the job at 25,
while at the other end of the scale the artist
and author, for example, can ply their trade

-at their own speed until they become

completely senile, or even after.

This raises the question of how to find out
when anyone is too old for a job. This is
primarily a matter of working out standards
of necessary performance, and is clearly
not an easy problem. It should, however,
be tackled with vigour, because no oné wants
to see oldish people retaining jobs long after
they have ceased to be adequate for them.
The problem then is to retrain them for a job
more suited to their current mental and
physical condition. As regards retraining,
it is usually said that only the young can
learn easily—you can’t teach an old dog
new tricks. But it would be much more
accurate to say that you can’t teach an old
dog by the same methods as you teach a
young dog. It is satisfactory to know that
this subject is receiving increasing attention
from experimental and industrial psychologists, and I understand that the old dog is
proving to be an interesting creature.

Quality of Population

I have now mentioned quantity and
composition of the population. The third
problem concerns quality, and in talking
about this I must restrict myself to basic
considerations. The first of these is that man
is biological material, and, as such, is inherently variable and mutable. All men are
not born equal and never will be. (Whether
or not they should be born to equality of
opportunity is quite a different matter, and
one with which I do not want to get entangled
in this lecture.) The second implication of
the biological nature of man is that inborn
characteristics tend to be passed on to the >
14 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

next generation, though the strength and
the exact nature of the tendency varies
with the characteristic’ in question. This
is true of mental characteristics as well as of
physical ones, as Galton showed in his studies
on Hereditary Genius. Man, therefore, like
other animals, has the two requisites for
modifying the type under the influence of
selection, and in the long run the nature of the
selection will influence the nature of the
modification. Natural selection has ceased
to operate except in a very crude form in
civilised society. What is to replace it?
And here, at the risk of wearying those of you
who are members of the Eugenics Soctety, I
want to quote from the last two paragraphs
of Galton’s Memories of My Life.

I conceive it to fall well within man’s
province to replace Natural Selection by
other processes that are more merciful
and not less effective.

This is precisely the aim of Eugenics.
Its first object is to check the birth-rate of
the Unfit, instead of allowing them to come
into being, though doomed in_ large
numbers to perish prematurely. The
second object is the improvement of the
race by furthering the productivity of
the Fit by early marriages and healthful
rearing of their children. Natural Selection rests upon excessive production
and wholesale destruction ; Eugenics on
bringing no more individuals into the world
than can be properly cared for, and those
only of the best stock.

This simple statement expresses a simple
idea. Is it possible to elaborate ? The words
“ fit ’’ and ‘‘ unfit ’’ remind one of the man
who spent a lot of time “ keeping fit”’
but who was unable to answer the question
“Fit for what?’’ In relation to a social
animal like man, Galton presumably used
the words to mean socially desirable and
socially undesirable. Extreme cases of both
of these categories are quite obvious, but
what of the rest? Galton himself realised
clearly that most people are neither fit nor
unfit, but just somewhere in between. It is
also evident that the development of inborn
characters is much influenced by environ
ment. And so difficulties arise immediately
in obtaining and interpreting the necessary
data and in making use of the results. As
an example of the difficulty of interpreting
data we may recall the experience of Sir
Godfrey Thomson with his two Mental
Surveys, which consisted in doing I.T.s
on the 70,000 to 80,000 r1-year-old children
in Scotland. Both in 1932 and in 1947, when
the survey was repeated, there was a strong
negative correlation between size of family
and score in the I.T. Therefore, intelligence,
thus measured, should have declined in the
interval. But it had, in fact, increased
slightly. Does this paradoxical result mean
that the whole phenomenon is environmental
or that the post-war children have had a
lot of practice in tests of this kind, or is there
some other explanation ? It is impossible to
say. None the less, certain tendencies at
present in operation seem to be most unbiological and to constitute a form of highly
unnatural selection. Thomson, in his Galton
Lecture in 1946, in talking of the selection of
intelligent children for higher education
said, “‘ The children chosen at 11 or 12 to
enter on a longer and more difficult course
of education are likely, on the average, to
marry later (if at all) and to have fewer
children (if any) than those who are not
chosen. This is still more the case with those
chosen later to enter colleges and universities.
The men will marry later than they otherwise

_ would have done, and a large proportion of

the women will not marry at all. In short,
the educational system of the country acts
as a sieve to sift out the more intelligent
and destroy their posterity. It is a selection
which ensures that their like shall not
endure.”” Thomson points out, obviously
rightly, that the solution for this problem
is not to stop educating the intelligent but
to remove the inhibition of propagation
occasioned thereby.

Consider another example. We are rightly
proud of the increasing success in the treatment of sub-fertility, and of the satisfaction
given to many individuals by the appearance
of a long awaited child. Looked at in a
broader way it is arguable that we are
spending time and money in propagating
THE PRIMROSE PATH 15

relatively infertile stocks and that from a
national point of view it would be much
better to devote the resources thus used to
encouraging really fertile couples to produce
larger families. This seems to me to be a
case where the certain interests of the
individual must come before the hypothetical
interests of the race.

But, assuming that we knew a great deal
more than we do about inheritance in man,
and how it was affected by environmental
conditions, what use could we make of the
information to promote the improvement of
the race in relation to its environment ?
We should have to decide upon a clear
definition of social desirability and on a
method of measuring it objectively—not a
task I should like to undertake. This would
then have to be combined with our knowledge
of human heredity to evolve a eugenic
policy and with economic vision to produce
a general population policy. What a task!
Who is going to do it, and when will it
be done? Probably never in a comprehensive way. Eugenic and population policy
will emerge gradually under the pressure
of events. And how is any such policy to
be implemented? Years ago most of the
people who had heard of the eugenic idea
thought it implied the use of farmyard
methods on man, and it has been much
attacked in the light of this assumption.
In its logical development a vigorous eugenic
policy would no doubt involve considerable
powers of negative control—positive control
would be much more difficult—but such
powers are not yet in sight. Nevertheless,
I do not see how some mild form of negative
control—sterilisation of the totally unfit—
for instance, can be long delayed. The State

is now ultimately responsible, from the cradle
to the grave, for everyone born, and must
therefore, it seems to me, begin to acquire
some control over who are born. But this
is a serious difficulty to me. Freedom of
propagation is a pillar of individual liberty
in a world from which individual liberty is
fast disappearing. How then can those of us
who are individualists reconcile ourselves
to the logic of the eugenic situation? That
is another question that I cannot answer,
except in relation to extreme cases. There
seems, however, little prospect of any
extensive form of planned selection, even if it
were scientifically possible and morally
permissible. I think, therefore, that every
effort should be made to spread the idea of
voluntary selection. The Eugenics Society,
originally known as the Eugenic Education
Society, has been striving to this end since
its formation, and should continue to do so
with all its might. Such an idea will not,
of course, make any impression on the lower
levels of the unfit, and in time society for its
own protection will have to deal with them
for the same reason as it now deals with
lunatics and criminals.

This concludes what I have to say on
quality of population, and with it my talk on
some aspects of the population problem.
I am sure you will agree that ‘‘ some aspects ”
is about the right description, but I hope I
have interested just a few more people in these
urgent problems. While I’ve been talking to
you, the population of the world has increased by nearly 3,000, the average age
has got higher, and inborn quality may well
have declined. We tread the primrose path
with the Furies, and who knows where the
path will end ?

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLII, No. 1
