 

oF eae SO a eee, dea os oO om. .) “ ; 9 oe ° i “
, s z " a, # ." - é 4 pe ‘ +. : ‘s Pe . “t i ‘ rm . ‘ ; S..
"2. a ‘ wv _— a We : 2 a . a” : on
- “we aan voy . . . 7 . <
» \oe ‘ ‘ 3 Se . . ’ . . v4 $ wo % “ . + sotN . :

AST :quarter I closed by | saying : “It

- has therefore become obvious that we
A_smust make strenuous efforts to increase
our inconie from other sources.” Before this
view is accepted with sufficient conviction to
yield the large sums I want, I feel that it
may be necessary to prove, despite the
apparent financial strength of the Society,
how wholly inadequate are its present re
civilization and Western population problems, a form of caution verging on insanity ;
(2) More especially because our experience in
recent yeats having shown that eugenics is a
subject which tends to attract legacies, we
may assume that the better known and

appreciated our work is, the larger in number

and amount will be the legacies we shall
receive. (Please note the hint!)

INCOME AND EXPENDITURE ACCOUNT FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER

3IST, 1935 ,
| | Z s.d. f£ s. d.
To Printing and expenses of By Subscriptions 521 10 6
REVIEW ... 573 4 4. ,, Donations ... wee wes I4 10 O
,», Propaganda <n --- 1,082 6 9g ,, Sales and Lecture Receipts 227 16 4
,, General Expenses ... - 2,178 14 O_ ,, Investment Income 3.483 8 4
| 3,834 5 I
Balance, carried down... 413 0 I
4,247 5 2 4247 5 2
», special Expenditure 2,384 13 9 _,, Balance brought down 413 o I

£2,384 13 9

 

sources for the work that has to be done. At
the rate of one page per quarter—my total

allowance—this will take time, but I hope

that in the interval the Society will not falter
in its policy of spending, without waste or

inefficiency, all that may be necessary for
taking advantage of the urgent opportunities

that present themselves. My reasons for
recommending this course are these: (1)
Because to retain £70,000 of capital to pro
vide an income for an indefinite future when .
there is urgent work tobe done is, in my
Judgment, in. the present state of Western

 
 

», Balance, being Excess of

Expenditure over Income, carried to Balance
Sheet

--- 1,971 13 8
£2,384 13 9

 

This quarter I shall analyse the Society’s
income and expenditure, the general structure of which is shown clearly in the table.

Both columns could, of course, be arranged
in.a variety .of groups and details, but I
believe that as shown they clearly illustrate
the chief sources of income and causes of
expenditure. The expenditure column is
divided into two main parts: (a) General

‘Budget ; which includes.all items of expenditure. unavoidable in conducting such an
organization as this Society, and must be
_Yegarded as a basic cost of its activities (e.g.
50 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

rent, rates and salaries) ; (6) Special Budget,

which includes all items not of a definitely

continuing annual character, such as those
which are concerned with passing or
transitory objectives which, having been
achieved, no longer require budgetary suport. | .
P It may be observed that I have shown
separately the amount expended on propaganda (i.e. lectures, health exhibitions, and
so forth) and also the cost of editing, printing
and publishing the EuGENics REvIEw,
which is distributed free, quarterly, to
Fellows and Members ; both these items are
regarded as part of the general expenditure
of the Society.

At this point I want particularly to draw
attention to the fact that the REVIEW costs
more to produce than is provided by the
whole subscription and donation income
received from Fellows and Members. I have
often challenged the wisdom of so expensive
an item, but have been told it is all our
Members and Fellows get for their subscriptions if they live outside the London area.
I dispute the whole basis of this argument
inasmuch as I am convinced that the supporters of our Soczety do not look upon their
subscriptions and donations as something for
which they must “ get ’’ something, but that
on the contrary the vast majority regard it

  
   
   
   
   
   
     
   
   

THE EUGENICS SOCIETY OFFERS A
LEONARD DARWIN STUDENTSHIP OF {250

for the year from the 1st October, 1937, renewable for a second year, tenable in
any approved Institution in the United Kingdom, for Research on subjects bearing
on Eugenics, such as the quantitative study of genetics and evolution, human
heredity, vital statistics, fertility, the eugenic effects of economic conditions and
legislation, etc. Application should be made before 31st May, 1937, to
THE GENERAL SECRETARY, THE EUGENICS SOCIETY
69 EccLEsTON SQUARE, LONDON, S.W.1.

from whom further particulars may be obtained.

as their contribution, however small, to.
wards the solution of one of the most important problems that face the human race.

It will be observed that whereas the regular
income of the Soctrety covers all the items of
the general budget with a margin, that
margin is very quickly exhausted by the
items of the special budget ; these indeed are
the items, and not those of the general budget,
that provoke considerable discussion at the
Annual Finance Meetings of the Soctety.
Almost every member of the Council has a
different emphasis on the value of the items
of the special budget ; but every item has to
be pressed for by a majority of those voting
at the Annual Finance Meeting in November
each year before it is included and approved.

The Council has been reluctant to refuse
support to any scheme which promises real
progress towards the achievement of. the
Soctety’s aims and objects, relying, as it feels
justified in doing, upon the increasing support which a more widespread understanding
of the quality and quantity of the Society’s
work will produce.

Next quarter I propose to outline briefly
the problems which the Council has regarded
as sufficiently urgent to justify expenditure
of capital, and shall draw attention to those

_ problems which await consideration until

such time as funds become available.

  
