DON BROTHWELL and THEYA MOLLESON

Sub-Department of Physical Anthropology, British Museum (Natural History)

The Frequency of Middle Phalangeal
Hair in Britain
A Pilot Survey with Comments on
Some Methodological Problems

AS IT WILL be some time before it is possible
to collect together further data on mid-phalangeal
hair in Britain, it would seem advisable to
make available the results already obtained
during a recent survey. The reason for this
short study was twofold; first to see how British
groups compared with other European series,
and secondly to get first hand experience of the
problems involved in recording this variant on
a medium-sized sample. Another factor which
might be mentioned and which interested us,
is that of time needed to record such observations, always important and sometimes very
critical in field studies. This survey also has
some bearing on our present work concerned
with certain “‘non-metrical’’ polygenic variables,
including hair distribution and patterns, which
forms one of the projects of Section D of the
ongoing International Biological Programme.
In an attempt to obtain the maximum
amount of information on variability in diminishing modern aboriginal populations, European
communities have tended to be neglected. In
Britain, except for serological reference data
and restricted studies on hair colour, colour
blindness and PTC tasting, and even fewer
useful anthropometric studies, we must resort
to much earlier publications for regional
studies. Although we do not have the problem of trying to get large enough sample
numbers in this country, nevertheless, it is
very debatable whether “indigenous” regional
groups will remain intact much longer than
modern primitive communities. During the past
two centuries very considerable population

ER—K

movements have taken place in Britain,
especially in southern England and more
northern industrial areas. This must already
have blurred the pattern of variation resulting
from a number of major intrusive population
movements into the country since Neolithic
times. One may best visualize the formation of
this variation by a sequence of superimposed
layers through time, each having a different
shape which inadequately covered the previous
one. Thus, Scotland and Wales were not so
affected by Roman and subsequent intrusions
(except for small-scale Viking landings) and the
south-west limb of England not so influenced
by the considerable Saxon movements into the
country. Danish and Norman groups moving
in at a more recent date may well have had
most affect upon South-east England and much
of the Eastern Coastal area. Serological evidence
strongly suggests that this pattern made by
earlier population movements is still evident to
some extent in modern groups. It would therefore seem very worth while to collect unrelated
genetic evidence to support the blood group
picture.

As early as 1921, Danforth 6 called attention
to the variations in the distribution of middle
phalangeal hair, and suggested its likely genetic
determination. Further studies showed that the
absence of mid-phalangeal hair varied in human
populations from about 20 to 98 per cent. As
a result of family investigations, Bernstein and
Burke? in 1942 suggested that a set of five
alleles, increasing in dominance, control the
distribution of this hair, whereas in a more

131

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, September 1965, 57, 3.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

recent study by Saldanha and Guinsburg 10
(1961) they conclude that absence of hair may
be determined by a pair of recessive genes. In
any event, the degree of variation displayed by
this character makes it worthy of continued
anthropological investigation.

In the case of the ongoing British survey, two
regional samples have been so far studied, both
from England. The larger series of 218 is from
Yorkshire and the smaller of 118 is from Southeast England (more particularly those living in
London or within a radius of about forty miles).

 

Map 1
Parental origins of the southern sample (in percentages).

The difference in the homogeneity of the two
samples—as demonstrated by a consideration
of the parental origins of the subjects examined
—is interesting. In the case of the sample from
Yorkshire, only 3-5 per cent of the parents were
born in other counties, whereas nearly 34 per
cent of the southern sample were from outside the
broad southern English zone terminated by lines
from Southampton to Bristol and thence to
The Wash (Map 1). Splitting this down further,
8 per cent of the parents were from Somerset,
Dorset and beyond, 4-5 per cent from Wales
and similarly from Scotland, 1:5 per cent from
Ireland and 15-4 per cent from Northern

132

England. We are stressing this point purely to
show the present perilous nature of trusting
postal addresses when sampling southerners.
In the Yorkshire sample but not the other, all
those with non-Yorkshire parents were excluded
from frequency estimates.

As far as the present work is concerned we
have found it necessary to restrict regional
division to a Yorkshire and non-Yorkshire
group.

_ Regarding the matter of recording data, only
one or two individuals refused to be examined,
although a number of more “crusty” Yorkshiremen were sure that they were being “had”.
Some of the younger females, on the other
hand, were more concerned about the possible
hormonal implications of their hairiness! 
The few cases of asymmetrical hair pattern
in our series occurred in individuals with very
little mid-phalangeal hair, and re-examination
of some of these individuals later demanded
the re-adjustment of original results. In particular
it is important to note that when only a few
thin fair hairs are present and these are only
represented by very short bristle, then their
presence could be overlooked. For this reason,
previous reports as to minor asymmetries seem
open to question.

Although data on the density and number of
hairs on each middle phalanx might have been
revealing, this would clearly have been an
arduous task, demanding far more time than
was available to us. General assessments of
phalangeal hairiness (scoring into “‘slight’’,
‘‘medium” and “considerable” grades) were
tentatively undertaken at first, but abandoned
as being too subjective, for the interpretation
of these grades was clearly likely to lead to
much error.

We are not aware of any previous worker
recording the time needed to undertake such
a study, per unit of individuals, although when
contemplating field work it is important to
know how time consuming each of the variables,
potentially worthy of recording, might be. In
the case of the British sample, most of the
individuals were examined at their work in
one of four institutions (two museums and two
factories), and although the period of recording
was broken up by other work, we estimate that
THE FREQUENCY OF MIDDLE PHALANGEAL HAIR IN BRITAIN

not more than six full days were given to
collecting our sample of 336.

Excluding those digits where the presence of
hair was obvious, all others were examined by
means of a X10 hand lens. Although there are
exceptions to the rule, it is usual to find at least
small bristle projections if hair is present at all,
and it is significant that such hair stubble
remained in males even when they undertook
heavy industrial work. Indeed, there were very
few cases in the males series where there was
any doubt as to the presence or absence of hair
follicles, but the females presented a greater
problem, the digital hair often being much
thinner in quality. Indeed, it may well be that
the significant sex differences noted by a number
of observers may be accentuated by the failure
to identify rather fine hair bristle in a few
female cases. As a sex difference is not present
in all world groups studied, inadequate sampling
may well be another contributive factor. This
is not to say that a sex difference for this trait
is unreasonable, especially in groups with
marked pilosity. It is significant that growth
studies have shown that phalangeal pilosity
increases significantly in males at puberty,
whereas the different hormonal picture in
females is not associated with a similar degree
of change.

In the case of the British group there is also
a slight sex difference, the female sample, however, being as yet too small to determine with
value the significance of this difference (Table 1).

In view of the fact that the final pattern of
digital hair is not fully expressed until the
pubertal growth phase is completed, only adult
or near adult individuals were examined. Only
8 per cent were a little under the age of twenty
years, the mean age for males being forty-two
years and for females thirty-three years.

Although there is variation in the relative
frequency of combinations of types of fingers

TABLE 1
Frequencies of mid-phalangeal hair absence in the
two sexes
Sample
Group Sex number Absence Per cent

Yorkshire 3 165 56 33-9
2 53 23 43-4
Non-Yorkshire 3 83 18 21-7
g 35 6 17:1
Total British 3 248 74 29°8
2 88 29 32:9
3+@ 336 103 30:7

(Table 2), the frequency order of the middle
digits with hair is the same in all populations
so far studied. As you will see in the simple
comparison of raw data, the relative frequency
order is IV-III-V-—-II; in other words a
bilateral gradient from IV is general in all
groups (Table 3). Considering the distribution
of this trait on left and right hands, there
would appear to be very slight skewing, the
left hand being more endowed with hair.
Considering the smallness of the samples,

TABLE 2

Percentage distribution of mid-phalangeal hair combinations (males, and left side only)

Group O IV
British (Combined series) 29 15
American “Whites” 29 20
American Negroes 83 (6)
American Indian 60 (20)
Gandhabanik (Calcutta) 51 (a7)

II, II,
H,IV MILIV,V IV,Vv IV, V Others

18 7 2 0

15 5 1 0
1 1 0 4 2
7 0 13 0 0

16 7 3 2 4

133
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

a

 

 

yw

 

ie

52

8
Soy di

 

74

 

Map 2

Frequencies of mid-phalangeal hair absence in Europe, North Africa and South-west Asia
(data from various sources: see References).

134
THE FREQUENCY OF MIDDLE PHALANGEAL HAIR IN BRITAIN

the percental frequencies of this trait for the
four phalanges in the Yorkshire and nonYorkshire individuals of both sexes is remarkably similar (Table 4).

Comparing the British combined series frequency for hair absence with published data
(Map 2), the present information conforms to

TABLE 3

Digits with mid-phalangeal hair in the combined
British sample

Left Right
cf
Sex No. V IV III If V IViitl i
3 248 89 173 130 14 189 171 130 14

2 88 29 58 43 8 28 58 43 8
$+¢ 336 118 231 173 22 117 229 173 22

TABLE 4

Percental frequencies of the hair trait in Yorkshire and
non- Yorkshire individuals of both sexes

Digits
Group Numbers -—
Vv IV Ill II
Yorkshire \ 3 165 22 42 31 4
Non-Yorkshire 83 21 42 32 3
Yorkshire 9 53 20 42 30 5
Non-Yorkshire 35 21 42 30 5

an apparent cline from high to low values which
is just discernible in the European, North
African and Western Asian data. From values
of 52 per cent and 74 per cent in North and
East Africa, and a range from 38 per cent to
50 per cent in the Palestinian-West Russian
area, there is a general decrease to 30 per cent
and under in Northern Europe.

This preliminary report on middle phalangeal
hair is restricted in the scope of its useful
conclusions by the smallness of the samples.
It does, however, corroborate previous evidence
as regards a sex difference and the apparently
universal relative frequency order of digits
affected; also it provides further evidence of a
trend towards increasing phalangeal pilosity in
Northern Europe.

Further studies of this trait in Europe seem
very worth while.

REFERENCES

1. Bat-Miriam, M. 1962. A survey of some genetical
characters in Ethiopian tribes. VIII. Distribution of
mid-digital hair. Amer. J. phys. Anthrop. 20, 196.

2. Beckman, L., and Bédék, J. A. 1959. Distribution
and inheritance of mid-digital hair in Sweden.
Hereditas, Lund. 45, 215.

3. Bernstein, M. M., and Burke, B. S. 1942. The
incidence and mendelian transmission of middigital hair in man. J. Hered. 33, 45.

4. Boyd, W. C., and Boyd, L. G. 1937. New data on
blood groups and other inherited factors in Europe
and Egypt. Amer. J. phys. Anthrop. 23, 49.

5. Boyd, W. C., and Boyd, L. G. 1941. Blood groups
ood renin in Syria. Amer. J. phys. Anthrop.
28, 319. .

6. Danforth, C. H. 1921. Distribution of hair on the
digits of man. Amer. J. phys. Anthrop. 4, 189.

7. Dutta, P. C. 1963. The incidence of middlephalangeal hair among Gandhabanik. Man, 63, 94.

8. Matsunaga, E. 1956. Erbbiologische Untersuchung
der Fingermittelgliedbehaarung bei Japanern und
Deutschen. Z. Menschl. Vererb. -u. Konstit. 33, 465.

9. Saldanha, P. H., Frota-Pessoa, O., Eveleth, P.,
Ottensooser, F., Cunha, A. B., and Cavalcanti,
M. A. A. 1960. Estudo genético e antropolégico de
uma Colonia de holandeses do Brasil. Rev. Antrop.
(Sao Paulo), 8, 1.

10. Saldanha, P. H., and Guinsburg, S. 1961. Distribution and inheritance of middle phalangeal hair in
a white population of Sao Paulo, Brazil. Hum.
Biol. 33, 237.

135
