REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS 409

Leach, R. A., Barrister-at-Law (with an introduction and annotations by).
The Mental Defictency Bill. London. The Local Government
Press, 1912; price 6d. net.
THIs little pamphlet is a reprint of the Mental Deficiency Bill, as introduced by the Government, in a convenient form, and the copious annotations and references to such reports and existing statutes as bear upon
the different clauses will probably be found of use by official and other.
persons concerned with the mentally defective. In our opinion it is
marred by the introduction, which not only reveals a curiously medizval
state of mind in regard to scientific and social progress, decidedly out
of place in a lawyer, but which also suggests that Mr. Leach’s practical
experiences of aments is somewhat limited. As an example we may
quote his statement that “the greater misery to mental defectives is to be
under detention in an institution away from their homes.” We wonder
how many superintendents of institutions would endorse this view. Again
he says, “if there be any hurt in the Bill, the labouring classes are the
classes that would be hurt most.” He is evidently unaware of the almost
daily requests made by members of the labouring class to have their
unfortunate children admitted into homes which do not now exist, and
most people who know will consider that the labouring class is not going
to be hurt, but to be helped most. A. F. TREDGOLD.

Pearson, Karl, F.R.S. Eugenics and Public Health. (Questions of
the Day and of the Fray, No. 6.) London, 1912. Dulau and
Co.; pp. 34; price 1s.

Pearson, Kart, F.R.S. Social Problems: Their Treatment, Past
Present, and Future. (Date of publication and price as above.)

(1.) Is a reprint of Professor Pearson’s address delivered at the York
Congress of the Royal Sanitary Institute this summer. Attention is
directed to the necessity of caution in interpreting the evidence relied
upon by medical officers of health; some instances of defective reasonin
are examined, and one or two aspects of infant mortality are discussed.
Professor Pearson, in the course of a criticism of the paper by Dr. R.
J. Ewart, recently published in this review, uses the phrase, “I cite from
the statement of a medical officer of health published by the London
Eugenics Education Society, a society which professes to help forward
the cause of Eugenics” (p. 13). It is perhaps desirable to remark that,
although the publication of a paper in this review indicates that the
editorial committee believe the paper to contain matter of interest to
students of eugenics, no responsibility is or can be assumed by the council
of the society for the correctness of the conclusions expressed or the
validity of the data used.

(2.) Contains the substance of a lecture delivered at the Galton Laboratory in March, and once more emphasises the difficulty of interpreting
the semi-official statistics which are now accumulating at a rapid rate
and are generally thought to prove the all-sufficiency of environmental
reforms in ameliorating racial and social defects. M. G.

Pearson, KARL, F.R.S. Tuberculosis, Heredity and Environment.
(Eugenics Laboratory Lecture Series, VIII.) Dulau and Co.;
pp. 46; price Is.

Pearson, Kart, F.R.S. Darwinism, Medical Progress and Eugenics.
(Eugenics Laboratory Lecture Series, IX.) Dulau and Co.;
p. 29, with seven plates; price 1s. ;

 (1.) The first of these lectures is a trenchant criticism of the evidence

upon which popular medical authorities found statements which lead

the general public to suppose that the “ conquest ” of consumption is to
410 EUGENICS REVIEW

be achieved by measures directed to the environment. We could wish
that the contents of this booklet might be carefully studied by all medical
officers of health and the army of officials called into being by the
Insurance Act. | |
_(2.) The second lecture was originally delivered to the West London
Medico-Chirurgical Society. It is an eloquent plea for the creation of
medical mathematicians and, pending the realisation of that ideal, for an
entente cordiale between the statistician and the public health officer.
Among the topics dwelt on are the influence of natural selection on
man and the inheritance of certain special defects, such as achondroplasia.
Some beautiful plates are reproduced from the “ Treasury of Human
Inheritance.’ M. G.

Zizek, Privatdozent. Dr. FRANZ, von Statistik und Rassenbioloyie
einschliesslich Rassenhygiene. (Sonderabdruck.) Statistische
Monatscrift, 1912; pp. 431-460.

THIS is a summary of the results reached by various workers in the departments of racial biology and hygiene with the aid of statistical
methods. The article will be of use to many who desire an introduction
to the literature, but the author’s knowledge of statistical processes, if
we may judge by his remarks on page 441 with respect to the meaning
of a coefficient of correlation, is somewhat superficial, and safer guides
may be found in this country.

Davenport, CHarRLeS B., M.D. Eugenics and the Physician. (Re
printed from the “ New York Medical Journal,” June 8th, 1912.)
In this address, delivered to a medical audience, Dr. Davenport
points out the valuable help which ‘physicians might derive from the
systematic study of family traits in their patients, as bearing, for instance,
on individual differences in susceptibility and mode of reaction to infective agents; and he further appeals to medical men to co-operate with
students of heredity in accumulating data concerning the inheritance
of normal.and morbid characters in man. The natural affinity of
Mendelian methods to the individualist attitude of medical practice
should secure a sympathetic response to Dr. Davenport’s invitation.
Though it ought to be well known by this time, it may be worth while
to repeat that the Eugenics Record Office at Cold Spring Harbour, New
York, will furnish printed schedules for recording such data, and will
welcome information with regard to family histories. Dr. Davenport
mentions that he is at present studying the heredity of cleft palate and
harelip, and would be glad to receive data hearing thereon.

W. C. SULLIVAN.

McConnell, R. M., Ph.D. Criminal Responsibility and Social Con
straint. London. John Murray; 1912; 339 pp.3; price 7s. 6d. net.
THis work is, in the main, an examination of the ethical basis of
punishment. It treats, therefore, of a subject of quite respectable
antiquity which has been so often and so exhaustively discussed in the
past that of necessity the arguments bearing on it have for the most
part become familiar almost to the point of being wearisome. It says
much for Dr. McConnell’s dialectic skill that he has been able to present
so hackneyed a theme in the fresh and interesting form which he has
given to it in this eminently readable volume. Defining punishment
as suffering intentionally inflicted by society on an offending member,
the author in the first part of the work discusses the social merits and
demerits of the four fundamental conceptions to which, in his view, it 1s
possible to reduce the theories of punishment, namely expiation, retribution, deterrence, and reformation. From this inquiry he concludes that
no one of these ideas can be accepted as the exclusive basis of punitive
treatment. On the other hand, each of them, except the idea of expia