AN OUTLINE OF A PRACTICAL
EUGENIC POLICY

(Approved by the Council of the Eugenics Society as a general
indication of their aims, immediate and ultimate, though
every item is not endorsed by all its Members).

Moral and Scientific Bases.

The moral basis of Eugenics is that our duties extend not only to
our neighbours, but also to all posterity. The scientific basis of
Eugenics is that the offspring of persons above or below the average in
any natural quality will probably be respectively above or below that
average in regard to this same quality.

The main methods of promoting social progress by improving
the inherent quality of the race consequently are (1) to multiply
the offspring of such stocks as are better endowed than the average;
(2) to diminish the size of families of inferior stocks.

Hence to insure racial progress and prevent racial deterioration it is urgently necessary to advocate a speedy realisation of the
following reforms, precautions and changes in social policy, a change
in public opinion being in some cases a necessary preliminary step.

Definitely Defective Types. Prevention of reproduction either
by (A) Segregation.

Dealing first with individuals who are unquestionably defective,
parenthood to be prevented in the case of all capable of being
certified as defectives under the meaning of the Mental Deficiency
Act, this being normally effected by segregation, that is by confinement in comfort, the sexes being kept apart. This method of preventing parenthood to be adopted also, as far as is Just and practicable, in order to lessen the fertility of habitual criminals, confirmed
drunkards, and the chronic unemployables; provided that segregation
is to be made permanent only after a number of lapses whilst at
liberty, periods of liberty forming the only reliable tests of the effects
of curative or reformatory treatment.

Or (B) Sterilization.

When liberty, partial or complete, is socially objectionable only
because it would involve the risk of procreation, and when such
liberty is permitted, sterilization to be adopted as a method of prevent ing parenthood. This method to apply to all afflicted with some
definite and serious defect which may be inherited; provided it is
effected with the consent of the individual in question, or, in the
96 EUGENICS REVIEW.

case of a mentally defective person (duly certified as such), of his or her
parents or guardians. The State to be given power to exercise a
limited amount of pressure in order to insure that such consent shall
not be unreasonably withheld.

Public opinion as a Safeguard.

Even when definite defects are very likely to appear in future
generations, trust must nevertheless now be placed on the effects of
public opinion in order to prevent parenthood in certain cases; such
as the insane after recovery, the epileptic, and those suffering from
certain comparatively rare hereditary defects. This is also true with
regard to the lessening of the fertility of apparently normal persons
with a seriously defective family history, though it is not easy to
determine where the line should be drawn. It is to be admitted
that the production of a small family may be justified when the
prognostication of defective progeny is doubtful, and that the good
qualities of relatives should be given full weight in judging of the
value of a stock. The undesirability of parenthood when the offspring will probably be on the average of a very inferior type cannot
be too definitely declared and socially recognized.

Family Limitation of the ‘‘Less Fit.’’

As to stocks which are generally inferior without presenting
clearly recognizable defects, any reduction in their fertility can be
produced only by the exercise of self-imposed family limitation.
Abortion being ruled out, the choice of the method of limitation,
whether by continence or by some other means, to rest entirely with the
individuals concerned; provided that married women shall have no
difficulty in obtaining on demand information concerning conception
control. No couple to be regarded as having an absolute right to
parenthood if their circumstances are such as to be likely to prevent
them from bringing up children without an exceptional amount of
aid from the State. When the amount of State aid already given indicates the probability of further parenthood being immediately
injurious to the nation and ultimately injurious to the race, the State
to have the right to exercise a limited amount of pressure in order to
prevent more children from appearing. The pressure to be applied
may take the form either of limiting the aid to be given by the
State, or, in the case of persons living an intolerably uncivilized
life, of actual segregation. When no more children could be born,
such pressure not to be applied.

Superior Stocks.

In order to prevent national deterioration, “the birthrate of the
superior types must be made to be at least as high as that of the inferior types; for no reliance can be placed on the effects of a higher
death-rate amongst the inferior. With this end in view, it must be
made widely known that for parents to limit the family to one or two
childrez is to behave as if they held that the stock from which they
sprang was not worth preserving for their nation, and that it is a
AN OUTLINE OF A PRACTICAL EUGENIC POLICY. 97

primary duty of all sound married couples to produce families at
least large enough to take their part in preventing national deterioration owing to the race-suicide of superior stocks.

Conception Control.

Conception Control, though highly beneficial in many cases, yet
constitutes a potential danger to the Race. It is to be regarded
as being justifiable only on the following grounds: (1) for recognised
medical reasons ; or (2) to secure an adequate interval between births ;
or (83) when a child, if born, could not on account of poverty be reared
in accordance with a certain minimum standard of civilization,
thereby promoting a beneficial method of regulating the density of
the population, or (4) to avoid lowering the standard already attained
by the family, though not merely to safeguard its members against a
loss of social status; or finally, (5) on account of the probable
transmission to posterity of serious hereditary defect.

A dual campaign, therefore, to be undertaken, the advocacy of
adequate facilities for birth control being available for married
women, especially amongst the poorest classes, being combined with
a strong condemnation of the use of contraceptive methods when
likely to result in an undue limitation of the size of families of
parents healthy both in mind and body. The use of contraceptives
(and of sterilization also) for immoral purposes to receive unqualified
condemnation. The avoidance of parenthood merely on selfish grounds
to be declared to be both immoral and unpatriotic.

Selection in Marriage.

Young people to be made to realize the disadvantages to themselves and their descendants likely to arise from marriage with
the unintelligent and the unhealthy. For parents of good stock
to sow high ideals in the minds of their children, mainly by example,
and also to give them ample opportunities of making friends with
young people of the other sex and of good type is, however, a far more
efficacious way of promoting eugenic marriages.

Legislation in Regard to Marriage.

As a preliminary to the issue of a marriage licence, certificates
to be exchanged between the persons concerned, these containing
declarations in regard to convictions for crime, legal certifications in
regard to mental defects and disorders, previous marriages, sterilization, and freedom from certain diseases. Whilst either party is
under age, the addresses of the parents and guardians to be included in
the declaration, to whom notices of the intended marriage are to be sent
by the authority issuing the licence. The marriage of persons whilst
certified as insane or mentally defective to be prohibited, to connive
at such marriages being made a penal offence. -False declarations to
be severely punished, and when gross deception has been practised by
either party on any matter of vital importance in regard to his or
her previous history, a court of law to have power to annul the
marriage contract.
98 | EUGENICS REVIEW.

Illegitimacy. .

Such allowances as the fathers of illegitimate children are ordered
to pay by courts of law to be obtainable by the mothers with all possible ease and certainty.

Family Allowances.

In order to promote the fertility of superior types the principle
should be affirmed whenever schemes are proposed, either national or
sectional in scope, that the benefit recovered per child should be
directly proportional to the scale of earnings of the parents.

Taxation.

In order to make taxation less where the expense of bringing
up children is greater the present system of income tax allowance should be amended, extended and rendered more effective.

Registration.

The reforms now needed in our registration systems to be so
effected as to facilitate the tracing of family histories and the
ascertainment of serious defects in ancestry.

Human Stocktaking.

At regular intervals a random sample of the youth of the nation
to be measured as regards mental and physical qualities in order that
in time it may become possible to ascertain in what respects the race
is improving or deteriorating.

Education.

Research and higher education in regard to human racial questions
to be undertaken at all universities. Biology to be given an important place in the curricula of all schools. Scholarships to be less
numerous and more valuable rather than more numerous and not
nearly covering the expenses thrown on parents. The mentality of
every child to be measured and recorded at an early age and again
shortly before leaving school.

Immigration.

Care to be taken that no alien immigrants shall be admitted
who are likely to lower the racial qualities of the national stock.

Miscegenation.

Further knowledge with regard to the effects of miscegenation
to be obtained in order to make it possible to frame a practical
Eugenic policy thereon. Meanwhile, since the process of race
mixture cannot be reversed, great caution to be exercised.

Racial poisons.

Whatever may be the effects, if any, of venereal diseases

and drunkenness on the racial qualities of the third and following

generations, the campaign against these evils to be left in the hands
of those excellent organisations now dealing with these questions.
AN OUTLINE OF A PRACTICAL EUGENIC POLICY. 99

Importance of Environment.

If eugenic societies do not concern themselves with the more immediate benefits to be derived from changes of environment, it is
not because their members fail to recognise how much remains to be
done in this field. It is only because they hold that their duties in
this respect will best be performed by co-operating as individuals
with the innumerable existing bodies already striving to improve
human surroundings.
