MIGRATION
AND THE BRITISH COMMONWEALTH’
By BRINLEY THOMAS, M.A., Ph.D.

N -view of the effects of the second World
War on the economic and strategic position of Britain it is suggested in several
quarters that mass emigration to other parts
of the Commonwealth is now desirable.
The question may be analysed under three
headings :

(2) emigration and the post-war crisis of
economic adjustment ;

(b) emigration and Commonwealth
security ;

(c) emigration and the probable long-run
economic condition of Britain.

Emigration and the Economic Crisis}

The other day many people must have
been surprised to hear the result of a public
opinion poll taken in this country on the
topic of emigration. Six out of every ten
persons over 21 and under 30 said they
wanted to emigrate. Some people would
doubt the validity of this result ; but even if
you reduce the figure by half you still get
30 per cent of the people in their twenties
saying that they do not want to stay in this
country. And we have other evidence, too.
It has been officially stated that there are
235,000 with their names down to go to
Australia, and I suppose there are hundreds
of thousands in the queues for Canada, South
Africa and New Zealand.

Why has there been this sudden renewal of
interest in emigration since the war? Before
the war it was very different. Conditions
were so disturbed in the thirties that 120,000
more people migrated from the Dominions
to this country than went out from here.
Between the wars the Dominions were not
very keen on having a large number of

* A paper read before the Eugenics Society on May
25th, 1948.

+ I am indebted to the B.B.C. for permission to
reproduce in this section some passages from a talk
which I broadcast on May 21st, 1948.

immigrants, and they wanted to be sure that
those who did come were willing to go into
agriculture and stay there. It was Britain
that was pushing Empire settlement. The
Government as well as a number of enthusiastic voluntary societies were doing all they
could to keep up the old tradition by which
the mother country had always been the
blood donor of the Empire. The fact that
there was a great deal of unemployment here
was an additional reason.

But to-day the position has changed both
in Britain and in other parts of the Commonwealth. Though we have full employment
the difficulties oftlife in this country have
made some people—probably young exservicemen—frustrated and restless. There
is the fear that austerity is going to last for
years, and the conviction that things are
much more normal in Australia or Canada.
Even though the young man with a wife and
small children realizes that houses are as
scarce in the Dominions as they are at home,
he feels he can put up with temporary difhculties more cheerfully if he knows that
before long he will be sure of a better house
and wider opportunities of a job. He reads
that the Dominions are crying out for industrial workers and technicians. And this is a
point which makes the outlook very different
from what it was before the war. In every
Dominion the emphasis is now on industrial
development. Canada, with her great
natural resources, anticipates years of steady
expansion. The discovery of new gold fields
in the Orange Free State has opened up a
prospect of brisk industrial growth in South
Africa ; while Australia and New Zealand
have programmes of development which will
call for hundreds of thousands of new urban
workers.

The position then seems to be that there
are a large number in this country who—
either because they are fed-up or just adven
127
128

turous—want to go and live overseas, and
the Dominions are anxious to have them.
The snag is that there are hardly any ships
available to take the emigrants. The British
Government agrees that it is a good thing to
let the Dominions have settlers from here so
long as they are a good cross-section of our
people. But here we come to the first difficulty. This country is up against a serious
economic crisis and is desperately short of
certain grades of workers. We shall not be
able to pay our way until we have reshuffled
our labour so that there is enough in industries such as coal, textiles and agriculture—
enough to earn for us the food and raw
materials we must get from abroad. Now the
trouble is that the Dominions are keen on
having men from some of the very occupations that are suffering from a shortage in
this country. For example, Australia, when
announcing the scheme for free and assisted
passages, said she wanted welders, sheet metal
and foundry workers, textile and clothing
operatives, boot factory workers, machinists
in the clothing, textile, printing, canvas and
leather trades—as well as doctors, dentists
and nurses. One cannot help wondering how
we can hope to get on our feet quickly if, say,
30 per cent of the men and women in our most
undermanned industries are to go overseas.

It is a pity that just at present Britain and
the Dominions seem to be competing for a
limited supply of key workers ; and I would
like to suggest that this side of the emigration
question—its effect on our uphill struggle to
overcome the economic effects of the war—
needs to be looked at very carefully. Now
that the mother country is suffering from a
bad attack of anzmia, can she afford to be
the blood donor of the Commonwealth ?
Perhaps there is something!in the idea that
what we need most at this time is more
immigration of suitable workers from
Europe — men who, because they are
foreigners, will not mind going to work
straight away in the industries where the
need for labour is greatest.

Migration and Defence
The strategic argument has strongly influenced the Dominions in favour of a vigor
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

ous long-term programme of immigration ;
and, from what we know of the ideas of the
British Chiefs of Staff, they, too, are convinced that the formidable defence problems
of an atomic age can be successfully overcome only by redistributing the population
and economic potential of the Commonwealth. At the meetings between the Prime
Ministers of Great Britain and the Dominions
held in London in April-May 1946 far-reaching plans affecting the future pattern of the
Commonwealth’s man-power and resources
were put forward by the Chiefs of Staff.
Reporting these meetings, The Times (April
27th, 1946) said :

It has been evident during the discussions that
the main burden of Commonwealth defence,
whether regarded independently or as part of a
future United Nations security organization,
would still fall, for many years to come, on this
country. Industrial and scientific resources, as
well as skilled manpower, are largely concentrated in Britain, the most vulnerable target to
atomic weapons of any of the Great Powers to
whom the task of maintaining security will fall.
The Commonwealth, on the other hand, is the
most widely dispersed of the world’s political
groups, and offers incomparable opportunities
for the redistribution of vulnerable industries
and stocks, and for the posting and training of
military, naval and air formations. The prospect
opened up by such an idea has been before the
minds of Commonwealth leaders for some time,
but only now are some of its economic and
political aspects being fully appreciated.

So far as the layman can see, the Chiefs of
Staff have logic on their side. The British
Commonwealth and Empire represents a con
siderable aggregation of power, and the

experience of two World Wars proves that its
capacity for concerted action is far greater
than would appear from the loose links that
bind it together in peace-time. While
political power within this family of nations
is being progressively decentralized, it becomes more and more of an anachronism that
so much of the economic potential should be
located in its most vulnerable corner. A
strategy for defence must postulate total
war, and so the military planner cannot
avoid drawing up schemes having far-reaching economic, political and_ sociological
implications. In the past Britain could feel
reasonably safe by spending enough on the
MIGRATION AND THE BRITISH COMMONWEALTH

upkeep of her navy, without even the
trouble of having military conscription. She
could prepare for all contingencies without
interfering with the freedom of her citizens to
live as they wanted to. But by now the
revolution in the art of war has robbed our
island of the advantage for defence which
she used to possess. By herself Britain will
in future lack the necessary power of initiative: her safety therefore depends much
more than ever before on the combined
strength of the group of countries with which
she has a special affinity. The imperial
strategist argues that the only way in which
the combined strength of this group can be
increased is by moving a substantial part of
the man-power and industries of the centre
to the extremities. Logically the conclusion
seems inescapable. You cannot produce the
necessary deterrent effect on a potential
aggressor and expect to leave the shape and
course of peace-time life unaffected. It is
argued that part of the price of a maximum
degree of security in an atomic age must,
therefore, be planned migration with all its
inevitable economic and social disturbance.

There are broadly two ways in which such
a strategic dispersal could be carried out :
either by transplanting over a period of
years, say, ten million people comprising a
cross-section of the whole community or by
large-scale promotion of spontaneous emigration. I shall assume the latter as the more
practicable possibility.

“The Lost Generation ”’

Emigration, like war casualties, bears most
heavily on the youth of a country, and the
effects are felt for many a decade. Who can
measure what Britain suffered in vitality
between I919 and 1939 as a result of “the
lost generation ’’ ? What will be the probable
consequences in the next thirty years if she
is to lose through emigration a good proportion of those who are in the prime of life ?

Let us first consider how the population of
Britain would have developed had it not been
for the war of 1914-18. Thanks to the demographic research done under the auspices of
the League of Nations, a good deal of light
has been thrown on this subject. The United

129

Kingdom had a population of about
46,085,000 in 1914. It is estimated that the
military casualties were 744,000, that there
was an excess of 402,000 deaths of civilians
over the age of one, and that 709,000 less
babies were born than there would have been
otherwise.* The military deaths were equal
to 5 per cent of the male working population.
Prodigious though these were, it is significant
that the loss through the deficit of births was
almost equally heavy, and by 1931 this
showed itself in a sharp shrinkage of boys and
girls in the age group 15-17. An indication
of the effect on the most active part of the
working population may be seen by comparing the actual with the “ expected ”’ population in 1926. In that year the size of the
male age group 25-49 in England and Wales
was 9 per cent less than it would have been
but for the war, and in the age group 30-34
the reduction was as much as 15 per cent.
The economic implications of this loss were
considerable, though they were masked by
the refusal of inter-war Governments to
accept the Keynesian remedy for unemployment. Moreover, the extent of the surplus of
women over men in the population as a whole
was nearly Io per cent. While isolating one
factor—war losses—one must not forget that
over a period its influence is overshadowed by
that of declining fertility. It is estimated
that by 1941 the population of England and
Wales would have been 1-1 million more than
it was, had it not been for World War I; if,
at the same time, the fertility and mortality
rates existing before that war had continued,
it would have meant an addition of another
5°7 million to the population of 1941.

In the second World War Britain’s losses
are estimated at a total of 398,000, of whom
290,000 were in the Armed Forces, 62,000
were civilians, and 45,000 men of the
Merchant Navy.ft It is very difficult to suggest a figure for the deficit of births, but it is
probable that it was proportionately much

* F, W. Notestein and others: The Future Population
of Europe and the Soviet Union, League of Nations,
Geneva, 1944, Pp. 75.

+ International Committee for the Study of European
Questions : The Results of the War of 1939-45 as regards
the Population of Germany and of the Allied Countries
of Europe, 1946.
130

less than in the first World War. The immediate future will reveal gaps in the age groups
30-49 as a result of the deaths of these
335,000 men mostly in their youth. Moreover the low birth-rate of the thirties will
soon be having its impact on the numbers in
the lower age groups. The number of young
men for call-up to the Services at the beginning of 1949 will be about 350,000, and by the
middle of 1950 it will be 300,000. This will
be a sharp fall from the figure of 417,000
for 1939. Assuming no net migration, it is
expected that the population of England and
Wales by 1959 (41,903,000) will have the
following age-composition : one-fifth will be
20-34, 27°7 per cent 35-49, I19°9 per cent
45-64, and 12:4 per cent 65 and over. Only
43 out of every hundred will belong to the
economically most productive group aged

20-49.

Demographic Consequences of Emigration

_ This prospect is depressing enough, but it
allows for no loss by migration. Let us now
suppose that a policy of promoting largescale emigration to the Dominions is put into
force. To obtain an idea of the probable ages
of the emigrants we may glance at the experience of Empire settlement in the twenties.
The age-composition of British adult emigrants in 1928 was as follows :

 

 

 

 

Age Males Females
Group per cent per cent
18-20 ... 13°7 9°7
ne 21-25 ... 30°5 20°6
26-30 ... 21°0 21°2
31-45 :-- 24°9 32°3
Over 45 9°7 16:0
Not stated o°2 o°2
I00°0 = 100°0
Totals --» 57,786 45,758

 

No less than go per cent of the men and
84 per cent of the women emigrating from
the United Kingdom in 1928 were between
the ages of 18 and 45 ; 65 per cent of the men
and 52 per cent of the women were between
18 and 30 years of age. It is reasonable to
assume that the same would be true of spontaneous emigration in the next few years.
Let us take a simple hypothetical case,
based on Projection No. 5 for England and

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Wales, given in the recent P.E.P. book on
Population Policy.* Suppose that from England and Wales in 1949 200,000 men and
200,000 women aged 20-24 emigrated (we
assume an even spread within the age group) ;
then suppose that in 1954 this same outflow
is repeated, while 200,000 men and 200,000
women aged 25-29 also go overseas. We
suppose that no immigration takes place.
Allowing for the expected death-rate among
these emigrants if they remained here, we can
calculate the expected deficit in the age
group 25-34 in 1959 attributable to emigration. According to the projection, assuming
no net migration, there would be 2,851,000
males and 2,823,000 females aged 25-34 in
1959. Given the volume of migration here
assumed, the figures would be 2,259,000
males and 2,230,000 females. In other words
there would be 21 per cent less people aged
25-34 than there would have been but for
emigration. To complete the picture one
would have to estimate the consequent
deficit of births and then recalculate the agecomposition of the whole population for
1959. It is clear that mass emigration of
young people is bound to add to the weight
of older dependants to be carried by a
shrinking body of active producers.

Some Economic Consequences

When men move overseas there is a tendency for money to go withthem. A constant
leakage of capital would be very harmful toa
country whose major task in the coming years
is to increase substantially the supply of its
own savings for use in this country. The
inevitable efflux of technicians and managers
would have a detrimental effect on this
country’s efficiency. The burden of debt a
head would increase and the overhead costs
of social capital would also become heavier.
Those who recommend mass emigration from
Britain should study the object-lessons in the
record of the depressed areas of this country
between the wars. That dismal episode is
too well known to be repeated here. If
Britain becomes the depressed area of the
Commonwealth, prematurely aged, struggling

*I am indebted to the authors for supplying the
figures.
MIGRATION AND THE BRITISH COMMONWEALTH

under a crippling load of debt and too poor to
rebuild her obsolete capital equipment, she
will be of no use either to the Commonwealth
or to Western Union. She will have to
abdicate the leadership of the Western
European democracies and live on the
charity of the English-speaking world. It is
not much comfort to John Bull to have to
become a chronic invalid in order that his
children overseas should live happily ever
after.

Weakness of the Security Argument

Perhaps the defence argument proves too
much. If, because of atomic bombs, it would
be a good thing for ten million of us to go,
then it would be an even better thing if the
whole lot of us were to go. It is most important to ensure that Britain is a healthy
economic unit after you have reduced her
population ; this is out of the question if
mass emigration takes place spontaneously.
In view of her past economic status, Britain
cannot help remaining a pivotal link in the
Commonwealth chain. Strength in war
implies a surplus over the bare necessities as
well as the substantial productive capacity
required to sustain the engines of modern
war. If Britain is to count at all she cannot
afford to become much smaller than she is at
present.

Finally, the military planners, in restricting themselves to Commonwealth defence,
are taking too small a canvas. Our destiny
appears to be bound up with that of the
United States, the British Commonwealth
and Western Europe regarded as one large
group of like-minded nations. In that wider
context it is by no means obvious that a wise
defence policy requires a mass exodus from
this island.

Racial Discrimination in the Dominions
Long before 1914 the Dominions had been
doing their best to exclude aliens of Asiatic
origin. Various Canadian Acts between 1885
and 1904 raised the head tax on Chinese
immigrants from $50 to $500, but nevertheless the number of Chinese people recorded
in the Canadian censuses increased from
4,383 in 1881 to 46,519 in 1931, with 58 per

131

cent of them in British Columbia. The
Chinese Immigration Act of 1923 put a stop
to the influx ; the only persons of Chinese
origin or descent who were allowed to land in
Canada were members of the diplomatic
corps and their suites and servants, children
of Chinese residents in Canada who had left
the country for educational or similar purposes, merchants and students, and persons
in transit. The last two classes had to have
passports issued by the Government of
China and endorsed by a Canadian Immigration Officer. An influx from Japan started
about 1896, and by 1931 over 23,000 people
from that country were living in the
Dominion, nearly all of them in British
Columbia. This movement, too, was reduced
practically to zero after 1929. |

Chinese people began to enter Australia
during the gold rush of 1851, and by 1859
42,000 of them had arrived. At first the
authorities instituted the head tax, and their
attempts to stop the influx were greatly
helped by the exhaustion of alluvial gold.
The Immigration Restriction Act of I9go1
introduced the famous “ dictation test,’
which classified as a “ prohibited’ immigrant “‘any person... who when an officer
... dictates to him not less than fifty words
in any European language fails to write
them out in that language in the presence of
the officer.’ In deference to a protest by the
Japanese Government that this provision
discriminated against citizens of Japan, the
words “any European language’ were
altered in 1905 to “‘any prescribed language,”
with the proviso that no prescribed language
could be used until it had been laid before
both Houses of Parliament for thirty days,
and both Houses had passed a resolution
approving it. The test has been applied not
only as an instrument of racial discrimination but also to keep out politically undesirable aliens. In 1934 a political radical from
Czechoslovakia—who happened to be a good
linguist—was given a passage in Scottish
Gaelic ; but this went too far, for the High
Court decided that this ancient tongue was
not ‘‘an European language.”

The Dominions were highly successful in
excluding Asiatic migrants. In 1934 out of
132

873,000 Japanese who lived outside their
homeland there were only 2,800 in Australasia and 21,000 in Canada, making about
3 per cent.* The Chinese living abroad
numbered about eight million, and the four
British Dominions together contained only
65,000 of them.t

The Threat to the Cohesion of the Commonwealth

Let us suppose that we took the plunge
and undertook to pay a heavy insurance
premium in the form of an annual outflow of
young emigrants but that the receiving
nations continued to keep their doors closed
to people of Asiatic origin. If the Dominions
of India and Pakistan remain in the Commonwealth, we shall then have the spectacle of
certain members of the Commonwealth
refusing to admit the citizens of other members ; or, if some of them are allowed in,
they may be obliged to occupy an inferior
status. The acute problem of the Indians in
South Africa is an example of the inflammable material lying at hand. The wellknown formula of 1926, enshrined in the
Statute of Westminster of 1931, describes
the United Kingdom and the Dominions as
“autonomous communities within the
British Empire, equal in status, in no way
subordinate one to another in any aspect of
their domestic or external relations, though
united by a common allegiance to the Crown,
and freely associated as members of the
British Commonwealth of Nations.”’ Migration policy is essentially a branch of international relations. What is to happen if His
Majesty’s Ministers in Australia advise him
to adopt an immigration policy which excludes nationals of the Dominion of India,
while His Majesty’s Ministers in India are
advising him to apply a retaliatory policy ?
Can the British genius for compromise
negotiate this particular hurdle? This poses
a peculiar dilemma for the United Kingdom,
without whose man-power the four

Dominions cannot realize their objectives.

*“* Japanese Emigration,’’ International Labour
Review, Nov. 1936.
{ Industrial and Labour Information,

1934, P- 52.

Oct.-Dec.,

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

To promote a redistribution of the white
population of the Commonwealth while
acquiescing in the maintenance of barriers
against citizens of India and Pakistan would
surely be a risky undertaking. A long-term
policy whose sole justification is security
might simply accentuate racial conflict and
create further insecurity. The population of
the sub-continent of India is increasing at
the rate of five million a year, and the next
few decades will probably see the death-rate
declining faster than the birth-rate. A
similar phase of expanding population is to
be expected in Japan and China. As the
pressure of these teeming millions on the
means of subsistence becomes more intense,
the Asiatic countries are likely to denounce
the “closed door” policy of the white
nations as an intolerable injustice. Those
who are interested in the solidarity of the
British Commonwealth and Empire should
think twice about the implications of a
migration policy based on a colour bar, particularly in view of the prominent place given
to racial equality in the creed of the Soviet
Union.

The Long-run Economic Prospect

I come now to the long-run question—
whether, in view of the ravages of two World
Wars and the unfavourable circumstances
now facing her, Britain can hope to maintain
50 million people at anything like the old
standard of living ? Can she possibly achieve
the export trade that will be required? Is
this island now in the throes of a long-term
crisis which was developing between the
wars and has been much heightened by the
last war, the only way out of which is largescale emigration ? |

I have recently been re-reading that excellent series of articles on “ Reconstruction in
Europe’ published by the Manchester
Guardian three years after the end of the
first World War. In a striking contribution
on population the late Lord Keynes gave
reasons for thinking that the Malthusian
Devil had returned to haunt this country.
Writing in 1922, he said :

For many years to come, regardless of what the
birth-rate may be from now onwards, upwards of
MIGRATION AND THE BRITISH COMMONWEALTH

250,000 new labourers will enter the labour
market annually in excess of those going out of
it. To maintain this growing body of labour at
the same standard of life as before, we require
not only growing markets but a growing capital
equipment. In order to keep our heads above
water, the material capital must grow as fast as
the material labour supply, which means new
savings at the rate of {400 million to {£500
million per annum. Whether we can reckon on
the continuance of this, in view of the change in
many of the circumstances which, during the
nineteenth century, were specially favourable to
saving is at least doubtful.... Indeed, the
problem of population is going to be not merely
an economist’s problem, but is in the near future
the greatest of all political questions.

So far as the inter-war period was concerned I do not think the prognosis could be
regarded as one of the most successful of
Keynes’s essays in persuasion. It is true that
our difficulties became apparent in our failure
to export enough. By 1938 the volume of our
imports was 25 per cent more than in 1913,
but the volume of our exports was down by
two-fifths. On the other hand the terms of
trade moved in our favour. The average
price we paid for our imports was about the
same in 1938 as it was in 1913, while the price
obtained for our exports was 40 per cent
higher.* As one of the world’s great markets
we reaped rich benefits from the cheap food
available to us.

But the question now is whether, at long
last, the Malthusian Devil has now come back
for good. Sir Charles Arden-Close is one of
those who think this is so.

The Outlook for Food

I cannot deny that there are some very
important facts about food which must command our attention.

1. First, the rapid advance of industrialization in primary producing countries will mean
a greater domestic demand for foodstuffs in
these countries in future. Let us remember
what has already happened in the U.S.A.
America’s food imports doubled in volume in
the quarter of a century up to 1939, and her
food exports declined. At the beginning of
this century the United States exported
twice as much food as she imported. Just

*See G. D. A. MacDougall, “ Britain’s Foreign
Trade Problem,” Economic Journal, March 1947, p. 78.

133

before the war she was importing twice as
much as she exported. By 1960 the population of the U.S.A. will probably have increased by 20 million compared with 1940.*
Quantitatively America’s food imports may
soon be as considerable as Britain’s. The
same process is starting in Australia and
other countries which used to be primary
producers. The traditional form of international trade—the exchange of manufactured goods for food and raw materials—will
become progressively less significant.

2. As a result of the work of the International Emergency Food Council we are
witnessing a remarkable essay in the principle of “‘ fair shares ’”’ applied to food allocations. Thanks to the magnificent work of
Sir John Boyd Orr, it is becoming recognized
that subsistence for the hungry peoples of
the world must become a first charge on
world food resources. It is a sad irony that
this new development in international
socialization is going to involve serious difficulties for insular socialism in Britain. Fair
shares in world food allocations means dear
food for the people of Britain.

3. The third fact is that the responsiveness
of food supply to price changes may be different from what it used to be. When countries like Australia, Canada and the Argentine are industrialized, the farmer will be
getting a higher average price than hitherto.
Now if he does not continue to get a high
price abroad he will either sell more on his
home market or consume more himself, e.g.
feeding grain to livestock rather than
marketing the grain itself.

4. The industrialization of poor countries,
e.g. India, will bring into play a force tending
to reduce supply for the market when prices
rise. It is well known that poor peasants,
when the price of their crops increases, ‘often
find it advantageous to sell less in the
market and consume more themselves. The
prospect in Asia is far from encouraging.
Before the war, Burma, Siam and IndoChina exported 7 million long tons of rice
every year; in 1946 this had fallen to
14 million tons. This is having a grave effect
on India, South China and Malaya, which

* Ibid., pp. IoI-2.
134

used to take most of this surplus. The
population of the sub-continent of India
increased by 83 million in the two decades
1921-41, and the impact of new ideas of
hygiene and sanitation will lead to an even
higher rate of increase.

Mass Emigration is No Remedy

For these reasons there can be no doubt
that the era of cheap food for the British
people is over. Are we then to infer that
emigration is the only remedy ? If we are to
rely for food on our own soil, then, of course,
drastic depopulation is inevitable. More of
certain foods should certainly be grown in
this country ; but the problem is far too big
to be overcome in this way. If we must expect the terms of trade to be permanently
against us, that is simply an additional
powerful argument in favour of a redistribution of the labour supply of this country.
Figures of density per square mile are not
conclusive. Once we turn our backs on the
most economical use of our own resources
our decline will be certain. We must contrive to use our resources to produce and
sell things in which we have special advantages. In this way Britain can obtain more
food per unit of effort than by growing a very
costly additional amount at home.

I conclude that to help overcome the
immediate post-war economic crisis what
Britain needs is immigration rather than
emigration. On a long view there would perhaps be a net gain in a moderate volume of
emigration (a good cross-section by agegroup) to the Dominions if this would lead to
an increase in our supplies of food and if the
Dominions would agree to take over a fair
proportion of our national debt and defence
expenditure. But I do not mean by this the
mass emigration which would be required to
put body into the military ideas of strategic
dispersal. Britain must no doubt put up
with a lower average standard of living in
future ; but it need not imply depopulation.

DISCUSSION

Sir Charles Arden-Close writes: I much
regret that I am unable to attend the annual
meeting, and that I shall not be present when
Professor Brinley Thomas reads his paper on

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

“ Migration,’ a subject in which many
members of our Soczety take an interest. But
I have had the opportunity of studying a
recent review article by him entitled ‘‘ Does
Our Migration Policy Make Sense?” and I
venture to send the following remarks in
the hope that the chairman may permit them
to be read, and that I may in this way
contribute to the discussion.

Very briefly, Professor Thomas’s article is
to the effect that certain of our industries,
such as tinplate, hosiery, cotton, clothing,
paper, and so on, are short of man-power, and
the man-power shortage is chronic. Another
factor in the national situation is “ anxiety
over the coming decline in our numbers.”
And, thirdly, ‘‘ the problem of defence has
been revolutionized by the atomic bomb,”
and “this island has become extremely
vulnerable.” He says that if we encourage
emigration ‘‘the age-composition of the
population by 1971 will be even more lopsided than the present estimate promises it
will be.”” He urges that, apart from considerations of defence, far from encouraging
emigration, we should, apparently during
the next few years, aim at a big scheme of
immigration.

Now, at the present time, Britain has a
larger population than it has ever had in the
whole of its history, and our numbers are still
increasing. The “alarm” spoken of was
partly caused by forecasts which have been
proved to be incorrect. But, unless our
population is to go on increasing for ever,
there must come a time when a maximum is
reached, and.this may be, perhaps, in ten or
twenty years. Meanwhile, if there is a manpower shortage the causes may be various,
such as our special population structure, including the large excess in numbers of women
over men, maladjustments in the labour
situation, and defects of output. If we are not
to expand indefinitely we must make up our
minds to put up with an increasing average
age over a certain period. The Government
can deal with adjustment problems.

Professor Thomas does not mention the
most important element in the problem,
namely the food situation. If we refer to the
Economic Survey for 1948 we shall find
MIGRATION AND THE BRITISH COMMONWEALTH

authoritative information about this vital
element. In the list giving the Expenditure
on Imports in 1947 the actual cost of imported
food and supplies for agriculture is given as
£750 million ; next to this, but £200 million
lower, comes the cost of raw materials and
supplies for industry ; the other purchases
are much smaller. Now, the raw materials
and supplies for industry are required largely
to enable us to export goods to other countries, in order that we may have money
enough to buy food. And so we get back
again to food.

With regard to supplies for industry, one
of our needs is, of course, a full complement
of workers. The Economic Survey reports
that, during 1947, industry was provided
with foreign workers to the number of 95,000,
with additional women workers, and workers
whose retirement had been postponed. These
measures were required to enable us to produce more goods for the export drive, which
was needed for the purchase of food and raw
materials. It all serves to show the straits
to which we are reduced to get food enough,
for we are the largest importers of food in the
whole world. Sir Stafford Cripps has said
that the key to the British situation is the
food question.

There is one very direct way of dealing
with this, our chief, difficulty, and that is to
increase our home production of food by
encouraging British agriculture, and this
would appear to be the policy of the Government. Let us suppose—and it is not a very
extravagant supposition—that we could
increase our home-grown supplies from 39
per cent to 50 per cent of our needs. By
so doing we should reduce our imports of
food and, in terms of the 1947 expenditure,
we should save £137 million per annum on
payments for food from abroad.

As to emigration, there are many good
reasons for desiring a reduction in the size
of our population. Such a reduction would
make the food situation easier in peace-time.
In the atomic war of the future, which in our
beleaguered condition will be even more
severe on our supplies than were the two
recent world wars, a reduction might save
us from semi-starvation. Strategically a

135

“scattering’”’ of the population of the
Commonwealth is usually held to be desirable, and a redistribution of numbers between Britain and the Dominions would
strengthen the structure as a whole. And it
is maintained by some that the present great
density of population in this island is not
conducive to healthy social life. |

We might contemplate a reduction of
numbers to be spread over a good many
years—a generation, for instance. Professor
Thomas has indicated twenty-five years for
the evolution of a strategic reduction, and we
shall not quarrel over the exact length of
such a period. If we could combine this
policy with a policy of agricultural expansion
at home we should have a plan which would
re-establish this country in a secure position.

Dr. G. C. L. Bertram writes: Having
listened to Professor Brinley Thomas’s
admirably talk, I had to leave to catch a
train before the discussion was under
way. Consequently I write these few remarks some hours later.

Though so lucidly expounded, proper
assimilation of the content of the argument
requires the printed words, which no doubt
we shall, fortunately, soon be seeing in the
EUGENICS REviEw. A point which I feel
needs further stressing is that, before conclusions on such a problem as migration
within the Commonwealth can be fairly
drawn, the aims must be defined, and the
criteria set in an order of priority. Is the aim,
for example, minimum vulnerability in war
for the people in the United Kingdom, or for
the greatest possible number of Commonwealth citizens ; is the aim the highest possible
standard of living and availability of food in
the United Kingdom in peace, or the greatest
protection for the people of these islands
from starvation in war; is the aim an
advance show of armed strength enough to
dissuade the war-maker from his purpose, or
the maximum degree of Commonwealth
resilience once a war has started ; should the
political, cultural and industrial needs of the
Dominions continue to be subservient to the
economic needs of the United Kingdom ? All
these and other considerations should,
theoretically, be put in an order of priority,
136

and each given a particular relative weight,
before the integration can be made which must
be the precursor of conclusion. The optimal
distribution of Commonwealth population
will vary greatly in accordance with these
priorities and weightings. The United Kingdom’s economic problems must not be held
as inexorable guides to population policy. If
strategic considerations were held throughout the Commonwealth to warrant absolute
priority, the whole economic régime of the
component nations might be modified and
merged in a way as yet uncontemplated.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Meanwhile variations in environmental
influences will affect the individual man and
woman just as they do members of other
species of animals. The contents of the
morning paper and shortages of food,
whether nutritionally real or comparatively
by past standards, turn thoughts and steps
towards the friendly lands of plenty. Migration is in our minds as my wife and I give
water to our family at breakfast, because
each child has drunk his whole milk allocation on the previous day.

The Life, Letters, and Labours of

FRANCIS

GALTON

by

KARL PEARSON

VotumeE I: Birth 1822 to Marriage 1853.
VoLuME II: Letters and Labours of Middle Life.

frontispiece, and 2 text figures.

With 5 pedigree plates, 72 photographs,

With 50 plates and many text figures. Votume IIIA: Letters and Labours of Later

Life.

With 44 plates (3 in colour) and many text figures. Wotume IIIB: Character
isation of Galton, especially by his Family Letters. With 18 plates, many sketches,

and an Index.

CAMBRIDGE

UNIVERSITY

 

Complete, £3 35. net

PRESS

Eugenics Review, Vol. XI, No: 3
