A EUGENICS PROGRAMME FOR THE
UNITED STATES

Memorandum by the American Eugenics Society

THE NEED FOR A PROGRAMME

OR over two hundred years on this

continent the forces of nature and of

social custom made for rapid natural
increase. To-day, these forces have ceased
to be effective with large sections of the
population. Some groups are still increasing,
but the majority of our people have now too
few children for permanent replacement.
This change, as yet almost unrecognized, is
rapidly and profoundly affecting our national

e.

A generation ago some relatively small
groups with an established educational and
cultural tradition were dying out, but only
to an extent which could be replaced by the
able or ambitious from other groups with a
large surplus of births. Recently the shortage
of births has extended to almost all educated,
urbanized people, and it is a serious question
how long the old method of replacement can
continue. The groups which are at present
failing to replace themselves by a fairly wide
margin include all the professions, clerical
and skilled manual workers, small owners,
business executives, and many partly skilled
workers. Among our city people, only unskilled labourers and certain marginal economic groups still show some natural increase.
It is solely in the rural districts, particularly
those in which incomes are lowest, that substantial groups are reproducing at a rate
sufficient to provide a rapid increase in their
own numbers. So long as present differentials
in birth-rates continue, a large proportion of
the more highly trained urban elements of
the population must be replaced in each
generation by migrants from rural districts
with an entirely different background. There
is a great inertia of educational and cultural
tradition to be overcome in fitting to a new
and complex environment so many people
from a different order of activity. The difficulties in such a change must go far to offset

other efforts at social progress in our urbanized civilization. Further, we may well ask
whether in the process of replacement the
more isolated or the more ignorant groups
are not being forced to give up a large proportion of their abler and more ambitious
members, with serious injury to the stock
which remains. It is not necessary to rely on
the existing, but meagre, evidence of biological differences between the upper and the
lower economic groups in the cities, to feel
that the present situation needs correction.

As the full significance of the decline in
birth-rates comes to be realized, both the
number and the quality of our people will
become increasingly a matter of public concern, and there may arise at any time a
demand for hastily conceived and ill-planned
measures. Fortunately, some years will pass
before the public realizes the extent of the
change which has set in, and the intervening
period can be devoted to scientific investigation and the intelligent development of
public opinion.

The vital change from an increasing
population to one tending toward decrease
has accompanied the spread of birth control.
The idea that family limitation is proper,
sometimes even a duty, has already reached
a large part of our population. Wherever
this idea has become generally established,
there, with few exceptions, the population
has ceased to grow. The shift from involuntary to voluntary parenthood has enormous |
possibilities for good, and also for evil. What
many consider a new freedom is in fact a new
responsibility.

If our civilization is to reach its fullest
possibilities, such new conditions and attitudes must be established that the families
best able to contribute to American life will
tend to participate voluntarily and effectively in the renewal of the nation’s children.

The American Eugenics Society has in the

321
322

past been concerned mainly with those
aspects of the birth-rate which affect genetic
inheritance. It is now consciously enlarging
its interests to include not only the hereditary qualities, but also the environmental
conditions which should influence size of
family in homes of various types.

The present is an opportune time for the

reformulation of many social policies. For |

better or worse, Western Civilization is
in a period which is likely to result in profound changes. Whether these changes prove
beneficial in the perspective of history will
depend in large measure on the extent to
which our attempts at social planning take
accurately into account the less obvious
underlying forces of our social life, not the
least of which are our present differential
rates of reproduction.

The following programme gives, in broad
outline, some of the practical proposals
advanced by the American Eugenics Society
in answer to this situation. It should be
added that the Society is less concerned
with any particular set of proposals for social
reform than with a sense of the urgency of
the problem, and the necessity that publicspirited citizens give this subject the intensive, prolonged, and constructive thought
that will eventually lead to effective social
action.

THE AIMS OF A EUGENICS
PROGRAMME, AND SOME PRACTICAL
APPLICATIONS

1. PUBLIC OPINION AND SOCIAL ATTITUDES

The first aim of a eugenics programme
must be to develop an intelligent and
aroused public opinion. The need for better
homes and a better home life is already
recognized. What must now be learned is
that a disproportionately low birth-rate in
socially adequate homes, and a disproportionately high birth-rate in inadequate
homes, is an adverse social force, working
against all other efforts to improve society ;
and that undoubtedly in many cases it is a
force opposed to biological improvement as
well. Leaders of American thought must be

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

aroused against the continuation of such a
condition, and, at the same time, the mental
attitudes of the ordinary citizen must be
re-directed. It is a two-fold problem.

The leaders of American opinion can best
be aroused by supplying them with factual
scientific material bearing on population
trends in this country and on the social and
biological effects of such trends. Much
material of this sort is already available ;
vastly more needs to be developed. The universities of this country, with chairs in psychology, sociology, anthropology, genetics,
and other sciences which deal with man,
must soon recognize the importance of teaching and research in the field of population,
from the point of view of the quality as well
as of the quantity, of our people. Studies on
the interaction of heredity and environment
to produce human characteristics should be
made in close relation to further studies in
human genetics. Only in this way can we
determine the biological foundations necessary for the development of character and
intelligence, and the method of their inheritance.

The development of new attitudes towards
family life presents another and different
problem. It is nothing less than an attempt
to reorient human desires among a substantial proportion of our people. Such a
task calls for the highest effort on the part of
those responsible for education in the home,
the school, and the college. For the moment,
it may be the popular habit to give immediate
material interests preference over the deeper
values of life. The sense of survival through
children, and of the continuity of generations,
while over-emphasized in Oriental countries,
is much neglected in our Western civilization. But one of the most fundamental
urges of living things is that which makes for
survival of the individual and of the race,
and it does not seem an impossible task to
redirect popular thinking towards a more
balanced view than that now prevalent.

Determining the best means of modifying
present social attitudes in regard to the
family, and putting these means into effect,
are among the most important aims of
eugenics.
A EUGENICS PROGRAMME FOR THE UNITED STATES

In considering practical methods of redirecting social attitudes, we cannot neglect
the economic factors which may prevent
emotional needs from finding expression.
People may be brought to realize that adequate economic means do not necessarily
supply the best background for the proper
rearing of children, and that character,
intelligence, and affection can provide a
good home for children in the poorest circumstances, where wealth without character
cannot. But at the same time, intelligent
parents will continue to desire for their
children certain proper things, such, for
example, as a higher education, in which
money is usually a factor, and will of necessity limit the size of their families in order to
obtain their desires for their existing children.
It may seem a paradox that the poorest
people have the largest families, while less
poverty would make for larger families
among people of moderate means. But we
must take into account, on the one hand, the
lack of aspiration among many of those in
the lowest groups, and, on the other, the
financial handicaps which block the aspirations of people in moderate circumstances
who have many children. If the desire for
children among responsible parents is to find
full expression, we should consider how it
may be possible to remove some of the economic handicaps which at present attach to
rearing children among those large groups of
our people whose aspirations for their children exceed their means of fulfilment.

2. ECONOMIC CONDITIONS AND LARGE
FAMILIES

In the period of selective decline in population which we are now entering, the greatest
effort of applied eugenics must be to increase
the proportion of large families among people
who provide homes fitted for the rearing of
children. Birth control and the system of
voluntary parenthood affect reproduction
mainly by reducing the proportion of large
families. The present decline in population
is not the result of a change in the average
age at marriage, or of a large increase of
actual sterility. It is the result of a decline
in the proportion of families of more than

323

four children, and an increase in families
of one, two, and three children. Although at
present rates of death and marriage in this
country an average of about three children
per surviving married couple would be a
sufficient number for replacement, the use of
such an average is misleading. In every
group some couples are sterile, others are
limited in fertility to one or two children, and
others, because of illness or for compelling
economic or other reasons, will have few or
no children. To bring the average up to
three, and secure permanent replacement for
any population group, a fairly large proportion, about 20 per cent., must have five or
more children. In rural areas, such a proportion of large families is frequent. But in
the cities where the expense and the physical
effort involved in the care of children are
both very high, it is only among certain
small and relatively well-off groups that a
number even approaching 20 per cent. of
the married couples have a sufficient income
to provide a secure living for so large a family
without seriously impairing their standard
of living. Evidently the expense of children
is in proportion to the relative standard of
living of each different group, and the expenses of those who send their children to
college are greater than are the expenses
of those who are content with high school
alone. But at present, in none of the larger
city groups can 20 per cent. of the couples
rear five children or more at even the most
moderate American standards.

It must, therefore, be our aim to provide
conditions such that in every class of society,
and in every occupational group, as many as
possible of the economic handicaps now
attaching to large families shall be removed
for parents providing decent homes and
desiring large families, so that it may be possible for a reasonable proportion of young
people to have families of five or more children without serious change in their standard
of living. This objective will not be fully
attained until we can increase the economic
well-being of very large groups of our people.
Eugenic reform, however, need not wait on
the hope of an increased production and distribution of wealth. Even under present
324

economic conditions, there are many changes
which might be expected to effect a substantial increase in the present rate of births
among people with whom parenthood is

voluntary.

Economic and environmental conditions
are so interrelated with attitudes affecting
family life, that further studies of the family
are necessary before final proposals can be
made. The following are among the suggestions most seriously considered at the present
time :

(a) Among all social groups more thought should
be given to strengthening the economic position of
young couples during their early married life.
There is no more vicious system than the so-called
American ideal that young people should work up
through a period of great self-denial in order to
arrive at a complacent maturity—with a minimum
of children. The expenses incident to the bearing
and rearing of children should be the concern of
the whole family group, especially of the parents
of the bride and groom. These expenses should be
prepared for, as far as possible, by savings in the
form of dowry, special types of insurance, and all
possible help from parents and relatives.

(0) The conditions of farm life, especially in those
districts where farm incomes are lowest, should be
improved as rapidly as possible in order to retain
on the farm a full proportion of the best family
stocks. The birth-rate among married women in
farming communities is at present about double
that of married women in the cities. While this
wide difference may diminish, it is probable that
for a long time to come the farm will continue to be
the source from which the otherwise diminishing
population of our cities. will be replaced. We
cannot afford to continue, in any rural districts,
those farm conditions which result in inadequate
facilities for the training of children, and which
may well tend to drive the abler and more ambitious people off the land, leaving the less able to
supply, of their own kind, the replacements necessary to make up the shortage in the cities. An
important part of the farm programme consists in
educating public opinion in the cities to the need
for maintaining at a high cultural level the rural
home from which will come, in each generation, so
many of their citizens.

(c) City housing programmes should be planned
with a view to providing, to a far greater degree
than at present, recreational and educational
facilities for the proper rearing of children. In our
cities as they are now constituted there should be
more adequate transportation to residential developments especially adapted to child nurture.

(d) There should be a greater development of
nurseries and pre-schools where, for frequent short
intervals, mothers may obtain brief periods of

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

freedom from the constant care required by young
children. There would appear to be great possibilities in the organization of co-operative nurseries.

(e) The excellent work now being done by child
welfare agencies should be extended at the same
time that restriction of further births is urged in
the case of inadequate families.

(f) In certain large groups comprising teachers
in schools and colleges, ministers, and possibly
Government employees, it would appear practical
to base salary payments on a scale proportionate
to the number of children. Such an arrangement
has been in effect for some twenty years among the
American staffs of American educational institutions in foreign countries. The introduction of such
a basis of pay appears to have been a factor in the
relatively high birth-rate among these groups.
Ultimately, such a system might find its way into
industry as well.

(g) In assigning school and college scholarships,
the primary factor must, of course, be individual
merit, but special attention should be given to
qualified students from large families. Substantial
benefits might be derived from an increased number of scholarships specially designed to meet this
need. Instead of limiting higher fellowships to
unmarried students, many more graduate fellowships should be open to those who are married.

(4) Existing income and gift taxes already contain provisions of some advantage to parents with
several children. Such provisions should be so
enlarged as to effect, in every income group, a
reduction in tax somewhat more related to the
actual cost involved in rearing each child to
maturity. Such a radical change in present exemptions would not seem unreasonable, in view of the
interest of the country as a whole in its future
citizens.

We have cited above some of the changes
which might be expected to increase birthrates by diminishing the economic handicaps
now attaching to parents of large families.
It is possible that insurance for medical and
maternal care and many other changes would
be desirable to the same end. Important as
all these factors are, they will be effective
only so long as there exists a strong conscious
desire for children among a substantial proportion of our people. The study of factors
affecting size of family has only just begun ;
as it develops, further important changes
may appear possible.

3. DECREASE IN SOCIALLY INADEQUATE
FAMILIES
It would seem a truism that as few children
as possible should be brought up in homes
where there is a bad physical environment,
A EUGENICS PROGRAMME FOR THE UNITED STATES

improper parental care and interest, seriously
retarded or handicapped parents, or other
factors which make for an unhappy childhood and a poor development of the personality. The large families which often occur
in such homes consist usually, after the first
two or three, of unwanted children, the product of ignorance or of isolation, or of that
hopelessness which is engendered by tenements or slums, whether urban or rural. The
very statement of these facts suggests the
remedies. If we can judge by the experience
of European cities, better housing, and the
improvement of economic conditions would
bring a new sense of responsibility to the
majority of these parents, and the extension
of birth-control knowledge, with new and
cheaper methods of contraception, would then
tend to reduce the proportion of very large
families, and bring these groups below the replacement level. Those who, because of subnormal character or intelligence, are unable
to respond to an improved environment,
will be considered in the section which follows.

Along with these changes in physical conditions, public opinion must be aroused to demand that there should not be large families
in homes where the children cannot be given
a fair chance to become good citizens.

The Eugenics Society strongly urges the
spread of birth-control information through
clinics and doctors, and the removal of
restrictive laws. Social advance can continue only with difficulty in a population in
half of which parenthood is voluntary, with
a shortage of births, and in half, involuntary,
with an excess of births. The change to
voluntary parenthood is already in progress.
It can be hastened by improving the condition of life in the poorest districts of our
cities and on our most isolated farms, as well
as by the development of contraceptive
methods sufficiently inexpensive and simple
to meet the needs of people unable to afford
present methods.

4. PREVENTING REPRODUCTION BY DEFECTIVES AND SUBNORMALS
There are two reasons for the efforts being
made in all the states to prevent reproduction among defectives. In the first place, the

325

perpetuation of a defective strain of human
beings tends to thwart all future progress,
and cannot be defended by either reason or
charity. In addition, defective parents cannot under any circumstances provide a
proper home for the rearing of children.
Secondary reasons are the need for reducing
the enormous public expense at present
involved in the care of defectives, and the
fact that many subnormal people who might
otherwise support themselves with little help,
leading reasonably happy lives, require
custodial care if involved with the strain and
responsibility of parenthood.

Reproduction by defectives may be prevented by segregation, or by modern methods
of sterilization which do not unsex the individual. All of our states provide for some
degree of segregation of defectives in institutions, and over half of the states provide for
legal sterilization, with consent of the individual concerned, or his guardian, in properly
certified cases. Neither of these methods is
at present effectively carried out, segregation being limited because of the enormous
cost involved, and sterilization because of
criticism by various religious groups and the
apathy of the general public. A combination
of both methods, with competent administration and psychiatric and medical advice, is
undoubtedly necessary for effective control.
In California recent experience with sterilization indicates the possibilities of combining
effective control with great savings in cost,
and a lessening of hardship among these
unfortunates.

The American Eugenics Society urges the
awakening of the public conscience to face
the realities of this situation and to bring.
about in all states of the Union real measures
to prevent continued reproduction by known
defectives.

IN CONCLUSION

There is nothing radical about these aims
and methods. They are in line with almost
every other programme of social and human
advance. They agree with those which might
be put forward by the economist in the
search for greater economic security, or by
the educator looking for a greater cumulative
326

effect in education. Nor does science at
the present time offer us any better general
test of biological fitness for parenthood,
applicable within the large groups with
whom we must deal in a period of declining
population, than the two-fold test here proposed, namely, under a system of voluntary
parenthood, the fruitful desire for children
rather than the satisfaction of other wants,
and the ability to provide home conditions
which will give every child a fair chance.
Even a slight change in the present differential birth-rate could be of great social and
eugenic value. We have already noted that
birth-control affects reproduction mainly by
changing the proportion of couples with
large families. A relatively small increase
in the proportion of families of five or more
children among certain groups, and a relatively small decrease in others, would have
a significant effect on present trends. Since
desirable eugenic changes may thus be
effected through conditions that will actually
alter the habits of a relatively small proportion of all married couples, progress in eugenic

 

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

reform is perhaps not so difficult as it is
imagined to be by those who are unacquainted with recent studies.

The present programme of eugenics seeks
to attain a wisely balanced distribution of
births by methods which are practical under
the conditions of to-day. It seeks a social
morality so changed, that under the system
of voluntary parenthood a larger majority
of our children will be born and reared in
those homes which can give them the fullest
and happiest preparation for life. It calls
for a public opinion which believes that the
quality of the human beings who compose
our nation is of more importance than are
other problems which have received far
greater attention. When these changes have
come, then the way will have been prepared
for an enlarged eugenics programme with
all it may contain of hope for the future.
With each new advance in knowledge, the
ideal of a better life on earth, to which all
men aspire, points ever more clearly to
this need, that the nation’s children be well
born.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVII, No. 4.
