A EUGENIC COLONY

A Proposal for South America ©
By C. WICKSTEED ARMSTRONG

HAD the honour of being invited by
the Council of the Eugenics Society to
read a paper on ‘‘ A Eugenic Colony ”’

last November, and had accepted the invitation; but unforeseen circumstances obliged
me, to my great regret and keen disappointment, to leave Europe for Brazil before the
date fixed for the reading of the paper, and
I see no prospect as yet of being able to
return even for a flying visit.

Although my paper was to have been
descriptive of a garden suburb which I had
hoped to be instrumental in founding in
England, on the lines, more or less, of the
Jardins Ungemach which I had studied de
visu in Strasbourg—but more definitely
eugenic in its conception—I have come to
the conclusion that the question of locality
for the first real eugenic colony is a secondary one; and it may usefully be founded
wherever most feasible; for it can keep
always in touch with the metropolis and
with other colonies subsequently founded ;
while the example, wherever set, will
sooner or later be followed in many places.

I therefore determined, after my arrival
in Rio de Janeiro, to take an early opportunity of visiting the Paran4é and Santa
Catharina Plateau, of which I had often
heard as being so exceptionally favoured
by Nature that it is highly probable it may
one day become the seat of a great civilization. In doing so I have had in view the
possibilities of a eugenic colony such as I
described in my book The Survival of the
Unfittest, rather than a garden city.

Before describing the places I have
visited or discussing their suitability for
such a scheme as I have in mind, let me
first go into the question of the desirability—nay the urgency—of beginning
some such practical work in _ positive
eugenics at the present time.

gI

It is easy and fashionable to excuse ourselves from action by saying that we do
not know enough yet about genetics, nor
are we sufficiently agreed as to what
hereditary qualities are desirable in mankind, to be able to do anything in the way
of positive eugenics. But if man had
always been so cautious in his social,
political, or scientific spheres of action, no
great enterprise could ever have been
undertaken; for, more especially in sociology, it is very difficult indeed to know
with absolute certainty, in advance, the
exact results of any proposed line of
action, having a view to human betterment. We know, in the present instance,
that health, intelligence, and moral
stamina are desirable characteristics and
that they are largely hereditary. We
know, too, that physical and mental
defect, criminal tendencies, and general
lassitude are undesirable, and that they are
quite as surely hereditary or due largely
to hereditary tendencies as are good qualities. We know that figs are not gathered
from thorns, nor does poor stock breed
sturdy humanity. That is all it is necessary to know in order to begin favouring
the multiplication of those stocks that have
the desired qualities and discouraging that
of the others.

At present, in England and in most
democratic countries, we are, of course,
doing exactly the opposite, since we have
family endowment for paupers and unemployables, and none for those working;
while, at the same time, we penalize procreation among the more effective sections
of the population by means of crushing
taxation. A wise old proverb says that
“God helps those who help themselves,”
but modern legislators have quite made up
their minds that, whatever God may do,
92

they, knowing better, will see to it that
help is not lacking for those who cannot
or will not help themselves, and that those
who do help themselves shall pay for it.
At the same time, medical science has for
long been busy saving the weaklings and
prolonging the lives of the unfit of every
description, that they may live to reproduce their kind; and ‘“‘ christian ’’ charity
has done perhaps even more than science
with, apparently, this same ‘“‘ charitable ”’
end in view. Under such circumstances it
is hardly surprising that racial decay goes
on apace.

I may be accused of preaching to the
converted in calling the attention of
readers of the EKuGENics REVIEW to such
facts as these. But it is just in these facts
that the reason lies for urgent action in
positive eugenics, of which so many
eugenists seem to be afraid. If we put
things off much longer it may be too late.
Certainly it will be so if we wait until the
science of genetics has found out all there
is to know about human heredity, or until
everybody is agreed upon what particular
sorts of intelligence are most desirable or
what code of morals will bring about the
greatest happiness. Moreover, as things
are at present in the world, it will perhaps
be easier to begin with positive eugenics
than negative, in the practical sphere.

It is feared by many that civilization
itself will crash during the next world war ;
and the failure of the League of Nations
(up to the time of writing) to effect any
substantial disarmament or gain for us the
prospect of such in the near future, certainly makes another great war more
probable than it may have seemed when
the Disarmament Conference began its
sterile deliberations. Now if socialistic
legislation or mutual extermination in war
bring about the crash of civilization, sooner
or later, then any eugenic colonies, founded
in our time, may eventually become the
refuge of civilization, of culture, and of
human evolution—physical, intellectual,
and moral—just as Alexandria and Byzantium were the refuge of knowledge and
wisdom throughout the dark ages, when

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the Roman civilization had gone under;
and the farther off from Europe such
colonies may be, the more likely, too, will
they be to escape the general débdcle.

A PRACTICAL SCHEME OF EUGENICS

So much in justification of my enthusiasm in seeking a home for the first eugenic
colony, and my boldness in putting before
the readers of this REVIEW, in the present
article, a practical scheme, by which, as I
believe, the ideal can actually be realized
with comparatively small expense—and
infinite possibilities for the future.

In the plateau to which I have referred
are to be found vast tracts of the most
fertile land in the world, still covered with
virgin forest—not tropical jungle, but
forests such as exist in the temperate zone,
largely coniferous. ‘There still flourish the
cedars, walnut, cinnamon, mahogany, and
other hardwoods that have been destroyed
in sO many countries, as well as millions
of pines. The rainfall is abundant, the
climate ideal—the height of the plateau
above sea level being from a thousand to
four thousand feet and the latitude from
the 24th to the 29th parallel South. There
is no disease and the people one meets are
sturdy and well fed.

The area of the plateau is about equal to
that of England and Wales, though it is
largely uninhabited. Even when the coast
towns are taken into cdénsideration, the
density is not more than eight persons to
the square mile. The average winter
temperature is about 52 degrees Fahrenheit and that of summer 60 degrees; the
extremes being three or four degrees below
freezing point on the one hand and 95
degrees in the shade on the other. The
plateau is bounded on the east by the Serra
do Mar and on the west by the basin of
the great Parana river.

In many parts there exist small and scattered settlements, resulting from the activities of certain companies which buy up
tracts of land and divide them into lots
of, generally, twenty-five hectares each—
that is, about 62 acres. These they sell
to German and Italian immigrants, who
A EUGENIC COLONY

generally do very well, or to people who
speculate on a future rise in values, leaving it therefore unused and unoccupied. I
have visited many of these settlements, and
wherever the colonists have worked, the
fertility of the soil has amply rewarded
them. During the first year or two they
generally limit their operations to cutting
down trees, selling the hardwood to the
saw-mills, which are to be found everywhere, and, after burning the worthless
trees, planting maize, potatoes, mandiocre
and other easily raised crops. The sale
of hardwood alone more than repays the
cost of the land. Later, they plant fruit
trees. Nearly all the fruits of sub-tropical
and temperate zones do well, especially
grapes, apples, pears, peaches, apricots,
plums, mangoes, pineapples, oranges,
lemons and—in the lowlands near the
coast, though not, of course, in the highlands—bananas. These last flourish greatly
wherever there is no fear of frosts.
They also plant wheat and other cereals,
tobacco, beans, clover, sunflower, and an
infinity of other crops which by their
wonderful exuberance prove eloquently the
great fertility of the soil. Pigs, chickens,
cattle, and horses, are also reared with
profit.

The concessionarios who plan _ these
colonies and arrange for immigration,
generally provide many conveniences for
new-comers, such as roads, bridges, and
the means for arriving at their land,
hostels where they can put up for a time
and where they can easily live for from one
to two shillings a day per person, or, if
they cook for themselves, about sixpence
—hospitals, club-rooms, medical attendance, churches,’ schools,  saw-mills,
pharmacies, general stores, etc. But the
inflow of German and Italian immigrants
which began about a century ago is now
small on account of the state of things in
Europe, for few can now afford a passage
out or find the capital with which to buy
land, even at the attractive prices for which
good land may be had. And so there are
still vast regions quite untouched.

I have priced the land with many of these

93

concessionarios, and have come to the conclusion that it would be wiser to buy land
from them than to go to more inaccessible
parts for the sake of greater cheapness.
From these settlements such products as
are not consumed locally can be sent to
the seaports by road, rail, or water-way—
some of the rivers being navigable. ‘Those
flowing eastwards are small, but are
navigable sometimes for steam barges as
far as the Serra do Mar, where roads or
railways connect up with the plateau.
Those flowing westwards are navigable for
hundreds of miles and eventually flow into
the River Plate.

CHEAP LAND AVAILABLE

One can buy as much as, say, four
thousand hectares (ten thousand acres) in
a single locality—all or mostly virgin
forest—and enjoy all the advantages provided for new-comers at anything from £25
to £100 per ‘‘lot’’ of 25 hectares (62%
acres). The price will vary according to
the part of the country chosen, the quality
of the land, the number of hectares taken,
and the method of payment. At £25 per
** lot ’? one could buy 10,000 acres of the
best Jand (virgin forest), in certain parts,
for £4,000. But one thousand acres,
affording double-sized lots of 125 acres each
for eight families would perhaps be suffcient, in the absence of ample funds, for
making a beginning, and more could be
acquired later on. That would only cost
£400 or a little more, on account of the
smaller quantity.

One of the first towns I visited was
Blumenau, in the State of Santa Catharina.
This pretty place—the ‘‘ city of flowers,”’
as its name indicates—is almost exclusively German. Many of the inhabitants
cannot speak Portuguese, which, of course,
is the language of the country. I was
received there with open arms when these
good people heard that I had a scheme for
bringing over English families. I don’t
think we English quite appreciate the
kindly feeling Germans in most parts of
the world seem to entertain towards us,
even after the world war. They call them94

selves Anglo-Saxons, and, historically
speaking, they certainly have as good a
right to the name as we have. Thus they
regard us as of their own kith and kin.
The war with England seemed to them
incredible ; for they could not see how fellow
Anglo-Saxons could join the Latins in a
war whose object they believed to be the
extermination of the German Homeland—
the Anglo-Saxon Homeland !

Blumenau is a little model township of
some six thousand souls, founded just fifty
years ago. All its houses have gardens
which bloom throughout the year. Even
the business premises are mostly in
picturesque chalets. The streets are
beautifully clean, and there are no poor.
Living is very cheap, and well-built brick
chalets with room for a large family can
be put up for about £250, for both labour
and material are cheap and good. The
town has no prison, for there is no crime.
It is situated in the lowlands near the
mouth of the river Itajahy, which is
navigable to that point. At the mouth of
the river is the little port of Itajahy, but
as large steamers cannot enter this port,
most of the exports from the settlements
go by barge from Blumenau to Sao
Francisco do Sul, the port of Joinville,
another German centre in Santa Catharina.
‘They find insatiable markets in Santos (for
Sado Paulo), Rio de Janeiro, and Buenos
Aires.

In Blumenau I stayed at an inn, where
I paid about two shillings a day, all
included. Life there was simple, but the
bedrooms were clean and the food abundant. From there I went by rail to Lontra,
at the head of the Serra do Mar. ‘There
one reaches the uplands which lie between
the lowlands of the sea board and the high
plateau. The height above sea level in
Lontra is about a thousand feet, and the
ground then rises gradually, as one travels
towards the interior, till the culminating
point is reached with the Serra Geral,
about a hundred miles inland. |

Going by motor-diligence to Trombudo
and thence by private motor-car to Tayé,
situated on a river of that name, a tribu
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

tary of the Itajahy, I found the lands
which, taking into consideration their price,
their quality and the conveniences offered,
pleased me more than any of those I saw
later. At the time of my visit these lands
could be had at £25 a lot or little more,
provided one bought at least ten or twenty.
They consisted of virgin forest and were
situated about twelve miles from Tayé, on
rising, well-watered ground, between the
Serras. The altitude is about twelve
hundred feet and the whole country is
undulating and very beautiful. The plantations I saw upon lots already sold and
nearer to Tayd were exuberant, consisting
of maize, mandiocre, tobacco, fruit trees,
and pasture ; but the settlers here were still
chiefly engaged upon clearing the ground
and exporting hardwoods.

A GERMAN POPULATION

The colonists throughout Santa Catharina
are mostly Germans, and that is one of the
reasons I prefer that State to the neighbouring States of Paran4é and Rio Grande
do Sul, which are more cosmopolitan.
These Germans are a simple, hard-working
people, and would be excellent neighbours.
It is a pleasure to see the pretty fair-haired
children of the settlers, after one has been
used to meeting so many negroes and halfbreeds in other parts of Brazil. They are
proverbially honest, and police are unnecessary and seldom met with. How
different from the Wild West of North
America! Probably an excellent way to
begin organizing a eugenic colony here
would be to offer a few lots to German
settlers on the spot, choosing, of course,
those with the highest eugenic value and
many sturdy children. These would eventually blend excellently with British stock,
and reinforce the Nordic blood of the latter,
together with those qualities of honesty,
orderliness, love of work, of family, of
music, and of social life which are among
the best characteristics of the Nordics
wherever found. ‘The proximity, too, of
numerous Italian settlers would offer
opportunity for selecting, later on, some of
A EUGENIC COLONY

the best Mediterraneans, with their artistic
temperament and physical charm.

A MIXTURE OF RACES

In Porto Alegre, the capital of Rio
Grande do Sul, where I am now staying,
the German, Italian, Spanish, and Portuguese elements have blended with very
happy results. Nearly 4o per cent. of the
original settlers were German, which is
just as well. The city is one of the most
go-ahead places one can encounter nowadays, and seems not to know what “‘ world
depression?’ means. Building operations
are going on everywhere, and business
seems very brisk. The population has
greatly increased during the past few years
and is now about 350,000; so that if not
already the third city of Brazil and one of
the largest in South America, it soon will
be so. ‘The men here are considerably
taller than elsewhere in Brazil and the
women often very beautiful. In this latter
fact Porto Alegre resembles Buenos Aires,
and is very different from Rio de Janeiro,
where human beauty is extremely rare.
Among other admirable traits evinced is
the love of music, which is very general,
and doubtless results directly from the
blend of German and Italian elements,
since these are the two most musical races
in Europe.

In the little town of Santa Maria, in the
hills, there is a curious custom to be noted
on the evenings when the Municipal Band
plays in the Gardens (every town has its
Municipal Band and its Public Gardens).
The marriageable young men walk
solemnly two by two down the central
avenue throughout the first part of the programme, while the marriageable young
women walk in the opposite direction, so
as to meet again. During the second half
the promenade continues, but the sexes are
no longer separated. It is in this way that
sweethearts are found and marriages
effected in Santa Maria; and perhaps it is
not a bad plan, for it has resulted in a rapid
increase of population and a happy blend
of the German and Italian elements.

I know that not only the Germans of

95

Blumenau but also the powers that be in
Rio de Janeiro would welcome British
settlers of good stock. One of the problems
Brazil has to face is the peopling of her
soil, and her rulers are alive to the fact
that the country’s future largely depends
upon the sort of immigrant to come over.
I have often heard it said, even by LusoBrazilians, that Brazil’s greatest misfortune was to be discovered and colonized by
the Portuguese; for had it been peopled by
Germanic stock—by the British or by the
Dutch, as very nearly happened—it would
to-day have rivalled the United States in
power and progress. But the Portuguese
imported slaves from Africa and freely
interbred with them; thus producing an
indolent race which can only become progressive in so far as new and vigorous
European blood can be infused.

THE BRITISH WANTED

At a time when all colonial lands are
shutting out the undesirable immigrant,
for the sake of their own racial future,
Brazil will not be slow to recognize the
advantages of eugenic immigration, for Dr.
Renato Kehl and other Brazilian eugenists
are becoming daily more influential among
the ruling classes here. At the present
moment they are endeavouring to have certain eugenic principles incorporated within
the new Constitution which is _ being
elaborated.

The Brazilian Dictator, Getulio Vargas,
recently wrote :

The authorities, in alliance with private
initiative and guided by a careful scientific
study of facts, have before them in the
protection of the nation’s children, especially in the preservation of life and health
and in their mental and physical development, a transcendental problem, the key to
our future wealth; more especially in this
country, where more perhaps than in any
other, factors injurious to the formation of
a strong and healthy race have accumulated.

The ardent desire to better the race is
not wanting, but, as happens at present the
world over, the really effective measures—
those of eugenic reform—are as yet hardly
96

contemplated. But they will be so: it is
only a question of time.

OUR OBJECTIONS

As to the possible objection, on the part
of British eugenists, to the draining away
from Britain of some of her best blood, to
however small an extent, at a time when
she most needs it—and this for the benefit
of lands outside the Empire—I venture to
predict that Britain would benefit by the
carrying out of my scheme, for the greater
the extent of the drainage and the greater
its publicity, the surer would be the
duplication or multiplication of such
experiments within Britain herself and
within the Empire. Once initiated, the
movement for eugenic colonies may well
become a world movement—and if that
is so, the benefit to Humanity will be
incalculable.

I shall not have space here to describe in
any detail the other regions I visited.
Suffice it to say that those in the central
highlands are perhaps too difficult of access
at present to offer attractions to newcomers, but could be taken up later as
opportunity arose. Those, again, in the
hinterland, beyond the Sao Paulo-Rio
Grande Railway, which cuts the plateau in
two, from north to south, are either
inaccessible or unable to develop for want
of markets, since the freights charged by
that railway are at present prohibitive.
The same applies to most of the State of
Parana; while in that of Rio Grande the
price of land is, generally speaking, considerably higher than in Santa Catharina;
though there are grass lands suitable for
rearing cattle, which can be had for prices
perhaps even lower than those current in
Santa Catharina. But these are entirely
devoid of trees, little raised above sea level
and, in summer, the heat there is oppressive. Near the Rio Grande-Santa Catharina
frontier, however, are lands which would
merit consideration on account of their
great fertility, their cool climate, and their
probable great value in the future, since
many of the best of these lands are not far

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

from the ocean and from future sea ports
of importance.

We now come to the practical question
as to how a Eugenic Colony can (and will,
I believe) be organized in these parts; and
the no less important question of its real
utility to the eugenic cause, which is the
cause of humanity.

READINESS TO BEGIN

If it is possible to arouse sufficient
interest in England to enable me to raise
from five hundred to a few thousand
pounds, I am ready to begin at once
carrying out my scheme, by buying the
land. The next step will be to advertise
in England for suitable families. These
should, in the first place, be farmers, with
families—the more children the better, provided all are thoroughly sound mentally
and physically. Someone in England
would have to be found willing and able to
judge of the respective merits of such candidates as might offer, taking into consideration, first and foremost, freedom from
hereditary defect and _ such _ physical
qualities as robust health, sound teeth,
hearing, eyesight, heart, and _ lungs,
together with some degree of physical
beauty. Proficiency in their callings and
perfect normality in all other respects
would be sine qua non. After the farmers,
useful settlers would be carpenters, electricians, builders, mechanics,  schoolmasters, musicians, and men who had
attained to eminence in any useful occupation. But all would have to accept two
conditions, namely: willingness to multiply as rapidly as Nature and their means
might permit, and readiness to obey one
law only—Do unto others as ye would that
they should do unto you—but the word
others must be made to include future
generations. For the Colony should be a
home of perfect freedom, and that is the
only law a free community requires.

The laws of the land would, of course,
have to be respected, but little or no interference need be feared from the authorities
in such a colony as is proposed, so long
A EUGENIC COLONY

as taxes were paid—and they would be very
light indeed. The number of candidates to
present themselves would, of course,
depend upon the advantages offered. Perhaps the free grant of something over a
hundred acres in a far-off country would
be insufficient to attract such numbers as
would be necessary if effective selection were
to be possible. The advantages one could
offer would depend again upon the money
raised, and might include a wooden chalet
ready erected upon the property, or even
a well-built house, for labour and material
are extremely cheap, and, possibly, an
assisted passage out, but preferably a
supply of seeds and instruments. Every
candidate, however, would have to possess
some little capital, as a guarantee of independence and a help toward success.

Once founded, the multiplication of the
settlers through procreation, as also
through the arrival of new-comers, would,
in the course of time, secure the development of a large and flourishing community, which would acquire new lands as
required, being bound in honour to maintain always the eugenic ideals and avoid
the admixture of inferior blood. Eventually political power would come, with the
increase in numbers, and more rapid
progress would then become possible.
Granted the foundation and initial success
of the settlement, its ultimate importance
as a centre of a new and better civilization
almost follows as a corollary. The colony
being in constant touch with such others
as might be founded in other parts of the
world, there would be interchange of ideas,
of products, of periodicals, and of visits.
Intermarriages would also occur, and
though the different nuclei were separated
by great distances, they might be as one
community with one common aim—the
advancement of human evolution.

97

I am, however, very sceptical about the
possibility of interesting even one moneyed
person in England in a scheme of this sort.
Conventional channels are the only ones
through which the rich care to exercise
charity, and, as every eugenist knows, they
generally succeed in doing more harm than
good thereby; for, while palliating human
suffering to-day, they may increase it a
thousandfold in future generations. It
does not seem to have occurred yet to any
wealthy man that the foundation of the
first eugenic colony—for sooner or later
there most certainly will be such colonies—
will secure deathless fame and the eternal
gratitude of generations yet unborn. Be
it so. I myself have six stalwart sons, and
my hope is that, failing outside financial
aid, if my present business enterprises
succeed, and life and strength last long
enough, I may secure to myself and them
that honour which others reject.

For years now I have been as one crying
in the wilderness. I have also seen abler
men than myself suffer the same continual
disappointment. Dr. Austin Freeman
proposed the segregation of the fit, as an
alternative to that of the unfit, some ten
years ago, and has written since in the
REVIEW most convincing articles upon the
necessity and the urgency of some such
action. But, so far as I have heard,
nothing at all has resulted. It is hard
indeed to stir up British conservatism and
inertia—even among eugenists! ‘There are
always such excellent excuses for inaction
and for delay. Amongst my most
treasured possessions is a letter from the
gifted author and undaunted paladin of
positive and practical eugenics to whom I
have just referred, in which, after lamenting his own advancing years, he says: ‘‘ I
feel, however, that you, in the end, will
succeed in getting something done.”’

God grant it may be so!

“pee Oe”

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXV, No. 2.
