THE HEREDITY OF THE STEWARTS
A Remarkably Varied Family

By W. T. J. GUN, F.R.Hist.S., F.S.G.

HE Stewart heredity presents more

problems than does that of the

Tudors, which was treated in the last
number of the REVIEW, and inherent diffculties face us from the commencement,
when we consider the character of the first
of the Stewart line to ascend the throne of
England.

KING JAMES I

PARENTS.
Henry, Lord Darnley.
Mary, Queen of Scotland.

GRANDPARENTS.

Matthew Stewart, Earl of Lennox.
Margaret Douglas.

James V, King of Scotland.
Mary of Guise.

GREAT-GRANDPARENTS.

John, Earl of Lennox.
Anne Stewart.

Archibald, Earl of Angus.
Margaret Tudor.

James IV, King of Scotland.
Margaret Tudor.

Claude, Duke of Guise.
Antoinette de Bourbon.

As in the case of the Tudors, the ostensible ancestry of James I is set out as above,
and one is immediately struck with the fact
that his characteristics have but little resemblance to those of any of these ancestors.
This fact was so obvious, that from an early
period doubts arose as to his parentage,
some considering that he was the son of
Mary by David Rizzio, while others contended that he was a changeling. Both of
these assumptions, but especially the latter,

were based on his plebeian appearance, want
of dignity, and extreme personal timidity,
none of these characteristics, except possibly
the second, appearing in any of the ‘ offcial’ ancestors. The assumption, however,
of a complete plebeian descent would seem to
be unwarrantable, not only from its inherent improbability, but even more from
the fact that no one of these traits reappeared in any of James’s own descendants,
which on such a hypothesis, must surely
have occurred.

There is certainly a greater likelihood
of the paternity of Rizzio, both from the
circumstances of the moment, and from biological theory. David Rizzio was the son
of an Italian musician, but of the general
characteristics of his father and of his remoter ancestry we know nothing; he himself was plain in his person, physically
timid, and showed a complete absence of
tact and savoir-faire when raised to the position for which he was totally unfitted.
While James, as has been said, was also uncouth in his person and physically timid,
he by no means altogether lacked tact and
savoir-faire; the absence of these qualities
was more marked in some of his descendants.

James was, of course, extraordinarily unlike his mother, in whom good looks and
natural dignity were conspicuous; the
former she inherited chiefly from her father,
the latter from her mother. On Darnley’s
side there were equal good looks, but neither
he nor his father, Lennox, were in any way
noted for dignity of bearing, though Lennox,
at least, did not lack physical courage, while
his wife, Margaret Douglas, was a woman
of strong and virile character, as befitted a
descendant of the Douglases and the
Tudors. Neither a plebeian appearance nor

195
196

physicai timidity could well have descended
therefore on James from his ‘ official’ ancestry, though the Lennox line might possibly be responsible for his lack of dignity,
and it is certainly conceivable that the
timidity was a purely ‘ acquired’ characteristic, occasioned by the brutal murder
of Rizzio almost before his mother’s eyes
shortly before his birth. A Rizzio paternity seems, however, to be indicated by
another trait in James’s character, his
curious pedantry mixed with a good deal of
shrewdness, qualities which may well have
been derived from a partly middle-class ancestry; there would, in any case, be some
Tudor descent to account for his attachment
to learning.

On the whole, James’s own character
seems to indicate a Rizzio rather than a
Darnley descent; considerations which
point the other way on this question of his
paternity can be more fully discussed in the
next section.

CHARLES I

PARENTS.

King James I.
Anne of Denmark.

GRANDPARENTS.
Henry, Lord Darnley.
Mary, Queen of Scotland.
Frederick II, King of Denmark.
Sophia of Mecklenburg.

GREAT-GRANDPARENTS.
Matthew, Earl of Lennox.
Margaret Douglas.
James V, King of Scotland.
Mary of Guise.
Christian II, King of Denmark.
Dorothea of Saxe-Lauenburg.
Ulric, Duke of Mecklenburg.
Elizabeth of Denmark.

Charles I, his brother Henry, Prince of
Wales, and his sister Elizabeth, Queen of
Bohemia, were thorough patricians by
nature, totally unlike their father in this
respect. The fidelity of their mother, Anne

THE EUGENICS REVIEW.

of Denmark, has been questioned, but with
little reason, and in their cases the ostensible
ancestry adequately accounts for their
characters.

Henry, Prince of Wales, whose early
death was so deeply lamented, showed promise of a high order, and was undoubtedly
abler than his younger brother. Elizabeth
was a woman of much charm, considerable
mental vigour, and inexhaustible vitality,
very tenacious both in her affections and her
dislikes. Charles’s dominating characteristics were undoubtedly obstinacy and lack
of tact, allied, however, to many excellent
qualities, great dignity, high morality, and
much love of culture.

It is obvious that Charles, and to an even
greater extent his sister Elizabeth, bore
many resemblances to their grandmother,
Mary Stewart, and to her immediate ancestry. From Darnley quite as much as
from Rizzio the tactlessness shown by
Charles may have emanated, and in the
cases of all three of James I’s children, a
Darnley descent fits the position better than
one from Rizzio.

Turning to the Danish ancestry, we find
Anne of Denmark a good-humoured woman,
very fond of gaiety and amusement, with
ordinary mental abilities, but not below the
average. Frederick II of Denmark was a
quiet, prudent man, of rigid principles, par
ticularly with regard to religion, while his

wife, Sophia, was a woman much above the
average, of great intellectual capacity, noted

_ especially as a patroness of scientists.

Turning to the great-grandparents of
Charles I, Christian III of Denmark was an
excellent and upright monarch, very simple
in his manner of life, hardly a strong
character, being much under the influence
of his domineering wife, Dorothea. No
definite character-picture of Ulric of Mecklenburg or of his wife seems to have come
down, but the Duke, who was a lover of the
arts, appears to have been a sensible ruler.
His wife was a sister of Christian III, and
their father, Frederick I of Denmark, was
therefore doubly the ancestor of Charles I,
Frederick was a somewhat hard and unloveable character, but showed sagacity and pruTHE HEREDITY OF

dence in the difficult times following the
introduction of the Reformation.

Common sense and prudence seem, on
‘the whole, to have been the keynote of the
ancestry of Anne of Denmark, particularly
among the men; two at least of the women
showed higher mental attainments, coupled
perhaps with less prudence.
probably took mainly from this side,
Charles obviously took less; his wrongheadedness has no counterpart among his
immediate Danish and German ancestors.
Determination some of them certainly
showed, but determination of a more sensible kind, and the more unfortunate features of Charles’s character were almost
certainly derived from his paternal grandparents, and more particularly from the
grandfather, whether Darnley or Rizzio,
both of whom and also Mary Stewart, were
alike wrong-headed.

Charles’s love of culture was derivable
from several sources, his high moral character, in the sexual sense, from his grandfather, Frederick of Denmark, a most upright man in this respect, and like Charles
himself, devoted to his wife. This strong
family affection was equally conspicuous in
Anne of Denmark and in her daughter
Elizabeth.

The character, in short, of Charles is far
more obviously derived from his ostensible
ancestors than is that of his father, and a
study of James’s family seems finally to
tilt the balance in favour of the Darnley
descent, strengthened as this also is by the
characteristics of the next generation. This
leaves a part of James’s character quite
unexplained by any known heredity, we can
in this event only conclude that some qualities, dormant for an exceptional number of
generations, re-appeared in him, and in
him only.

CHARLES II AND JAMES II

PARENTS.

King Charles I.
Henrietta Maria of France.

Prince Henry

THE STEWARTS 197

GRANDPARENTS.

King James I.
Anne of Denmark.
Henry IV, King of France.
Marie de Medici.

GREAT-GRANDPARENTS.

Henry, Lord Darnley.
Mary, Queen of Scotland.
Frederick II, King of Denmark.
Sophia of Mecklenburg.
Antoine de Bourbon.
Jeanne d’Albret.
Francis, Grand Duke of Tuscany.
Joanna of Austria.

There are few more interesting studies in
history than the characters of these two
brothers, both so strongly marked, and
both so different in almost every respect.
Selfishness was the keynote of Charles’s
character; he hated taking trouble, but
could work hard enough when he liked.
He possessed an excellent memory, strong
powers of observation, and was probably the
wittiest monarch that ever lived. By disposition he was tolerant and good-natured,
and, though, of course, a complete sensualist, not given either to drink or to gambling. Withal he took great interest in both
literature and science, particularly in the
latter. |

James’s intellectual attainments were of
an obviously lower order, but he not only
could work, but loved hard work. Of a
commanding appearance, better looking
than Charles, he was stiff and restrained in
manner, though not incapable of a gracious
courtesy. Tactless obstinacy was clearly
both his worst defect and at the same time
the keynote of his character. The difference between the brothers was well summed
up by Buckingham, “‘ The king could see

things if he would, the duke would see

things if he could.’’ Licentiousness was the
one characteristic that the two shared in
common.

Of their two sisters who lived to maturity,
the character of Mary of Orange, which will
be further considered when we come to her
198

son, William ITI, bore, on the whole, more
resemblance to that of James; but the lively
and vivacious Henrietta of Orleans, with
her intense love of pleasure coupled with
considerable mental ability, was almost
the female counterpart of her brother
Charles.

Let us now turn to the maternal ancestry
of this very interesting family. Henrietta
Maria, a woman of a somewhat frivolous and
shallow mind, incapable of concentration,
showed a great want of tact and judgment
when tested during her husband’s troubles ;
her disposition was, however, affectionate,
and her nature pure. She transmitted some
ability from her brilliant father, but showed
little of that ability herself. That father
was, indeed, a ‘ preux chevalier,’ ‘ sans
peur’ if not altogether ‘sans reproche.’
Courageous, dashing, vivacious in company,
attached to learning, Henry IV of France
was dowered with all the graces, but his
private life was completely licentious, and
cynicism, albeit an enlightened cynicism,
was the keynote of his public policy. His better qualities he quite obviously derived from
his mother, Jeanne d’Albret, ‘‘ a queen in
whom nothing was woman but her sex, a
soul given wholly to manly things, a mind
capable of great affairs, a heart invincible by
adversities.”’ She was the third of a line of
singularly brilliant women. Her husband,
Antoine de Bourbon, was an altogether inferior character, at once irresolute and licentious, personal courage being his best attribute.

On the mother’s side the heredity of
Henrietta Maria was far less satisfactory.
Marie de Medici was an unreasonable and
hopeless type of woman. Very vain and
accordingly ambitious, she proved quite
unable to use power when it came to her,
and after perpetual quarrels with her
husband during his lifetime, was thereafter governed by unworthy favourites. A
genuine love of art was the best feature of
her character, as a genuine love of science
was the best feature in the character of her
father, Francis of Tuscany, who, however,
in the administration of affairs showed himself a mere bigoted tyrant. His Hapsburg

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

wife shared the bigotry, which together with
her cold hauteur and iack of charm, was so
eminently characteristic of her first cousin,
Philip II of Spain, and indeed of many other
subsequent Hapsburgs.

It is obvious that of all his ancestors,
Charles II most resembled his maternal
grandfather, of whom, indeed, he was a
weaker copy. ‘‘ Paris vent bien un messe,”’
how Charles would have echoed that saying!
His mental gifts he certainly derived mainly
from the line of Jeanne d’Albret, though the
influence of the unstable Antoine de Bourbon is also apparent. From the Medici
line we can only trace in Charles his love of
science, though this may also be attributable
to Sophia of Mecklenburg. There are also
certain resemblances in his character to the
latter’s daughter, Anne of Denmark, and in
another line to Mary Stewart. Unlike both
his parents in most respects, Charles took
something from several of the ancestors of
both, but the maternal line certainly predominated. This line was entirely southern
in its composition, as the paternal line was
almost entirely northern, and Charles was
perhaps the most complete southerner of all
who have occupied the throne of England.

James was certainly more of a northerner,
but by no means entirely so, and much as he
resembled his father, his bigotry was certainly mainly derived from his Medici-Hapsburg descent. Henry IV he resembled in
no respect but licentiousness, and the influence of the latter’s ancestry is otherwise
negligible ; nor is the influence of the sound
and sensible Danish stock at all perceptible
in his case. Obstinacy, that most marked
feature in his character, is traceable in the
direct male line, and affords another presumption of the greater probability of the
Darnley descent. But with it may be
coupled a possibility of the descent of both
obstinacy and bigotry through Mary Stewart from the Guises.

As the characters of all the eight greatgreat-grandparents of Charles IJ and James
II are sufficiently well known, a rare occurrence even in royal families, a summary of
the characteristics of the brothers as
derived from these eight may be added:
THE HEREDITY OF THE STEWARTS

(1) Darnley (who may be taken as the ancestor). Little or nothing to Charles,
tactless obstinacy to James.

(2) Mary Stewart. Charm to Charles,
little direct to James, but perhaps
bigotry from the Guises.

(3) Frederick of Denmark. Nothing to
Charles, perhaps some slight bigotry
to James.

(4) Soplia of Mecklenburg. Love of
science, and intellect generally, to
Charles, nothing to James.

(5) Antoine de Bourbon. Licentiousness
to both.

(6) Jeanne d’Albret. Mental ability generally to Charles and perhaps his wit,
conspicuous in her mother Margnerite
of France ; nothing to James.

(7) Francis of Tuscany. Love of science
to Charles, bigotry to James.

(8) Joanna of Austria. Nothing to
Charles, bigotry and hauteur to
James.

Roughly speaking, five of the eight seem
to have transmitted characteristics to
Charles, and five also to James, while every
one of the eight had some influence on one
or other brother. In the case of James, it is,
curiously, the direct male and the direct
female lines in which this influence can be
most clearly traced.

WILLIAM III
PARENTS.

William II, Prince of Orange.
Mary of England.

GRANDPARENTS.

Frederick Henry, Prince of Orange.
Amelia of Solms.

King Charles I.
Henrietta Maria of France.

GREAT-GRANDPARENTS.

William ‘ the Silent,’ Prince of Orange.
Louise de Coligny.

John, Count of Solms.
Agnes of Sayn-Wittgenstein.

199

King James IJ.
Anne of Denmark.
Henry IV, King of France.
Marie de Medici.

Though not a Stewart in the male line,
obviously William III’s characteristics may
be studied in connection with his immediate
predecessors on the British throne, owing
to his maternal descent from that family.
The most striking of these characteristics
in his case were clearly his considerable
mental ability, and his excessively cold and
reserved nature. Its ability was not manysided, he cared nothing for learning or for
the arts, and his great qualities were purely
those of the statesman. This ability was,
without doubt, mainly attributable to the
direct male line. William ‘ the Silent,’
Frederick Henry of Orange, and William
II of Orange, all alike showed qualities of
the highest statesmanship, though the lastnamed lived too short a time to leave any
considerable reputation behind him.  Before his early death he had, however, proved
himself to be a man of the greatest vigour
and determination. Probably in the whole
of history there is no other case of such remarkable ability descending for four successive generations in the direct male line. The
intermarriages were sound; Louise de
Coligny, who belonged to a highly distinguished family, was herself a woman of
much charm and force of character, and was
adviser to both those able leaders, her stepson, Maurice, and her son, Frederick
Henry. Amelia of Solms was almost as
notable a character; of her parents little
seems to be known, but she herself was
vigorous and determined, always respected
if not always liked; of a distinguished appearance, she was fond of state and magnificence, and still more fond of her own way.

The third marriage into the Stewart
family would prima facie have hardly
seemed likely to have kept up the ability,
but this Mary Stewart was the ablest of the
children of Charles I, and would seem to
have taken as a whole from the ablest of her
ancestors. Celebrated as a girl for her
grace, beauty, and intelligence, Mary
200

showed gravity and decorum beyond her
years when called upon to preside at state
functions after her early marriage, and as a
young widcw exhibited determination and
sang-froid in dificult times. She was, however, somewhat tactless, and her nature was
cold, in both respects bearing some resemblance to her brother James, and the frigid
character of her son William was almost certainly inherited from her, as in this respect
he differed entirely from his Orange ancestors.

William ‘ the Silent,’ in whose character
taciturnity was not in reality a prominent
feature, was ‘‘ constant in disaster, devoted
to duty, hopeful in defeat,’’ qualities shared
by his great-grandson, but he ‘“‘ bore the
load of a people’s sorrows with a smiling
face,’’ and a smiling face the great-grandson
lacked. Frederick Henry was a handsome
and chivalrous man with a conciliatory,
genial temper, and his son, William II, bid
fair to be of much the same type. Amelia
of Solms, too, was far from reserved by
nature.

We must, therefore, attribute William
III’s cold disposition to the maternal side,
this being perceptible in his grandfather,
Charles I, as well as in his mother and his
uncle James. It is not easy to trace it
further back; it was not apparent in the
Danish line, from which line, however, William may well have derived some of his prudence. Most probably this coldness was
mainly due to the ultimate Hapsburg descent, but there was also, if the Darnley
paternity is correct, a double descent from
Henry VII, and to that monarch William
III bore obvious resemblances. As a quality
it may have been Jatent for several generations, at any rate it was certainly part of
the Stewart complex. The origin of William’s ability as a statesman remains, however, easier to ascertain than the origin
of his cold and reserved nature.

MARY II AND ANNE

PARENTS.

King James II.
Anne Hyde.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

GRANDPARENTS.
King Charles I.
Henrietta Maria of France.
Edward Hyde, Earl of Clarendon.
Frances Avlesbury.

GREAT-GRANDPARENTS.
King James I.
Anne of Denmark.
Henry IV, King of France.
Marie de Medici.
Henry Hyde.
Mary Langford.
Sir Thomas Aylesbury.
Frances Denman.

Neither Mary nor Anne left much mark
in history, but in Mary’s case her comparative insignificance was largely due to extrinsic circumstances. Amiable, cheerful,
and equable in temper, she, unlike her husband’s mother, gained the hearts of the
Dutch people; she was, moreover, far from
unintelligent and her nature was singularly
pure. With some of the vivacity of her
uncle, Charles II, she was very unlike him
in most respects. . Of a most unselfish disposition she subordinated herself entirely
to her husband. Had she been the survivor
and had reigned as a sole queen regnant,
there is little doubt that she would have left
a far deeper mark on history. Her unselfish
disposition she can hardly have inherited
from her father’s side.

Her mother, Anne Hyde, had borne herself well in a difficult position; a woman
of many talents and accomplishments, she
was gifted with discretion and tact, together
with a certain grandeur of both manners
and spirit. Clarendon was eloquent as a
speaker, gifted as a writer, consistent and
upright as a statesman, though his abilities
in some directions were limited and he was
specially unable to adapt himself to changing circumstances. His father, Henry
Hyde, was a man of learning and parts who
preferred to live the life of an honoured
country gentleman ‘‘ with great cheerfulness and content.”? Sir Thomas Aylesbury,
father of Lady Clarendon, was a man of
THE HEREDITY OF THE STEWARTS

erudition, particularly in mathematics, and
‘a great encourager of learning and learned
men,’’ Of the women of the family but little
is recorded, but Lady Clarendon was a most
devoted wife, and it was probably from her
that the sweetness and unselfishness of
Queen Mary’s character was derived.

In any case Queen Mary was more of a
Hyde than a Stewart, and some of the intellectual qualities of the former family undoubtedly descended to her, but her sister
Anne inherited neither the intellect of the
Hyde connections, nor the accomplishments
of the Stewarts. Anne undoubtedly had
certain resemblances to her father James,
a distinct share of his obstinacy and lack of
tact; her better qualities, her naturally
affectionate disposition and her attachment
to the English Church, were certainly derived from her mother’s side.

Anne was, without question, a weak
character, decidedly below the average, and
Mary can scarcely be described. as above it.
Their ancestry was curiously varied, the
result was morally good, but not at all
brilliant. They can have derived little from
the more distinguished of their ancestors.
Henry IV of France, Clarendon, Aylesbury ; but «mong the others there were sufficient elements of weakness or commonplaceness to account for the sisters, for Mary,
however, rather better than for Anne. The
origin of the latter’s character is certainly
more explicable than the origin of that of

201

James I, but prima facie, with her ancestry
she ought not to have developed into so
stupid, if well-meaning, a woman.

The heredity of the Stewarts presents far
more complications than does that of the
Tudors. ‘The characteristics of the earlier
line are comparatively simple, efficiency was
the dominating note. The Stewarts were
not efficient, but their characters were
remarkably varied. Certainly the fatal
quality of tactless obstinacy, with its
momentous historical consequences, ran like
a thread down the direct male line, not least
conspicuous in James IJI’s unfortunate son.
But to this quality there were marked exceptions, and the picture on the whole is one
of great variety. Remarkable, for example,
are the unlikenesses between Mary Stewart
and James I, between James I and Charles
I, between Charles I and Charles II, between James II and Mary II, between William III and Anne.

The ancestry, in fact, varied from the
beginning, grew more and more varied as
the successive intermarriages took place.
The earlier Stewarts of both lines, the
Danish, Bourbon-d’Albret, Medici-Hapsburg, the Orange, and the Hyde families
differed markedly in their group characteristics, and the results did not, as in the
Tudors, combine into a harmonious whole.
Hence the striking contrasts in this line of
monarchs, hence also their inexhaustible
interest.

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXII, No. 3.
