REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS.

Pearson, Kari. Zhe Life, Letters and Labours of Francis Galton. Vol.
I. ; 1822-1853; Cambridge University Press; 1914; pp. 246; price
215.
IN the Preface to this work we are told that the author was much discouraged by finding a serious gap in the material available, little information being forthcoming concerning Galton’s thoughts and actions between
the years 1844 and 1849. Though the impossibility of fully discussing
this developmental period of his career is much to be regretted, yet we
are sincerely glad that Professor Pearson’s discouragement was but
temporary; for, whether we look to his knowledge of the subject, or to
his evident admiration and respect for the character he so well portrays,
there is unquestionably no other person who was nearly so well qualified
to undertake this difficult task. To say that this work is a labour of
love is no mere empty phrase, but gives the true clue to the charm of
this notable biography. The large volume now issued, which is profusely
illustrated, takes us from Galton’s birth in 1822 to his marriage in 1853,
and is in time to be followed by a second volume. Many readers will no
doubt consider that the work is overloaded with detail. But we must
remember that a frank indication is made that it is intended as a
permanent memorial to the founder of the Galton Laboratory, and that
it is not written to amuse the casual reader, but for the perusal of those
who for years to come will wish to understand and to know Francis
Galton. Professor Pearson’s aim throughout this volume has been to
make the picture of a great man stand out vividly before us, and to
indicate as clearly as possible the various steps of his mental development; and no item is considered too small if it serves either purpose.
Such a task is full of difficulties, and the author tells us that a sense of
failure grew on him as the pages took form. We think he builded better
than he knew, and that his success has been remarkable. In the Preface
we are also informed—and the fact is naturally of especial interest to
me—that though much information concerning the family history of
Francis Galton’s cousin, Charles Darwin, had unavoidably been collected,
and though it was advisable to place these two men to some extent in
contrast, yet it was held to be unprofitable to discuss their relative greatness. Could Charles Darwin have read this statement, he would, I am
certain, have thanked the author for this omission, and also for the vast
labour spent in this monumental record of the life and labours of his
cousin, Francis Galton, to whom he also was bound by the same strong
ties of affection and regard.

To give an epitome of this volume will not here be attempted, except
for the purpose of reminding the reader of the period of Galton’s life
which it covers. A more elaborate ancestral record is given than is usual
in biographies; and this is not only appropriate in the case of one “ who
did so much to make the world at large appreciate the value of a good
series of forbears,”1 but was needed by the author to serve as a basis
for the many subsequent allusions to the correlation between Galton’s
characteristics and those of his ancestors. For example, though Galton
and Darwin had many qualities in common, qualities which were derived
from their common ancestry, on the other hand a parallel may be drawn
between their differences and the differences between the ancestral strains
which they had not in common. The value of the Quaker blood on
Galton’s side is strongly insisted on, not far short of half his ancestry in
the fifth generation belonging to that “grandly and simply stubborn ”2

* Page 5.
2 Page 29.
REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS. 24I

people, a stock purified by persecution, and maintained in its purity by
frequent intermarriages. Many other distinguished ancestors are mentioned—Savile, Sedley, Collier, etc., etc., too numerous here even to be
alluded to.

An account in considerable detail is given of Galton’s childhood, both
in his “spacious, pleasant home” near Birmingham, and at school, from
which we learn that he “was a normal child with rather more ”—or
decidedly more—‘* than average ability,”! with an affectionate nature and
with that keen sense of humour which never forsook him. There are fewer
records during his later school days of any signs of ability, and certainly
his teachers can claim no share in his subsequent fame. After a foreign
tour on leaving school we find Galton a medical student at the age of
16, nearly a year of his training being passed at Birmingham, where the
strain was excessive, and a second year in London, where he made many
valuable friendships. After a second foreign tour, in which his Wanderlust showed itself most clearly, he entered Trinity College, Cambridge,
at the age of 18, having had a far more varied experience than falls
to the lot of most young men when entering on their university careers,
an advantage which his elder brothers had not had, and which may
therefore fairly be correlated with his own superior innate qualities.
Overwork at the University, and the fact that he there became “a centre
of much social life, of literary ambitions, and of varied and somewhat
scattered purposes”? led to a breakdown in his health and to a poor
degree. In the following year his father died, and thus ended a correspondence which not only gives a charming picture of the son’s character,
but also proves the existence of a most exceptionally frank, affectionate,
and companionlike family intercourse. And now began the fallow years
already alluded to, in which no doubt the waste of time—if it was
wasted—was partly due to the necessarily slow recovery from the previous
overstrain.

We have now to deal with Galton as a man with independent means,
and to our surprise we find him abandoning all thought of practising
medicine, and, again being seized with the spirit of restlessness, wandering off to beyond Khartoum apparently purely on pleasure bent. Then
followed three years’ hunting and fishing in England, with how many
interludes of thought and study we know not. But after six years this
fallow period ended as suddenly as it began; for in his well-known travels
in Damaraland in 1850-51 he not only traversed much unknown country,
but his explorations were conducted in such a manner as to win for him
the gold medal of the Royal Geographical Society. His familiar letters
home serve in this volume the double purpose of illustrating his
character and of indicating the main features of his expedition, which
included diplomatic negotiations with the natives obviously requiring
much courage and judgment. He returned to England after an absence
of two years, and then this volume closes with his marriage in the
following year.

To those of us who knew Sir Francis Galton in his later years this
volume will be doubly precious; for all who can recall his welcoming
hospitality, his kindly sense of humour, his keenness of mind, his
resourcefulness in details, and his determination to seek the truth in face
of difficulties, must find it intensely interesting to note the appearance of
the same characteristics in his earlier life. The charm of Galton’s
company lay not only in these qualities, but also in a certain element of
unexpectedness; for one could never in the least foretell what he would
say or do next. I well remember one day, which seems but a few years
ago, when he astonished me by asking me to come with him to the
Derby, and I have ever since repented that I did not throw aside all other

* Page 75.
2 Page 194.
242 EUGENICS REVIEW.

engagements to seize that rare chance. Needless to say that our outing
would have been very different to that of the ordinary race-goer. After
leaving London as late as possible and in comfort, we should have gone
straight to the starting post, just in time to see the start, where we might
have had the fun of seeing a jockey thrown, I was told, and with the
certainty of seeing the horses in all their freshness and beauty. Then
after a short scamper in the open in order to get a distant glimpse of the
finish, there would have been ample time to return to town before the
crowd had begun to think of moving. But I must resist the temptation
of telling anecdotes about one who was both very loveable and very
great, a rare combination on this earth. As to those readers who have
not had the privilege of Galton’s personal friendship, we believe that
if they will read this volume from cover to cover, and if they will
follow patiently his career “through the great and the little, through the
apparently trivial and the apparently vital incidents of this story,” they
“cannot fail to fall in love with a nature which met life joyously, and
from childhood to extreme old age resolved to see life at its best and
be responsive to its many-sided experiences.} ” LEONARD DARWIN.

Hartog, Marcus, M.A., D.Sc. Problems of Life and Reproduction.
Progressive Science Series. London. Murray; 1913; price
7s. O6d.; pp. xx. + 362; figs. 41.
THIS is a book to know and to admire. For it deals in a fresh and
interesting way with many of the fundamental problems of biology, and
gives us the conclusions reached by an investigator of distinction, who
has very emphatically a mind of his own. The first essay is on the
significance of fertilisation, and this Professor Hartog finds in rejuvenescence. “The creation of a new cell, whose nucleus and protoplasm
have not been previously associated in a common cell-life” gives individuality another chance. The saying that “ Nature abhors perpetual
self-fertilisation ” was an exaggeration of the truth that races require
rest and change. In the sixth chapter the author discusses in a very
learned way all the different forms of fertilisation or syngamy, and
suggests the formula that what is brought about is a distinctive reorganisation of the cell, which often leads to something new. In the
second essay Professor Hartog exposes some of the difficulties that beset
corpuscular theories of inheritance, such as Weismann’s. The packing
of the germ-plasm with various kinds of determinants becomes so complex
that we are reminded of the Spanish King’s comment on the epicycles
required to render the universe workable on Ptolemy’s geocentric hypothesis: “ Had I been consulted at the creation, I could have simplified
matters.” We shall only note that the Mendelian theory of inheritance
which is so much in vogue to-day does not seem much simpler than
Weismann’s. And, after all, life is a very intricate business.

The next three chapters deal mainly with cell-division, which is a
central problem in biology. The power of spontaneous division is one
of the most characteristic differences between the living and the notliving, and any light on the instability that makes a unit divide is most
welcome. Professor Hartog draws a useful distinction between constructive processes leading directly to an increase in the living substance
and those leading to the accumulation of reserves which become available
by the action of an internal ferment. One cannot help speculating as to
the possibility of some “autokatalysis” being at the bottom of celldivision, but Professor Hartog’s contribution, which is of great interest,
is on another line. He finds evidence of “mitokinetism, a new dual
heteropolar force,” quite different from surface tension, osmosis, electrostatic force, or the like.

The next two chapters show in a lively way that there is a good
deal to be said for the Lamarckian theory of the transmission of indi
" Page 4.
