18 EUGENICS REVIEW.

for others. And lastly, if one cannot always be sure of when it
is right to speak or how much to say, err if at all by speaking
too soon rather than too late, and saying more rather than less
than may be needed. For the danger and the prize are alike too
great to be set upon a risk.

HOW THE DIFFICULTIES OF TEACHING EUGENICS IN
SCHOOLS HAD BEEN MET.

By Miss FAIrHFULL
(Headmistress, Cheltenham Ladies’ College).

WHEN I was invited to take part in the Conference, I was
asked to read a paper on ‘‘ How the Difficulties of Teaching
Eugenics in Schools had been met.’’ I felt obliged to confess
that, as far as I knew, these difficulties had not been met, and
that I was therefore unable to speak on the subject. I now
observe that this subject finds no place on the programme,
so I expect that I was right in assuming that no one has successfully attempted to teach eugenics in so far as it includes a
knowledge of sex-hygiene in schools.

There are, it seems to me, two ways in which the question
may be approached—the direct and the indirect method—both
of them beset with difficulties. .

It is often said that eugenics can best be taught through
natural history lessons. Does this mean that the subject is
more wisely approached indirectly, hidden in analogies, or
that it is so difficult of explanation and expression that it can
be most easily understood if described in the terms of another
science. If the former, it is open to this objection, that you are
pretending to do one thing while you are really doing another,
and the most ordinary result of this is a failure to do either
thoroughly well. If the eugenic aim is to be deduced from the
botany lesson, and this is to be the aim of the teacher, the
lesson will probably fail to be a good botany lesson ; in any case,
it will not be one of a progressive course. If, on the other
hand, the scientific aim be paramount, and the eugenic aim be
subordinated, it is more than possible that the children will fail
to discover the eugenic.aim at all.
EUGENICS EDUCATION CONFERENCE. 19

If, however, it means that the subject is more easily
approached by means of botany and biology, I would urge the
objection here that very few if any analogies will carry you right
through in an explanation of anything. An analogy will suggest, it will not fully explain, and very often at the crucial
point it will break down. And it is inevitable in the teaching
of eugenics that this method should break down, since the moral
element which affects the human problem has no place in the
animal and vegetable worlds.

Failing this method of teaching the subject, there remains
the direct method, and here the problem differs in the case of
girls and boys. To begin with, the school life of boys is
definitely regulated—first, the preparatory school at the age of
eight or nine, and then the public school, whereas the ages at
which girls first come to school are very various, and there is
very little uniformity with regard to their previous training.
Then, again, it is more dangerous with the nervous, highlystrung temperament of girls to discuss the subject openly.
Some have a natural dislike to and shrinking from all physical
details, whereas others have the spirit of curiosity that insists
on being satisfied. In any case, girls would resent being spoken
to in public or in groups on the subject, and I entirely agree
with a headmaster who holds that ‘‘ one does not deal in full
circle with matters which one does not wish to have discussed
when one is gone.’’ Each girl would, therefore, have to be
treated individually.

A wise mother, realising this difference in temperament
between her two daughters, yet at the same time fully aware of
the necessity of safe-guarding each by an adequate knowledge
of the facts of life, dealt with the difficulty in this way. She
told one that, in as far as she had disinclination for such knowledge, she would only tell her what was absolutely necessary,
while she made the other feel that her curiosity was natural and
not in any way a thing to be ashamed of. She promised both
that she would answer any question at any time with absolute
truth and fullness, stipulating only that they should in each
case go to her for the information they wanted, and not try and
learn it either from books or from conversation with others.
20 EUGENICS REVIEW.

By such wise dealing it seems to me that the aim which
we must keep in mind by imparting such knowledge was fully
attained, namely, first, the avoidance of any shock by the
sudden and unexpected acquaintance with physical details on
the part of a very sensitive girl; secondly, the prevention of so
much ignorance on the subject as might be dangerous;
thirdly, the avoidance of a morbid or unhealthy curiosity,
resulting in obtaining information from undesirable sources,
whether persons or books. Obviously such a course could
only be taken by someone having a very thorough knowledge
of the individual. In a large school, however well the principal
may know her girls, she would be a bold woman who would
pretend to the intimate knowledge of a parent as regards
children, though she may have an even better knowledge of
their characters, since she sees them in situations and circumstances different from the home. Therefore the mistakes that
she would make, even if it were possible for her to deal with
each case individually, might be many and serious. Such mistakes, indeed, might result in an alienation of the pupil from
the person who had touched a matter so delicate at a time when
the information was neither appreciated nor desired. Very few
children would, I think, approach anyone connected with their
school life on this subject, whether she be head mistress, house
mistress, or class teacher, whereas they turn quite naturally
to their parents.

Again, if a head mistress is to speak to girls of these
matters, either singly or together, she must take such time as
she can manage from her multifarious duties; it must be a set
and formal occasion, while in the home the mother can take
some opportunity that comes naturally in connection with habits,
or a talk about a book or a person to introdtice the subject that
she feels must be dealt with; she has her finger, so to speak,
on the pulse of the girl’s temperament, and can choose the
suitable moment to speak.

Furthermore, I am of opinion that there would be grave
danger in undertaking to propagate this knowledge through
the schools, in that many parents who should realise their responsibilities in the matter, would feel relieved of this responEUGENICS EDUCATION CONFERENCE. 21

sibility if they were sure that the school would make up for any
omission on their part. Already, as regards discipline and
manners, we see that parents are only too willing to shirk their
duties and leave training in these matters to the school authorities. And were they encouraged to forego this additional
responsibility, the result would defeat our principal aim,
namely, the endeavour to impress upon parents the necessity
of carrying out what is their privilege and their sole right.

But when opportunities naturally occur in school life and
lessons, of dealing straightforwardly with some aspect of the
physical side of life, as, for example, in reading Shakespeare,
in the physiology or history lesson, or in the discussion of social
and economic problems, the matter should not be shirked.
There the teacher has her proper province, and while I would
deprecate the use of a lesson, as I have said before, for introduring the subject, I would certainly not avoid it, when it
incidentally occurs. Both seem to me to savour of dishonesty,
and to avoid an allusion when it occurs in a lesson is as
dangerous from the point of view of awaking an unhealthy
interest and encouraging private enquiry as the forced introduction of the subject by means of analogy when the lesson does
not naturally suggest it. Above all, do not let us, as one
writer has expressed it, ‘‘ suggest an initiation into the unspeakable rather than a _ straightforward piece of natural
history.’’

But while I consider that the home is the proper place in
which a girl should make acquaintance with the more intimate
details that underlie the science of eugenics, I am far from
wishing to suggest that the school has not its special responsibility in a more general way.

It is the duty of every head mistress, as part of her school
work, to teach her girls the control of their affections in relation
to school friends and teachers, and the reasons for the importance of reserve in the expression of emotion. This cannot be
done by a mother with the same ease, since she does not know
her girl under the conditions which foster what is known in the
school world as ‘‘ raves.”’ Here the school has a great responsibility, and may do much by a system of severe repression of
22 EUGENICS REVIEW.

all demonstration towards the authorities, and of wholesome
ridicule of symptoms of effusiveness towards each other. In
her talks with elder girls, a head mistress can discuss very
plainly the reasons for reserve and self-restraint in friendships,
and the possibilities that lie before the girls in falling in love
and marriage. The effect, too, on health through the disturbance of the nervous system by a want of emotional control can
be insisted upon to those who are old enough. Such a statement as the following made by an American physician is full
of significance :—

‘‘Tt is not in my memory that a professing Quaker ever
came into my hands to be treated for nervousness. If the
opinion I have already stated so often is correct, namely, that a
want of control of the emotions and the over-expression of the
feelings are the prime causes of nervousness, then the fact that
discipline of the emotions is a lesson early and constantly taught
by friends would help to account for the infrequency of this
disorder among them and add emphasis to the belief in such
a causation.”

In school, then, though we may leave the insistence on
natural processes to the timely teaching of the home, it is possible
to educate the girls to realise the supreme dignity of motherhood, the value of leading healthy lives, the duty of preparing
themselves for the care of a household and children and the
tasks of citizenship. In this way they may be taught respect
for the body by cleanliness, right feeding, open-air and exercise, the danger to the nation of self-indulgence and luxury,
the importance of wholesome thoughts and interests to the
health of the mind and the value of high ideals and aspirations
to keep pure the life of the spirit.

It may, perhaps, be said that up to this point I have only
been destructive and shown the difficulties of the proposed
introduction of this subject into the school curriculum or the
work of the headmaster or head mistress. In conclusion, |
should like to make two suggestions tending to promote a more
thorough knowledge of sex-hygiene which I take it we all desire
that girls should have, both in the interests of the individual,
of the school and of the community at large. 1 would suggest
EUGENICS EDUCATION CONFERENCE. 23

that, while it is not the business of schools to undertake this
work, it is our business to see that it is done by those who are
best fitted to do it outside the schools. It is possible for us to
bring pressure to bear upon the parents by making it clear that
if unseemly talk takes place in school owing to the ignorance
of a child, the school authorities will feel bound to expel that
child. Few, if any, parents face such a possibility, and none I
think would run such a risk were they aware of it. There is
among school masters and school mistresses a general consensus
of opinion that unwholesome talk emanates from those who
are ignorant and not from those who have been properly instructed at home. Parents might also be helped in a somewhat
difficult task by the school authorities arranging for a lecture
to be given to them by a thoroughly competent lady doctor,
such as Dr. Scharlieb, who is able to judge the best way of
approaching the subject with children. I know that in many
cases such a lecture would be greatly valued.

My second suggestion is that if anyone in school is
obliged to make up for the deficiencies of the parent, the best
person to do so would be the lady doctor who acts as medical
inspector. Every doctor is accustomed to the hard task of
giving information on matters of kindred difficulty, and knows
well how much or how little should be said. The child would
recognise that it was part of the doctor’s work and when the
facts had been explained the moral purport of them could be
treated by the head mistress, as shown above.

DISCUSSION.

Dr. Haywarp (Educational Department, London County Council)
remarked that during the last thirty or forty years a number of isolated
attempts had been made to improve moral education in the schools,
including attempts at instruction in civics, courtesy, temperance, kindness to animals, patriotism. Those attempts were to him significant
as indicating a certain lack of comprehensiveness in the existing systems
of moral education, because all the schools in the country were supposed
to devote forty minutes or more every morning to a consideration of the
problems of life in an adequate manner. Yet in spite of that, these
separate various attempts had been made, of which eugenics was the
last and one of the most important, to improve the moral education of
the scholars. The obvious implication was that although for forty
years we had had a system which avowedly dealt with the great
