72 EUGENICS REVIEW.

senting social science with some completeness of outline and under the
light of Catholic principles.” As an outline the work is admirably
comprehensive and clear, and it deserves a wide circulation among
beginners who find it hard to co-ordinate their ideas of society. Monsignor
Parkinson deals first with the elements of social life, such as the individual,
the family, the State and the Church. He then explains production, distribution and consumption under the general heading of Economic Relations. Lastly, he discusses poverty and its remedies. As a reformer, his
attitude is practically that of modern conservatism, although he calls
himself a Catholic social reformer, and is more advanced than “the
Conservative School.” Throughout the book Christian principles are
appropriately stated, but they never get mixed up with economics or
political science.

The Papal encyclical “On the condition of the working classes ”
(“Rerum Novarum ”) is frequently quoted as giving the authoritative
view of the Roman Church upon modern problems of life and labour,
and at the end of each chapter a short bibliography of religious and
secular works is given. Where all is good, it is hard to select passages
for praise, but the economic explanation of the injury done to society
by extravagance in all classes is especially excellent and more valuable
than many sermons. Our only regret is that in a work dealing with
fundamentals, the author has made no reference to the action of heredity
in society or to the importance of the eugenic point of view.

A. W. COCKBURN.

McCabe, J. Zhe Principles of Evolution. London and Glasgow. Collins’
Clear Type Press; price 1s. net; pp. 264.

THIS is one of the series of small shilling books issued under the title of
“The Nation’s Library.” It gives a clear and easily comprehensible
account of the main facts on which the theory of evolution rests, and of
the less certain theories of the means by which it has been brought about.
The earlier chapters may be recommended to the novice who has not
made any previous study of the subject. It is somewhat doubtful, however, whether there is room for another small book of the kind when more
than one good account is available at no greater price, and in the later
chapters the author is frequently irritating and sometimes misleading.
Large parts of the book are obviously written at second hand, and the
dogmatic attitude adopted towards unsolved questions is regrettable. The
account of Mendelism is almost ludicrously inadequate, and clearly indicates that the author has read little on the subject and has not grasped
the essence of what he has read. The sentence “ The fluctuations are said
to be due to environmental influence, and to be transmissible; the mutations are due to changes in the determinants and are not transmissible ”
shows inexcusable carelessness in writing or proof-reading. The author’s
philosophical attitude is exemplified by the sentence, “ Idealism is the most.
singular and the most hollow delusion that ever entered the human
mind.” : L. DONCASTER.
