EVOLUTION OF THE PREHISTORIC
RACES,

By H. F. Humpureys, M.C., M.B., Ch.B., M.D.S.

Our knowledge of the antiquity of man is still very imperfect and is
derived from a number of finds, for the most part fortuitous, nearly all
of which have given rise to acute controversies. But the discoveries
of the last decade have settled some of these : and the publication within
the last year or two of some important new books, and new editions of
the few standard works on the subject reveal not indeed unanimity,
but a convergence of the best opinion towards certain agreed conclusions. The present time seems therefore a suitable one for a provisional
summary of our knowledge on the subject, and in what follows it is
these conclusions I shall follow, avoiding so far as possible, controversial points and omitting from lack of time the detailed evidence on
‘which these conclusions rest.

All undoubted traces of the human family that have been discovered
fall into the Pleistocene period. the last epoch of geological time. It
was a period of violent oscillations in climate ,and our own country
was at one time largely covered with ice, at another enjoying a subtropical climate. It is important to map out these changes and so
obtain a time-table for our journey into the dark backward of Pleistocene time. Our evidence is derived from the study of the earth’s
crust, of fossils, and of human remains,and though sometimes equivocal, it provides us with an agreed chronology at any rate for the later
phases for which the evidence is naturally most abundant. This
chronology is of course relative, but there now seems to be sufficient
evidence to justify a rough calculation of absolute time for these later
phases. I shall give the approximate estimates which are now beginning to find widespread acceptance.

10,000 years is generally allowed for the Holocene or recent period
of geologists, the period in which geography and climate have been
approximately those of to-day. In the story of man it includes not
only the whole growth of civilisation from its beginnings but the neolithic chapter which tells us of man’s first conquests over nature, the
power to domesticate animals, the growing of crops from seed, and the
dawn of the useful arts such as spinning and pottery.

Before the Holocene was the late Pleistocene period of geologists,
occupied by the gradual retreat of the ice of the last ice age which has
been calculated as lasting 7,000 to 10,000 years. It corresponds with
the upper palzolithic age of the anthropologist and the reindeer age of
the paleontologist and at its beginning perhaps 20,000 yearsago in
the first or Aurignacian phase of the upper palzolithic cultures we
find in Western Europe the earliest certain traces of homo sapiens, the
species to which all modern races of mankind belong. The geographical environment of Aurignacian man was very different from our own.
16 EUGENICS REVIEW.

The English Channel, part of the North Sea and Mediterranean were
dry land ; the climate was far colder and herds of animals now extinct,
either entirely or locally, roamed over his hunting grounds. The
Mammoth, woolly rhinoceros, bison, reindeer, cave lion, cave hyaena,
cave bear were his contemporaries and often his quarry. He lived as
a hunter pure and simple, hunting his game in packs and killing them
with his flint axes—ignorant of all domesticated animals, of the art
of agriculture and the simplest crafts. What then had he to distinguish him from the brutes about him. We can decipher four important
accomplishments ,though he may have had others the records of which
have been destroyed: (1) He had attained a high degree of skill in the
fashioning of flint implements; (2) He understood and could control
the use of fire; (3) He buried some at any rate of his dead, a practice
which denotes a high level of imagination and some sort of belief in a
future life; (4) He had a considerable measure of artistic skill engraving on bone, horn and ivory, modelling in clay, and painting on the
walls of caves the animals he hunted: it is almost certain that this
pictorial art represents an attempt to practice sympathetic magic,
another testimony to his powers of imagination.

It is astonishing to find Aurignacian man no whit inferior in
physical development to ourselves. His cranial capacity was fully
up to and often exceeded the modern average of 1500 c.c. and his
bony skeleton shews no characters separating him from modern races
greater than those which distinguish those races from one another
to-day. Already he seems to have been divided into two races,
neither of which is a probable ancestor of the races of modern Europe.
We must conclude therefore that he represents not the archetype of
homo sapiens but merely one of the different varieties into which that
species had already diverged elsewhere, long before he appeared in
Western Europe as the earliest known pioneer of his kind. One more
lesson he teaches us—that we have no evidence to shew that the
immense progress of the human race since his time represented by the
whole width of the gulf which separates ourselves from the savage,
owes much to the evolution of man in the biological sense. We have
progressed mainly, perhaps entirely, by the addition of one invention
to another, by the adoption of customs ever more suited to our needs,
by the sifting of truth from falsehood and half-truth through secular
experience, in short by each generation starting from the highest point
reached by its predecessor. There has, of course, been many a halt
and many a retreat in this forward march, and there is ample evidence
to shew that progress has been made on different paths by different
peoples, chiefly by a few progressive and happily situated races and
has become widespread by the diffusion of cultures far from their
original home. Modern man then stands compared with the earliest
known example of his species not as a superman but merely as the heir
of all the ages that have rolled between them.

When we look back beyond Aurignacian times into the heart of
the last Ice-Age (the Middle Pleistocene of some writers) we lose sight
of homo sapiens altogether and find Europe and (in the light of recent
discovery Syria also) peopled by man of another species, though still
EVOLUTION OF THE PREHISTORIC RACES. 17

of the same genus, the famous Neanderthal or Mousterian species .*
Remains of a sufficient number of these individuals have now been
discovered to reconstruct his physical likeness and reveal him as a
creature widely different from ourselves. He used a less erect posture
than we, and walked with a forward stoop and probably a shuffling gait,
his back being one uniform convex curve and lacking in the reverse
curve in the small of the back characteristic of ourselves. The head
was large and the face very brutal in appearance, with prominent bony
eyebrow ridges like the apes, a protruding muzzle and an absence of
chin. The forehead was not upright but sloped steeply backwards
and the frontal area of the brain, the seat as we believe of reason,
and the higher forms of intelligence, was small. In spite of this his
total cranial capacity was as large, sometimes larger than the average
of modern man, due to the great development of the posterior portion
of the brain, the part concerned with the interpretation of sense
impressions. He was succeeded in Western Europe so abruptly by
Aurignacian man,and his physicaldissimilarity is so great that there
is no question of his being an ancestor, but it is surprising to find that
he had acquired the accomplishmerts possessed by his successors to
an extent which almost compels us to harbour some suspicion of contact between the two. Thus (1) he manufactured flint implements of
a peculiar type known as the Mousterian, which have never been found
associated with truly human remains; (2) he understood the use of
fire and probably also, in view of the severe climate, of clothing; and
(3) most surprising of all he practised interment of his dead and possessed definite beliefs about a future life so that he was very far
removed indeed from the brute creation, though so far as we know he
had none of that skill in pictorial art that characterises homo sapiens
when he first stepped on to the European stage. He lived as a hunter
pure and simple, surrounded by the same extinct animals as his successor, and taking refuge in the caves where we find his remains. The
evidence is inadequate to tell us the duration of the last glacial age
during which he flourished and estimates vary from 20,000 to 50,000
years.

Looking backwards beyond this period we find the world enjoying
the milder climate of the last interglacial epoch when it was warm
enough for animals like the hippopotamus, the extinct Elephas
antiquus and the soft-nosed rhinoceros to flourish in England. It
appears to have been an epoch of considerable duration, anything from
50 ,000 years to five times that amount, and is known variously as the
lower Pleistocene and lower palaeolithic period (though the latter
term generally includes the Mousterian).

Before we consider what evidence it yields of human or sub-"
human existence it will be well to complete the outline of Pleistocene
time. Everyone is agreed that this period of genial climate was pre
* I ignore the few doubtful finds of Homo Sapiens dating from Pre-Mousterian
times such as those from Galley HiJl, Dartford, St. Olmo, etc., as even Sir A
Keith, the chief upholder of their authenticity in this country, now appears more
inclined to join the majority of anthropologists in putting them to the suspense
account.
18 EUGENICS REVIEW.

ceded by yet another ice-age which appears to have been the most
severe of all : and the evidence of palaeontology and anthropology point
to it as marking the beginnings of the Pleistocene epoch .*

Evidence of human existence in the period we now have to consider,—the long period of genial climate that separated the two last
ice ages—is much more fragmentary than that we have reviewed for
the succeeding periods and consists of flint implements and a few fossils.
Towards the end of the period Mousterian stone implements are found
but as these have been discovered as far away as South Africa, where
we have no records of Neanderthal man, we cannot at present: accept
them as evidence of the presence of that species. Prior to this the
flint implements are classified into three types, the Chellean with an
earlier type, the Strepyan which led up to it and a later, the Acheulean,
which developed from it, but as they appear to be successive phases of
one culture it will be sufficient for the broad outline of this sketch to
speak of the Chellean as respresenting the group. In fact the whole
period is sometimes spoken of as the Chellean age. These flints have
been produced by a definite and particular method of flaking, the results
of which give a flint implement of a peculiar type readily distinguished
from all others, a type which is unlikely to have originated in a number
of different centres. In fact the method in which they were used is
still uncertain and no modern savages living in the palaeolithic phase
of culture like the Australian blacks have been found to possess them.
It is probable therefore that the art of makingthem was discovered
by one group of people and spread from its place of origin by diffusion
of culture. Chellean flints have been discovered in practically every
region of the inhabited world except Australia and the Oceanic Islands,
an astonishing and profoundly significant fact, though the lessons to
be learnt from it must be drawn with great caution. Their worldwide distribution does not imply a universal Chellean epoch. Though
in Western Europe they have been roughly dated, in other parts of the
world there has been no accurate geological analysis of the strata in
which they occur and in some parts they may be quite modern in
point of time. We were living in the industrial iron age when Australian blacks were still in one of the lowest phases of palaeolithic culture,
and the art of making Chellean flints may have been spreading in
remote parts of the world long after it was discarded for newer methods
in the country of its origin. Furthermore, not even in Western Europe
still less elsewhere, can we correlate Chellean flints with Chellean man
as we can do in the case of Mousterian and later cultures. Two kinds
of the extinct fossil men I have to mention shortly, the Piltdown and
Heidelberg species, are now usually regarded as belonging to the

 

* Many geologists agree with this but there is strong evidence of one or even two
more glacial epochs before this one, separated from one another by interglacial
periods of genial climate, and some would bring these into the Pleistocene period.
Some of these ice ages were probably only local or have at any rate left only local
traces ; one however at least was general, but if this is placed, as it often is, in the
Pliocene epoch which preceded the Pleistecene the three sciences are brought into
harmony. Their differences are really due to the absence of agreement as to the
line which should separate Pliocene from Pleistocene formations, a line which is of
course only a mental conception the transition from one to the other being in fact
gradual.
EVOLUTION OF THE PREHISTORIC RACES. 19

Chellean epoch though it is unlikely that they were contemporary.
It is probable therefore that the use of Chellean flints became common
to more than one species as we have already seen to be the case with the
knowledge of fire. All we can say is that several flint working members of the human family existed in Western Europe in early Pleistocene times and that migrations of human culture diffused themselves
widely over the world long before the most ancient history begins.

When we turn from flints to fossils we find that our information of
Pre-Mousterian man becomes very scrappy indeed : we have knowledge
derived in each case from a single specimen and therefore very imperfect of four distinct species.

Rhodesian man is the most perfectly preserved but unfortunately
he cannot be dated, nor do we know anything of his cultural attainments. The value of the Piltdown remains is vitiated by the absence
of complete certainty that the cranium and the lower jaw belonged to
the same creature. Heidelberg man is represented only by a single
lower jaw and Pithecanthropus Erectus only by the vault of the skull, a
thigh bone and two teeth. The latter is thought to date from the
beginning of the Pleistocene, while the two others are now usually
placed in the Chellean epoch on the strength of geological evidence and
that of the associated animal remains. If that date is accepted they
must have lived when in some part of the world at present unknown
homo sapiens was already in existence and cannot therefore have been
ancestors of ours. It is perhaps more scientific to wait for further
evidence than to draw definite conclusions from such imperfect data.
But we seem justified in believing that (1) homo sapiens is merely the
last survivor of a number of members of the human family that flourished in different parts of the world in Pleistocene times ; (2) that these
represented not only different species but different genera; (3) that all
of them yet discovered were distinguished by a cranial capacity nearer
the human than the simian standard ,* by the erect posture, and by the
rudiments of speech, a faculty we deduce from the cranial casts and
the jaws.

Beyond the Pleistocene we lose any trace of fossil men and also of
the earliest flints that are the admitted work of human hands and the
Pliocene is a blank page in the story of fossil man, except for a single
tooth of doubtful affinities from the lower Pliocene of America. As
however, at least three genera were in existence in early Pleistocene
times, the family of Hominidae must have existed in the Pliocene
though it is incredible that our own species can date so far back as
practically none of the Pliocene species of animals survive to-day.
Indeed it seems probable that the whole genus homo like many other
living genera was a creation of the Pleistocene .t

* Pithecanthropus had a cranial capacity about mid-way between the two.
Piltdown and Rhodesian man were only just below the smallest modern brains.

f It is the Pliocene measures that yield such abundance of those rough flints
called eoliths and the later rostrocarinate implements which are still considered by
some to represent human handiwork. [I cannot now touch on this controversy, but
it should be noted (1) that both types of flint can be and have been produced by
natural causes ; (2) that eoliths are found in most of the tertiary geological forma
tions ;(8) that if made at all they must have been made by some species of Hominidae
very different from our own.
20 EUGENICS REVIEW.

The Pliocene rocks do however yield remains of several extinct
apes such as Paleopithecus an extinct form allied to the Chimpanzee ,
and when we pass on to examine the Miocene rocks we find the earliest
remains yet discovered of the larger Simiidae in Oryop?thecus, a large
ape whose fossil remains are found in Western Europe while other
members of the same family existed about the same time in India.
There seems good reason to believe that some species of these miocene
apes became the founder of the human family,as they seem in many
ways to have been less brutal and more human in their general character
than their other descendants, the living apes. We believe that they had
not such excessive length of arm or such large canine tusks as the latter
and it is probable also that their foreheads were less receding and that
they lacked the great eyebrow ridges of the gorilla and chimpanzee.
Vor the orang outang has never developed them and they are verv
slight in the other two apes before adolescence. It is a well known
biological principle that development recapitulates race-history and
in the relatively refined characters of the young chimpanzee we have a
truer picture of his ancestor than in the adult form. From this origin
in the Miocene the human family would branch into different genera of
which several perhaps all, acquired the habit of walking erect and the
rudiments of speech. To-day homo sapiens is their sole survivor and
of his actual ancestors we have as yet found no remains.

What can we discern of the factors that have influenced this evolution whose scanty traces we have followed. Man differs functionally from the apes onlv in three important particulars. (1) His more
complicated brain which is the physical basis of his great intelligence ;
(2) His erect posture which has made possible the development of his
hand; (8) the power of speech which is merely one aspect of his greater
intelligence. In the course of his evolution, he has only climbed
further up a ladder, the lower rungs of which had already been ascended
by the apes in the progress that differentiates them from the primitive
stock of mammals, and to understand the earliest influences that have
moulded man we must consider the beginnings of the primates, or
monkey family as they have been made clear to us by the brilliant
work of Professor Elliott Smith.

Primates and insectivora are the oldest of the existing orders of
mammals and we find them represented at the beginning of the Eocene
by small and primitive lemurs, one of which the spectral Tarsier of
the East Indies has survived practically unchanged to the present day, a
unique example of a living fossil. When other early mammals were
becoming specialised for life on the land, in the water and the air,
the ancestors of the primates lived in the trees and thereby took the
first step that led toman. The brains of most mammals and still more
of the reptiles from which they sprang, show that the sense of smell
dominates their impressions of the outside world: but when the first
primates Legan to live in the trees the sense of smell was of little use
and we can detect a rapid increase in those parts of the brain connected
with vision and to a less extent in the centres for hearing; eventually
the sense of sight dominated the brain of the primates, till the higher
monkeys alone amongst mammals developed the hypersensitive centre
EVOLUTION OF THE PREHISTORIC RACES. — 21

to the retina which has endowed them with the gift of true stereoscopic
vision.

Now visual impressions are pre-eminently those in the interpretation of which thinking and the active exercise of intelligence is
necessary, and the acquisition of stereoscopic vision implies powers of
concentrated attention, with the development of those parts of the
brain in which sense impressions are co-ordinated into some sort of
mental conception. Besides this factor in the development of intelligence, there is another gift that the primates owed to their arboreal
existence. Life in the tree-tops to creatures that cannot fly necessitates a fine sense of balance, what is called the kinaesthetic or muscular
sense, and a power of quick and agile movement. This led to the
development of the parietal portion of the brain which is concerned
with the accurate co-ordination of complicated muscular movements,
of which man’s use of his fingers is the supreme example. Life in the
trees therefore encouraged that growth of the visual type of brain and
the acquisition of high powers of skilled movement which distinguishes
the monkeys equally with man from other mammals. But at the
same time it permitted the retention of a primitive and unspecialised
build of body which has allowed the primates to survive when all
the other early orders of mammals whose bodily structure became
specialised to fit them for particular conditions of life have perished as
these conditions changed in the course of the ages. Man’s bodily
structure apart from the comparatively slight changes brought about
by the crect posture is of a remarkably primitive type compared with
the living animals of the world around him, a character that has helped
to make him the most adaptable of all animals.

Man in his evolution has merely travelled further along
that particular path the first stage in which has been already climbed
by his simian ancestors and we have now to enquire what cause impelled him further onwards. It has been argued on the one side that
the adoption of the erect posture by setting free his hands for purposes
other than locomotion led to the growth of a brain adequate to develop
the powers with which the new instrument had endowed him, in other
words that the hand educated and developed the brain. On the
other hand Prof. Elliott Smith argues that it was only the
previous growth of the brain that rendered the hand a useful instrument, and points to the gibbons, the lowliest of the apes who are
capable of the erect posture but have never advanced because their
brains are too primitive for them to exploit their hands’ latent possibilities. Our fragmentary knowledge of extinct members of the
human family seems to shew that the two developments of brain power
and erect carriage went on side by side and in any case we have still
to enquire what led to these new developments. Here we can only
advance our knowledge by thinking pure and simple as the diseovery of
a complete series of fossils would not help us at all and there is no
possibility of experimental evidence. All we can do is to frame a hypothesis which best explains every known fact, and the only one so far
as I am aware which is adequate to explain them is that at some time
{? in the Miocene period) the ape-like ancestors of the human family
22 EUGENICS REVIEW.

forsook their forest home and vegetarian habits, and took to hunting

wild game in more open country. This step, so pregnant with future

developments, may have been due to a sheer act of will or to some
climatic change which turned their particular forest home into a more
open grass-land. We do not and probably never can know what were
the habits of miocene apes, but their descendants, the apes of to-day,
who as they have undergone no great change in their bodily structure,
have probably not altered their habits, are all arboreal animals living
in pairs or small families and feeding mainly on the abundant fruits of
the tropical forests , though they will eat small animals and birds when
they can catch them easily. Their life is essentially sluggish and unprogressive. On the other hand the earliest men of whom we have
detailed knowledge are always gregarious creatures living in packs or
tribes, and subsisting as hunters of wild animals ,and the change may
just as well have taken place at the beginning of man’s evolution as.
later ; if we compare primitive hunting tribes with other animals like
wolves which also hunt in packs, we discover many suggestive similarities not only in their mental and emotional characters, but even
in their social habits, traits that puzzle and distress humanitarians,
and moralists when apparent in human nature, and have been investigated by a psychologist Prof. Carveth Reid in a suggestive little book..

But it will be asked why hunting habits should have turned an

ape into a man but left a wolf unchanged? Several important factors
at once suggest themselves. A wolf is a creature specialised through
long ages in its bodily structure and mental endowment as a beast of
prey. It has speed, endurance, powerful natural weapons in its
teeth, and a brain dominated by theolfactory sense which enables it
to hunt by scent. The ape on the other hand had been evolved for a
totally different kind of life : it has sacrificed the sense of smell for more
discriminating visual perceptions, it moves more slowly for the most
part than the herbivorous game animals, and though man has developed great powers of endurance, these only count when exertion is
very greatly prolonged and have probably only developed as a response
to the hunting life .* And though the teeth of apes will serve as weapons:
for killing and devouring game they are far less perfect instruments for
this purpose than the teeth of carnivora. An ape therefore that
changed its natural habits could not run down single-handed the
game it hunted and we may suppose development to have proceeded
somewhat on the following lines:

(1) The adoption of the erect posture would not only enable it to
move faster,—more and more swiftly as its structure became
modified to suit the new position,—but would set free the hand as.
an auxiliary weapon. Probably from the first the hand would
arm itself with sticks and stones as several monkeys both can and
do so employ their hands on occasion. Intime the increased use
of the hand would supercede the canine tusks as hunting or sexual
weapons and these in accordance with a well established natural
law would then shrink to the human proportions.

* Over very long distances, e.g. in the recent London to York trial, a man can:
beat a horse when the latter is handicapped by a rider.
EVOLUTION OF THE PREHISTORIC RACES. 28

(2) The combination of a number of animals into a pack would greatly
enhance the chances of success, and such combination involves as
in wolves subordination to a strong and cunning leader and a
certain primitive discipline. This would form the germ of man’s
social habits. Certain monkeys such as baboons, though none
of the great apes, are habitually gregarious to-day and will combine in packs to raid plantations ; and it is not unlikely that man’s
remote ancestor may have been an ape that was a sociable animal
by nature.

(8) Our ape being unable to run down game by scent or even by
sight, could only catch it by stratagem such as hunting in relays
or driving, and by a minute and intelligent study of the habits of
its quarry and of its most vital spots. Ability to study tracks
(it could not smell them like a wolf), enough concentration of mind
and will to follow up an animal over long distances, and power to
form mental images of what the unseen quarry was doing would be
advantageous. All these things would place a high premiium on intelligence and would lead to the survival and progressive
evolution of a more and more intellectual type of being.

(4) To animals hunting in this way a method of signalling and calling
to other members of the pack would be of enormous value, and a
much more complicated method than the simple baying of a
wolf would be required. To this may be attributed the first
rudimentary development of speech, made possible only by the
existence of a brain already highly endowed with intelligence.
In time habits of speech would produce alterations in the jaws
towards the human pattern, in order to obtain free movement for
the tongue, though Piltdown man teaches us that this last change
came as a response to the new habits.

(5) A she-wolf and cubs at twelve months old can take their place in
the pack. In the genus Homo however, and probably in his
ancestors too, the female is far less capable of prolonged and
violent physical exertion than the male and the young are not
physically mature till 15 years or later. The primitive ape-pack
must therefore have made some provision for the women and
children who could not hunt and such provision led to higher
moral development and the growth of law and custom.

Along some such lines as these I have briefly indicated does the
hunting hypothesis seek to explain the emergence of man from the ape
as it may be presumed to have progressed during the Pliocene period.
Can it explain the whole story? I think not, for it does not account
for those high powers of imagination and abstract thinking of which
man is the sole possessor. The most primitive savages are endowed
with a degree of imagination which expressing itself as it does in false
conceptions of natural causation and complicated magic practised in
the effort to control it, appear rather to hamper than to help him in
his struggle for existence. It has been often remarked that man as a
Savage possesses far more brains than he needs or can use, and we must
seek some further cause for this excessive hypertrophy of brain. Wecan
of course invoke a supernatural agency but the evolution of man is
24 EUGENICS REVIEW.

here regarded from the standpoint of natural history, and there is
one somewhat obscure natural law which seems to offer if not an
explanation, at least a rationale of the process. It is a fact well
known to students of extinct forms of life that when an animal in the
process of evolution starts to increase in size, that increase tends to
progress far beyond its point of maximum utility until it finally becomes
a grave hindrance and leads to the animal’s extinction. The classical
example is the gigantic reptiles of the secondary geological epoch.
There seems to be a sort of momentum in the matter which rushes the
creature to destruction, and the same is often true of single parts of
the body when they start to grow, e.g. the monstrous horns and spines
of some extinct reptiles, the tusks of the babirusa and the elephant.
The whole evolutionary story of the latter is a history of successful
endeavour to adapt itself to the steady increase in the size and weight
of its tusks. One more example of a different kind. ‘‘A study of
cretaceous polyzoa has revealed the fact that the habit of secreting
lime when once adopted persists in an increasing degree: it has led to
a brilliant but brief career in skeleton building and has doomed the
organism to evolve in the end only the architecture of its tomb.’’
By a similar process the brain of man having once started to increase
in size, in response to the factors I have described, has grown more and
more till the ultimate result is beings so obviously outside the opera tion of natural selection as a Plato, a Da Vinci, a Shakespeare.
