  
 
   
   
 
 
   
  
   
   
 
   
   
 
  
   
  
   
  
  
 
 
   
 
   
  
   
 
 
 
  
  

; } Population Policies Com. nd its forerunner, the Popula* vestigation Committee, owe
fen to the inspiration of Pro-Saunders. His Galton
> Bagenis in the Light of
5 ar ends’ ¢ was responsible for
: .@ new trend of thought in
. He stressed the fact that this
POC o longer, as in the past, afford
euself with the quality of the
p the exclusion of considerations
r Embers. He urged that it should
, Heol the nickname ‘“ The
2 Detection of Persons Un| 23 , Posterity ” by failing to develop
@ of positive eugenics as imporconcrete as its programme of
Binics. In view of the emergence
: plic issue of the problem of the
| population, he warned the
er of allowing the initiative
w population policy to be taken
mes and institutions who might
pense ves with the problem of
0 ut considering at the same
bbl em of quality.
nit of Professor Carr-Saunders’s
ke dress was a Series of discussions
fimately to the institution, on
& of this Society, of the Populasation Committee, for the purpose
| four population trends, past and
of studying the influences which
. The Investigation Committee
rily a fact-finding body, and has
work in elucidating the how
} trends, But it is also conF diagnosis, with the why of
meends, and, at this point, its work
& that of the Population Policies

Me } before the Eugenics Society on

PeviEW, 1935, 27, 11.

THE WORK OF THE
ATION POLICIES COMMITTEE*

By FRANCOIS LAFITTE

Formation of Committee

This Committee was brought into exis
tence in the spring of 1938, again on the
initiative of the Eugenics Society, with the
object of complementing the work of the
Investigation Committee by tackling the
vital question of remedies—of measures to
“ prevent the decline of the population from
proceeding faster or further than may be

deemed socially desirable.”’

Whilst the

Investigation Committee is primarily concerned with ascertaining facts, the Policies
Committee is primarily interested in devising

remedies ;

both Committees are concerned

with the diagnosis of causes.

The reasons which led the Soczety to take

the first steps in establishing this new
Committee were admirably stated by Professor Carr-Saunders in his Galton Lecture :

The coming decline is as yet hidden from the
people at large. Prophecy is dangerous; but it
needs no courage to foretell that, once the
decline in numbers becomes apparent, universal
interest and concern will be aroused in the
population problem. This problem may well
assume first place among public questions, and
put in the shade those economic and social
matters which now occupy attention. Discussion will lead ultimately to action, and this
is the point to which I wish to draw special
attention. . . . If eugenists set to work now
and formulate a policy designed to lift the birthrate, they will be first in the field. Under such
circumstances their proposals will at least
obtain sympathetic attention and may well be
adopted in whole or in part. Such proposals will
possess the great merit of having been formulated with the problem of quality as well as
the problem of quantity in mind. But if they
delay, measures will be proposed by others who
have quantity alone in mind, and the nation will
get committed to a population policy in which
eugenic considerations find no place. . . . The
Society has an opportunity which is never likely
to recur. Everyone will soon be asking what
can be done. A population policy will certainly
be constructed ; now is the time to ensure that it
will be a policy in which eugenic considerations
are not omitted.*

 

47

* loc. cit., 17.
48

And so the Population Policies Committee
was established, by this Socze¢ty and P.E.P.
jointly, in the hope that its discussions of
the factors involved in the framing of a
positive population policy and its sifting of
the experience of foreign countries in this
respect would result in the formulation of
proposals which could not be ignored when,
in due course, national opinion became ripe
for action to be taken.

The Committee, under the chairmanship
of Professor N. F. Hall, Director of the
National Institute of Economic and Social
Research, includes among its members
Professor Carr-Saunders, Dr. C. P. Blacker,
D. V. Glass, Mrs. Eva Hubback, and Mr.
Max Nicholson, Secretary of P.E.P. Five of
its members are also members of the Population Investigation Committee, so that coordination with that body is ensured.

Immediate aims of Committee

The Committee’s immediate aim is to make
a preliminary survey of the field of positive
policies, and to embody the results in a fairly
detailed report, discussing pros and cons at
some length. This report it is hoped to
publish in April of next year. This is
regarded as the first stage. After the publication of the report, according to its reception
by the public and the attitude to it of the
various organizations which are feeling their
way toward acceptance of the necessity of
a population policy, it may be decided to
reconstitute the Committee on’ a broader
basis, to undertake more detailed investigations and possibly to work for the implementing of any generally agreed proposals.
Nothing concrete can be said on this point
at the present stage.
Our work since June of last year has been

concerned with three main topics :

(x1) the position of the family on un
employment pay ;
(2) family allowances ;
(3) a diagnosis of the causes of the fall
in fertility.

We are now about to embark upon a series
of discussions of the general aims and
principles of a population policy, and will

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

 
  
      
  
   
   
  
    

later pass on to a consideration of sf
measures.

Posttion of families on relief

Why did we begin with a study ¢
financial position of families on unen}
ment pay? Partly because, since the su
we are tackling is both vast and somé
elusive, we preferred to start on an aspé
it the facts of which are fairly easily q
tainable and concrete ; partly because}
a study throws indirectly a good deal of;
upon the financial aspects of child-re
among manual workers generally. @
analysis, some of the results of which
recently published in the EUGENIcs REV§
led us to two main conclusions. ;
that unemployment pay, whether be
or assistance, becomes progressively *
adequate for human needs as the size of
dependent family increases. In other we
unemployment pay, in spite of its ng
basis, tends to reproduce, at a lower
one of the weaknesses of the present w
system—its failure to ensure to familié
different sizes an income commensurate ¥
their needs, its financial penalization’
parenthood. |

We found further that a substantial j
portion of the children in unemplo
families must be living in circumstaj
below any commonly accepted “ pov
line,’ and that this position is not conf
to families on unemployment pay. In‘
case of large families a considerable “
lap ’’ between normal wage-rates and
employment pay was found to exist. I
precisely because this “overlap” exy
because the scale of unemployment pay
circumscribed by present wage levels ang
the inflexibility of the wage-system, t
even such a service as Unemploym
Assistance, specifically designed to sup
income in accordance with need, car
avoid some penalization of the large fam

Financial position of dependent family

This study convinced us of the necess
of considering the financial position of {

* F. Lafitte: ‘‘ Unemployment and Child-bearin
EvucGENIcs REvIEW, 1939, 80, 275.
  
    
  
   
   
   
 
   
 
 
  
   
   
 
  
   
 
 
  
  
 
   

% family in general, and the merits
mits of family allowance schemes as
fer method of redistributing income
Eway as to eliminate or mitigate, at
ie level, the financial bonus which
Kt: wage-system bestows upon the
fe the relatively infertile. It was
that, in so far as married couples
families for financial reasons, the
onomic bonus on infertility must
Eby a redistribution of income in
pparents. On this principle there
. -agreement. Income, unlike the
8 family, is not elastic. Are family
j the best or the only method of
. f this inelasticity of income? A
alle discussions of this topic left
Med. We had to consider, on the
* he apparent failure of the family
Psystems in France and Belgium
p to influence the birth-rate, and
2 rejection of cash allowances in
h population policy, as an exMpeasure which might have unes equences. On the other hand
: the experience of Germany in
Bent the birth-rate has risen,
: is not clear to what extent cash
t have contributed to this rise.
bere was the argument that cash
pmay have had no appreciable
| Roreic countries because they are
ten an “‘ adequate ”’ scale ; larger
Bought to stimulate births.
up against two difficulties: (a)
wcide the size of an ‘‘ adequate ”
pai relation to an income of a given
; how to raise the money for allowbe.“ adequate ” scale. On neither
Miny definite decision been taken.
Msideration of the matter has been
i two reasons.
st place we have come to realize
#re many methods apart from cash
by which the desired redistribuMeme might be effected. It was
Mt advisable first to make a study
wencies by which income is or may
rom the childless to the parents.
Bes include direct and indirect
» ial insurances, social services,

    
  
   
 
   
 
 
  
   
  
   
   

THE WORK OF THE POPULATION COMMITTEE 49

rebates and differential pricing schemes.
The operation of all these agencies in combination requires to be considered before it
will be possible to determine what importance
to attach to cash allowances in respect of
children in a_ reconstructed system of
taxation, social insurance and social services.
One thing at any rate has become clear to us :
that family endowment in the sense solely of
cash allowances cannot be regarded as a
panacea for the population problem, nor even
necessarily as the simplest and most effective
method of relieving the burden of parenthood. <A clearly thought-out population
policy will probably include cash allowances
in some shape or form among its measures,
but it will include them as one element in an
integrated system of measures rather than as
the main plank of its programme.

Our second reason for postponing a
decision about family allowances was that
our work had made us keenly aware of the
necessity of considering the motives behind
family limitation, and the social factors that
underlie those motives. To what extent are
families limited for financial reasons rather
than on less tangible grounds, and what
exactly are the financial reasons involved ?

Motives behind family limitation

A diagnosis of causes was therefore our
next task, and it is proving to be an immensely complex undertaking. As Dr.
Blacker and Mr. Glass remark in a recent
publication :

Many people are in the habit of putting forward on this subject opinions which are based
on personal problems which happen to be
occupying their minds at the time, or on preconceived political theories. Here are some of
the separate *‘ causes ’’ which various people who
have written to the papers regard as accounting,
singly or exclusively, for the whole problem :
fear of another world war ; the inadequate wages
paid to the working man ; the cost and difficulty
of obtaining domestic servants; the craze for
amusement and pleasures; the ‘‘ pace” of
modern life; over-indulgence by the modern
girl in athletics; the danger of dying in childbirth; the increase of homosexuality among
men; the selfishness of the modern girl; the
demoralizing influence of towns. It has been
well remarked that ‘‘ hardly one of the opinions
arrived at in this ‘ intuitional ’’ fashion will bear
50 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

examination.’’ The problem is not so simple and

straightforward as many people seem to think.

Different causes are at work which, in various

combinations, affect people in different occupa
tions and in different parts of the country in
many complicated ways about which we should
know more.

The more closely the problem is studied, the
clearer does it become that, in fact, the causes of
the decline in fertility are numerous, complex
and deep-seated. In western European countries
they form so intimate a part of what we may call
the twentieth-century view of life, that we can
prophesy with some confidence that really
effective counter measures will not be easy to
find. The raising of our national fertility would,
in fact, prove a gigantic task, the achievement
of which would necessitate a drastic revision of
many of our current ideas about wages, social
services, the economic system and the family.*
Nevertheless, in order to see the problem

in its right perspective, and to achieve at
any rate a first approximation to a correct
assessment of the relative importance of the
main factors discouraging fertility, it is
necessary to attempt such a diagnosis.
Without it we cannot hope to devise a
realistic or an adequate policy.

The birth-rate has been falling for the past
sixty years, and one thing at least is clear:
that by far the most important reason for
this is the fact that people have to an increasing extent consciously sought to avoid
having large families. The problem is
basically one of volition, of the motives of
married couples, of attitudes to parenthood.
What we have to find out is why in the

* seventies of last century there developed a
new attitude to parenthood which was
unfavourable to fertility. It is not a sufficient
explanation to state merely that the publicity
given to the idea of family limitation by the
birth-control trials of the late ’seventies led
people to realize the possibilities of avoiding
large families . . . and so the birth-rate fell.
That is of course true, but it is not the whole
truth. For the revival of the birth-control
movement at that time, after a period of
quiescence lasting some thirty years, was
itself a response to the growth of a new
attitude of parenthood. What developments
in our social life in mid-Victorian times and

* Population and Fertility. See Euczenics REvirw,
1939, 30, 235.

  
 
 
 
  
   
 
  
   
   
  
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
   
   
 
  
 
 
  
 

since have brought about this chag
outlook, this ever-extending desire tol
family responsibilities? The attem
answer this question involved us?
sociological analysis of British life ov
past hundred years. Since this anal
still being considered by the Commit
what follows I shall be expressing mf
sonal opinion rather than the final vi
the Committee. :

My own view of the basic factor iny
is somewhat complex. It seems to mg
the development of British society ov
past hundred years—that is, sine
stabilization of the modern industrial ¢
—has awakened the great mass of peg
the possibilities of high standards of ¥
and comfort, and thereby to a hithe
paralleled realization of wants, which
only in part been satisfied. Since the
quarter of last century the growth of 4
of living seems to have outstrippe
growth of actual standards of living—t y
to say, an increasing proportion of pq
to-day perhaps the majority, have cog
expect more of what are called the ‘
things of life’’ than they are
getting. At the same time children have
turned into a financial burden for the
fourteen years of their existence. Fe
has consequently been sacrificed to a gr
determination to span the gap betwee
actual standard and the desired standg
living by individual effort to “‘ get on
to “ make good.” *

E ffect of high economic and cultural stay

The great economic, social and cy
expansion of Britain since the middle ¢
century has given us higher standa
living, a multiplication of the variet
comforts and luxuries, made possib
mass-production, a growing richness ¢
possibilities of enjoying life, and abo
the achievement of what has been ca
“silent social revolution ’—mass li
popular education, the “ civilization,’

 

* The phrase ‘“‘ the good things of life ”’
concept of a standard of living are intended I
include cultural and spiritual as well as n
desiderata.
  
   
 
  
  
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
  
   
    
  
   
  
   
   
  
   
   
  
 
 
  
   
 
   
  

. mass of the people. These
s have resulted in a transformaattitudes. As standards rose
meven faster. Economic and social
Mas lagged behind the growth of
ger welfare and comfort. The less
we more prosperous classes above
wee mode of living: they strive to
Svhat they now enjoy tends to be

% but a foretaste of what they may
the future, if they can only “ get
. orld ’’ by individual striving. To
pwhich is not unlike the phenomemgo described by Arséne Dumont
| pia,” children tend to be

g of standards has brought with
Btion of child labour, compulsory
re p to fourteen, and the enforceWher standards of child welfare and
Mesponsibility, all developments
be weakened many of the old
ts to parenthood. Education and
Bexpansion of norms of living have
oe an ever greater awareness of the
i ges of parenthood. Because people
mes of life, both for themselves and
Mrildren, they tend to have fewer
Mt to care for them better, and
Mitions which in the past would
mo barrier to fertility have to-day
ated into barriers.

modern attitude to parenthood

mins of the modern attitude to
B.can be traced back to midThe moral atmosphere of
s dominated by the doctrine of
which after all was in fact the
Beipation of M. Dumont’s “‘ social
, The “ self-help ’’ doctrine,
tress upon individual enterprise,
at fhought and hard work, was a
Mece in raising a large body of
: kmen out of the social degrada“thirties and ’forties. “‘ Selfpted the emergence of the typical
mman of the period, industrious,
Mication, ambitious to make his
ther by ‘becoming his own master
Mating. Individual striving to

ere oad 6

THE WORK OF THE POPULATION COMMITTEE 51

a)

“get on in life’ was bound in the end to
generate a critical attitude towards parenthood. “Self-help”? implies saving, and
children were becoming more and more
costly.

Education in particular—a major instrument for competitive self-advancement—
was becoming a heavy expense, not merely
for the manual worker but in all classes.
Throughout the second half of last century
education was assuming an ever greater
importance to the middle and upper classes,
for reasons both of social prestige and of
economic necessity, as Dr. Grace Leybourne
so clearly demonstrated in an address to this
Soczrety.* Social progress was continually
raising the standards of professional and
educational qualifications, abolishing patronage and privilege in one sphere after another,
throwing posts open to competitive examination, and making it necessary to educate
daughters as well as sons. Moreover, every
great step forward in working-class education
had its influence upon the educational
standards of the middle and upper classes.
Education was turned into a necessity for
all and the financial burden of parenthood
thereby increased. What applies to education applies to many other things which have
come to be regarded as necessities. To
parents inspired with these new tastes the
one obvious economy was to reduce the size
of the family.

Stabilization of modern attitude

And so gradually the new attitude to
parenthood was formed. It still had to
become explicit and widely acceptable. Its
wide acceptance was hindered by ignorance,
the conventional morality, the lack of sex
equality, and the unreflecting moral certainty
of the age (typified in the dogmatic belief in
“progress ’’). It required a social crisis to
crystallize the new outlook and to make it
respectable. The great depression, the economic crises and the land slump of the last
quarter of the century provided the necessary
shock. Victorian complacency was shaken.
The thrifty workman was frightened. After

* EuGEenics REvIEW, 1938, 30, 175.
52 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

a quarter of a century of unparalleled and
practically undisturbed progress, uncertainty
and fear of falling back into the poverty he
had barely escaped replaced his earlier
confident belief in automatic and inevitable
economic advance. He had tasted the fruits
of the new industrial order and he wanted
more. In this situation the birth-control
trials had the effect of a catalysing agent.
The new attitude to parenthood was crystallized and made respectable. The trials gave
fine publicity to contraception, but far
greater was the publicity for the zdea of
family limitation. The trials constituted, as
it were, a ‘‘ show-down ”’ between the conventional morality and the new outlook,
and the old morality did not emerge unscathed. For the first time it became widely
appreciated that children were not the
inevitable consequence of marriage, and the
idea spread that it might be right and proper
to limit one’s offspring.

For the wealthy too this was a period of
transformation of values. Economic developments accomplished the eclipse of the social
values of the landed gentry ; henceforth it
was money rather than land, birth or status
which conferred prestige. The growth of
*“conspicuous expenditure’” among the
wealthy and the growing burden of education expenses to parents of the upper and
middle classes must have provided strong
reasons for family limitation.

Present-day determinants of family limitation

Once voluntary parenthood had gained a
foothold, contraception ceased to be merely
a means to family limitation, but became in
addition a contributory cause of family
limitation. The gradual diffusion of the idea
of family limitation opened up new vistas to
many who previously would have accepted
the “‘ devastating torrent of children” as
part of the order of the universe. It was not
difficult for people to discover hosts of new
reasons for not wishing to have large families,
and social emulation assisted in making the
small family fashionable.

Subsequent developments have generalized and reinforced the new attitude. The
“self-help ’’ morality, expressing itself

   
   
  
  
   
 
   
  
  
    
   
   
   
   
  
   
 
 
   
 
   
    
    
 
  

to-day in the urge to achieve security
than independence, has penetrated ak
every rank of society. General edu
the standardization of patterns of4
through the growth of towns, the b
down of rural isolation and of indepg
rural life, the growth of opinion-f
agencies on a national scale—the p
press, the film, the radio—have gene
in all classes the tendency always to ¥
little more, and to live a little abovw
means. There is probably more cor
ness to-day than in the past of ff
between the desired standard of livé
actual financial possibilities.
Finally, the twentieth century hag
steady increase in the social impo a
section of the community whichg
historically predisposed to low fertili
great lower-middle class of black
non-manual workers. The nature q
work requires relatively high stand@
education and personal appearance, al&
in the mass their remuneration approxy
to that of skilled manual workers.¢
sequently the tendency to live song
above their means is perhaps chronic 4
them, and they feel the pinch of
norms and limited means with e
keenness. Their importance as sy
exemplars for the mass of manual
must not be underestimated. nd
respectable, everywhere in evidence,}
in the new suburbs and along the by4
thronging the shopping centres. The
look finds expression in the daily g
They spend perhaps no more
manual workers, but they spend their
differently and to greater advantage.§
are looked up to, and their mode of life
to become an ideal pattern for those be
them.

Further factors in the problem

Such is my view of the main issue.
are many additional factors which mu
be overlooked, of which I think four r
special notice.

I. Industrialism has resulted in vy
may describe as a far-reaching “j
sonalization’’ of work—the ine

“4
 

EF. THE WORK OF THE POPULATION COMMITTEE 53

 
 
 
 
 
   
  
   
   
  
  
   
  
     
   
  
  
   
  
  
 
   
  
  
  
  
   
 
  
    
  
 

Siarge-scale production and the
eet labour—and this has led, in
Miitions, to a sharp division
gand leisure. Work means less

al than it did in the past, and
ance is being attached to
from earning a living. The
i has become greatly enhanced,
; reason and because of the
ity’ accorded to the leisure
ve wealthy by press and film.
ed and commercialized
vision of enjoyment has itself
Mdustry, and its products must

3 ‘money. So that, to a certain
K, because it involves the spendpr has become an alternative to

‘series of developments has
pee earmarking in advance of a
Mbortion of income. Accurate
Fuot easy to obtain, but it seems
mthat the past fifty years have
wy growth of the proportion of
; has to be written off in
fixed charges such as rent,
mang expenses, house and hirefyments, voluntary and coma Bnce contributions, income tax,
*The result is that a relatively
Bi of income is left over for
zt ure, including budgeting for
family.
Fo not fit well into modern
ih its street accidents, its lack
miable open spaces, its lack of
ee i adequate housing accommogon. Moreover children tend to
® important kinds of leisure
@ it should be noted that this
meant not because towns to-day
e-in than the towns of last
Pe ecause people expect and are
. ect far more now than in

B sonst refer to the growth of
Bid of sexual knowledge. The
pment of our society has
mily of its former importance,
i extraverted social life. The
* m reduced from an earning

unit to a consuming unit dependent upon
one main earner, it has lost a great part of
its educational functions, and much of its
leisure and recreational functions. Simultaneously increasing sex equality and sexual
knowledge have enhanced the importance of
the husband-wife relationship, often to the
detriment of the parents-children relationship. As marriage becomes more and more
a partnership of equals, the health and
happiness of the married couple assume
greater importance, and children tend to
become a welcome, but not indispensable,
addition to the happy marriage, rather than
an integral part of it.

The formulation of policies

Such, in the baldest of outlines, are the
main features of the problem as they strike
me. What about policies ? The Committee’s
next task is a discussion of the basic principles
and general aims of a positive policy. After
that we shall pass on to consideration of
specific measures in detail, including cash
allowances.

At this stage I can do no more than to
indicate some of the main issues upon which
we shall have to dwell. I cannot do better
than to begin by recalling the way in which
Professor Carr-Saunders has formulated the
problem with which voluntary parenthood
confronts us:

Children were formerly the inevitable accompaniment of married companionship and home
life. There was no question of any attitude to
size of family ; that settled itself. There was no
thought of replacing the present generation ;
replacement was automatic. Children were a
forced levy ; now they are a voluntary contribution. But though size of family is now a matter
of deliberation, replacement as yet plays no part
in these deliberations. To how many people does
it ever occur to connect the size of their family
with the future of their country? No such
notion ever enters the head of the man in the
street.

Voluntary contributions have, as we all know,
to be earnestly solicited ; but for these essential
contributions there is as yet no solicitation on
behalf of society. It is therefore a mistake to
speak of a retreat from parenthood if by that is
meant a deliberate refusal to replace the present
generation. Replacement is not and never has
been a conscious matter. But with a system of
voluntary parenthood it must become so if
54

society is to survive. . . . When children were
a tax which could not be escaped by those who
desired home life, the community, which relied
upon this revenue for its perpetuation, was
under no pressure to smooth the path for those
who had to pay it. ... Under a system of
voluntary parenthood, however, the situation
undergoes a profound change; the community
now relies for its revenue upon voluntary contributions, and it must see, not only that
obstacles do not stand in the path of contributors,
but that all the resources of modern knowledge
and skill are employed in order to assist those
who take their share in the essential task of
replacement.*

At every stage in the formulation of
policy we are confronted with the need for
making choices. At the outset we have to
choose between the new system of voluntary
contributions and the old system of enforced
levies. I am certain that this Society shares
the view of Professor Carr-Saunders that the
achievement of voluntary parenthood is a
great step forward in human history, and
that it would be both mistaken and ineffective to attempt now to suppress birthcontrol. But accepting voluntary parenthood, do we merely accept it, or do we seek
to foster and encourage it ? Here there may
be some difference of opinion. Professor
Carr-Saunders argues that ‘* parenthood
must be made truly voluntary throughout
society, in the sense that all births must
become wanted births,” but others might
point out that at present the elimination of
all unwanted births might result in an
enormous fall in fertility. Every eugenist
wishes to see knowledge of contraception
and sexual hygiene disseminated as widely
as possible. On the other hand it may be
urged that it is better to soft-pedal contraception until the positive aspects of our
policy begin to bear fruit. Here again a
choice will have to be made.

““ Voluntary parenthood ”’ as basis of policy

Whatever we decide we must understand
that there is a certain risk involved in basing
our policy upon voluntary parenthood and
wanted births. It means that we shall be
relying upon freely given contributions,
whilst doing all we can to make it easy for

* Carr-Saunders, A. M., loc. ctt., 16.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the contributors to make their offerizg
means in fact that we shall be relying
the strength of the instinct to parent
having removed the major obstacles
expression.

Now while there is much evidence fl
philoprogenitive instinct is often th
we can none the less not be certain tha
removal of the major obstacles to if
pression would in itself suffice to maj
our numbers. Moreover, in those cases 4
an unwanted pregnancy results in a wi
child, the generalization of voluntary
hood would presumably prevent;
children from being conceived, by
ing unwanted pregnancies. ;

For these reasons the removal of 0
to parenthood must go hand in han¢
measures to enlighten and persuade
to want more children. To_ borro
analogy from another field, if the vo
system of recruiting is to survive,
must be made to see the need to md
work. Therefore I would agree with Prof
Carr-Saunders that a positive popul
policy must have two objects :

first, to make it universally understood:
with a system of voluntary parenthood,
munity can only survive if varticipation }
task of replacement is undertaken as an
social duty, and secondly, to remove obs
to, and to create facilities for, the fulfilm
this duty.*

But I should disagree with his pt
enlightenment and propaganda in th
rather than in the second place. It 1
that over the past sixty years only on
of the question has been put—namel
case against fertility. Social develop
public opinion, the continual incitem
expenditure that is a feature of m
advertising, have all stated the case a
fertility. The high-pressure salesm
tended to supersede the parson as th
stant visitor on the housewife’s do
and he, unlike the parson, is not inte
in her family affairs or her children.
quite recently the case for fertility has
been stated. All this is true. There is
fore ample room for propaganda.

  
 
 
 

   

* loc. cit., 17.
    
   
   
  
   
   
  
   
 
  
   
 
   
 
   
  
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
  
  
   
   
   
   
  

Montributor will make a donation
mnless he has been convinced that
Mthy cause. But there are many
Mrecognize the worthiness of the
Mout feeling that they are in a
W’make any contribution themBre is therefore a danger in speakpehe duty of parenthood without
Maly providing for the rights of
M children. As Dr. McCleary has
P » we may get the retort : ‘“‘ What
y ever done for me that I should
to it?’ It is dangerous to talk
Bf selfishness as a cause of family
+ when what some call selfishness
§ by others as plain common sense,
a strong sense of responsibility,
rents a married couple from
Ato the world more children than
Mhey can bring up in health and
F:Who is to say that their standards
phigh ?
@ regard to propaganda, we shall
bose what emphasis to place upon
tals, and to which sections of the
gine’ should be mainly directed.
r ng is that, since we are soliciting
00 atributions, we should do what
mecit charity for good causes do, and
; ce mainly to the better-off
R would perhaps be a little rash to
Bt, from the eugenic point of view,
‘ Me most valuable sections of the
fy, but at any rate they are not by
W the least valuable. The fact that
Miso the least fertile groups seems
F that they require special atten
Enerically they are less important
Rgreat mass of wage-earners. In
fo some sections of the latter
will entertain misgivings about the
fy of any indiscriminate exhorta
lity. For my own part I feel that
Mise the creation of conditions
¥ for birth-release is more imporpropaganda, and that any positive
st go hand in hand with birth8 eugenic enlightenment, and that,
fez sible, eugenic safeguards should
fated in the programme.

THE WORK OF THE POPULATION COMMITTEE

35

Objectives of birth-bromotion measures

What should be the material basis of
propaganda for birth promotion ? At present
the needs of society clash with the private
interests of the individual married couple.
The aim of a positive policy must therefore
be to resolve this conflict of interests. It
seems to me that there must be two main
objectives :

1. To reduce the extent to which childbearing and -rearing is dependent upon
what Miss Rathbone calls the “rough and
tumble of wage negotiations,”’ by providing
the family with a source of income other
than the earnings of its breadwinner, an
additional income, independent and distinct
from wages, which will vary according to the
size of the dependent family. By an additional source of income I do not merely imply
cash allowances. I include, as I have already
explained, every form of ‘ ‘horizontal redistribution ’’—rent rebates, school-feeding,
improved maternity and medical services,
differential pricing schemes, taxation, and
so forth.

2. The second objective should be to
ensure that every child that is brought into
the world is guaranteed an adequate basic
minimum of food, clothing, shelter and
medical care. I incline to the view that
poverty at the bottom of the social scale is
likely, in these days of voluntary parenthood,
to prove more and more a deterrent to
fertility. At any rate there should be a
revision of the absurd social accountancy
which provides that ten times as much
money should be spent weekly on a mentally
defective child as on the (potentially)
healthy child of an unemployed worker.

To sum up my two objectives into one
formula : everything possible should be done
gradually to reduce the extent to which the
fate of the nation’s children is bound up with
the struggle for economic welfare and social
advancement of their parents.

Many less fundamental lines of reform
come to mind.

1. The social services must be reorganized

so as to incorporate the family as a unit.
This applies especially to National Health
56 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Insurance, which to this very day continues
to exclude the dependent family of the
insured worker from the benefits he enjoys.
A chain of community centres, on the lines
of the Pioneer Health Centre in Peckham,
might well be founded, to act as centres for
prophylaxis and at the same time as centres
for encouraging ‘‘ neighbourliness’’ on a
family basis, and generally creating an
atmosphere in which family ties are strengthened and family troubles dissipated.

2. Our towns should be purged of the
harmful features which discourage fertility.
Housing accommodation suited to the needs
of large families, nurseries and créches where
infants can be safely parked when parents go
out to shop or to enjoy themselves, playgrounds, parks, green belts, and much
besides are needed before our towns will be
fit for children to live in.

3. There is probably considerable scope
for preferential treatment of parents of large
families, not merely in differential pricing of

railway fares, electricity, etc., in the:
vision of free holiday accommodati
wireless sets, and so forth, but also,
paribus, in the allocation of emplo
This is a controversial matter upon
the experience of Germany and Italy
throw some light.

The foregoing are merely the sort of
which my Committee will probably be.
sidering in the near future. What dec
will be taken I cannot of course forecas

I conclude with a suggestion. I hav
touched upon the question of the nat
the eugenic safeguards which it woul
advisable to incorporate in such a popula:
programme. It would be highly interes
to learn the opinions of members of.
Society as to the kind of measures wl
would be necessary to ensure that
expansion of the birth-rate shall not i
eugenically undesirable consequences.
recommend this point as a topic for fu'
reflection to all members of the Soczety.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXXI,

 
