PROBLEM FAMILIES AND THEIR
HOUSEHOLD BUDGETS

By E. T. ASHTON, M.A., B.Sc.

WiTH Notes By D. CARADOG Jones, M.A. AND DAVID JONES

HE word “ household’’ rather than
“home ’’ has been chosen deliberately
in the title of this article. It is a noun

that refers to the home in its economic
aspects. ‘‘ The household is the unit of

decision as far aS concerns the economics of.

consumption ’’ say S. J. Prais and H. S.
Houthakker.* When we hear the phrase
“the home background of the problem
family ’’ we expect discussion of far more
than the economic difficulties; ‘“‘ home ”’
denotes psychological considerations, which
are secondary when “household ’’ comes
to mind.

The title of an article can be very misleading. It was a temptation to call this
article “‘ Lawless Families.”’
immediately prepare the reader for a
discussion of family influences in crime and
juvenile delinquency. If I had given way to
the temptation and used that title I would,
however, have meant something quite different! Problem families are, it seems to me,
lawless in the economic sense, whatever
‘their significance for criminologists. They
are lawless in their irrational disregard of
ordinary commonsense management of
income.

The subject of consumer-choice is one of
the higher mysteries of modern economic
theory. Consumer-choice among problem
families would be an esoteric study which
might, or might not, reveal regularities based
on constant irrationality rather than on the
rationality which is postulated in economic
theory. Economics is often called the
dismal science, reasonable behaviour being
so much less fascinating to observe than

unreasonable behaviour, as witness the
* The Analysis of Family Budgets. 1955. p. I1.
Cambridge University Press.

95

This would’

appeal of the Sunday newspapers. Yet it is
the “unreasonable’’ economic choices of
problem families which make their way of
life dismal indeed! |
Because a mode of life appears “‘ lawless ”’
when compared with an ideal type of normal
household budgeting, that is no excuse for
ignoring its peculiar economy. Modern
research on problem families is engaged on
finding what distinct types this blanket-term
includes. The research will not yield a full
picture of these families unless their economic
thinking is included. It is more convenient,
of course, to describe on the one hand
psychological features such as instability,
dullness, neglect, and, on the other, the
physical condition of family members and
their home. Both of these are, however,
aspects of the problem closely related to the
way income is utilised in the household. |

4

Distribution of Income _ within the

Household

One of the most difficult things in the
study of household budgets is to ascertain
what the household income really is. This
difficulty itself can be subdivided into two
parts. Firstly, in a budget survey it is
a¥most impossible to obtain full and accurate
figures of earnings, including overtime, of a
large enough group of workers. This is
particularly the case where problem families
are concerned. The authors of the 1952
Eugenics Society study (Ed. C. P. Blacker,
while giving figures, admitted “ information
about income was sometimes difficult to
obtain, and when obtained, was felt to be
untrustworthy.”’ Secondly, it is difficult to
assess what proportion of the earnings are
given to the wife, with which to meet

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, July, 1956. 48, 2.
96 | THE EUGENICS REVIEW

household expenses. Michael Young* gives
a vivid account of the biased “ distribution
of income within the family ”’ resulting from
the insufficient housekeeping allowance granted. He summarises the observations of
many social workers that wives often do
without for the sake of husband and children,
especially in times of depression. He com‘ments, with examples taken from social
surveys, on the disproportionate part of the
household earnings retained as pocket money
by the husband.

Dr. Zweig in his “ Pelican”’ study, The
British Worker (pp. 72-5) comments on the
situation, adding that “ the higher the wage
level, the smaller the percentage given to the
housewife,’’ her housekeeping allowance
remaining constant when wages rise.

Both these difficulties are encountered
when problem family budgets are studied.
Variations in the domestic economy are so
numerous that it is difficult to strike a
realistic average for income over a period. It
is equally difficult to assess what part of that
income finds its way from husband to wife.
With rational planning at its minimum, it is
clear that whatever she gets will not be
handled with the foresight required to make
a little go a long way.

Several problem family surveys have
shirkéd the task of computing household
incomes, and have concentrated on the rich
variety of alternative headaches presented
by these families. In Southamptont we soon
learned that to follow the detailed financial
fortunes of the hundred families involved
over a two-year period would have left us
little time and energy for other matters that
we wished to examine. Dr. Maurice Williams
says of them, for instance, “ their debts pile
up, they resort to football pools and
gambling in the forlorn hope that by some
stroke of luck all their worries will disappear.’’+ So do other people, but within a
reasonable budgetary framework which in
the case of problem families does not exist.
We were relieved in a way when good
fortune and the kindness of the National

* British Journal of Sociology, 1952. 3, 305.

¢ Ford, P., Thomas, C. and Ashton, E. T. Problem

Families. 1955. Blackwell.
+ EuGENIcs REVIEW, 1956. 47, 219.

Assistance” Board allowed us instead to
examine just one source of problem family
income.

National Assistance

We found that seventy-four out of 104
families had received National Assistance in
the two-year period. Twenty-four of these
seventy-four families had had long-term
allowances of over twelve weeks at a time;
these long-term allowances alone amounted
to £2,592. Particularly interesting was the
number of families (sixty) who had received
emergency cash grants, over and above any
other grants they were receiving. No less

than 369 such emergency cash grants were

made in the period. The reasons tabulated
for their award throw considerable light on
the tangled finances of the families, and
should be closely scrutinized by all interested
in this subject.

This was interesting enough, but would
have been even more valuable if we had been
able to relate the National Assistance Board
figures to total household income. This we

-were not able to do with any exactitude. As

Dr. Williams states, “ one-third of the 104
families gave betting, drink and gambling as
the main reason for their financial difficulties.’’§ This is ultimately however just one
aspect of their general financial fecklessness
and ineptitude. Looking at it any way, it is
clear that quite a large proportion of their
sacrifices on the altar of chance come out of.
public money.

Primary and Secondary Poverty

It is obvious that much more investigation
is needed into the special nature of problem
family income and expenditure. I will
merely suggest a few approaches that could
be tried. The first relates to the secondary
poverty that is more characteristic of problem
families today than the primary poverty that
existed before the war. It will be recalled
that Rowntree, who coined the term,
denoted by secondary poverty those cases
where “ total earnings will be sufficient for
the maintenance of merely physical efficiency

§ Ibid.
PROBLEM FAMILIES AND THEIR HOUSEHOLD BUDGETS 97

were it not that some portion of it is absorbed
by other expenditure, either useful or
wasteful.’’ Rowntree insisted that there
were many such families with adequate
income, where nevertheless acute poverty
existed. This is probably still, to a lesser
extent, the case to-day, as we shall see.

Dr. Young* pleads for a closer study of
secondary poverty within the family. So
far, primary poverty has been much more
accurately observed. “ It had,”’ says Young,
“one brilliant advantage; it was statistically
measurable.’’ It is not so easy to gauge the
degree of secondary poverty in a family.
Descriptive or comparative accounts seldom
give the whole picture.

Yet some light on the situation of the
problem family in the community is thrown
by a study such as Poverty and the Welfare
State.t Chapter 8 of this little book is called
“Life below the minimum.”’ In it occurs
(p. 59) a paragraph that should make us
query the extent of poverty that exists to-day.
“Since our poverty line is a stringent one,”’
say the authors,“ and itself represents, as we
fully recognise, a standard of living that is a
good deal below what is desirable, and since
Classes ‘A’ and ‘B’ [ie. 4:64 per cent of
the population of York] fall below our
poverty line, it follows that the 846 families
in York in those classes are going short of the
necessities of life, even if they did not spend
anything on non-essentials.’’ In fact we
should add to these families in York another
1,395 families (Class “C’’, i.e. 19-4 per cent)
technically above the poverty line, but only
if they concentrate all their spending power
on absolute necessities.

The frontier linking primary and secondary
poverty does not indeed end, in this York
study, until we reach class “ D,”’ only the
more prosperous of whom are free from actual
or likely poverty. Even if this study, as
some critics allege, over-estimates the
amount of primary poverty, it certainly

points to a wide range of secondary poverty.

It is certain that problem families would
represent, in York or elsewhere, one of the

* Op. cit., 1952.
+ Rowntree, Seebohm and Lavers, G. R.
Longmans.

1951.

permanent sources of primary and secondary
poverty. This, moreover, was in 1951. It is
not likely that problem family incomes since
that date have risen in proportion to the rise
in prices. It is even more unlikely that the
ability of these families to manage their
income has increased proportionately to the
rise in the cost of living. It is accordingly
very probable that the amount of secondary
poverty among problem families is increasing
rather than decreasing.

Health of the Wife

Another point for further research is the
relations between the health of the wife and
the distribution of income within the family.
The poor health, often mental as well as
physical, of the wife in these families is a
fact often noted. Regrettable in itself, it is
also a matter of major sociological importance, being a primary cause of the family’s
deterioration. Any light thrown on her
position in the family Uluminates equally the
whole family situation.

The Eugenics Society study, Problem
Families: Five Inquiries (1952) gives in its
Table 17 (p. 63) a clear picture of the
frequency of this factor. Of the 347 known
cases in the districts studied, only a third of
the problem family housewives could be
classified as in normal health. Over 55 per
cent of them, while not actually ill, were
assessed ‘as below par; another II per cent
were actually ill at the time of the investigation. Small wonder that their efficiency as
home managers, never very marked, decreases
steadily with every year of life and every
additional pregnancy. The trouble is that
these families, as Dr. Williams comments,
are not usually receptive to health education.
Very persistent efforts, indeed the maximum
effort from health visitors and others, appears
to bring only minimum returns where these
families are concerned.

Dietary Levels

One last point might interest those concerned with problem family budgets. Engels,
writing a hundred years ago; said that food
represented the largest item in family
98 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

budgets, but that the proportion of expenditure devoted to food decreases as the
standard of living of the household increases.
The dietary levels of problem families are
certainly among the more alarming of their
characteristics. It would be valuable to
know therefore the effect of rehabilitation on
their expenditure on food. It would be
interesting to learn whether the proportion
spent on food does in fact decrease as family
standards are raised.

This may however be one of the respects in
which these families defy normal economic
laws. Experience makes it seem probable
that improved standards will not greatly
alter the total proportion of family income
spent on food. Efficient rehabilitation would
however alter the proportion of different
kinds of food bought. Present problem
family diets are normally, as David Jones
said, ‘“‘ tea, bread, margarine, cheap cake and
chips taken at odd times.’’* Obviously, to
quote again, “‘ they have little idea of food
values, and what food they have is lacking
in nourishment.”’

Problem families probably spend on food
(if the term is taken in a very loose sense to
include sweets, etc.) more than most workingclass families. Improved standards might
mean that they would spend no more on
food, but would distribute their purchases
more wisely on a balanced diet, including
some items such as extra meat. This would
absorb any savings effected by eating less
fish and chips!

Rehabilitation

Rehabilitation would substitute planned
and reasonable choice in diet for irrational
and capricious choices. This would mean a
major variation in spending habits, not
necessarily connected with the income level
of the household. Household budget studies,
however, often use the so-called ‘“ Engel’s
curve,” which relates to the variation of
expenditure on particular commodities according to the income level of the household.
This is a good illustration of how difficult it
is to apply ordinary economic laws to the
behaviour of problem families, for the

* EUGENICS REVIEW, 1950. 41, 172.

Engel’s curve is based on a model of rational
economic choice. Prais and Houthakker, for
instance, say “a working-class household
will be acting in a perfectly rational manner
if it discounts very heavily its future incomestream and establishes habits of expenditure
which are appropriate to a lower income
level than it may in fact be enjoying.”’
Would this apply to problem families? |

Rehabilitation might of course mean that
more comes into the home; it should at least
mean that existing income is more wisely
expended. Much of the success of the Family
Service Units with these families is due to
friendly help with household budgeting.
More information would be welcome from
Family Service Units, Local Authorities and
National Assistance Boards on this matter.
What, that is to say, is the extent of change
in diet with higher standards, and what
effect does it have on the general finances of
the family?

Conclusions
It is not claimed that budgeting, or the

‘Jack of it, is the whole or even the main

source of the difficulties that perpetually
plague these families, and all who have to
deal with them. Their financial situation is
one aspect of a many-sided problem. It is a
situation that can only yield to a totalitarian
approach. This does not mean Hitlerian
measures, but an all-out attempt to deal
with all their interrelated problems concurrently. Nevertheless, in this frontal
attack, the weapon of budgetary control
should not be spurned. To bring order into
the lives of such families is a formidable task.
A good start in clearing the muddle can be
made by analysing the family budget.

Mr. D. CARADOG JONES writes:

Mr. ASHTON cogently argues that budgetary
control—I should prefer to say guidance—
should not be spurned in any radical attempt
to cope with problem families. Admitting
that the outlay of their income is not the
main source of their difficulties, he has
nevertheless underlined certain aspects of
their household economy which deserve
further exploration, for he believes that
'... PROBLEM FAMILIES AND THEIR HOUSEHOLD BUDGETS 99

“research will not yield a full picture of
these familjes unless their economic thinking
is included.”

In my experience the majority of such
families seem, in fact, to be incapable of
economic thought, or at least of forethought.
I will illustrate this by an example which
has recently come to my notice. In a village
with which I am well acquainted there lived
a retired glass-worker, over eighty years of
age, with an unmarried woman of about
sixty as housekeeper. While he was alive he
used to settle the monthly accounts and dole
out small sums for her to buy food and other
essentials. When he died the woman was
left with a pension judged to be adequate for
maintenance, supplemented as it was with
national assistance. But, never having had
the full direction of expenditure before, she
has no idea of setting aside the weekly sums
needed to pay the rent and meet the cost of
fuel and other regular charges. Moreover,
being somewhat simple, she cannot easily be
taught to look ahead by those who would
help her.

The consequence is that she has got in
arrears several weeks with her rent, and there
would be in addition a heavy bill for coal had
not a friend paid what was owing in the very
cold weather to prevent her weekly hundredweight being cut off. When she draws her
money at the post office she goes straight to
the village stores, pays the back week’s
account, and proceeds to buy her groceries
and a quantity of most unsuitable food,
sausages, iced cakes, sweet biscuits, anything
that is tasty but of little nutritive value.
With fires also she is lavish at the beginning
of the week, so that at the end of it she suffers
from cold and hunger. Now she has been
taken to hospital with bronchitis and the
ward sister says that she has been “ badly
neglected.”” When she comes out she will
continue to be a problem for the village and,
were it not for the kindness of neighbours,
her plight would be a sad one.

Here we see progression towards the
typical problem family condition, reduced to
its simplest terms, for only one individual is
involved. The fundamental cause of the
trouble in this instance is subnormality of

intelligence and one symptom is a recurrent
economic crisis. The root cause of the
trouble in another individual may be a
chronic lack of self-control, the resulting
symptom being some form of moral delinquency. The case might be described in fact
as one of moral rather than mental subnormality; and when the individual concerned is the breadwinner or his wife, the
family readily becomes a problem family.
Here too, sooner or later, as a secondary
symptom, the family economy may be
observed to suffer. It is a signal of impending
disaster if the national assistance officer does
not intervene.

In this respect there is some likeness
between “ problem families ’’ and “ broken
families.’’ What is the cement which holds
any household group together? It may be
ties of blood, as with parents and children;
or affection, as with husband and wife; or
community of interest and feeling, as with
friends who choose to share a home; or a
combination of these factors. Given one or
two such intimate ties, the household will not
necessarily disintegrate even if both ends_
cannot be made to meet and from time to
time they have to fall back on outside
assistance. But, if these ties loosen, it is
unlikely that the economic bond, one member
of the group supporting the rest or making a
significant contribution to a common pool,
will suffice to keep the family together. And,
just because it is at these times of economic
crisis that the household is likely to attract
public attention, it 1s easy to mistake the
effect for the cause of the trouble, when in
point of fact, here as in the case of problem
families, economic ineptitude is nearly always
a symptom only of some deeper underlying
malady. |

My own opinion, for what it is worth, is
that the only approach which gives hope of
anything more than purely temporary relief
in dealing with problem families is that
adopted by Family Service Units. The appeal
must be by example rather than by precept,
and it must be inspired by a patience that
persists in spite of repeated failure and by a
faith which continues to believe in the
possibility of achievement though dealing
I00

with what seems to most of us to be utterly
hopeless human material.

Mr. DAviID JONES writes:

THE budgets of problem families, although
often apparently almost wilfully irrational,
can usually be explained in the light of the
total family situation. Secondary poverty
arising from mis-spending is certainly a
typical feature of these families and is partly
responsible for their poor material standards,
and for the condemnation they receive from
the community. Primary poverty, even as
measured by fairly stringent survey standards
still occurs, however. The amount of such
poverty is possibly underestimated, partly
because some families, almost always those
with more than one wage earner, have quite
large incomes, and partly because irregular
employment, change of employment, shorttime and other factors which often reduce
the average income of a family considerably
may be ignored. .

Most problem families are living on fairly
marginal incomes and even slight financial
mismanagement can have disastrous results
for them. Many people with more ability
and foresight may be managing a good deal
better on similar incomes, but many others
will be just as irrational in their expenditure
but will evade the consequences because they
have more income to mismanage. —

Families living on small incomes are
inevitably more vulnerable to misfortune,
such as ill-health or the death of the wage
earner, and their financial situation is usually
such that any long-term planning of
expenditure is difficult. In many ways it is
also more expensive to live in poverty; the
quality of articles will be inferior and
expensive credit will have to be obtained for
any major purchases. Sometimes the only
way of getting by is through mismanagement.

In addition the budgets of families are
much affected by the attitudes towards
spending current in their area or social
group. Irrational spending may be the result
of giving priority to matters which to the
family and its neighbours are of greater
importance, e.g. funeral expenditure. Such
attitudes and priorities may in turn be

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

exploited by commercial interests through

- hire purchase, etc. Many notorigus aspects

of the budgets of problem families are
common to a much wider group of families
although complicated in the problem family
by adverse circumstances and _ personal
deficiencies.

Personality factors are, in fact, usually of
great importance in determining the spending of problem families. Low intelligence and
ignorance may in some instances be so
extreme as to make wise spending an
impossibility. More usually, however, mismanagement can be traced to emotional
immaturity and instability of temperament
and of character. Nor is it due only to the
personal inadequacies of the individual
parents; the relationship between them is
frequently of crucial importance. For
example, Mr. Ashton rightly emphasizes the
disproportionate amount of his earnings
often retained by the father for his own use
and, although this biased distribution is by
no means confined to the problem family,
in such families it reflects and is accentuated
by the disharmony between the parents.

The budgets of problem families are thus
closely related to many other aspects and
they are usually symptomatic of personality
and relationship difficulties. Study of spending habits might well be valuable in that
they might typify the family’s way of
dealing with their problems generally and
reveal underlying attitudes and behaviour
patterns. But unless the study is related to
the total situation it could be misleading,
particularly when methods of helping the
family are being considered.

In some instances straightforward advice
and education in budgeting may be all that.
is required. Usually, however, the ability of
problem families to respond to such a direct
and rational approach is very limited.
Hostility and suspicion might easily be
aroused and the family become resistant to
any kind of influence. In addition, since
financial mismanagement is usually only
part of the problem of the family, any
attempt to deal with it in isolation is doomed
to failure. Often, in fact, a budget might be
changed not directly but as a by-product of
_. ° PROBLEM FAMILIES AND THEIR HOUSEHOLD BUDGETS

assisting the family with other and possibly

more basic aspects of their problem such as

the relationship between the parents.

In each case the assistance provided must
therefore be based on as full as possible an
understanding of the family and of their
situation. A prerequisite both for gaining
understanding of the family as well as for
making constructive help available to them

IoL.

is the establishment of a relationship with
them. This relationship is quite fundamental ;
it is not merely the medium through which
various forms of help can be provided but is.
in itself the help. As Mr. Ashton indicates in
his conclusion, with problem families budgeting guidance can usually only be effective as
part of an intensive casework process adapted
to meet the needs of the particular family.
