DISCUSSION

EUGENICS AND THE PREVENTION OF DESTITUTION*

THE term “Prevention of Destitution” involves the consideration as to
whether and to what extent destitution is preventable, and these questions
can only be answered after inquiry into the causes of destitution when found.
Such an inquiry resolves itself into an examination as to the mental and
physical condition of the destitute individual, his character or type, and the
environmental condition in which he was reared and moves. In short, has
the individual been endowed with a sufficient measure of energy, capacity,
and intelligence, to enable him to make the best of his environment, and so
attain that standard of efficiency which will be at all times self-supporting.

The “ Eugenics Education Society ” recently undertook an inquiry from
that point of view, and as I was intimately concerned in that inquiry, I have
been asked to put before you to-day the view of the Society with regard to
Prevention of Destitution.

Any proposal for the Prevention of Destitution must command the
sympathetic consideration of all interested in the welfare of the race, and it
must be admitted at once that a fair proportion—perhaps not a very high
proportion—of the destitution caused by temporary sickness might be
prevented. It is agreed, too, that given a community ‘ well-born,” the
provision of a good environment should prevent destitution for all who
wished to be independent.

But it is the view of the Society that destitution, so far as it is represented by pauperism (and there is no other standard) is to a large extent
confined to a special and degenerate class. .

Those acquainted with the Poor Law know that the steady decline in
pauperism is the result of the consistent application of well established
principles, and of improvement in administration, and that the whole
process of administration and legislation since 1834 has been gradually to
press the passably efficient out of the ranks of pauperism.

This process, together with other causes associated with treatment,
has been to develop and confirm a defective and dependent class known
and recognised as the pauper class. The proposition that there is a
distinctive pauper class need not be laboured. All connected with either
the Poor Law or private charity know that they deal with a class separate
and distinct from the world of independent men and women, whose
ramifications extend only into well defined channels.

The problem of destitution lies distinctly and for all timein the personal
and human element which this consideration involves. Policy and administration directed merely and extensively to an elaboration of machinery,
which in principle and in practice leaves the personality of the pauper
untouched, will not only raise the cost of pauperism above the present high
figure, but, inasmuch as it involves the increased dissipation of public
funds on a class incapable of improvement thereby, will do no more than
serve to perpetuate the defective class and to attract within the pauper
class the enormous population living on its border.

More and more public policy is developing in the direction of higher
expenditure on the unfit, and less, comparatively, on the fit. In the name
of education, special schools are now provided for cripples, the deaf and
dumb, and other mentally and physically unfit. Under the Poor Law,
workhouse accommodation in all classes is superior to the standard of
living among labourers of independence, and it is admitted that the medical
provision has now reached such a degree of excellence as to be above that

* A paper read at the recent Conference on the Prevention of Destitution.
June rst, rg1r.
DISCUSSION 19I

obtainable, not merely by the independent labourer, but also by the working
classes generally, and in some districts by the middle class. It may be
noted here, too, that ‘‘ the period of the greatest increase in the expenditure
per pauper corresponds with the period of the greatest numbers” (Majority
Report, page 31).

It is commonly asserted that these provisions are to be justified on the
grounds that they are remedial in their character, and with regard to the
pauper, that the restoration to independence is a sufficient excuse for the
expenditure. Whilst there was reason to hope that restoration to independence was possible, or that those subject to special treatment as remedial
were likely to improve to any appreciable extent under treatment, it was
possible to view the expenditure with some degree of acquiescence, but it is
now generally admitted by those who know the system, that the special
treatment afforded to children in special schools, in institutions for the
feeble-minded, and for adults in homes for inebriates, etc., that beyond an
increased measure of comfort and happiness whilst in the institution (which
could be secured at much less cost) the system has accomplished little of
ultimate practical value. |

With regard to the restoration to independence of the pauper, the
claim rests on the example of an occasional case, here and there, of some
person or family who received relief for a period, probably in special
circumstances, and thereafter were not known to re-apply—at least fora
time. Except in the case of orphan children “ permanently ” maintained, on
the death of their parent or parents, it could not be shown in any considerable
number of cases that the receipt of Poor Law Relief does more than tide
the pauper over a period of exceptional distress.

Even in the case of infirmary treatment it could not be shown that a
sufficient measure of restoration takes place to justify the expenditure made
to that end. Not more than 4o per cent. of current chargeability in
infirmaries could be shown to be cases of first chargeability, and that
proportion would in part consist of sickness of a permanent kind. At least
another 35 per cent. would be found to consist of chronic paupers—persons
who spend their lives between the workhouse and the infirmary. The other
25 per cent. are cases of repeated admission—chronic paupers in the
making.

That conception of pauperism which is based upon the assumption that
the pauper is the normal person made destitute by necessitous circumstances,
fails to recognise that behind those circumstances there is the character
and personality of the destitute person; that destitution in an adult is a
sure and certain sign of inefficiency (not necessarily a fault), and that
efficiency is pre-eminently a matter of hereditary quality. ~

Let us take the class most favourable to the point of view that the
pauper is the normal person—the able-bodied—and try to ascertain the
measure of efficiency in that class.

From the Local Government Board Report, 1909-1910, it appears that
on January 1st, 1910, there were: Able-bodied indoor poor (in health),
24,916; able-bodied indoor poor (temporarily sick), 34,843; able-bodied
outdoor poor, 75,109.

Now let us remember that included in these figures are many persons
not directly chargeable :

(1) Widows receiving relief for children.

(2) Deserted wives.

(3) Women waiting for maternity wards.

(4) Wives with children, whose husbands are in hospital or prison,
and who cannot keep the children without assistance.

(5) Men relieved on account of the sickness of wife or child.

(6) Able-bodied men who become chargeable on the death or
absence of their wives, and who cannot get on without them.

All the various persons I have named are classed as able-bodied .. .
172 DISCUSSION

and properly so. They form at least 60 per cent. of the ordinarily ablebodied. Many of these are chargeable only in the sense that they are the
responsible heads of families relieved—often by medical attendance only.

I wish to say nothing to weaken that sense of responsibility which alone
keeps this form of relief in check, or to minimise the burden imposed upon
the community in the maintenance of a service to meet all these varying
requirements; but I want to insist that those who study the statistics, and
build their social and economic theories out of them do not realise the
diversity of causation lying behind this chargeability.

They see that there are so many thousands of able-bodied paupers, and
assume that these are unemployed workmen needing only to be employed
to be rendered independent.

The chargeability of an able-bodied widow with her children may be,
and often is, due as much to biological as to economic cause. . . . The
desertion or imprisonment of a husband or wife may be due—and I find
frequently is due—to a distinctly inheritable defect—namely, mental. Many
husbands and wives part because life together isimpossible . . . and
for reasons of character associated with inheritance. . . . And in such
cases it is good for the community and the race that they should part.

Now all these varying classes cover quite 60 per cent. of the ordinary
able-bodied class. Of the remaining 4o per cent., at least 38 per cent. suffer
from some mental or physical defect or some abnormality or deficiency, and
in nearly every case of indoor able-bodied pauperism it will be found that
the individual is of a low mental type.

It is this low mental type that I particularly commend to the attention
of those working for the Prevention of Destitution. What are you going to
do with it? Itis prolific: itis healthy: and under pampering legislation
and administration it has a survival value not to be found among the higher
and more sensitive types. Yet it has neither the mental nor physical energy
to keep pace with the normal population, and be at all times self-supporting.

This low type finds its way inevitably to the workhouse. Lack of
initiative, lack of control, and the entire absence of a right perception is a
far more important cause of pauperism than any of the alleged economic
causes. How do you propose to deal with it ?

The Poor Law is said to have failed with regard to this class. What
else can be expected? The Poor Law is set and hedged about with a
number and variety of contrivances designed by the various religious and
charitable agencies to arrest the course of the destitute person on his
devious path to the workhouse. The arrangement acts as a sort of human
sieve through which only the hopeless and the helpless pass to the Poor
Law. All that can be used, turned, or exploited by the arresting organisation do not reach the Poor Law. . . . Itis retained, used, and exploited,
and made the subject of favourable report.

And the failure of the Poor Law with this class is not less than the
failure of the Education Department, the Central Unemployed Body, or any
other organisation, and for this reason: If the organisation treats them as
normal persons, they fail to come up to the standard; if they are treated
as less than normal, the organisation at once becomes a charity, is pampering
as such, and thus increases the volume of its dependents.

To this broad general class four smaller classes regularly contribute :

(1) The feeble-minded, to which I need only refer.

(2) The wandering family. The man and woman with children
who wander up and down the country, never having a settled home,
and often no settled locality. Their children are born and die in the
workhouse, their existence is eked out with periods of hop-picking, peaand fruit-picking, in short intervals in prison, the infirmary, or the
workhouse. The children are not educated (guardians will not even
adopt them because they ‘‘do not belong to the parish ”’), they never
learn a trade, and have not even the slum child’s privilege of a settled
environment.
DISCUSSION 173

(3) The “ins and outs.” These differ from the last, but are so well
known that I need only refer to them.

(4) Again, in a special class society permits reproduction, but holds
the parent unfit to rear the offspring. Under the Poor Law Act, 18g9,
guardians were empowered to adopt and withhold from their parents
the children of parents whose mode of life is such as to render them
unfit to have the control of children. A large number of children have
been adopted under this statute, and the parents set free—without
enforceable obligation to even contribute towards the maintenance of
such children—to recommence the process of reproduction over again,
well knowing that they will be relieved of their fresh obligation by the
community, if, in the meantime, their conduct is only sufficiently bad.
The Poor Law, like the Prevention of Destitution Scheme, is defenceless

against all these classes. Whilst society permits full freedom for production
and development, it must provide a service for their care and, at least
partial, maintenance; moreover, no deterrent policy will influence men
aud women who by character and temperament are impervious to the
considerations which move the normal person.

No scheme for the Prevention of Destitution can hope to be successful
which is not based upon the principle that the individual whose destitution is
to be prevented actively co-operates in the measures to that end. This
assumes the desire to be assisted and the capacity to co-operate. What is
the nature of the appeal to be made in these cases ?

The pauper is shown to be a person outside the considerations which
move the normal person; appeals to his manliness, his courage, or his
self-respect all fall on barren ground, because there is nothing in him to
respond. . . . As Dr. Slaughter has so well said, “‘ he was born without
manly independence . . . hecameinto the world with his mainspring
broken,” and no sort of virtuous appeal can reach or move him.

To what length is the community prepared to go in its defence against
these elasses? It is clear that for some of them the only measure is that
suggested by the Eugenics Society—namely, detention and segregation.

The important considerations are (1) the liberty of the subject; and (2)
the increase in cost imposed on the present generation for a service the
benefit of which will not be felt in this generation. With regard to the
former a distinction must be drawn between liberty and licence. The latter
term is more appropriate to many existing conditions. If the term liberty
is to cover freedom in its widest and wildest sense, then there is no
justification for the measure of interference already established.

The increase in cost ought not to be great, due regard being given to
the relief afforded to the existing system by the withdrawal of its expensive
members, and the possibility of detention in self-maintaining conditions.

Eugenics and the Prevention of Destitution will be best served if and
when we secure that the best in our organisation is used in an effort to
educate and develop those who are educable, and in whom the development
is possible on the right lines; and that our accommodation for the treatment
of sickness shall be available for those who may be nursed back to health
and independence to take their share in the world’s work, instead of, as at
present, being absorbed by the hopeless, the incompetent and the defective..
Thus would be saved the waste in our organisation, not only in itself, but
in the improper survival value it gives to the defective.

Any scheme for the Prevention of Destitution, to be successful, must
take into account the value of original human quality, and must consider
the consequences of supplementing the survival value of defective strains.

Survival value consists of two parts—production and preservation.
The fecundity of the defective is abundantly established; the preservative
element is supplied in the social organisation which so elaborates its
administration as, not merely to arrest the natural disease of the defective,
but to preserve and develop the defective community on better terms than
the normal person—and at his expense. Ernest J. LIDBETTER.
