REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS. 65

In No. V. Pearl points out that there are two really distinct kinds of
inbreeding, (1) when the two parents are closely related, (2) when they
are unrelated but each closely inbred. The two types may be combined
to varying extents in any individual case. Since repeated inbreeding of
the first kind leads to the increase of homozygous characters, while the
second does not, the two types are very distinct in their genetic effects,
and to estimate these, in addition to the co-efficient of inbreeding given
in the earlier studies, there is néeded a co-efficient of relationship which
is provided in the present study. The co-efficient is the percentage for
any generation of the mother’s ancestors which are also ancestors of the

father.
L. DONCASTER.

Grotjahn, Pror. A. Geburten-Rickgang und Geburten-Regelung.
Berlin, 1914.

THERE is at present in all civilised countries a tendency towards a
decrease of the birth-rate, which in most countries is by no means counterbalanced by a proportionate decrease of the death-rate. The author gives
us in the above book an excellent survey of the whole problem of the
decline of the birth-rate, and discusses exhaustively the remedies. With
many modern writers, he comes to the conclusion that the chief cause
of the evil lies in the conscious restriction of births which is prevalent
in the advanced classes of all civilised countries, and must nowadays be
reckoned with as a permanent cultural possession. It is here that the
book brings before us a fresh and frank treatment of the problem, so
different from the prudish attitude which is still considered appropriate in
this country. The author does not shrink from taking into consideration
the sexual factor of procreation, which after all is the gateway to propagation. Finding that preventative measures have become the rule with
most responsible men and women, he discusses the various methods of
prevention.

Not only this, he ventures to suggest, perhaps against the present
day general opinion of the medical profession, that individuals have not
only the right, but the duty, under certain conditions, of using these
restrictive measures; nay, that it should be the doctor’s duty to instruct
his patients in certain cases. Most eugenists will, of course, agree with
the proposal that preventatives should be used in all such cases of
physical or mental degeneration where segregation is either inadvisable or
still impossible. It is here that the instruction in the proper use of the
means at disposal should become a commonplace among modern medical
men.
An important point which shows the utter waste of excessive births is
the fact that, wherever there is a high fertility there is also a high deathrate; while, vice versa, a low birth-rate generally goes with a low deathrate; so that the rate of the renewal of a population is dependent on both
factors. Now, the establishment of the second condition, i.e., a low
birth-rate with a low death-rate, is certainly not only the more humane,
but also the less wasteful; and this is the state of affairs to which all
advanced civilised nations are tending. As the average of progeny for
each couple, Prof. Grotjahn posits at least 3.5 children, this being the
minimum for the upkeep of a population. The author discusses the
various means of encouraging propagation under our present conditions,
such as the endowment of motherhood, social insurance, graduated taxation, etc., measures with which we cannot but agree, as far as they go.
What seems doubtful is, whether such means—short of a complete economic solidification of the poorer classes—will ever have much effect.

There is perhaps one point which may suitably be raised here. How
far is a population-surplus a condition sine gua non of social progress?
It is implied as a necessity by every writer on population statistics, and
the argument often assumes, as in the author’s case, the form of racial
66 EUGENICS REVIEW.

antagonism. But it is, to say the least, a moot point whether social
progress, as distinguished from national or racial integrity, cannot be
secured in a practically stationary—though not declining (!)—population.
The problem of Malthusianism from this point of view is certainly worth
discussing. S. HERBERT.

Kelynack, T. N., M.D. Auman Derelicts: A Collection of MedicoSociological Studies. London. C. H. Kelly; 1914; price 5s. net. ;

PP. 337EXPERIENCE has taught us to regard the editorship of Dr. Kelynack as a
sufficient guarantee of excellence. By the value of its subject-matter, as
also by the method and the manner in which this is presented, Human
Derelicts fully justifies our expectations. “ This book,” writes Dr. Kelynack in his preface, “ aims at providing all workers engaged in enterprises
striving for human betterment with a concise and reliable presentation, in
non-technical language, of such essential facts, guiding principles, and
effective practices as are likely to be of assistance in the study and
solution of those social problems which are directly related to the chief
sections of morbid mankind. It is hoped that the book will find favour
with those for whom it has been specially written, ministers of religion,
parents, teachers, leaders of organisations dealing with adolescents, as
well as social and religious workers.” We would also commend the book
to the attention of those societies and circles which exist for the discussion
of social proolems. Each of the seventeen articles composing the book
is the work of an expert of high standing, whose guidance may safely be
trusted. The titles of some of its chapters are an indication of the scope
of the volume. These include “ Mental Derelicts,” “ The Epileptic,” “ The
Inebriate Derelict,” “The Criminal Derelict,” “The Vagrant,” “ The
Prostitute,” “The Human Derelict : Pre-Natal Influences,” and “ Eugenics
and the Human Derelict.” And since it is a lack of knowledge rather
than a lack of will which hinders our progress in cleansing human society
and in beautifying human life, we could wish nothing better than a wide
circulation for Human Derelicts, for it is full of vitally important knowledge, set forth with an admirable simplicity.
R. DIXON KINGHAM.

Mereier, C. A., M.D. A Text-Book of Insanity and other Mental
Diseases. London. George Allen and Unwin, Ltd.; price 7s. 6d.
nett; crown 8vo.; pp. 368.
AN authoritative text-book upon mental diseases is worthy of notice, for
it needs to be written by a medical man of large and long experience with
the insane, and who himself should be a physiologist, a pathologist, and
a psychologist of repute and standing. Too rarely is such a combination
of qualifications found, but it is not too much to say that the author of
this manual fulfils all these requirements, being, in addition, a recognised
master of metaphysical subtleties. The text-book under review is lucid,
original and informing, but it is also lacking in some essentials, and to
these deficiencies we shall refer later.
The first edition, brought out a dozen years ago, was designed fo
the student, but, as the present preface suggests, this new edition is intended also for the instructed, and we recognise this must be so, for the
author is frequently tempted to reflect upon the ignorance of the alienist
and the uselessness of the psychologist, and he proceeds to repair these
imperfections in a dogmatic, cynical, albeit original fashion. “A knowledge of text-book psychology is of no more value to the student of
insanity than a knowledge of cuneiform inscriptions. ... The nature and
varieties of attention, the association of ideas, imagination, and the relation of thought to language are no concern of the alienist, the analysis of
sensation or the nature of apperception are useless acquisitions, and the
sooner he forgets them the better will he understand the disorders of mind
from which the patient suffers... . To understand the disorders of mind it
