C. P. BLACKER
Eugenics in an Atomic Age’

Features of an Atomic Age

URING THIS CONFERENCE two themes
1) are being discussed on separate days.

One is Population in an Atomic Age: the
other is Education for Family Life. The two
themes could be combined. We could consider
Education for Family Life in an Atomic Age.

What are the characteristics of what we call
the atomic age? I will consider two.

The first is its power for good or evil. Atomic
science resembles the ancient Roman god of
doorways, Janus, after whom the month of
January is named. He had two faces looking in
opposite directions. Or it resembles a medal with
two sides. On the one hand, atomic science can
give us vast sources of physical power at a time
when supplies of fossil fuels (coal and oil)
are seen to be exhaustible; hand in hand
with other advancing technologies, it could
multiply amenities and raise standards of living.
In this aspect, nuclear power is a bountiful
cornucopia, a horn of plenty.

But there is the other aspect which to-day
haunts the world. By the pushing of a button
nuclear power can be used to exterminate in a
single cataclysm millions of human beings; it can
cause an orgy of devastation the mutagenic
effects of which will reverberate through future
generations.

That is the first characteristic of the atomic
age—the twin faces of the new god. The second
is the influence of atomic science on our ideas
about education. The newly available power is
not easy to tame and harness. The youth of
to-day must be taught more science, and
those capable of later adding to knowledge
must be sought out. There is now a rush
to enlarge the scientific departments of
universities and to enlist students of the necessary calibre. Attention is turned to the quality
of the student population, particularly to their

* A paper delivered at the Sixth International Conference
on Planned Parenthood, held at New Delhi, on February
15th, 1959.

21

intelligence and to their ability to profit from a
higher education.

The atomic age of the future will be more
complex than this. With increasing numbers
and rising standards, problems of organization,
administration and control will become more
intricate. They will make increasing demands on
what can be literally called the governing class
which includes (among others) elected representatives,members of the civil service and the moulders
of public opinion. The need for intelligent,
incorruptible, disinterested and high-principled
leaders will become more pressing. A central
problem of democracy will come to the fore:
how to secure that the members of the governing
class will possess the needed intellectual and moral
qualities; or in other words how to overcome
the main weakness of democracies—the facility
with which unscrupulous, self-seeking, and powerloving men bribe and cajole themselves into
authority. (The less educated, less critical, and
more suggestible its electorate, the more easily
does a democracy become corrupt.) It has been
said that a democracy gets the leaders it deserves.
A problem of education, which will be accentuated in the atomic age, will be so to fashion
children that when they grow up they will
deserve (by being able to recognize and
choose) good leaders. An atomic age will need not
only able physicists and engineers, but also a
capable and upright governing class. It will also
need men and women versed in the sciences concerned with human beings.

Two Fields of Science

In his paper given this morning my old friend
and tutor of forty years ago Sir Julian Huxley
did well to remind us of two aspects, national
and personal, of all population policies. From
the national standpoint, numbers (quantitity) are
of chief, though not exclusive interest. From the
personal standpoint, quality is the central issue.
By planning their families in the light of their
living conditions and resources, parents can
better nurture their children whose prospects of

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, April 1959, 51, 1
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

survival and well-being are improved; and the
mother’s health, otherwise taxed by too numerous pregnancies and perhaps by abortions, is
conserved.

Science, Sir Julian reminded us, has been
mainly applied to improving humanity’s external conditions: water is conserved by engineering feats, purified, and harnessed to do
work; food supplies are increased and made
transportable; lethal and crippling diseases
are controlled. What we to-day call the population explosion is attributable to advances in
science.

A more subtle task now confronts scientists.
It is a balancing task whose field is not the
external conditions of man but man himself.
The sciences here involved could be broadly
described as human or anthropological. Among
them we recognize human ethology (dealing
with behaviour including customs and traditions)
and human ecology (concerned with the interaction between man and his environment or
habitat). There emerge from these sciences
problems for the philosopher and moralist with
whom the scientist should come to terms. The
central problem is that propounded by Plato:
What is the good life? From this follows: How
can the good life best be attained for the largest
number of men in the atomic age? And: How
should children be educated so that they can
understand the good life and strive to attain it?

Mr. R. A. Piddington has well shown in his
book The Limits of Mankind (1956: John
Wright, Bristol) how an excess of human beings
can stultify the good life; and how this stultification by mere numbers is aggravated by rising
standards of living. His book raises in our
minds further semi-philosophical questions with
a geographical cast: How can the good life be
best realized in different latitudes? How can
optimal conditions for the inhabitants of diverse
geographical areas be harmonized in the
interests of the world as a whole? Moral questions are here intricately blended with agronomic,
industrial, political and climatic factors.

Conservation and Eugenics

In what we do to-day we must also take
account of the needs of the future. Exhaustible
resources must not be irresponsibly squandered;

22

irreplaceable heritages must be protected. Here
are raised broad questions of conservation to
which Dr. William Vogt has made notable contributions. The obverse of conservation is
eugenics, both being concerned with the future.
The province of conservation is the world in
which man lives; the province of eugenics is man
himself.

Stages in Education for Family Life

How does education for family life in an
atomic age bear upon the problems which confront the humanistic sciences? People can be
educated for family life at several stages of their
growth. The process can begin early. I recently
noted the following dictum on a calendar which
Lord Simon of Wythenshawe (to whom this
Federation owes much) sends to his friends instead of a Christmas card:

By the tales told at their mother’s knee do men
live or die. Praise the Gods, mother, that you told
me tales of open-breasted Gods and not of
vermin.

Tales of courage, generosity, truthfulness
and kindness (especially of kindness to animals
in which children are deeply interested), if told
by parents for whom children have affection
and respect, will inculcate ethical values which
persist till death. These values will guide their
conduct as citizens and their choices as voters.

The educative movement can be continued
at school. Here I commend to your notice an
official booklet: Sex Instruction in Swedish
Schools published by Sweden’s Royal Board of
Education. Courses of instruction on sex
questions, for the use of teachers, are here set
out for children of different ages. The information is skilfully combined with education for
family life and with education on ethical
questions.

The movement of education for family life is
taken forward another stage by many Marriage
Guidance agencies who regard it as their
business not only to salve marriages which are
foundering, but to prepare engaged couples for
the problems which lie ahead—among others,
problems of rearing children. At a conference
of this Federation (the I.P.P.F.) held in Berlin
the year before last, I suggested a yet later
measure—seminars for primigravidae.
EUGENICS IN AN ATOMIC AGE

These are some of the stages in education for
family life. Success, whatever the gradations of
the programme, will favourably influence
character and thereby facilitate the task of the
eugenist and the scientist whose province is man.
His raw material (humanity) will become more
malleable in the measure that men and women
are enabled to recognize worth-while objectives
which transcend their own lives and which, as
ends in themselves, evoke disinterested effort.
Such objectives should be kept firmly in view at
the beginning of the atomic age.

Eugenics: Its Potential Value in an Age of
Nuclear Competition

I now turn to eugenics. In a democracy where
methods of compulsion are excluded, eugenics
can operate only by means of public opinion
and of publicly approved incentives. There are
two well-attested facts: there is, first, an inborn
and inherited factor in (measurable) intelligence,
which is brought to fruition by education and by
other (perhaps fortuitous) experiences; and,
secondly, there are inborn and inherited factors
in special abilities and in the complex of traits
we call temperament and character. Character,
though assessable, is not measureable on a scale
as is intelligence. In the florescence of character
the circumstances of childhood and the atmosphere of family life are primarily important.

There are two practical problems of positive
eugenics: first, how to “ascertain” (or discover)
people, women as well as men, who are above
average in natural ability and in qualities of
character ; and second, how to induce such people
to have an adequate number of children—how,
in other words, to provide incentives which will
counteract the prudential considerations favouring small families which operate widely to-day,
particularly in periods of economic depression.

These are difficult problems to solve without
resort to arbitrary discriminations which, in an
egalitarian age, excite opposition. I have a feeling
that these problems might be more boldly
tackled in Communist than in non-Communist
countries with, among the latter, the possible
exception of Japan. If, for example, the Russians,
in their search for first-class mathematicians and
physicists, were to discover that certain families
or family connections were more likely to pro
duce these human treasures than others, they
might hesitate less than, say, Englishmen in
approving and offering the requisite inducements. A tradition in this field has already been
established in Russia. Heroine mothers of
exceptionally large families have been recognized
and honoured. It would not be a big jump to
recognize and honour hero fathers and heroine
mothers of exceptionally gifted children. In an
atomic age the nation that produces the largest
number of such children, and which makes fullest
use of their abilities, will forge ahead.

I mentioned the Japanese. Since the end of
the war these have produced astonishing results
in reducing fertility; and they are now attacking
with apparent success the difficult task of replacing time-honoured habits of abortion by the
novel and unfamiliar practice of contraception.
Having perceived the need, the Japanese have
adopted vigorous measures to deal with the
quantitative problem of population. If they
recognize as clearly that the needs of an atomic
age call for measures to deal with a qualitative
problem, they might act no less energetically.

Eugenics and Political Stability in an Atomic Age

But as remarked above, the needs of an age of
nuclear competition not only call for mathematical geniuses and scientific prodigies. Unless
their increasingly complex frameworks are to
disrupt in organizational chaos, strikes, disaffections and recurrent political crises, parliamentary democracies will need an able, honest
and trusted governing class, elected and selected
in an approved manner. Here is a more acceptable field for positive eugenics than that provided
by international nuclear competition. First
must be produced in sufficient numbers the men
and women endowed with the exceptional
qualities necessary for leadership; second, the
cultural standards of the average man must be so
raised as to enable him to deserve (by recognizing
and choosing) good leaders.

Conclusion

It has been contended that, from the standpoint of political stability in face of the increasing
complexities of an atomic age wherein humanity
is quickly multiplying, and also from that of
the international nuclear competition which

23
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

calls for able men, there will be a need for better
education for family life and (as a product of
such education) there will be scope for eugenic
policies. It would be timely if all countries gave
thought to such policies.

Summary

The international nuclear competition which
characterizes the present early phase of the
atomic age creates a demand for people of high
intelligence with gifts for mathematics and
science.

The atomic age, which will present intricate
organizational problems in a_ differentiated
economy, will also call, if it is not to founder,
for able, honest and trusted leaders and, among
the masses, for the ability to elect and select the
right leaders.

Two fields of science can be compared, one
concerned with events external to man, the other
with man himself. Problems of conservation and
of eugenics, both concerned with these contrasting aspects of man’s future, are likely to come to
the fore.

Communist régimes may have quicker mancuvrability than others if they come to recognize the inheritance and familial incidence of
special abilities as in a practical sense relevant
to the age of nuclear competition. Such régimes
may be quicker than non-Communist to introduce
eugenically orientated incentives.

It would be timely if, on the threshold of the
atomic age, all countries gave some thought to
positive eugenic policies.

I am grateful to Sir Julian Huxley for helpful
criticisms of this paper.

GENUS

the Review of the
ITALIAN COMMITTEE FOR THE STUDY OF POPULATION PROBLEMS
and of the
ITALIAN SOCIETY OF GENETICS AND EUGENICS

edited under the auspices of the National Research Council
Editor: CoRRADO GINI

Summary of Volume XIII, December 1957.

C. GINI Progrés et instabilité.

L. E. TAVENER A New Approach to Urban Geography.

G. GrurovicnH Alcune considerazioni sulla concentrazione della popolazione Italiana prima e

dopo l’ultima guerra.
A. OKASAKI

Recensioni

Growth of Urban Population in Japan.

Reviews of Italian, English, American, French, German, Dutch, Belgian, Chinese and South
GENUS

accepts scientific articles, papers, notes and communications written in Italian, English, French, German
and Spanish in the field of the different sciences related to population problems (Demography, Soctology,
Economics, General Biology, Genetics, Eugenics, Anthropology, Social Hygiene, Psychology, Geography)

Orders should be addressed to: Segreteria del Comitato Italiano per lo Studio dei Problemi della
Popolazione, Via delle Terme di Diocleziano, n° 10—Roma (TII-8°) (Italy).

American books.

24
