REVIEWS OF BOOKS

to consider it. This and other moral questions
raised by prostitution should have been treated
with the seriousness that they deserve, and
curtailment of other material would have ensured that this was done without enlarging the
book.

SHERWIN BAILEY

Williamson, G. Scott, and Pearse, Innes H.
Science, Synthesis and Sanity. London, 1965.
Collins. Pp. 352. Price 45s.

THIS BOOK Is the work of two doctors who
inspired the Peckham Experiment which first
took off as a pilot project in 1926-29. This later
developed into the Pioneer Health Centre, a
scheme which combined the recreational amenities of a family club with facilities for education
in healthy living, regular medical overhaul and
supervision with an integrated approach to
positive health based on the study of the individual in relation to the ecological background
of the family. When the centre closed in 1951
from want of funds, Dr. Williamson began the
preparation of this book, but died before its
completion, since undertaken by the co-author,
his wife.

The Peckham Experiment was an immensely
important pioneering venture, which has paved
the way for far-reaching future developments
involving not only the National Health Service
but the whole matter of healthy living in the
widest sense.

When the scope, purpose and validity of the
National Health Service is being subjected to
scrutiny and reassessment, the light shed by the
Peckham Experiment is highly relevant and
significant. Despite some successes, the NHS
remains less a programme of promoting health
than of palliating disease, though the existence
of the large “submerged iceberg of disease”
shows how far it is from doing even that. It was
in fact the Peckham Experiment which was
largely responsible for first drawing attention
to the problem of unrecognized and untreated
disease. Thus figures drawn from overhaul of
the first and second 500 families examined,
revealed that only about one person in ten was
free from some disorder or other, although well

ER—C

over half imagined themselves well. The experiment also demonstrated how much could be
done to correct and prevent these common but
little appreciated deviations from optimum
health and fitness, by skilled medical supervision
and the inculcation of better hygiene and living
habits. When one regards the thousands of
millions squandered on drink, tobacco, gambling,
dissipation and frivolity, with misery, frustration
and impaired well-being as the outcome, it is
clear that the diversion of a few hundred millions
from those channels into health conservation
and promotion on the lines foreshadowed by
the Peckham Experiment might represent an
excellent bargain, from both the social and the
individual point of view.

This book presents the basic philosophy which
underlay the Peckham Experiment. Accepting
fully the contribution science has made to an
understanding of organic mechanisms, its authors
question the adequacy of the quantitative
approach to healthy living. Many qualitative
factors, including feelings, relationships and
activating motives remain poorly defined and
outside the scope of the essentially quantitative
methodology of science to-day. They claim that
qualitative as well as quantitative aspects must
be taken into account in relation to the wholeness that is health.

In synthesis alone lies the sanity which
maximizes the well-being of the individual in
integrating it with the interests of society. An
hypothesis combining these conditions is presented which is open to verification by experiment. In this there is offered a definition of the
dimensions of quality and of the conditions in
which it becomes manifest, and the possible
correlation of these dimensions with those of
the Space Time Realm is explored.

The potentiality and promise of the Peckham
Experiment sprang from the background of
hypothesis presented in this book, which deserves
consideration of all who are concerned to advance the ideals of positive health and creative,
integrated living. One may note with satisfaction
the promise of a further book which will review
in additional detail from the qualitative angle
the material which has been observed in terms
of that hypothesis.

HERBERT BREWER

33
