DELINQUENT BEHAVIOUR: SOME
UNANSWERED QUESTIONS*
By JOHN SPENCER, M.A., Ph.D., J.P.

RIMINALS, like the proverbial cob| bler, not infrequently stick to their
“ww lasts. Many follow one pattern of
. delinquency throughout their criminal career.
The criminologist, however, cannot follow
their goodexample. Heis, to use Sellin’s words,
a king without a country, and the advancement of his discipline is dependent on the
various sciences from which his knowledge is
derived. My immediate difficulty, therefore,
in reading a paper to this Soczety is that I
may appear a jack of all trades and master
-of none, but this handicap is inherent in my
subject.
The aim is to review the state of present
knowledge on juvenile delinquency with a
view to assessing where the most significant
gaps are to be found. Two questions are
selected for special attention in which the
Eugenics Society may have a particular
initerest. The choice of juvenile delinquency

rather than adult crime as the main focus of

our attention is quite deliberate. The
evidence points to the commencement of
_criminal careers in childhood and it is the
‘young delinquent on whom the weight of
“research must be directed.

Juvenile delinquency is, and has long been,
the subject of considerable popular attention
and frequently of anxiety, and for this there
are perfectly sound psychological reasons.
(Reiwald 1949.) Yet on few subjects is
public opinion more unreliable. Scott’s
‘analysis of 500 press cuttings records a
variety of panaceas from the feeding of more
-oranges to the urging of economic reforms
_(1950), while an analysis of crime news in the
Colorado press showed an inverse relationship between criminal statistics and news‘paper space devoted to the subject.
' There are certain obstacles involved in a
‘scientific study of the problem. The first
9A paper read at a Members’ Meeting of the Eugenics
‘Society on January 2oth, 1954.

29

relates to the question of apprehension : the
more efficient the police, the stricter the
administration, the less intelligent the delinquent, the greater the chance of being caught,
and the greater the need for caution in the
interpretation of results. It is unfortunate,
therefore, that so many of the researches
referred to in this paper are of delinquents
who have either appeared before the Court or
have been committed to an institution of
some kind. |

I remember at the Toynbee Hall J.C. a
lively boy called Charlie. He was aged 14
years 8 months, and was charged with breaking into a warehouse. Twenty other offences
were taken into consideration. He said
“ Since 12 years old I have been committing
crime but have never been caught. I want
to get things off my mind and don’t want to
thieve any more as I have got to know a girl
who said she didn’t like going with thieves.”’
He was technically a first offender. The
police cleared up 200 offences as a result,
and the total value of his activities amounted
to £1,400.

In the so-called delinquency area, the gap
between published figures and the amount
of delinquency is particularly high ; it is the
minority who get caught, and the deviant
who fails to conform to the expected rules of
behaviour. Juvenile delinquency, Mays
states (1952), is ‘an accepted part of the
pattern of juvenile conduct handed down by
tradition and maintained by the familiar
system of gang allegiance.”

Side by side with the delinquents waiting
in the Court are the children subject to the
Court’s non-criminal jurisdiction, the ‘‘ care
or protection ’’ and “ beyond control ”’ boys
and girls, but especially girls. It is through
this means that the young prostitute is first
apprehended. The etiology of the two
groups is surprisingly similar though the
behaviour may well be different.
30 : THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Underneath the umbrella of delinquency
“are to be found a wide variety of offenders
and offences, from the street-footballer and
the casual group caught “ scrumping ”’ to the
aggressive and dangerous young psychopath.
Yet all among this heterogeneous collection
of law breakers are given the same label, and
all are the Court’s responsibility. Frey, the
Swiss children’s magistrate and psychologist
has distinguished between “ pseudo-criminels’’ and “‘criminels précoces (1950).”’ For
the first group, about 85 per cent of the total,
delinquency is a passing phase of development. They but rarely produce the recidivist.
The second group contains the true delinquents, among whom the recidivist, or per
sistent offender and habitual criminal, will

appear in the course of time. It is, therefore,
no accident that a large part of recent research has been devoted to ways and means
of detecting this group at an early age, and of
helping their rehabilitation.

In the scientific study of delinquency a
multi-disciplinary approach is essential and
it is becoming increasingly clear that future
progress must depend on effective team-work
between the various disciplines. I have
selected three approaches for discussion
before turning to the main subject of my
paper: the psychological/psychiatric, the
sociological, and the bio-physical.

Psychological/psychiatric Approach

It is in this field that the foundations of
scientific knowledge have been laid. Progress has followed two lines of advance, the
statistical and the case-method, the former
tending to be the approach of psychology,
and the latter of psychiatry. Both have been
concerned with causes, though the psychiatrist has also had a special concern for
treatment. The statistical method has not
unnaturally been more successful when
control groups have been employed. In
psychiatry a leading part has been played
by the psycho-analysts not merely through
‘the fundamental thinking of their theory,
but for the practical value of their conclusions. Aichhorn’s Wayward Youth (1925)
has proved an invaluable guide to the re
education of the delinquent, and is a work of
great intuitive skill as well as theoretical
knowledge.
There has been no firm borderline between
the two and collaboration has become a
commonplace. I disagree both. with Burt
(1949) when he says that “‘ with rare exceptions juvenile delinquency proves to be
plainly a problem for the social and educational psychologist rather than the doctor or
psychiatrist ’’ and equally with Winnicott’s
view that “ the time is in sight when statistical inquiry will have done all it can do in
the elucidation of problems of delinquency.”
Until recently the emphasis has been on
the search for causes. Before the pioneer
works of Burt (1925) in England and Healy
(1915) in America, investigators had already
pointed to what is now recognized as the
key to the problem. Leeson in 1917 had
described the effects of the break-up of
family life in World War I and its consequences for the child. Though Burt and
Healy differed in their emphasis on environmental and psychological conditions ’‘ they
pointed the way for later work. Carr-.
Saunders, Mannheim, and Rhodes (1942)
again showed the association between delinquency and families of abnormal structure,
and an attempt was made to divide the
“broken. home’’ into individual groups.

' The presence of delinquency in the home was

closely associated with the subsequent delinquency of other children, a fact also observed
by Ferguson (1952) in a more recent work.
The control group of non-delinquents was a
livelier lot as regards leisure interests, with
better records of school attendance and
conduct. All this has been substantiated by
subsequent research.

Their final remark is of. considerable
significance, and is indicative of the change
in emphasis that has recently taken place :
No one characteristic or set of influences
typifies all the delinquents. The basic problem is one of susceptibility or predisposition
and the authors suggested a parallel between
predisposition to delinquency and physiological immunity to disease. The concept of
the “broken home” has rightly been
criticized as being of too vague or general a
.. DELINQUENT BEHAVIOUR: SOME UNANSWERED QUESTIONS — 31

nature, and the psycho-analysts have clarified the emotional relationship between
parent and child which they understand to
be of primary importance.

This concept of predisposition has Jong
been recognized but is of special interest in
‘recent work. “ Each child reacts according
to his own inherent tendencies’ wrote

Aichhorn, who used the phrase “ latent

delinquency ” for predisposition to delinquent behaviour. Stott (1950) in his study of
102 Approved School boys emphasized the
importance of detecting and treating the
problem while it was still at “ situdtionlevel.”

These conclusions point the way to what
has been the most fruitful source of collaboration—the use of prediction techniques. Our
debt to the Gluecks is immense though the
work of Mannheim and Wilkins in a follow-up
study of Borstal boys (not yet published) will
provide a material contribution to existing
knowledge. One need hardly add that the
practical value of such methods to the court
and to the penal administrator, when the
validation of sufficiently large sam es have
been completed, will be considerable. Past
studies have not in fact been carried before
the courts, and the lawyers are not unnaturally suspicious. The Gluecks focused their
attention on possible success and failure of
offenders sentenced to an institution. The
disadvantages are important. There is a
general resistance to the use of prediction
tables from those who are afraid of the stigma
inflicted by attaching the label “ predelinquent’ to a child (Glueck 1952).
Glover (1954) comments that though they
may tell with reasonable accuracy whether
a given child may become delinquent, they
provide only a hint as to whether he will
remain delinquent, nor do they indicate the
type of delinquency which will be selected.

The results of the Cambridge-Somerville

study, moreover, showed that although the
delinquents had been successfully forecast,
many who had been predicted as delinquents
did not in fact become so.

Sociological Approach

“ The time is rapidly coming to an end
when it can be regarded as justifiable to
consider the characteristics, behaviour, and
treatment of the delinquent as an isolated
person, set apart from the community of
which he is a member. . . . Crime itself is the
result of disfunction within the society
in which it takes place.’? Professor Simey
(1949) points to what is the essence of the
sociological approach. The concept of the
individual delinquent is an abstraction which
fails to do justice to the infinite variety of
delinquent reactions, the accidental and the
chronic, the sub-normal and the clever.

More particularly the sociologist is con
cerned to show not merely the diversity of

norms which exist within any given society,
but the divergence which may exist between
those norms and the official code of behaviour
which the law prescribes. In a (unpublished)
paper read to the Scientific group of the
I.S.T.D. in 1953 Mrs. Wootton contrasts the
visiting foreigner’s statement ‘‘ your bobbies
are so wonderful ”’ with the accepted view of
delinquent society “‘ all coppers are bastards
and the only good copper is a dead copper.”’

In the field of juvenile delinquency the
most fruitful source of study has been the
gang. Thrasher (1936) and others have
shown how the gang provides for the underprivileged boy an outlet for emotional
expression and social experience which has
been denied him through the normal means
of family life. Above all, they show how.
misguided certain assumptions of deviance
may often be. Obedience to the code prescribed by the gang has the first claim on a
member’s loyalty. In stealing, for example,
there will be a hierarchy of values in which |
theft from the pocket of a fellow-member
is at one extreme, and theft from Marks and >
Spencer or British Railways is at the other.

The fact remains, however, that while gang
membership has been extensively studied,
the effect of court experiences, and of
experiences both within and without institutions has not. ‘ For ten detailed analyses of
a boy’s relations to his parents, one is lucky
to find a single comparable story of the32 | THE EUGENICS REVIEW

impact upon him of a fortnight’s stay in the
remand home or of a year’s probation.”
(Wootton 1953.) This impact is certainly
one of our unanswered questions and must
surely rank high on any list of priorities. I
myself have long hoped that someone might
do a careful investigation of the waitingroom of a juvenile court. It might well
prove more rewarding than observation of
the events in the Court itself.

Biophysical Approach

The disappearance of the Lombrosian
concept of the born criminal has led to a
distrust of the so-called anthropological
approach in most countries of the world with
the exception of Italy. Under this head I
include a rather miscellaneous collection.
Intelligence (more correctly included under
the heading of psychology) : Twin studies :
somatotyping and electro-encephalography.

Intelligence

On the place of intelligence in the ztiology
of delinquency, opinion is divided. The
difference in opinion must depend in no small
measure on methods of ascertainment and
disposal. Goddard’s claim (1926) that lowgrade intelligence was the greatest single
cause of crime has been rejected by later
workers. Burt found five times as many
mental defectives in his group as in the
school population, while 82 per cent of his
sample were technically dull. Healy and
Bronner showed only slight difference of
intelligence between their groups. Bagot,
using headmasters’ assessments concluded
that backwardness is strongly associated
with delinquency though in itself it does not
make a child delinquent. Stott (1950) on the
other hand is sceptical of the often quoted
relationship between low intelligence and
delinquency since emotional influences are
too easily neglected in the assessment of test
results. |

High-grade rather than low-grade deficiency is the more relevant factor. More
significant, however, is the effect of frustration and insecurity which follows as a consequence. In his study of younger soldiers

at a Special Training Unit (1952) during the
war Trenaman states that, as between the
one-third manifestly delinquent and the
remaining two-thirds, differences in intelligence were slight. He emphasizes, however,
their educational backwardness and the high
percentage (57 per cent) of truants in the
group. In my own study of the Army:
deserter persistent truancy was also noticeable, while the poor school record of the
young soldiers was also observed by Trenaman. Mannheim, in his Cambridge survey
(1948), also comments on the mental inferiority of the delinquent group, though he does
not generalize on such limited evidence.
Studies of recidivists are most likely to point
to low intelligence though samples of court
cases show few grounds for optimism.*

Twin Studies

Twin studies have also been the subject of
strong claims and of later scepticism. Lange’s
view (1929) that “‘ heredity does play a role
of paramount importance in making the
criminal ’’ though supported by his statistics
and by the work of Rosanoff, Kranz, and
Stumfl, is weakened not merely by the inadequacy of his criteria, but by the tenuous
nature of his case-material particularly in
the early period. Their evidence is still of
value in showing the significance of inborn
characteristics which create a susceptibility
to delinquent behaviour.

Whelan’s investigation (1951) of a pair of
uniovular twins in which one was an
aggressive psychopath presents some fresh
evidence. She used in her examination a
variety of techniques, including E.E.G.
psychological tests, and electromyography.
The twins, though reared in the same environment, showed personality differences at
an early age. ‘Before the age of ten their
paths began to diverge, and after very
different Army careers and dissimilar marital
histories, their lives become totally unlike.
The patient showed a more aggressive,

* An analysis of 100 consecutive cases from the
Bristol Juvenile Court in 1949 shows dullness (I.Q.
80-90) in 25 per cent, borderline subnormality (70-79)
in Im per cent, subnormality (under 70) in 7 per cent
and mental deficiency in 2 per cent.
DELINQUENT BEHAVIOUR :

immature personality, and an inability to
cope with social situations, a high level of
aspiration but marked lack of persistence.

Somatotyping

The knowledge of the relationship between
physique and character built up by Kretschmer has not generally been used by researches in delinquency. The more recent
work of Sheldon (1949) and his associates
for somatotyping has been simplified in this
country by Parnell. The conceptual framework has rightly been severely criticized by
Emmanuel Miller and by Sutherland, yet the
results are of some interest. Epps and
Parnell (1952) have discussed their conclusions from a comparative study of 177
Borstal girls and 123 young women at an
Oxford College. Corresponding differences in
physique and temperament were found. The
delinquents were shorter and heavier in
build, more muscular and fat. In temperament they showed a predominance of somatotonia and viscerotonia over cerebrotonia,
broadly confirming Sheldon’s work. Using
his psychiatric index the predominance of
affective-conative exaggeration was also confirmed. Seltzer’s findings in the Gluecks
(1950) large-scale study of 500 young delinquents chosen from reformatory institutions
and 500 non-delinquent controls, agree with
their evidence. The predominance of endomorphic-mesomorphs was also observed.
Ferguson’s (1952) picture, on the other
hand, of his Glasgow delinquents, undersized
and of poor physique, though not measured
in so systematic a manner, provides a striking
contrast to these conclusions. The problem
raised by this contrast in body build requires
further study.

Electro-encephalography

Finally there is the study of electroencephalography. Only in recent years has
the development of technical skills been
correlated with information on the delinquent gained through psychological and
social means. A recent investigation by
Sessions Hodge, Walter, and Grey Walter
(1953) of 100 successive admissions to the

SOME UNANSWERED QUESTIONS 33

Kingswood Classifying School is evidence
not only of great ability on the part of the
authors but of an understandable caution in
the interpretation of the results. In the
absence of experiments showing the extent
to which E.E.G. features. are susceptible to
environmental changes, the authors refuse to
accept a dichotomy between nature and
nurture to which this research can give
support. A bias in favour of nature may be
justified by further experiment, but the
evidence is inadequate, they suggest, to
support an uncompromising assertion.

In this research as many as 84 per cent
had abnormal E.E.G. records, though ‘‘there
was nothing to suggest that the peculiar
appearances seen in the primary records
were suggestive of any particular clinical
condition.””’ The popular connection between the dysrhythmia of behaviour disorders and epilepsy was rejected. Again,
although the slower rhythms were associated
with a factor called ductility (a word covering a variety of epithets, easily led, submissive, docile, malleable) it proved too
facile to explain these findings in terms of
simple immaturity. The authors forsee the
possibility of what they call a physiological
sociology, progress in which must be dependent on research over a much wider child
population than delinquents alone and followed up over a long period.

Against this background I have selected
two problems which seem to demand further
study as well as the expert knowledge which
this Society is able to provide. The first
concerns the psychopath, and the second
the social problem group.

The Psychopath

The effect of the new knowledge on
separation in early childhood which has been
made possible by psychiatric and in particular by psycho-analytic research, has been a
swing of the pendulum from heredity in
favour of environment. In the case of the
‘ pseudo-criminel,”’ the environmental delinquent, the results have been of slight
importance. In the case of the chronic
34 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

delinquent, but especially of the psychopath,
the matter is more important.

The concept of psychopathy has a long
history, beginning with the idea of moral
insanity and at various times including most
of the mental disorders except psychoses.
It has been criticized on various grounds—
that it is no more than a waste-paper basket
for cases which cannot be adequately
diagnosed, and that it involves its user in
circular reasoning. Yet the presence of the
non-sane non-insane character—to use East’s
terminology—both adult and _ juvenile,
within and without the penal or reformatory
institution, constitutes the most serious
challenge to existing knowledge, and also to
the whole system of penal administration.
Not only do existing methods of disposal
remain unsatisfactory, but within the prison
walls he creates a perpetual disturbance to
the normal routine and to the staff.

The size of the psychopathic group is itself
a matter of some dispute. Frey equates
psychopathy with habitual criminality, an
argument that would not be accepted in this
country. Morris (1951) states that, of the
two groups of habitual criminals in prison
investigated by him, for at least 20 per cent
the East-Hubert institution is required.
Stafford-Clark and his colleagues (1951),
however, point out that the number is little
more than 5 per cent. Criminality per se, they
state, seems to add little to our knowledge
of this particular form of character disorder,
one of whose most striking features is an
inability to accept any form of authority.
They see a failure to mature as the fundamental abnormality in the prison subjects
selected for their examination. This characteristic belongs to psychopaths in general,
though in the aggressive and explosive type
the damage to society or the prison is most
serious. In their electro-physiological study
83 per cent of the subjects displaying
aggressiveness had an abnormal E.E.G.
record as compared with less than 50 per
cent of those without overt aggressiveness.

There is a body of opinion which regards
the origin of psychopathy as constitutional.
Bowlby, on the other hand, in his study of

the Forty-four Juvenile Thieves (1946) and
again in his later work (1951) questions the
contribution of heredity. The evidence of
genetic factors is in the realm of inference.
“The relatively high incidence of mental
illness in the percentage of both groups of
cases, delinquents and unstable or neurotic
controls, is suggestive of the possible importance of heredity as predisposing to the
development of delinquent and unstable
character.”’ In the case of the affectionless
character, however, whose characteristics
seem to approximate most closely to those
of the psychopath, he emphasizes the high
degree of association with a history of
mother-child separation.

In America other workers, Goldfarb, Spitz,
and Bender, to mention but three names, had
arrived at similar conclusions. Bender also
argues that there is a specific connection
between prolonged early separation and the
development of the affectionless psychopathic character given to persistent delinquent conduct at an early age and extremely
difficult to treat.

The evidence of electro-encephalography is
suggestive also of immaturity in the psychopath. The majority of abnormalities in
Stafford-Clark’s group were of excess Theta
activity mainly in the central areas, a normal
occurrence in young children. Bowlby argues
(1951) that although there is a common
assumption that these abnormal rhythms are
due to a physical factor, such as genetic
defect or birth injury, there is in fact nothing
to support this conclusion, and they may
well prove to be psychogenic in origin,
resulting from a fixation at an earlier level
of functioning.

To the criminologist the presence of a hard
core of persistent criminality, in which
psychopathy, though not necessarily a large,
is nevertheless a most dangerous element,
constitutes a challenge to the research techniques at our disposal. A review of the
evidence suggests that there is urgent need
for further investigation, using in any team
designed for the purpose such help as the
geneticist can provide. If I have only done
justice to one side of the argument, it is in
_ DELINQUENT BEHAVIOUR: SOME UNANSWERED QUESTIONS — 35

part at any rate due to the inadequacy of
information in case-records on the heredity
of delinquents.

The Social Problem Group

The second of the two unanswered
questions which I shall discuss lies on the
borderline of eugenics and sociology. It
concerns the Social Problem Group to a study
of which this Soctety has devoted much of its
thought. I raise this problem because of a
preliminary study which I have begun while
planning the Bristol Social Project in the
last three months.

The classic description of the Wood
Report is well known to you. The idea of the
‘‘ dangerous and perishing classes ’’ appeared
to the social reformers of Mid-Victorian
England as characterized by “‘ moral ”’ rather
that “ physical”’ destitution. Matthew
Davenport Hill in the Minutes of Evidence
to the Select Committee of 1852 emphasized in particular “the children of
criminals: they are hereditary criminals ;
then illegitimate children . . . orphans, for
obvious reasons, form another class. Foundlings and step-children form a large class ;
and no doubt the children of the very poor
form a class.”

Since then there have been many changes,
not only in our knowledge, but in the philosophy of our social administration. Blacker
(1937) pointed out that recidivism appears
to fall into a group of conditions more or less
intermediate between the medico-psychological and the sociological. Of the three
sub-groups, subnormality of intelligence
appeared to be the common denominator.
Hubert concluded as a result of a study of the
literature that the proportion of defective
recidivists in the recidivist population was
surprisingly low. The hereditary factor
involved, he concluded, is generally regarded
as some sort of constitutional inferiority
which may show itself in other forms of social
behaviour as readily as. in criminality.
Subnormality of intelligence has also been
observed in a report on neglectful mothers
by the Governor of Holloway Prison (1950).

The Problem Family

The concept of a “ social problem group ”’
gave way to that of the ‘‘ problem family,” a
change of phrase which, Blacker (1952)
observes, ‘“‘ reflected a transition from an
impersonal and sociological to a personal and
human approach.’ More important, however, it characterizes the emphasis which is.
now rightly laid on the place of the family
not merely etiology of delinquency but in
many other troubles of a similar character.
Persistent truancy and sexual promiscuity
among girls are but two examples. The
nature of causation is taken further in this
later work. To mental subnormality is added
temperamental instability and a vicious
circle is quickly set in motion. .

Information on the relationships between
crime and the problem family is no more
than a pointer to further investigation.
Among the parents in the 379 families,
imprisonment or conviction was noted in
forty-nine men and nineteen women. Of
333 families forty-four children were in
Remand Homes or Approved Schools. Of
themselves, problem families do not appear
to be productive of a large proportion of
juvenile delinquency in the community. It
would, however, be of interest to study the
records of those forty-four children removed
to a reformatory institution and to observe
how far they contributed to the hard core of
delinquency, characterized not merely by
separation but also by rejection, frustration,
and anxiety of which the psychopath
appears to be the product. Wofinden has, in
fact, commented on the unity and happiness
which workers observed in some of the
families (1950).

In the course of the initial planning of the
Bristol Social Project I have been studying
the ecology of certain symptoms of family
and social disorder, such as truancy, child
neglect, delinquency, and so on, with the
intention of comparing their distribution
with that of the problem families of whom
Wofinden has already provided a map.
(1950), |

The Bristol Social Project is a five-year
scheme of “‘ operational ’’ or action-research,
36 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

supported by the Carnegie Trustees, and
intended to help the inhabitants of a local
community in that city to deal more efficiently with its social problems. Although
initially formed as an operational research
project in the treatment and prevention of
delinquency, it was argued that such a
scheme could not be limited in this way. It
is intended that by the summer a team of
trained workers will be appointed, who will
start work in various fields, in whichever
community may have been selected.

Here I shall confine myself to certain
aspects concerned with the ecology of
symptoms of social disorganization. It has
been assumed, though not without certain
criticisms, since the work of Shaw and
McKay (1942) in Chicago, that the distribution of delinquency, correlated with such
other problems as recidivism, mental deficiency and T.B., reaches the highest rates
in the centre and declines towards the
periphery of the city. This pattern was
applied not merely to Chicago but to certain
other American cities. Faris and Dunham
(1939) also showed that the total insanity
rates followed the same ecological principles,
although the same was not true of all types
of insanity, schizophrenia following the
pattern closely ; while manic-depressive psychosis and epilepsy did not conform.

In his study of Cambridge, Mannheim
(1948) argued that while these principles of
ecology held good in the case of the distribution of delinquency in London as shown, by
Burt or in Liverpool as observed by Bagot,
or in Birmingham according to an Education
Committee report, the same was not true for
Cambridge, where some of the highest rates
are to be found in the new housing estates
on the periphery of the town.

The theories of the so-called ecologists do
not hold for Bristol, where the distribution
of delinquency and certain other indices
appear to conform to no such principles. The
incidence seems to be similar to the distribution of problem families shown in the map
prepared by Wofinden (1950). We observe
an accumulation of social problems in outer
areas on the circumference, in certain new
housing estates. The “ black spots,” in short,

have moved from the centre to the outskirts
of the city leaving, however, a residue
behind.

Housing Estates

There is one obvious explanation for this
change. The indices in question are all
characteristics of the social problem group,
which was moved ‘under the slum clearance
schemes brought about by the Housing
Acts of 1930, 1936, and 1938, from old
central slum areas to new estates. Such
movement was later accelerated by the
bombing of the central areas during the war.

But the housing estates themselves have
created a fresh set of social problems. From
a study of the ecological approach to mental
disease Hare concludes (1952) that it is
possible -to distinguish in every environmental situation a constant underlying factor
for mental health. This factor, which he
calls ‘‘ social communication,” reflects the
fact that a man’s normal mental development depends on his being able to borrow a
sense of security from a community by whom
he is accepted as a member. In short, social
communication has become a limiting factor
in mental health. It may well be that a
study of housing estates would provide a
basis for the hypothesis which Hare proposes.
The absence of communication has frequently been contrasted with the neighbourliness of the old slum areas.

Here then is a problem in which many of
the questions have not finally been answered.
To what extent are we dealing in the new
areas with a population characterized largely
by mental subnormality and temperamental
instability, to mention two of the characteristics to which Blacker gives causal status in
the creation of the problem family ? What
has been the effect of the new social services
of the Welfare State on the social problem
group? Lastly, how far is the social pathology of these new housing areas due to a
process of social selection, and how far to the
effect of what—for want of a better word—
may be called a delinquent culture ? 
At one time it was argued that delinquency
was the product of slum living. After removal
_ DELINQUENT BEHAVIOUR: SOME UNANSWERED QUESTIONS 37

of the slum population to the new areas had
failed to diminish the rate of delinquency it
was pointed out that the absence of social
provision on new estates had led to boredom
and frustration among the young and a
weakened sense of community with impaired
means of social communication among the
adult.

In the movement from old slum areas to
new housing estates there are, too, those
difficulties arising from the disruption of the
kinship group.* The presence of old people,
more particularly of the mother, near the
family in times of stress, at periods of sickness or childbirth, and in the giving of daily
assistance and advice, is only seen in its
right perspective when the effects of separation are later experienced. ‘‘ Going back to
mum ”’ is a not uncommon reason given for
the anxiety to return to the old central areas.

Kuper has suggested (1953), in a recent
study of Coventry, a dichotomy in which
roughness and sociability, respectability and
withdrawal from neighbourly contacts appear
to form two fairly distinct groups. The
application of this hypothesis to certain new
housing areas of Bristol appears to be of
some interest. A slow process of social
selection or more accurately perhaps social
rejection by neighbours takes place. The
“respectable ’’ move away from the ‘‘rough.”’
They apply to the housing authority for a
transfer to a different estate or to a section
of their present one, where they may live
undisturbed by the “ rough ’’ members of
the locality. Movement also takes place in
the case of the rough group, one factor being
ability to pay the rent demanded, and the
process of drift into the cheapest and most
inadequate accommodation gradually takes
place. .

The significance of low morale should not
be underestimated. Its prejudicial effects
may be observed in the case of application
for employment. An address in a particular
area may well debar an applicant from an
appointment. In areas of this kind the
number of ascertained problem families may
well be small, though their effect on the

* Personal communication from Michael Young, of
the Institute of Community Studies.

standards of neighbourhood behaviour may
easily be underestimated.

The Dutch programme for the rehabilitation of the problem family at least has the
merit of recognizing the existence of a social
problem (the effect of which may well extend
outside the immediate group which constitutes it) and of adopting a constructive
policy to deal with it.

In the process of re-education there is a
need for greater emphasis on the development of group techniques. Lewin’s view that
“it is usually easier to change individuals
formed into a group than to change any one
of them separately ’’ constitutes a fundamental principle on which future progress
is likely to be made. Whether the objective
of social change be family-planning or the
prevention of delinquency, the use of conventional methods through formal instruction seems handicapped by difficulties of
social distance between worker and the
neighbourhood.

The extent of residential mobility in these
areas suggests that the idea of a delinquent
culture with its own norms of behaviour and
sanctions may be less accurate than that of
a disorganized group of families rejected by
neighbours and constrained to live together.
With frequent movement from one house to
another no accepted code is given time in
which to grow. The study of the individual
problem family must be supplemented by a
study of the locality in which it lives. The
biological effects of intermarriage, the
place of the kinship system, the techniques of

child-rearing, the emotional development of

the children, the handicaps to family living,
both economic, social and psychological, and
the appropriate social policy to be adopted
—all these are matters on which only the
beginning of social research has been made.

REFERENCES

Aichhorn, A. (1951), Wayward Youth. Imago.

Bagot, J. H. (1941), Juvenile Delinquency. Cape

Blacker, C. P. (Ed.) 1937), A Social Problem ‘Group ?
Milford.

(1952), Problem Families. Eugenics Society.

Bovet, L. (1951), Psychiatric Aspects of Juvenile
Delinquency. W.H.O.

 
38 _ THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Bowlby, J. (1946), Forty-four Juvenile Thieves. Bailliére
———— (1951), Maternal Cave and Mental Health.
O

Burt, Cyril (1949), ‘‘ Recent Discussions on Juvenile
“Delinquency.” Brit. J. Educ. Psychol. 19, 32.
Caradog Jones, D. (1945), The Social Problem Group.

Squire Law Library.

Carr-Saunders, A. M., Mannheim, H., and Rhodes,
E.C. (1942), Young Offenders. Cambridge Univer
' sity Press.

Epps, Phyllis and Parnell, R. W. (1952), ‘“‘ Physique
and Temperament of Women Delinquents compared with Women Undergraduates.” Brit. J.
Med. Psychol. 25, 249.

Ferguson, T. (1952), The Young Delinquent in his
Social Setting. Oxford University Press.

Faris, E. and Dunham, H. W. (1939), Mental Disorders
an Urban Areas. Chicago University Press.

Frey, E. (1950), ‘‘ Etude des facteurs criminogénes chez

les mineurs.’’ Proceedings of the Second International Congress of Criminology.

Glover, E. (1954), ‘‘ Team-Research in Delinquency.

' A Psycho-Analytical Commentary.” Brit. J.
Deling. 4, 173.

Glueck, E. (1952), “

| Bunt. J. Deling. 2, 275.

Glueck, Sheldon and Eleanor (1950), Unraveling
Juvenile Delinquency. Commonwealth Fund, N.Y.

Goddard, H. H. (1926), Feeble-Mindedness : Its Causes
and Consequences. Macmillan, N.Y.

Hare, E. H. (1952), ‘‘ The Ecology ‘of Mental Disease.”
J. Mental Science. 98, 592.

Healy, W. and Bronner, A. (1936), New Light on Delinquency and tts Treatment. Yale University Press.

Kuper, L. (Ed.) (1953), Living in Towns. Cresset Press.

Lange, J. (1929), Crime as Destiny. Allen & Unwin...

Leeson, C. (1917), The Child and the War. King.

Lewin, K. (1947), in Newcomb é al. Readings in Social
Psychology. Holt.

Mannheim, H. (1948), Juvenile Delinquency in an
English Middletown. Kegan Paul.

Mays, J. B. (1952), ‘“‘ A Study of a Delinquent Community.’ Brit. J. Deling. 3, 5.

Predicting Juvenile Delinquency.”

Mental Deficiency Committee, Report of. (Wood
Report) (1929). H.M.S.O.

Morris, N. R. (1951), The Habitual Criminal. Longmans.
Green.

Pearce, J. D. W. (1952), Juvenile Delinquency. Cassell.

Prison Commissioners for 1949, Report of (1950).
H.M.S.O., Cmd. 8088.

Reiwald, P. (1949), Trs. T. E. James.
Criminals. Heinemann.

Scott, P. D. (1950), “‘ Public Opinion and Juvenile
Delinquency.” Brit. J. Deling. 1, 56.

Sessions Hodge, R., Walter, V. J. and Grey, Walter W.
(1953), ‘‘ Juvenile Delinquency. An _ Electrophysiological, Psychological and Social Study.”
Brit. J. Deling. 3, 155.

Shaw, C. R. and McKay, H. D. (1942), Juventle Delinquency and Uvban Areas. Chicago University
‘Press.

Sheldon, W. H. (1949),
Harper.

Simey, T. S. (1949), Contributor. to Why Delinquency ?

Spencer, J.C. (not yet published), Crime and the Services.
Kegan Paul.

Stafford-Clark, D., Pond, Desmond and Lovett Doust,.
J. W. (1951), * The Psychopath in Prison.” Brit.
Jj. Deling. 2, 117.

Stott, D. H. (1950), Delinquency and Human Nature.
Carnegie U.K. Trust.

Sutherland, E. H: (1947), Principles of Criminology.

Thrasher, F. M. (1936), The Gang. Chicago University
Press.

Trenaman, J. (1952), Out of Step. Methuen.

Whelan, Lorna (1951), ‘" Aggressive Psychopathy in
One Pair of Uniovular Twins.” Brit. J. Deling.
2, 130.

Why Delinquency? The Case for Operational Research.
(1949). Contributions by J. Bowlby, H. Mannheim, T. S. Simey. N.A.M.H.

Winnicott, D. W. (1943), ‘‘ Delinquency Research.”
New Era. 24, 65. 2
Wofinden, R. C. (1950), Problem Families in Bristol.

Cassell. .

Society and tts

Varieties of Delinquent Youth.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLVI, No. 1
