The Home and the School

A REVIEW

HERE HAS RECENTLY been published

the third volume based on a follow-up of

children born in Britain in one week in
March 1946.* The first volume was concerned
with medical aspects of the maternities, the
second with the health of the children, and this
third volume deals with the educational experience of the English and Welsh children up to the
age of eleven, with some additional information
on school leaving. The sample is one-quarter of
the children born in the week, except that
children born to non-manual workers and farm
labourers are included in full; it totals over
4,000 children.

Two special examinations were made of the
children for the purposes of the survey at age
eight and eleven, consisting of an intelligence
test and tests of school achievement. Average
scores on these tests are fifty, and the standard
deviation of the summed tests are 8-4 at age
eight years, and 8-9 at age eleven years.f Dr.
Douglas uses these findings to study the influence and interactions of five main socioenvironmental factors on the child’s score, his
progress between eight and eleven, and his
success at winning a place at a grammar school.
The five social factors were social class, parents’
interest, housing, completed family size and
academic record of the school.

The most marked association, expectedly, of
test score at age eleven was with social class. In
the upper-middle class (defined as father’s
occupation non-manual, one parent having a
middle-class background and secondary education, the other having at least one of these
characteristics) children averaged 56-99. In the
lower-middle class (remainder of those whose

* Douglas, J. W. B. The Home and the School. London,
1964. MacGibbon & Kee. Pp. xxv + 190. Price 36s.

t+ The tests at age eight were a non-verbal picture
test, a reading comprehension test, a mechanical word
reading test, and a vocabulary test. At age eleven the
latter two tests were the same, but for the first two were
substituted a verbal and non-verbal ability test, and an
arithmetic test.

93

father’s occupation was non-manual) the average
was 53-88. The upper-manual class (father’s
occupation manual and at least one parent with
a middle-class background or secondary education) averaged 50-05, the lower-manual class
(remainder of families where father’s occupation
is manual)* averaged 47°55.

Less expectedly, perhaps, an equally marked
association was with the parents’ interest in the
child’s education. Where parents’ interest was
high the average score at age eleven was 57-36,
where it was average the average score was
52:61, and where it was low the average score
was 48-14. It is impressive to see how children
of the lower-manual class, whose parents show
a high degree of interest, score as high as
children in the upper-middle class whose parents
show a low degree of interest (though it should
not of course be assumed that this is necessarily
an environmental effect, parents who take most
interest in their child’s education will tend to be
the most intelligent parents in each class).

The association with academic record of the
school is rather less marked, the average scores
at age eleven being 53-69, 50-26 and 47-73
respectively for children in schools with a good,
fair and poor academic record. The average
scores where housing is satisfactory is 53-40,
where it is unsatisfactory it is 48-26. Of special
interest for eugenics are the scores in relation to
completed family size, which are—for one child,
52:96; two children, 52:16; three children, 50-41;
four children, 48°57; five children, 47:51; six
children, 46:04; seven or more children, 42-49.

A sophisticated statistical analysis of these
results was carried out by Mr. H. R. Simpson,
and is shown in tabular form in Appendix II.
This measures the significance of these associations independently of each other, within the
two main social class groups and by sex of child.

* This will include most of the skilled workers in the
Registrar General’s Class III, as well as those in IV and

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, July 1964, 56, 2.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

The association with parental interest is highly
significant, and the association with housing is
significant, in both occupational groups and in
both sexes. The association with family size is
significant, except in middle-class girls. The
association with academic record of school is
significant, except in working class boys. As is
often the case, it is difficult to know to what
extent associations of this kind are due to cause
and effect, and to what extent they merely reflect
an association with parental ability. The more
capable parents within each occupational class
will also be those who tend to take more interest
in their children’s schooling, achieve better
housing for their children, choose the better of
two available local authority schools, and are
more successful in planning the size of their
families. It is unfortunate, but understandable in
view of the technical difficulties, that Dr.
Douglas has no information on the intelligence
of the parents. It is noteworthy, however, that
children in the upper-middle class are relatively
free of these associations with socio-environmental factors, whereas the associations are
strongest in the lower-manual working class.
The upper-middle class parents will be a
relatively homogeneous group for intelligence,
whereas the lower-manual class parents, the
largest group, as here defined will include
parents who range from highly skilled craftsmen
to unskilled labourers and cover very great
variation in natural intelligence.

The associations of the socio-environmental
factor with changes in score between eight and
eleven are also instructive. Taking first social
class, it may be seen from Table VI d in Appendix III that the average score of upper-middle
class children rose by 0:35 points. The lowermiddle class children showed a gain of 0-92,
the upper-manual a gain of 0-06 and the lowermanual a loss of 0-5. These changes are small
and, though Dr. Douglas does not make the
point, would in part be due to the increase of
spread of scores on the second test, shown by
the increase of the standard deviation from 8-4
to 8-9 points. These changes are tucked away in
the Appendix and Dr. Douglas’s text gives a
very different impression, which is that the
middle classes have gained and the manual
classes have lost ground substantially between

94

eight and eleven. This impression is intensified by
a table in the text (page 47) showing, not the
changes in average scores, but the changes for
children scoring at various levels. This table is
reproduced below. For example, the table shows

MIDDLE CLASS

MANUAL
WORKING CLASS

Change in score Change in score

Lower

+0-68
-0-23
+0-02
—0-78
-2:27

60 and over —4-60

 

* Fewer than 20 children in these groups.
+ = improvement. — = deterioration.

that of the children scoring 46 to 50, at age
eight, the upper-middle, lower-middle, uppermanual lower-manual have gained 3-44, 2°38,
0-59 and 0-02 points respectively. The impression
given by such figures is very misleading, and
may have mislead Dr. Douglas himself. They
will in large part be due merely to regression,
the tendency of the child on any second test to
return towards the average of his group. The
distribution of scores on a second test, if both
tests are well standardized, will alter little but
the children who score, for example, very much
above the average of their group will not be
entirely the same children in the two tests. Dr.
Douglas mentions the principle of regression,
but does not make clear that the regression is
towards the average of the group (for example
of upper-middle class children), and not to the
average of the whole sample. The upper-middle
class children scoring 46 to 50, at age eight, will
be expected to improve their scores in the
direction of their group average of 56 to 57 ona
second test at age eleven simply as a result of
regression, and they do. In contrast, lowermanual children scoring 46 to 50 at age eight
are at their group average, would not be expected
to show any appreciable change at age eleven
from regression, and they do not. Dr. Douglas
even writes (page 46) ‘“‘the middle-class children
improve their scores and the working class
children deteriorate—this holds at each level of
ability’. His own table (page 47) shows that this
THE HOME AND THE SCHOOL

statement is not correct, and that the changes are
in the directions one would expect from regression. Middle-class children who scored above
their group average scored lower, not higher, on
the second test (—2:32 points in the case of
upper-middle and — 1-94 for lower-middle class
children who scored 60 and over on the eightyear-old test), whereas working class children
who scored well below the average of their
group scored higher, not lower, on the second
test (+0:5 points for upper-manual and -+-0-68
for lower-manual class children who scored 40
or less on the eight-year-old test). It may be
that the distribution of scores in the four social
class groups showed significant changes between
eight and eleven, for example an increase in
upper-middle class children scoring more than
one standard deviation above the mean score of
50, though the Table (IV d) showing average
scores makes this unlikely, but the distributions
are not given. It is unfortunate that Dr. Douglas
should publish these misinterpretations of the
changes in special groups and not publish the
actual distributions, which would enable the
reader to work out for himself what real changes
there had been.

It is important to realize however, that if there
were real changes these would not necessarily be
for environmental reasons. It is an important
principle of the genetics of growth and development that polygenically determined resemblances
between child and mid-parent will be expected
to increase as the child grows up. A child’s
stature at eight may be measured precisely but
provides limited information on the genetic
factors which will determine growth between
eight and eighteen. Mid-parental height might
provide more information. If two groups of boys
have the same height at age eight, but one group
has, say, 6-foot fathers and 5-foot 6-inch
mothers, and the other group has, say, 5-foot
6-inch fathers and 5-foot mothers, the first group
will on average be substantially taller at age
eighteen. In the same way, even if tests at age
eight could measure precisely the genetic
component of a child’s intellectual capacity
developed so far, this would provide limited
information about the genetic factors influencing
the child’s further intellectual growth. And any
changes in test score between eight and eleven,

though small, would be expected to be in the
direction of the mid-parental intelligences.
Further changes in score after the age of eleven
would be expected in the same direction until
test-score ceases to improve, which will be
somewhere between the ages of sixteen and
twenty.

With parental interest there is a better case for
the view that there is real association between
parental encouragement and change in score
between eight and eleven. Yet Dr. Douglas’s
text and his table (page 56) showing changes in
score by child’s score at age eight are unsatisfactory for precisely the same reasons as the
text and table on social class. Once again he does
not give the actual distribution scores at the
two ages. But Mr. Simpson’s analysis in Appendix II shows that there is a consistent difference
in the direction expected between the average
scores at ages of eight and eleven and parental
interest, which though trivial in the case of
middle-class boys and small in the manual class
boys, is over 1 point and meaningful in the case
of the perhaps more malleable and docile girls.

The association of academic record of school
with change in score between eight and eleven is
almost certainly real, the difference between
children in schools with a good academic record
and those with a poor academic record increasing by 1 point in manual class children and by a
little more than 14 points in middle-class children. In the case of housing, the associations
are small, the difference between the scores of
middle-class children in satisfactory and unsatisfactory housing decreasing between the ages of
eight and eleven in both sexes, while there is a
small increase in the difference in manual class
children. The associations of family size with
changes in score are small and inconsistent.

The association with academic record being
the most convincing, Dr. Douglas has collected
information on the effect of streaming. Once
again his text and the table in the text take no
account of regression. The tendency is for the
upper stream children who score well below the
high average of their class at eight to improve
several points towards the class average at age
eleven, while children in the lower stream who
score well above the low average of their class,
deteriorate several points towards the class

95
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

average. Both tendencies will largely be due to
regression. This is shown by the fact that the
change in mean scores, +0-7 for upper stream
children and —0:5 for lower stream children, is
little more than one would expect for the greater
standard deviation of the scores at age eleven.
The finding that middle-class children gain more
than manual class in the upper stream, while
middle-class children gain slightly and manual
class children showed a small deterioration in the
lower stream, is also probably a regression
phenomenon.

In each section, Dr. Douglas is concerned to
estimate the “‘wastage”’ of ability: in particular
to estimate how many more children might
benefit from a grammar school type of education
if, say, manual class children scoring well at age
eleven, or at age eight, were as often chosen for
grammar school places as middle-class children
making the same scores or if, say, high-scoring
children whose parents show little interest in
their education get as many places in grammar
schools as children scoring equally well whose
parents show much interest. His estimates are
unrealistic for the reasons given above. For
example, he notes that of the group scoring
56-60, which is the borderline for grammar
school entry, about a half of upper-middle
class, a third of lower-middle class, one-fifth of
upper-manual class and one-eighth of lowermanual class children get into a grammar school.
Dr. Douglas accepts this at its face value.
However, the children were not selected for
grammar schools on Dr. Douglas’s test, but on
the local authorities’ own tests. Upper-middle
class children scoring at the borderline level of
56-60 are scoring at about their group average.
On any reliable second test, therefore, about
half of them would be expected to score higher
and be selected, and about half would score
lower and be rejected, for a grammar school
place. In contrast, lower-manual class children
scoring 56-60 are about 10 points above their
group average, therefore on any reliable second
test, because of regression only a minority will
score as high and be selected for grammar

96

school, the size of the minority depending on the
correlation between scores on Dr. Douglas’s test
and the particular local authority’s test.

If they had been given, the distribution scores
in the four social classes, would show if there
was any real tendency for middle-class children to
be unfairly preferred in selection for grammar
schools. One test of this will come when the
children take their “‘O”’ level school certificates.
If more children of low borderline ability have
been selected from the middle classes, middleclass children should contain a greater proportion who fail to get 5 or more “O” levels in
academic subjects. One suspects that the reverse
will be true, both because of regression to group
means and because of a greater average genetically determined gain of the middle-class
children.

The reviewer does not want to suggest there is
no wastage of ability, but merely that Dr.
Douglas has much overestimated it. It may be
that the socio-environmental influences which he
has studied in such detail have had their full
influence before the age of eight. It is more
likely, ‘however, that—exceptional instances
apart—the wastage in selection for grammar
school is of a different kind. The real wastage is
probably of children who will be in the top 20
per cent of ability at age eighteen, but do not
perform at this level at age eleven for more
fundamental reasons than social handicaps—
reasons such as minor neurological and psychological disorders, especially those affecting
reading ability, emotional disturbances, or just
slow biological maturation.

Despite these criticisms there are much
valuable data in the book, especially in the
Appendices (it is for example interesting and
surprising to see that social class differences in.
age at menarche have disappeared). The misinterpretations in the book should have been
eliminated by criticism in departmental seminars.
It is very much to be hoped that Dr. Douglas
will continue this survey. It is also be hoped that
he will publish his data in full in future.

Cc. O. CARTER
