THE GENETICS OF AMENTIA"’

By FREDERICK GRUNDY, ™_D., D.P.H., Barrister-at-Law
(Deputy Medical Officer of Health to the Borough of Luton)

INTRODUCTORY

WAS asked to address this Soczety
because a thesis I wrote some little time
ago on the basis of a territorial survey of

amentia in East Anglia caught the eye of our
very vigilant secretary. The primary justification for my presence, therefore, is to give
you a brief account of one aspect of this investigation ; but it would be unfair to you
and to me alike were I to confine myself
rigidly to the subject-matter of the original
thesis, for you will understand when I
describe the circumstances of its inception
that my outlook has matured considerably
since then. Furthermore, the thesis was intended to be a scientific document, and I
am pursuaded that a leavening of its cautious
premises with a little more venturesome, if
more precarious, opinion is likely to add to
the interest of a discussion of this sort.
Consequently I propose to divide my
address into two parts. (1) A description of
the investigation and the conclusions I drew
at the time. (2) A critical estimate of the
methodology of genetic surveys, and a statement of certain personal views, which I shall
submit for your comment and criticism.
So that you may reach a valuation of the
work I must tell you something of the
circumstances that led up to it, and of the
extent of my own knowledge at that time.
In 1931 I took up a post involving a good
deal of school medical work and mental
deficiency in East Suffolk, and there I made
my first acquaintance with rural England, a
very beautiful, peaceful countryside. My
knowledge of mental deficiency was restricted
to its clinical and 4dministrative aspects.
The social aspect of feeble-mindedness, the
relative influences of heredity and environment in the determination of the various

* A lecture delivered before the Eugenics Society on
March 2oth, 1935.

217

grades and clinical types, I knew only as textbook subjects, but after a short intimate
medical contact with the family life and
the educational machinery of the county
the real nature of the problems was forced
upon me, their difficulty and their magnitude alike. I drew up a provisional scheme
and began.

With the exception of the Wood Report I
avoided references to other workers’ findings
until I had completed the collection of my
data, and I believe that the investigation
was on that account as free as possible from
preconceptions. Latterly I have given
thought to the problem of the causation of
amentia, and to the control of its incidence.
The outcome of these deliberations I shall
submit when my major task of describing the
family survey is fulfilled.

The area in which the investigation was
carried out had a population of 45,435 anda
school population of 6,645. It may conveniently be described as the north-east
quadrant of East Suffolk, constituted of
three rural districts and the townships of
Beccles, Bungay, Halesworth, and Southwold. The whole area is essentially agricultural and there is longshore fishing along the
coast. Many of the villages are still comparatively isolated, for cross-county communications are relatively poor. There was
no great difficulty in obtaining family histories in most instances, for the inhabitants
knew a good deal about neighbouring fami-.
lies ; social cohesiveness was, in fact, high
throughout the area. I employed the same
standards as those fully described by Dr.
E. O. Lewis in the Wood Report, 1929, using
Stanford tests and Burt’s graded tests in the
estimation of mental age and educational age
respectively. In all 750 children (11-2 per
cent. of the entire school population) were
examined by individual methods, and the
investigation of suspected defectives followed
218

closely that usually undertaken for certification under the Education Act. It was
neither practicable nor desirable to subject
adults to systematic testing, and their
examination was undertaken with the social
concept in mind. There is every reason to
believe that the ascertainment of defectives
of school age was complete for all practical
purposes. It is clearly impossible to submit
details of individual cases, but I want to say
that the diagnosis of deficiency in school
children was invariably based on precise
personal assessment, and that relating to
adults on strongly presumptive evidence in
all cases, and on personal observations
whenever possible.

Mention must be made of certain terms
which may not be familiar to all of you:

1. Mental age (M.A.) means equivalent age

in ‘terms of intelligence tests.
2. Educational age (E.A.) means equivalent age in terms of educational tests.
3. Intelligence Quotient (I.Q.)
__ Mental Age x I00
~~ Actual Age
4. Educational Ratio (E.R.)
__ Educational Age x 100
- Actual Age

5. Retardation for the purposes of the
investigation was given an arbitrary
meaning which corresponded roughly to
an all-round backwardness of two years.
The term retardation, therefore, refers
to educational attainments and to
nothing else.

THE RETARDED CHILD

Any detailed consideration of retardation
such as the original thesis contained would
be irrelevant to this discussion ; but I cannot
avoid referring to certain broad conclusions,
a recognition of which is essential to the
proper understanding of the subject-matter
of this address. So as to occupy a minimum
of time in this connection I propose to make
bare statements without attempting to
familiarize you with the evidence on which
they are based.

1. Incidence of Retardation. According to
the tests employed 7 -3 per cent. of the school

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

population of eight years and over were
found to be three and a half or more years
retarded. Assuming a normal frequency distribution of Educational Ratios, 30 per cent.
of the children of eight years and over are
two or more years retarded.

2. Distribution of Retardation and Mental
Deficiency in the Area. I marked on a map
those parishes which had 4 per cent. or more
of defectives in their schools, and as might
be expected the incidence of deficiency and
dullness were shown to run hand in hand, for
most deficiency is of the sub-cultural variety.
Although not apparent from the map itself
without an intimate knowledge of local
circumstances, the incidence of deficiency
and retardation was highest in the areas of
greatest geographical and social isolation.
This factor of social isolation seemed to
operate indirectly, raising the incidence of
poor stocks by providing a strong incentive
to the better stocks to migrate to areas of
greater social amenity, that is to urban areas.
There was no doubt in my mind that although
inbreeding was relatively common in the
more isolated places, the role it played was
insignificant as compared with the factor I
have mentioned.

3. The Causes of Retardation. The following table which summarizes the causes of
retardation in children in the eight years plus
age groups is almost self-explanatory. I wish
only to direct your attention to three points:

I. The small part played by medical
conditions.

2. The mythical character of ‘‘ aprosexia.’’

3. The inclusion of instances of bad teaching in the group “‘ other causes,”” which
accounts for its size.

Table showing Causes of Retardation in
children of eight years and over

Low general intelligence 307

Change of school .- 15 8& 7.
Sensory defects ... . 6 3& 3¢.
Absence without illness 5 4& Ic.
Physical illness ... .. 2% 11 & ioc.
Aprosexia see . 2 r& Ie.
Other causes . 47

Total .- 403
GENETICS OF AMENTIA

The figure followed by c. indicates the
number of cases in which dullness was a contributory cause in conjunction with the
other named condition.

Summary. Seventy-seven per cent. of retardation is associated with dullness exclusively, and 82 per cent. with low general
intelligence. Twelve per cent. may be attributed to deprivation of education opportunity and 3 per cent. to medical conditions.

4. Disordered Conduct in School Children.
Very briefly the following facts emerged :

I. Only twenty-nine, or one in 220, of the
school population exhibit disorders of
behaviour.

2. Of these twenty-nine, fourteen were
actual defectives, and eleven had I.Q.s
between 70 and 80 per cent; that is only
four had mental ratios over 80 per cent.

3. It is equally noteworthy that of 135
feeble-minded children only ten showed
any outstanding disorder of conduct.
That is to say, twelve out of thirteen
feeble-minded children are so designated
purely and simply because of a low I.Q.
and its associated low educability.

This fact is of extreme importance in so far
as it limits the conclusions which may correctly be drawn from geniological data
relating to adults and children; for in the
case of adults the criterion of mental
deficiency is an incapacity to effect independent social adaptation, a standard which
refers exclusively to social behaviour.

5. The Relationship between the M.A. and
the E.A. I reached the general conclusion
that these variables are so highly correlated
that the I.Q. can be estimated with fair
accuracy from the E.A. in the absence of
unusual factors, such as defective sensory
apparatus or deprivation of educational
opportunity.

It must be concluded that the E.A. is
closely dependent on the I.Q., or that in
general both are measures of the same attributes. That is to say, intelligence tests are
but educational tests in disguise. It is
generally admitted that the I.Q. is determined to a considerable extent by environmental agencies, and I suggest now that

219

given an environment as uniform as that
provided in the case of the average child in
this country the E.A. is almost as reliable a
measure of intelligence as the I.Q.

If intelligence is defined as ‘‘ the aggregate
of characteristics which intelligence tests
measure,’ which I submit is a rational
definition, this is merely another way of
saying that the M.A. and the E.A. are highly
correlated. Lest the proposed definition
seem insensate I will outline the argument
that leads up to it.

(2) The word intelligence is commonly
used to mean certain characteristics
possessed by one person in the judgment of another. In this sense it is a
private judgment and not a scientific
datum. Psychological definitions other
than the one suggested above give no
greater precision to the word.

Tests have been devised which are

ethically neutral, and which embody

everything public in the various judgments.

(c) When intelligence is defined in terms
of these tests it becomes the business
of the psychologist to ascertain to
what extent test scores are correlated
with the characteristics of intelligence
in the ordinary sense of the word, and
the business of the biologist to investigate the relative influences of nature
and nurture in their determination.

(b

~~”

FAMILY HISTORIES

I do not propose to describe the method I
adopted in obtaining family histories, locating defectives, and checking information, for
I am sure your imagination will carry you
over all that.

A total of 165 ascertained defectives of
school age was made up of 135 feeble-minded,
twenty-three imbeciles, and seven idiots, a
proportion almost identical with that found
by Dr. Lewis in rural areas. The close
correspondence is a matter of importance,
because it raises a presumption that no great
disparity existed between the standards
employed in the investigations.

Of 116 family histories, twenty-eight were
220

not full enough to permit confident conclusions. No fewer than 149 of the ascertained
defectives of school age appeared in the
family histories, leaving only sixteen, all of
feeble-minded grade, in whose case a family
history was unobtainable. Set out below are
summary classifications based on the histories.

PATHOLOGICAL TYPES
Imbeciles and Idiots Feeble-minded

Mongolians ... 9| Infantile encephalitis 2
Meningitic ... 1 | Traumatic (birth inHydrocephalic I jury) son 8 of
Epileptic . .. I] Simple primary . 132
Simple primary ... 18
Total a wa wes 30 Total 135
CAUSATION

Feeble-minded
(a) Environmental

Imbeciles and Idiots
(2) Environmental

factors... 6 factors... 4
(7) Without apparent (6) Without apparent
17 cause . Io
(c) Prima facie evid- (c) Neuropathic inence of a heredi- heritance » *

(2) Combination of
neuropathic inheritance and environmental factor 15

tary factor mn FF

 

 

23 per cent. attributable to
inheritance.

71 per cent. attributable
exclusively to neuropathic
inheritance.

I need say nothing | about Group (a), and it
will be sufficient to say of Group (db) that cases
under this heading could not be referred to a
cause, although reasonably complete information was available. It is likely that a
fuller knowledge would have led to their
classification with those due to environmental
causes.

I must now indicate the nature of the
evidence which was taken into account in the
selection of cases attributed to neuropathic
inheritance, either alone or in combination
with an environmental factor. Very briefly
inheritance was regarded as a factor in causation in the presence of (a) several defective
siblings, (6) defectives or other marked neuropaths in antecedent generations, especially
defective or borderline parents.

Feeble-mindedness was judged to be due
to the combined influence of hereditary and
environmental factors where, in the presence
of a neuropathic family history, only one of
many siblings was actually defective, whereas
several others were of poor mental quality,

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

although not actually defective. It seemed
that a factor, sometimes suggested by the
history, additional to the neuropathic inheritance had operated to produce an actual
defective among a group of poor quality
siblings.

Without elaborate statistical methods, the
value of which I shall consider later, conclusive proof of hereditary influence cannot be
offered, but it is noteworthy that other
workers who have used the method of family
surveys have reached substantially the same
conclusions as those presented here. A
glance at the family pedigrees gives a very
fair notion of the standard employed, but a
personal acquaintance with the families in
their usual environmental setting is by far
the most convincing evidence.

The symbols used in the charts are those
adopted by the Eugenics Society. There is
one unusual feature to which I would draw
your attention. According to my own estimate, which does not conflict with generally
accepted views, roughly half the children
certified under the Education Act will not
be defective in a social sense in adult life ina
rural area. Likewise there is no doubt that
many parents who were classed as poor type
would have been classed as defective during
school life. That is to say, there exists a wide
disparity between the standards used in the
educational and social classifications of
feeble-mindedness, and it is beyond doubt
that the use of the single term “ feebleminded ” in two distinct senses, both of
which are legal and not scientific, is highly
confusing in an inquiry of this sort. An
attempt was made to overcome the difficulties implicit in this duality of meaning by
introducing the letters E. and S. into the
charts with the following connotation :

(a) Applied to adults: was probably
defective educationally during
E. school life.
(0) Applied to children: defective in
an educational sense.
(c) Applied to adults: defective in a
social sense.
S. (2) Applied to children : will probably
be defective in a social sense in
adult life.
GENETICS OF AMENTIA 221
Symbols used in. the Family Pedigrees TWWtustratz the" Neuropathic Inheritance’ Group
DO mate
OQ Female
HM @ Defective Male or Female

e §=6©Sillbirth or Miscarriage
FE @ Defective or borderland child
or poor type adult

LAD Person dead

collateral relation

A&A Se unknown.
FF Stip couplings

SandE used tn sense described in the text,

 

 

   
    

Typical of No Apparent Cause” Group. Prima Facie Evidence of Neuropathic Inherit tance

 

 
   

Chronic
Diabetes

 
222
a OD /|Suicade a
A om | Aer © a © ©

 

  

Epilephic

It might be objected that (d) is a perilous
prophecy, and (a) no more than a retrospective guess, yet they are all. that can be
attained by any investigation that is not
spread over at least two decades. I can give
you no better example than this of the nonsense implicit in family charts relating to
defectives, quite apart from any fallacies
that may creep into their interpretation.

The representative charts I have selected
to give a fair notion of the family histories
are almost self-explanatory, and I shall not
go into them in detail.

The following numerical summaries supply
information about the family histories as a

 

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

whole of children whose amentia was attributed to neuropathic inheritance.

Number of defective sibs (2)
in family ms | I121314

Number of families

 

Total (b) size of sibship .... 1 | 2 | 3]4]5 | 6/64
Number of families -/ 51/8)8)/9]4{/—| 2

Number of unsatisfactory (¢) siblings __98.
Total number (8) of siblings =79 percent.

124
Number of defective or borderline
(d) parents .. sus
Total anmber (b) of parents

a) ‘‘ Sibs ”’ means siblings in family of an ascertained
defective of school age. (6) Total number does not
include those who were not assessed either because they
were inaccessible, or in the case of children too young.
(c) ‘‘ Unsatisfactory ’’ means defectives, borderline
cases (I.Q. less than 80 per cent.), dead during infancy,
and stillborn. (d) ‘“ Borderline’’ means _ illiterate
dullards who were almost certainly defective in an
educational sense during childhood.

40
=66= 60 per cent.

You have noticed that in 86 per cent. of the
feeble-minded there is evidence of hereditary
influence alone or in combination, in contrast
with a prima facte 23 per cent. of lower grade
aments, which supports the generally accepted conclusion that lower grade deficiency is
not a family problem to the same extent as
the higher grade. If all grades of defectives
are considered together, 75 per cent. appear
to be associated with a neuropathic inheritance. As the incomplete histories, which all
refer to feeble-minded persons, are not taken
into account in this estimate, it follows that
the proportion of cases in which heredity
plays a part is somewhat underestimated, for
an undue proportion of lower grade defectives is admitted.

It cannot be too strongly emphasized that
the majority of feeble-minded children are
merely profound dullards, distinguished from
those usually classed as “ dull and backward’’ by a purely arbitrary borderline.
Such deficiency has no pathology in the
ordinary sense of the word, and the!subjects
thereof are represented by the extreme left of
a frequency distribution curve of intelligence
quotients. They are quite properly regarded
GENETICS OF AMENTIA

as the analogues of short individuals of say
5 feet, in a community of average height
5 feet 6 inches, in which a few members
attain heights of 6 feet. It is among this
group and not among the definite pathological types that hereditary influence is so
prominent.

This, the major portion of my address, I
shall wind up by asking you to glance at the
summary of conclusions as they appeared in
the original thesis. I advance them tentatively on the basis of the family histories I
collected, and their limitations will be
apparent from what I shall say in the course
of the next few minutes.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

1. Roughly 75 per cent. of defectives of all
grades come of stocks which exhibit
distinct mental abnormalities, of which
deficiency and gross dullness are the
commonest.

2. Of the remaining 25 per cent., a few are
attributable to environmental causes,
but most are without apparent cause.

3. Feeble-mindedness and dullness are
familiar to a much greater extent than
lower-grade deficiency.

4. The mating of two mentally defective
individuals yields offspring who are all
defective.

5. The mating of two individuals of ‘‘ poor
type ”’ yields offspring of “‘ poor type,”
who are often defectives in an educational and sometimes in a social sense.

6. ‘‘ Dull parents, dull children,” is a
usual association.

7, When a neuropathic stock exists the
chance presence of an adverse environment, using the term in its broadest
sense, may produce actual deficiency in
cases which might not have been
defective without the intervention of
such a factor.

TRANSMISSION OF SUBCULTURAL
AMENTIA

Before considering the question of the
control of deficiency let us take stock of our
knowledge of the genetics of subcultural

223

amentia—the group that to my mind constitutes the only problem of any real importance from a genetic point of view.

Weare at once confronted with the general
problem of the measurement of the degree to
which social conduct is genetically determined, and this in turn involves two issues.

1. The measurement of the ability to effect
social adaptation.

‘2. The estimation of the influence of
heredity and environment in determining the measured ability.

With regard to the first, let us admit quite
frankly that we have no method of estimating this ability. The I.Q. is a measure of one
aspect only. It is true that the expert can
form a very sound judgment about the
capacity of an individual by the use of
current performance tests, but like a personal judgment of intelligence it is not a
scientific datum. We must look to the
psychologist to invent tests which involve
affective mental content to a greater degree
than those in current use, and which correlate more highly with observed social
capacity. This is the first step.

The second problem, so far as I can see, is
by its nature incapable of solution. I cannot
go into my reasons for saying this without
introducing rather tedious mathematics, but
the crux of the matter is that a neutral
environment cannot be constructed in which
gene differences are real isolates.

Now suppose these two problems solved,
still a further trial awaits us—that of determining the mode of transmission of differences due to genetic constitution. Forget for
a moment that subcultural amentia is a
sociological rather than a clinical category,
that the frequencies of such aments occupy a
segment of the distribution curve of I.Q.s,
from which it follows that the notion of any
specific germinal determinant, Mendelian or
otherwise, must be excluded. I say forget
these difficulties, and ask how the mode of
transmission of differences due to genetic
constitution may be investigated. Experimental genetics is clearly out of the question,
and we must fall back on statistical methods
of which two are available.
224

1. The principle of inbreeding, which is
useless because the incidence of the
condition under consideration is too
great.

2. The principle of random mating, which
is likewise inapplicable for the following reasons: (a) Assortative mating is
the rule among feeble-minded and
borderline cases; (0b) The number of
substitutions is unknown; (c) 70
per cent. I.Q. does not delineate a
category.

I hope that I have made it abundantly
clear that there is little hope of establishing
the mode of transmission of ‘‘ simple primary
amentia ’’ in terms of Mendelian genetics. It
may be that you find it difficult to subscribe
to all these opinions, but I have at all events
convinced myself that there is no more room
for argument than in the case of a wellestablished proposition in mathematics. If,
therefore, you are seeking a strictly scientific
solution you are chasing a will-o’-the-wisp.

Happily the scientific solution is not essential for reasoned action, for there can be no
doubt in the minds of most people that
aments are undesirable parents either because of their genetic constitution, or because
of their incapacity to provide a suitable
environment for the proper development of
their offspring of whatever genetic constitution, normal or otherwise ; or for both these
reasons. It follows that unless the State contemplates the provision of a suitable environment for the offspring of aments, presumably by removing them from the care of their
parents and supporting them at the expense
of the community, whatever their mental
status, the computation of the relative influences of nature and nurture in the production of ‘‘ simple primary amentia ’’ is more
important in theory than in practice.

Although I shall suggest almost in the next
breath that I see no urgent need to institute
a radical control of the incidence of deficiency,
certain provisional measures might be instituted at once with good effect, but some of
you may think my provisional measures
rresponsibly radical.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

CONTROL OF DEFICIENCY

I suggest, in respect of all feeble-minded
persons in a social sense, the prevention of
their parenthood, and in respect of imbeciles
and idiots, their painless extermination as
they arise. There is little hope of preventing
the occurrence of more than a small proportion of lower grade defectives. For practical
purposes they do not propagate, for nature
has conditioned their sterility, and I contend
in favour of their extermination not because
they constitute a serious economic burden or
a potential danger to society, but on humanitarian grounds.

I venture to argue that it is unfair to the
defective himself to permit him to survive,
that it inflicts unnecessary pain and suffering on his parents, who, being almost always
of normal mentality and sensitivity, have
been dealt the hardest of all blows in the
birth to them of an idiot child. Against this
euthanasia, which would remove a class of
writhing, paralytic, vegetating masses which
outrage the self-respect of man, there is
nothing but irrational sentimentalism.

It would be presumptuous of me to discuss
eugenic policy here, for I could at most
repeat what has had its origin in this very
Society. I shall, however, ask your indulgence for a short time to enunciate a question
which demands an answer in precise terms if
negative eugenic policy is to be placed on a
generally acceptable footing.

It must be asked if the problem of deficiency is in any way so urgent that immediate radical action is indicated. An answer to
such a question must always be a matter of
personal judgment based on such evidence
as the incidence of defectives of the several
grades, their relative fertilities, the economic
capacity and needs of the community, the
probable future development of the community, the ideals of the community, and if
these clash, the extent of willingness to sacrifice one for the realization of another.

There can never be scientific opinion about
some of these matters for they involve values,
but the more clearly such questions are
enunciated, the more complete the data
relative thereto, the more likely is substantial
agreement to be reached.
GENETICS OF AMENTIA

I have already indicated that in my
personal view there is no great urgency, and
to suppose that there is, is to lose one’s
sense of proportion. In my submission any
urgency that exists is for investigation and
the concomitant enlightenment of the public.
In this connection I suggest the institution of
territorial surveys extending over at least
two generations, and I believe that to provide
the necessary body of evidence such measures must have the support and guidance of
the central government and embody a system
of state genetic records.

Not for a moment do I believe that such
measures would lead to the solution of the
theoretical difficulties I have mentioned, but
they would unquestionably provide a very
valuable body of knowledge. Eugenic measures, like other measures of preventive
medicine, can only be successful in so far as
they are in step with public opinion, but it is

225

my view that the general body of opinion
in these matters does not lag greatly in a
temporal sense behind the most enlightened
opinion of the day.

The mere fact that such bodies of advanced
thinkers as this and kindred societies
have crystallized out of the general social
milieu is sufficient to presage a broader
understanding amongst the general population, and with repetition and the use of penetrative methods even statesmen may be
stimulated to understanding and action. I
am not astonished that active measures of
positive and negative eugenics are at present
outside the scope of practical politics, but I
am appalled that the central government
has made no move to collect systematic
genetic records, which might, perhaps, assist
future generations to face problems that we,
in our lack of knowledge, bequeath to them
in a confusion of conflicting sentiments.

\ eee SO Oa”

JOURNAL OF COMPARATIVE LEGISLATION
AND INTERNATIONAL LAW

THIRD SERIES.

1. ARTICLES—

Vout. XVII. Part I.

FEBRUARY 1935

CONTENTS:

The Administration of Justice in East Africa. By Sir Alison Russell.
The Constitutional Capacity of Canada to give effect to International Labour Conventions. II. By

C. Wilfred Jenks.

Broadcasting and Comparative Law. By B. A. Wortley, LL.M.

Bynkershoek’s Observationes Tumultuariae. By Professor R. W. Lee, D.C.L.

The Law relating to Devaluation of Currency. By Dr. jur. Rudolf Gottschalk.

Measure of Damages in the French Law on Contract. By Professor René David.

New Regulations in the German Code of Civil Procedure. By Dr. Ernst J. Cohn.

Mens Rea in German and English Criminal Law. I. By Professor Hermann Mannheim.
Salvage and Collisions of Aircraft—Draft Conventions.

Notes on Imperial Constitutional Law. By Professor A. Berriedale Keith, D.C.L.

2. NOTES.

3. NOTICES OF BOOKS.

Annual Subscription, One Guinea.

SOCIETY OF COMPARATIVE LEGISLATION, 1 Elm Court, Temple, E.C.4.

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVI, No. 3.
