SPEECHES AT THE GALTON DINNER

, ‘HERE was an exceptionally large
, attendance of Fellows, Members and

guests at the Galton Dinner which
was held at the Waldorf Hotel on Monday,
February 17th, with Lord Horder, President
of the Eugenics Society, in the chair. Among
the guests of the Society were Sir Laurence
Brock, Col. Sir Charles and Lady Close, Sir
Daniel and Lady Hall, Sir Richard and Lady
Gregory, Mr. and Mrs. Aldous Huxley, Sir
Walter Langdon-Brown, Dr. Maurice Shaw
and Miss Ellen Wilkinson.

Introducing the Galton Lecturer, Dr.
Julian S. Huxley (whose paper entitled
‘Eugenics and the Social Environment” is
published on page 11), Lord Horder said :

The Galton Lecture was founded to commemorate the father of Eugenics, the distinguished Englishman whose vision and
whose work led to the activities in which our
Society is engaged. Its existence is almost
contemporaneous with the Eugenics Society.
Men of varied outlook have been honoured
by the invitation to deliver this lecture:
lawyers, priests, doctors, sociologists and
scientists. This evening we welcome one of
the last-mentioned, a man who has added
additional lustre to a name that stands
amongst the very highest in British science,
and whose versatility lends an additional
glamour to the name of Huxley. Our Galton
Lecturer for this year possesses not only a
genius for observation and for research—the
two desiderata of all true scientists—he also
possesses that other and even rarer quality
of being an interpreter of science.

Incidentally we have amongst our guests
this evening another grandson of the great
biologist, Mr. Aldous Huxley, and the exceptional mental equipment of these two
brothers is a demonstration of the way in
which genetics behave at their happiest
and best.

In an illuminating autobiography which
Thomas Henry Huxley left behind him, and
which is such a model of brevity, we learn
what were the objects which this great man
had in view during his long and useful life.

Cc

33

They were ‘To promote the increase of
natural knowledge and to forward the application of scientific methods of investigation
to all the problems of life to the best of my
ability ; in the conviction which has grown
with my growth and strengthened with my
strength, that there is no alleviation for the
sufferings of mankind except veracity of
thought and of action, and the resolute
facing of the world as it is, when the garment
of make-believe by which pious hands have
hidden its uglier features is stripped off.’

Dr. Huxley may be too modest to say so,
but there are ample proofs that his aims and
purpose in life are much the same as these.
Our Society is fortunate in securing him as its
Galton Lecturer for 1936.

Col. Sir Charles Close, President of the
International Union for the Scientific Investigation of Population Problems, proposed the vote of thanks to the lecturer.

It is my privilege, he said, to propose a
vote of thanks to Dr. Huxley for having
given us such an important and stimulating
address on a subject of the greatest interest
to all of us. Dr. Huxley has given us much
food for thought, and we shall find his remarks well worth studying quietly when they
are published. We cannot digest all of them
at the present time; to attempt to do so
might bring us to the condition of that unfortunate fly of which he has spoken, the fly
that suffered from a swollen abdomen. But,
speaking seriously, he has put before us
many important facts connected with the
social environment which deserve our most
careful consideration.

Our lecturer mentioned briefly the present
state of affairs in Germany. Several of us
connected with the Eugenics Society attended
the Population Congress, which was held in
Berlin in August last, and among those who
attended this Congress were Mrs. Hodson,
Mr. Glass and myself. Present-day Germany
must be regarded as a vast laboratory which
is the scene of a gigantic eugenics experiment.
It would be quite wrong and quite unscientific to decry everything which is now
34

going on in that country. There is, as a fact,
much being carried out in Germany which
deserves our approbation. The authorities
there are in the position of being able to
carry out the advice of their scientific
advisers. If Dr. Frick, the Minister of the
Interior, with the approval of the Head of
the State, desires to enforce certain social
legislation, he has only to issue the order and
the thing is done. How different from us!
Why, some of us are not even dictators in
our own houses! In Germany the most
advanced eugenic legislation is carried
through without difficulty.

In his opening address to the Congress,
Dr. Frick told us what were his main objectives. These are, first, the increase of the
birth-rate ; he is afraid that unless special
measures are taken the population of Germany will shortly decline. His next point
was that it is most desirable to. get as many
people as possible on to the land. And his
next, that it is desirable to eliminate the
definitely unhealthy stocks, as far as this
can be done by legislation. And his last
point was that it is important to unify the
German people. This latter objective is
being attempted by industrial legislation,
and also by the institution of the labour
service in which the young men of the
country must work for a period, all working
together on useful, interesting and necessary
manual employment. Well, there is not much
in all this to find fault with. Of course, as we
all know, there are some aspects of government action in that country which we cannot approve of ; but it would be unfair and
unwise to shut our eyes to so much that is
being attempted that is quite in line with our
own aims.

I feel that I owe Dr. Huxley a private vote
of thanks for that admirable and interesting
book which he has recently written, with
Professors Haddon and Carr-Saunders, entitled “‘ We Europeans.’”’ At home we tried
the experiment of guessing the nationality of
the individuals whose photographs appear
as the frontispiece. Quite independently, my
wife, my daughter and I spotted one correctly
each, out of the total of sixteen, and, curiously enough, it was the same individual—

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the Spaniard. It occurs to me, in this connection, that it might be fairer to use, as a
test, composite photographs, such as Galton
invented so many years ago. Why should
we not have a composite photograph of the
Council of the Eugenics Society? We might
use it as the type of British face, and, no
doubt, it would be very beautiful.

Well, I will end as I began, and propose a
hearty vote of thanks to Dr. Huxley for the
very important Galton Lecture to which we
have just listened.

Mr. Aldous Huxley: When I was asked to
second the vote of thanks to this year’s
Galton Lecturer, my first impulse, I must
confess, was to say no. For suppose, I said
to myself, suppose the lecture is a good one—
and incidentally it probably will be pretty
good. What then? IfI praise it, I shall seem,
as the lecturer’s brother, to be blowing a
trumpet that is vicariously my trumpet.
Whereas if the lecture turns out to be bad,
I shall feel inclined to follow a fine old
fraternal tradition and say, Am I my
brother’s keeper ?

My first impulse, then, was to refuse the
invitation. But on second and maturer
thoughts I changed my mind. For after all,
I went on to reflect, it is possible to be objective even about one’s relations. One can
think about them ina detached and scientific
way—even at a dinner party of eugenists.
The Galton Lecturer is my brother. But that
is neither his fault, nor mine. And, brother
or no brother, the fact remains that he is
worth talking about. For—let me try to be
as completely detached as possible—he is an
interesting, significant and also encouraging
phenomenon. He is interesting, because he
is uncommon, significant because he is
timely, and encouraging because, let us hope,
he is symptomatic, a portent of muchneeded change. Our lecturer is that rare
specimen, a man of science who tries to be
scientific all the time and not merely when
he is busy with an experiment. In an age of
excessive specialization, he has insisted on
taking an interest in many things. His range
extends from the problems of growth to
those of colonial administration, from the
behaviour of birds to industrial planning,
SPEECHES AT THE GALTON DINNER . 35

from crustacea to religion, from pure zoology
to that tabooed subject, which the orthodox
regard as the scientific equivalent of pornography—psychical research.

Science, for only too many of its practitioners, is merely the intensive analysis of a
tiny section of reality; and they feel that
their whole duty as men of science has been
performed if they succeed in carrying that
analysis a single step further. Our lecturer
is of another opinion. He thinks that it is
the duty of a scientist to be more than the
minute investigator of a single small province of fact. The laboratory, in too many
cases, 1s merely the modern equivalent of the
cloister—a place to which people, for whom
the problems of real life are too difficult,
retire for peace and safety. Our lecturer
. preserves the more humanistic attitude to
science, which characterized the workers of
an older day. He thinks that a scientist
should be, not only a specialized researcher,

but also a natural philosopher; that he
should take an interest in and responsibility
for the world outside his laboratory.

The ills from which we suffer at present
are of many kinds ; but a large proportion
of them are traceable to the one-sided
development of science and the fatal indifference to human needs of scientists and
technologists. The Sabbath was made for
man, not man for the Sabbath. The same is
true of science. But men of science have
ignored this truth. Most pure scientists have
simply failed to think about the problem at
all and have left the technologists to exploit
their discoveries, not for the benefit of human
beings in general, but for that of shareholders. Our lecturer is a scientist who insists
that science and technology are made for

-man, not man for science and technology.

That is why he is a phenomenon, not only
interesting and significant, but also profoundly encouraging.

SCIENTIFIC BOOKS

Current and Standard ENGLISH, FRENCH and GERMAN Literature
in MEDICAL, CHEMICAL, BIOLOGICAL and PHYSICAL SCIEN CE
supplied from stock, or obtained promptly to order.

A visit to this Department is respectfully suggested.
Please write for CATALOGUES, mentioning interests.

H. K. LEWIS & Co. Ltd.,

 

136 GOWER STREET
LONDON W.C.1

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVIII, No. 1.
