EUGENIC PROBLEMS NEEDING RESEARCH
By C. P. BLACKER, MD., F.R.c.P.

I

UR Treasurer is a man who imparts
to all the organizations which he
supports a healthy stimulus. Readers
of the REVIEW who have not skipped his
page in the last three issues will have
realized that he has big ambitions for the
Society. He strongly believes in the importance of eugenics and wants the Soctety
to play a part commensurate with this importance. In particular, he believes in the
urgent need and limitless possibilities of
research. He would like to see the Society’s
financial resources quadrupled in order that
we might promote and supervise much more
research than we can cover at present.
One of his many functions as Treasurer
is to raise money ; hence it is natural that
he should want to know for what purpose
money is to be raised. ‘‘ If you had £20,000
a year for research,” he recently wrote to
me, ‘what would you spend it on?” I
asked for time before giving an answer, and
the problem has been much in my mind
during the last three months. The more I
thought about it, the bigger and more important I recognized it to be. Finally I came
to the conclusion that the question was of
such magnitude that I could not myself
undertake the sole responsibility for drawing
up a programme of research which, though
intended mainly to express my own views
and not in any way to commit the Council,
might be publicly represented as among the
objectives of the Society. I therefore asked
for and received help from several members
of the Council. In preparing Part IT of this
article, I have been much assisted by valuable suggestions from Mr. B. S. Bramwell,
Dr. Fraser Roberts, Dr. Julian Huxley and
Dr. Thornton; but for the opinions expressed in Part III, I am solely responsible.

II
The Society's statement of its aims and

objects is divided into two headings:
research and propaganda. The paragraph
dealing with research opens with the words :
“The Society encourages the study of all
aspects of human heredity and differential
fertility.” There follows a list of subjects
which we regard as specially in need of
further investigation. Through its Darwin
Research Studentships and by means of
other grants the Soctety has already promoted and subsidized several of these items,
particulars of which will be found in the last
Annual Report. These need not be recapitulated.

“All aspects of human heredity and
differential fertility.’”” The subject is so
immense that it is impossible to assign
limits to it. How can the numerous and
varied problems here raised be best formulated ? SO

Research on a given subject proceeds in
two distinct stages. In the first we must define what we want to find out ; in the second
we must devise a concrete scheme of how we
are going to find it out. In the first stage
we state the problem about which we
require further information ; in the second,
we make detailed plans as to how many
research workers are needed, exactly what
each of them is to do, where they are to
work, and how much their work will
cost. As concerns the need for eugenic
research, we cannot at present go beyond
the first stage of formulating general problems. It would be a waste of time to try to
plan out detailed methods of how each item
of research should be carried out and how
much money should be spent on each. The
reason for this is that the detailed features of
every scientific problem change from year to
year. Hence I regretfully find myself unable
to comply with the Treasurer’s request for a
detailed list of specific subjects needing
research, with estimates of the cost appended
to each item, which would add up to £20,000.

Though the methods employed in scientific

181 _
182

investigation remain but little changed,
the exact scope of any given scientific
inquiry, whether upon eugenics or any other
subject, must be determined in the light of
work which has already been done and of
the researches which are being carried out
by other people at the precise time that the
inquiry is planned. These circumstances
change quickly. A detailed scheme drawn
up to-day might be wholly inappropniate
in a year’s time by reason of work undertaken
by other investigators during the year.
Overlapping and duplication of research
must be avoided and collaboration must be
established with other workers. The practical details of how each investigation is to be
carried out must therefore be left to experts,
i.e. to persons with special knowledge of
what is being done at the time in question,
and by whom.

In a sentence, the aim of eugenics is to
promote the fertility of people with socially
valuable inborn qualities and to discourage
that of persons with the opposite qualities.
But tremendous questions are raised by this
simple statement. Here are some of them:
What are the socially valuable qualities
which we wish to propagate? How are
they to be estimated and measured? To
what extent are they hereditary or inborn ?
How far can such inborn qualities remain
latent and, as it were, masked by an unfavourable environment ?

Genealogical research may throw light on
some of these questions. Although in each
case we are arguing from the particular to
the general, we are nevertheless dealing with
definite facts.

Take the case of a certain man who died in
1792. His descendants in the last twenty years
have held the following appointments among
others: Chief of the Imperial General Staff,
First Lord of the Admiralty, Ambassador in
Washington, President of the Chamber of
Shipping, President of Royal Society of Watercolour Painters, Chairman of South Wales Coal
Owners’ Association, Principal Woman Factory
Inspector, Master of Caius, Fellow and Tutor
of Balliol, Fellow of Trinity, Cambridge, M.P.
for the City of London, etc. On the physical
side there have been two rugby internationals,
two trial caps and other athletic distinctions.
Fifteen were killed in the war, 1914-18. Many

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of the women have been noteworthy and many
have been able both to pursue a career and
raise a family.*

This connection shows valuable social
qualities which are reflected in the extraordinary list of honours conferred upon,
and distinctions achieved by, its members.
The change of environment which unmasked
these qualities was a migration from a place
providing little opportunity but where,
nevertheless, the ancestors had risen to the
highest posts available in a very limited
sphere ; another factor was the opportunity
presented by the war. Much money might
be profitably spent in employing genealogists
to trace out the complete list of descendants
of other noteworthy men who are known to
have several descendants of eminence.

But connections like the above, which include many distinguished persons of high
endowment, do not, in all probability, constitute more than Io per cent. of the population.
The families they comprise, being unmistakably above the average, are fairly easily
recognizable, as are the 10 per cent. of
families least endowed with socially useful
qualities. What of the intermediate 80 per
cent. ? How are we to evaluate the power of
environmental processes to modify or override their innate genetic characters ? What
social changes would be desirable in order
to disclose the good qualities here latent,
to bring them uniformly to ight throughout
the whole community, and enable us to
recognize and deal with them appropriately ?
To what extent are they possessed by persons
falling in different grades, occupations and
professions? To what extent do they manifest themselves in urban and rural populations, and what is the effect of migration
from the country to towns ? What influences
lead people to become grouped in different
professions and classes ?

Other problems are raised. How far are
the different social grades and classes now
reproducing themselves? What are the
influences which lead people in_ these
different grades to breed at different rates

 

* A further account of this family will be published
in our next issue.
EUGENIC PROBLEMS NEEDING RESEARCH

—in a word, what are the causes of differential fertility? To what extent are the
existing differential fertility rates good or
bad from the standpoint of the race? If
they are bad, what steps should we take to
change them? How precisely are human
inborn qualities inherited ? And how far do
they conform to the recognized laws of
heredity? In so far as human characteristics are inborn and also measurable,
what steps should be taken to have them
measured and recorded ? What is the effect
of different kinds of matings, such as consanguineous matings and _ race-crossings ?
In the light of the answer to the last question, what migration policies should be encouraged ? (This matter will come to the fore
if a marked quantitative decrease takes
place in our population.) What kinds of
people (if any) should we encourage to leave
the country to go to different parts of the
empire or elsewhere ? What kinds of people
should we encourage to enter and stay in
the country ?

These questions are all touched upon in
that part of the Soczety’s statement of aims
and objects which deals with research. Is
it possible to give them further precision ?
I think it is and will make an attempt,
starting with the problems of differential
fertility.

What, in the first place, are the facts? Of
these we are, so far as this country is concerned, sadly ignorant ; but the innovations
which the Minister of Health has promised
to introduce into the system of registration
will be of great help. A private society with
limited funds can do little to throw light on
this immense problem. The census and
registration machinery must be invoked and
adapted to the purpose. But limited inquiries might well be promoted into the
fertility of certain definite grades of persons
characterized by the possession of socially
valuable or socially burdensome qualities.
Dr. Newth has shown that in Nottingham,
feeble-minded children belong on average to
larger sibships than normal school-children.*
What about scholarship children? These

* A Social Problem Group, London, 1937, p. 31.

183

are distinguished by an intelligence above
the mean. How does the fertility of the
families from which they come compare
with that of the families of average and subnormal children? A good deal of work of
this kind has been done both on feebleminded and scholarship children ; but much
remains to be learnt, and fertility rates are
changing. The organization of similar inquiries, by which we could estimate the
fertility of stocks showing different kinds of
aptitude or talent, would be relatively
simple, and much could be done by arousing
the interest of the teaching profession.

Turning now from the facts about differential fertility to its causes, it can be said
that, disregarding for the moment the
problem of illegitimacy, which in this
country is statistically small, the fertility
of a given community or section of a community depends upon two separate factors :
the amount of marriage, and the fertility
within marriage.

The first factor, the amount of marriage,
or nuptiality, is known to vary within wide
limits in different countries. Does it vary
in the different occupations and grades withinacountry ? To what extent are restrictions
placed on marriage in different occupations ?
Actual prohibitions are sometimes in force,
as for example among women school teachers.
In what occupations do restrictions operate
so as to hinder marriage? This is by no
means accurately known.

The second factor—fertility within marriage—is influenced by a host of considerations, among others, the age of marriage.
The restrictions on marriage above referred
to have a bearing here ; so has the remuneration provided in different occupations as age
advances, for instance the increase of pay
which goes with seniority of rank in the
fighting services. Our knowledge of the
operation of this age-scale of remuneration’
is as yet unorganized.

Apart from factors affecting the age of
marriage, fertility is influenced by another
definite event, namely the incidence of
physiological sterility. How prevalent is
this? Is it increasing or decreasing in the
community as a whole ? Is it more prevalent
184

in certain social grades than in others ? How
far is it caused by dietetic factors? Are
the recognized sterilizing diseases (venereal
diseases, etc., the list is a long one) increasing
in incidence ? Is so-called idiopathic sterility
—i.e. physiological sterility unconnected with
any recognizable disease or abnormality—
increasing? And how far, if at all, is it hereditary? We know little about these problems.

Then we come to the multitudinous
medical, socio-economic and psychological
deterrents from parenthood which operate
among fertile people after marriage. A brief
outline of this immense field of problems has
been given in a pamphlet, The Future of our
Population, published by the Population
Investigation Committee. It need not here
be repeated. Among which sections of the
community are these deterrents operative
or inoperative ? A very extensive inquiry is
here called for into many important social
problems such as housing, taxation, and the
cost of education. What steps can we take
to minimize or remove these deterrents if
we think that their influence is dysgenic ?
Here we enter the field of social legislation.
Remedies of all kinds have been proposed
ranging from the provision of family allowances to the abolition of the capitalist
organization of society.

The problems of differential fertility above
outlined are now engaging the attention of
the Population Investigation Committee.

In the event of our concluding that the
high fertility of a given social element was
dysgenic, what steps should we take to
reduce it? This is the province of negative
eugenics. The Soczety desires to see legalized
voluntary sterilization and _ termination
of pregnancy for persons suffering from or
carrying serious transmissible infirmities.
It has supported research with a view to
discovering ‘more practicable methods of
contraception and sterilization than now
exist and it has interested itself in the characteristics and delimitations of the so-called
social problem group. But knowledge of the
hereditary transmission of such dysgenic
conditions as insanity, mental defect, epilepsy, criminality and sub-normal intelligence could be immensely increased.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

The Brock Committee was concerned with
the negative aspect of eugenics. In chapter
7 of its report it enumerated, under the
following headings, nine items of research
which it regarded as urgently needed :

~~
re
—

Effect of vasectomy on development.
Influence of consanguinity.

) Investigation of twins.

) Classification of mental defect.

) Nature of defective inheritance.
)

)

N
~——

Causes of mental disorders.

Influence of intra-uterine conditions.
) Study of germ mutation.
Sociological research (particularly into
the social problem group).

©
em

These subjects vary much in scope. The
inquiry on the effects of vasectomy on development would be limited and could probably be settled with an approach to finality
by a series of carefully planned animal
experiments. The nature of defective inheritance and the problem of how far mental
disorders are genetically determined are
huge subjects upon which very considerable
sums of money must sooner or later be
spent. Some of the researches are already
being promoted, for instance, that into consanguinity by the Medical Research Council ;
but the Soczety could give a most valuable
impetus in all the nine fields by appropriately
placed grants.

Further items of importance to eugenics
could be added to the list, such as the inheritance of physical diseases and abnormalities.
More detailed knowledge of the genetic
mechanisms by which these are inherited
might enable us to remove serious but
groundless misgivings entertained by people
of otherwise good stock whose fertility is
socially desirable. But, as already pointed
out, the Society encourages the study of all
aspects of human heredity. The basis
of our present knowledge of human heredity
was laid by experiments on peas. It has been
widened by the study of fruit flies and many
other animals. Genetic studies of all kinds,
whether of plants or animals, have a possible
bearing on our knowledge of human heredity.

It is common knowledge that discoveries
of the highest importance to human beings
EUGENIC PROBLEMS

are sometimes made unexpectedly in spheres
of inquiry remote from the direct interests
of man. In the field of genetics such discoveries have been made in the past, and will
probably be made in the future. If sufficient
funds were available, the Soczety could make
grants towards research into various aspects
of animal and plant genetics. Indeed, the
Brock Committee, under heading 8 above
quoted, recommended the study of germ
mutations. ‘‘ Genetic research in Great
Britain,’ it said, ‘‘ in so far as it has received
public support, has been largely devoted to
practical agricultural problems. The need
we stress is for at least one institution
devoted to research in the fundamental
problems of inheritance in the widest sense.”
The investigation of blood-groups holds great
promise ; further theoretical and experimental work on the efficacy of selection is
needed ; and in the field of cytology much
can still be done. The Soczety is well served
by people thoroughly conversant with these
subjects. Through them, if funds were available, it would promote and inspire valuable
work which otherwise might not be undertaken.

Turning now to the question of mating,
this will be seen to include not only the
problem of consanguinity or the crossing of
closely related types, but also the thorny
subject of the crossing of distantly related
racial types. This has become a political
issue in one European country, and it is of
the first importance in those parts of the
Empire where mixed populations live close
to one another. It is also of great importance
in the formulation of immigration policies.
The Society has allotted a Darwin Research
Studentship to the subject; but it is open
to intensive and direct investigation in the
Dominions and Crown Colonies, where it is
desirable that scientific interest be focused
upon it. A stimulus in this direction could
be provided by a few well-placed grants to
genetical or anthropological societies or other
scientific bodies in the Dominions or Colonies.

Among the problems of mating I would
also include eutelegenesis or the application
of artificial insemination to man. The Society
has not yet defined its attitude to this

NEEDING RESEARCH 185
subject, which is not mentioned in our statement of aims and objects. But the Society
has given full opportunities to Mr. Herbert
Brewer to describe and develop his ideas.
Eutelegenesis raises acute ethical problems
and the subject is very new ; its implications
are so great that it surely merits further
research. A small beginning might be made
by trying to ascertain through adoption
societies how many children are adopted
because of physical sterility on the part of
the husband, or reluctance on the part of
the husband to have children for eugenic or
other reasons. The mother might well prefer
to have a child herself by a father possessing
characteristics which she admires than to
adopt a child of relatively unknown genetic
quality, born to strangers. The identity of
the eutelegenetic father would be concealed,
but the organization providing the facilities
would hold itself responsible for making a good
selection, and in accordance with the mother’s
desires as to the type of father. At present
we do not how many couples adopt children
because of the sterility of the father or
because of the reluctance of the father to
have children of his own for genetic reasons.
In the matter of the technique of insemination and the preservation of sperm knowledge
has increased in recent years; but further
advances are clearly possible.

Let us, then, suppose that our Treasurer’s
most sanguine hopes were realized and that
the Society became possessed of an income of
between ten and twenty thousand pounds a
year. How would this money be spent on
research ? Three courses might be adopted.
We might, in the first place, repeat the procedure followed in the awarding of the first
Darwin Research Fellowship. That is to
say, the Soctety might, through its Executive
Committee or a committee set up specially
for the purpose, prepare a comprehensive
list of subjects of eugenic interest and invite
applications from research workers, the
award being made to the candidate with the
best programme and qualifications. Secondly
the Society might name a subject which would
be unlikely to attract research workers
unless some specific stimulus, such as a
research studentship or special grant, were
186

provided. This course was taken with the
second studentship. Or lastly, the Soczety
might decide that a given piece of research
which it wished to promote could be better
organized and supervised by some society
or organization other than itself. To such
an organization a grant might be offered,
provided that satisfactory guarantees were
forthcoming that the desired work would be
properly planned and executed. The Soctety
has on its Consultative Council and among
its Fellows and Members a distinguished
body of scientific men, and its constitution
is now sufficiently elastic to enable it to add
to the list by co-optations to the working
Council and by further appointments to the
Consultative Council. Money placed at the
Soctety’s disposal through donations and
legacies would be spent with all the caution
and discretion that the occasion demanded.

III

A final word about how a Society like ours
is to appraise its activities. It is very difficult to know by which of many criteria we
are to estimate success. We might, in the
first place, aim to increase our membership
and to appear as prominently as possible
before the public. An augmentation of our
roll of Members, an increase in the popularity
of our meetings, more references in the press
to the subject of eugenics, a rise in the sales
of our literature—all these events would be
very welcome. They would be the outward
and visible signs of success. But it is possible
to imagine all these agreeable things happening without any progress being made towards
the achievement of what we may call our
veal aims—namely the promotion of eugenic,
and the discouragement of dysgenic, births.

How many eugenic births have been promoted and how many dysgenic births prevented through the direct agency of this
Society since it was started twenty-five years
ago? I have not the least idea. But of this
I am certain ; that with nothing more solid
behind us than a skilful and stentorian
publicity, the Soczety could have been ten
times its present size and have achieved much
less.

Then, again, a society can be small,

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

unobtrusive and, to the general public, little
known; yet it can enjoy a high prestige
among people closely conversant with its
activities, and it can exert a much wider
influence than might an egregiously pressnoticed organization with similar aims.

Then, again, results of a substantial and
lasting character can follow from a single
achievement that takes place in a culminating of time. The movement for votes for
women, though it was accorded immense
publicity and gained many adherents, did
not obtain a single vote for any woman until
the red-letter day when the enactment passed
into law; but the effects of this event were
lasting and have changed the face of politics.
The same might be said of the Soczety’s
campaign for sterilization. How many
dysgenic people have, up to now, been sterilized as a result of the Soczety’s activities ?
I do not know. Possibly few. But our past
efforts will be justified on the day when
voluntary sterilization passes into law ; they
will be still further justified if the law works
successfully and provides definite eugenic
results.

For these reasons I do not much reproach
myself that our membership has increased
but slowly. I believe that, largely through
our activities, a eugenic conscience, stronger
and more discriminating than ever before,
exists in the country to-day. I believe, moreover, that our essential propaganda will be
readily done for us by others if we can establish our contentions on scientifically solid
grounds. Indeed, I doubt very much
whether the “ outward and visible ’’ success
of the Society will ever be commensurate
with its veal success. I would even go farther
than this. Real eugenic results—the favourable influencing of the trend of births and the
appropriate guidance of legislation—will not,
I believe, be mainly attained through the
publicly recognized agency of the Soctety ;
they will rather be achieved by other societies
and organizations which our Soctety can
in fluence.

A large part of the task of negative
eugenics will doubtless be fulfilled through
the agency of birth-control organizations.
These in recent years we have helped in the
EUGENIC PROBLEMS

matter of research ; we may also have succeeded in giving to their activities a eugenic
orientation. Most of the programme of social
research described in this article has been
taken over bodily and in its entirety by the
Population Investigation Committee — an
organization which was called together and
at first financed by the Sociefy but which is
in no way subordinate to us. The Soctety’s
declared policy as to sterilization, as set
forth in our now out-of-date buff pamphlet,
was very closely reproduced in the report
of the Brock Committee. But the task of
implementing this Committee’s recommendations is not now in the Society’s hands ; it is
in the hands of the Joint Committee for
Voluntary Sterilization, which we largely
subsidize and house, but which, like the
Population Investigation Committee, is in
no way subordinate to our Council.

For the communication to those who, on
eugenic and personal grounds most need it,
of a workable contraceptive method ; for
the collection of data at present non-existent
on differential fertility ; for the legalizing
of voluntary sterilization, the Society does
not want, and will not get, the credit. For
our purposes it is enough that the desired
results are achieved. If, by well-planned and
carefully executed research, we can purge
our principles of prejudice and establish them
upon an objective basis of scientific fact, the
necessary propaganda will be carried out
willingly enough by others. The Soczety’s
influence will be unobtrusively exerted
through its members who have made themselves experts and whose guidance will,
accordingly, be sought.

NEEDING RESEARCH 187

Our President, Lord Horder, has said that
the real abilities of a medical man are often
in inverse proportion to the frequency with
which his name appears in the press—a
modest statement from one who, despite
himself, is kept so much before the public
eye. I believe that the same thing holds of
the intrinsic value of societies, particularly
of those with scientific aims. The avidity of
the press for copy relating to sex problems,
and the unavoidable concern of the Soctety
with these problems, have given me good
opportunities for getting myself publicized ;
but I have avoided these opportunities and
my name has appeared very rarely in the
columns of the popular press. For this, I
have been criticized by those who regard
propaganda as our main function. Inevitably
there will be differences of opinion as to how
much energy we should devote, and how
much money we should spend, on the two
functions of research and propaganda respectively. I am in a better position than anybody to appreciate the excellent work done
by Miss Pocock, the Soczety’s Propaganda
Secretary, through her lectures, exhibits and
propaganda literature and through the film
which she was largely instrumental in planning. Indeed, I regard her work as an
essential feature of the Society’s activities,
and I believe that, if our contentions are
substantiated by properly grounded research, no one would be more pleased than
she. Hence, our Treasurer’s ambition that
the Eugenics Society should be enabled to
inspire and promote much more research
than is now possible is very welcome to me.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIX, No. 3.
