PROFESSOR SIR CYRIL BURT
D.Sc., D.Litt., LL.D

Gifted Children

THE LATEST REPORT OF THE TERMAN STUDIES *;

HE LATEST INFORMATION about the
progress of the gifted children selected by
Professor Terman for a follow-up study

forty years ago is contained in this highly interesting report, planned and partly written by
Professor Terman himself just before his death.
Mrs. Oden, who has been responsible for completing the unfinished chapters, was one of his
former students, and worked with him on the
project from 1927 onwards. The book is the
fourth in the series dealing with the group. It
makes a somewhat slimmer volume than its
predecessors, and for a complete appreciation of
the results that it records, it must be read in the
light of the details given in the earlier accounts.
In the first volume of the series, Mental and
Physical Traits of 1,000 Gifted Children (1925), a
gifted child was defined as one who is “‘well
within the brightest 1 per cent of the school
population,” or in more precise terms ‘‘a child
with an I.Q. of 140 or above.” In the hope of
getting something like a thousand cases the
schools of the five largest cities in California were
systematically screened with the aid of the
teachers. The pupils which they put forward were
progressively examined first with a group test,
then with an abridgement of the Stanford-Binet
scale, and finally with the full Stanford-Binet.
The result was 661 gifted boys and girls between
the ages of seven and seventeen. These formed
the “main experimental batch.” In addition a
number of supplementary groups were subsequently included, “located by less systematic
procedures” (Binet or group tests); many were
discovered by volunteer testers working in the

* Terman, L. M. and Oden, M. H. The Gifted Group at
Mid-Life: Thirty-five years follow-up of the superior child.
Stanford, Cal., 1959. Stanford University Press. (London,
Oxford University Press.) Pp. xvi + 187. Price 36s. Genetic
Studies of Genius, Volume V.

17

smaller urban communities. In all, the final
number of subjects amounted to 1,528.

Six years later (1927-8), when the group had
reached an average age of about seventeen, the
first follow-up survey was carried out and published under the title The Promise of Youth.t A
second survey was undertaken in 1939-40, when
the subjects had attained an average age of about
thirty and had presumably settled down into
adult life: these further results were summarized
in the volumeentitled The Gifted Child Grows Up,t
perhaps the best known of the whole series. The
present survey is based mainly on data collected
by means of tests, questionnaires, and interviews
by field workers, and general correspondence between the years 1950 and 1955. Ninety-three per
cent of those who survived out of the initial
survey are still co-operating. As a longitudinal
study the whole series of researches is unique. It
not only extends over a far longer period than
any other similar inquiry, but covers a far wider
range of problems: and indeed has already
largely revolutionized the general view about the
nature and subsequent history of the gifted
individual.

It has long been the popular belief that, as the
youthful prodigy grows older, he will as a rule
either revert to the general average, or, particularly if pressed during early years, decline
and sicken and end with a premature
decease. “‘Early ripe, early rot” is the proverb
commonly quoted. The outcome of Professor
Terman’s surveys is to demonstrate that the
exact opposite is true. ‘““With few exceptions the
superior child becomes the superior adult,

¢ 1930. Stanford University Press. Volume III.

t 1947. Volume IV. (Volume ITI of the series, The Early
Mental Traits of Three Hundred Geniuses, was not concerned with this survey.)

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, April 1961, 53, 1.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

superior in nearly every respect to the generality,
though, as in childhood, the degree of the
superiority differs in different areas.”

Throughout the thirty-five years covered by
the case-records the general health of the gifted
group remained superior to that of the average
population; and their liability to specific defects
or ailments proves to be far slighter. When fully
grown the males were three inches taller than the
general average, and two inches taller than
the average college student. With the females the
differences were similar but smaller. The overall
mortality was only 84 per cent of that reported
for the general population of California. The
relative degree of nervous and emotional
stability and of general social adjustment proved
harder to evaluate, partly owing to the lack of
comparable data for the normal population.
Judged by the incidence of delinquency, alcoholism, suicide, homosexuality, neurotic and
psychotic breakdown, together with reports
from the subjects themselves and their acquaintances, the frequency of nervous or mental disabilities was certainly no greater than the
average, and probably, when due allowance is
made for the greater thoroughness with which
the information was collected, decidedly less.

The question which naturally interests us most,
however, is to what extent is the promise of childhood fulfilled by the achievements of later life?
As a general rule, it would seem, the intelligent
child develops into the intelligent adult. As we
might expect from the mode of selection, “‘the
superiority of the gifted group is greatest in
intellectual ability, scholastic accomplishment,
and vocational success.” Tests applied in 1927,
1939, and 1950-52 show that at every stage their
mental superiority is astonishingly wellsustained.
“The majority of the subjects remained close to
the 99th percentile of the generality; and this was
true even of those whose careers were not
particularly notable.” Indeed, judged by the test
mainly employed in the follow-up surveys (a test
of “concept mastery’’) ‘‘not only do the mentally
superior hold their own, they actually increase in
intellectual stature.”

The educational record of the group is exceptionally good. Over 85 per cent entered college,
and nearly 70 per cent graduated, usually a year
or two earlier than the average college student.

18

This proportion is ten times as high as that which
would hold for a random group of the same age.
14 per cent of the men, 4 per cent of the women
obtained a doctorate, whereas the figure for
college graduates generally is only 3 per cent.
And academic honours were three times as
numerous as among an ordinary batch of excollege students.

The vocational record is similar. In most of the
follow-up surveys the occupational classification
adopted was the so-called Minnesota scale. Of
the gifted men 86 per cent now have posts in one
or other of the two highest categories, viz.
““professional’’ (chiefly lawyers or judges, members of college faculties, scientists or engineers,
physicians, school administrators or teachers—
in that order) or “semi-professional’’ (chiefly
executives or managers in business, industry or
banking, accountants, sales managers, and the
like). From the earlier volumes we learn that
only 62 per cent of their parents were in this
category, and that the proportion for all males in
California would be just under 14 per cent. None
of the gifted individuals are in the lowest occupational categories, though these categories account
for about 13 per cent of the general urban population. The income ranged from $4,000 to
$400,000 a year, with a median of just under
$10,000. 10 per cent are earning $25,000; and in
every occupational category the earnings of the
gifted men were well above the median for that
category as given in the Statistical Abstract of the
United States. The lowest salaries were earned by
those who had taken holy orders. Although most
of the men are still in their forties, they include a
number who “have won national prominence,”
and nearly a dozen who have achieved an international reputation. Seventy (of whom thirtynine are physicists and twenty-two biologists) are
included in American Men of Science; ten in the
Directory of American Scholars (biographies of
notable persons in the world of scholarship and
the humanities); and thirty-one in Who’s Who in
America. Three have been elected to the National
Academy of Science—one of the highest honours
accorded to scientists in America, comparable to
a Fellowship of the Royal Society in this country.
None of the eminent personages are named; but
they include the vice-chancellor of one of the
largest universities in the U.S.A., a physicist who
GIFTED CHILDREN

is head of one of the most important laboratories
for research in nuclear energy, a physiologist who
is director of a world-famous laboratory and
himself an international celebrity, one of the
world’s foremost oceanographers, the controller
of one of the largest steel companies, and the
vice-president of one of the largest American oil
companies.

Additional evidence of the surprisingly high
achievement attained is furnished by their publications and patents. These include nearly 2,000
scientific and technical articles, some sixty books
or monographs on science, art, literature, or the
humanities (including textbooks translated into
several languages), thirty-three novels, and 700
plays, short stories, essays, and miscellaneous
articles, not to mention thousands of journalistic
contributions and scripts for film, radio, or television. The number of technical patents runs to
at least 230.

With women occupation or occupational
status depends less on talent or training and
more on extraneous circumstances. Of those in
the gifted group the majority became and remained housewives, though frequently working
at the same time outside the home. Two, however, have already found a place of their own in
Who’s Who in America, and seven in American
Men of Science. The publications of the gifted
women include five novels, five volumes of
poetry, four plays, over thirty professional books,
200 essays, critiques, and short stories, and more
than 700 scientific papers.

It may be noted, however, that the men and
women of the highest achievement, and in particular those who have won international fame,
are nearly all of them scientists. There are a few
who are heads of university departments in
music or art, and several who have produced
excellent original work in one or other of these
fields; but there is not a single painter, sculptor,
or musical composer with a reputation that could
be compared with that of the most eminent
scientists. This appears to be in keeping with what
factorial studies have shown, namely, that music
and art depend more on specialized abilities for
each subject and less on “general intelligence.”
To some extent the discrepancy also seems to
hold good of literature: in poetry and belles
lettres, we are told, there were fewer persons

showing “‘the same high order of creativity” as in
the sphere of science and technology. These conclusions, I fancy, tend to confirm what I have
ventured to suggest elsewhere on somewhat
different grounds, namely, that the individuals
picked out by the best known scales of intelligence test tend to belong to the analytical and
logical type rather than to the synthetic, intuitive,
or creative.

A good deal of the foregoing information was
recorded in Terman’s previous volume. What we
now discover is that even during the last ten
years the group has still been advancing; and, as
it turns out, the predictions which Terman tentatively then put forward were far too modest.
Where he expected the entries in the books of
fame to be doubled they have been quadrupled;
where he thought they might be trebled, they
have increased sixfold. “There is,” we are told,
“almost no one who has not improved his status,
even though he may be well below the average
of the group in terms of realizing his intellectual
potential in his vocational accomplishments” ;
and plainly the peak of achievement is not yet
reached.

Out of the 1,500 cases, however, there were
eighty or ninety whose apparent progress fell
short of expectation. Since their intelligence, as
assessed by tests, differs little from that of the
rest of the group, it is evident that outstanding
accomplishments call for something else besides
sheer innate ability. A comparison between the
most successful and the least successful suggests
that health, emotional stability, ambition, and
will to work are equally indispensable. This does
not affect the main inference to be drawn from
all these investigations—namely, the value of
intelligence testing, even in its present imperfect
form, for the purpose of predicting future accomplishment. Indeed, the accuracy of the methods
used in 1921, when mental tests were still a
novelty, is quite amazing.

Terman himself was always a firm believer in
Galton’s view that high achievement in almost
every sphere of adult life is dependent largely on
the degree of general ability with which the
individual is genetically endowed. During the
period between the two world wars, while behaviouristic doctrines still predominated,
Galton’s views were rejected or brushed aside.

19
ER—D
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

But during the last two or three years opinion
has been rapidly changing. And, as one American
reviewer has observed in summing up the present
volume, “‘with to-day’s emphasis on the identification of the gifted, one must indeed be grateful
for the vision which has thus provided us with
detailed information on the factors influencing
the subsequent achievements of a group typifying
the highest 1 per cent of the school population.”

To the student of eugenics there is one further
point of special interest, namely, what the geneticist would call the “‘breeding system” of the
highly gifted. On this a good deal of data is now
available from this latest survey. It appears that
the incidence of marriage and the age of marriage
do not vary greatly from those of ordinary men
and women. Here they differ from other college
graduates among whom marriage is somewhat
less frequent, and is contracted later in life: the
discrepancy, it is added, “‘was particularly striking in the case of the gifted women.” “Assortative mating,” however, is well marked. There is
a strong tendency for gifted men and women to
marry persons who, like themselves, are above
average in general intelligence. The divorce rate
is lower than in the general population, amounting to little over 20 per cent of those who have
married.

It is too early to estimate the ultimate fertility
rate of the group as a whole. But by 1955 the
entire group had produced approximately 2,452
children and 115 grandchildren. Among those
who have married the average number of
children so far is 1°9—rather more for the gifted
men and rather less for the gifted women. Those
who were college graduates have slightly larger
families than the rest; but this may be a conse
20

quence of their superior financial position. The
proportion, of course, is under that required to
maintain the stock; but it will obviously increase
as the years go by. The average I.Q. of the
children is 133—just a little higher than the
ordinary figure for regression would lead us to
expect.

How far the conclusions that can be drawn
from these surveys are limited by. the circumstances to which they relate, and how far they
would hold good of other countries where the
population, the type of culture, and the economic
and social conditions may be widely different,
are questions that cannot be answered without
further research. That some of the results can be
safely generalized is strongly suggested by
psychological studies of men of genius in the past
and by investigations of gifted children carried
out elsewhere, e.g., the follow-up inquiries
relating to London pupils who have gained
junior county scholarships. But is is urgently
desirable that a comprehensive longitudinal
investigation should be undertaken on similar
lines in this country. The probable cost is indicated by figures given in the preface to the
present report. The cost of the initial Californian survey (defrayed partly by grants from the
Commonwealth Fund of New York City and
partly by contributions from Stanford University)
amounted to $50,000. The further surveys have
been subsidized by additional grants and a
number of anonymous donations from various
sources. ““The total expended to date,” we are
told, “has been approximately a quarter of a
million dollars.” Few researches can have so
magnificently justified the outlay which they
entailed.
