The Eugenics Review

NOTES OF THE QUARTER

THE GALTON LECTURE 1967

THE GALTON LECTURE was delivered in the Rooms of the Royal Society on 25th April
1967 by Dr. A. H. Halsey. His subject was “The Changing Relations between Biological
and Social Sciences” and the lecture is printed in full in this issue of the REVIEW.

At its conclusion a vote of thanks to Dr. Halsey was proposed by DR. ELIOT SLATER:

It has been said that sociologists are distrustful of biogenetic explanations of human
behaviour, in part because of the view that biological theories necessarily lead to predatory
ethics. This has always been very surprising to me because some of our most distinguished
human geneticists, such as J. B. S. Haldane and Lionel Penrose, have stood rather far to
the left in social and political attitudes, and all our distinguished contemporary biologists
have been contemptuous of racist theories. Familiarity with biological ways of thinking
disposes us to wide tolerance. In 1946 J. B. S. Haldane gave an elegant demonstration of
the ways in which genetic-environmental interactions could lead to different types of
society. In the perfect society of the eugenist every genotype would be able to find the
environment which suited him best, and no one genotype would consistently excel all
others. In the perfect society of the environmentalist, every environment would suit some
genotypes if not others, and no environment would be consistently the best for everybody.
The type of society which is above all to be avoided would be one in which, wherever they
went, some genotypes would always be at a disadvantage, and some environments would
be universally unfavourable and avoided. The type of society which we should try to attain
would be one in which genetic and environmental advantages went contrariwise. The ideal
society would be one in which every existing environment would be the best for one of
the existing genotypes, and every existing genotype would be able to find the environment
which favoured him above all others.

I wonder whether the sociologist has been as long and as firmly persuaded of the

immense importance of variety and variability as the biologist has been. In his Reith
lectures some years ago Sir Peter Medawar strongly emphasized this point. He gave us,
in fact, the strongest warning against genetical snobbism. All wild populations carry
great numbers of genes of deleterious effect, and yet maintain their vitality. The variability
of a race is its source of strength, and variability is the contribution of the heterozygote.
To develop Haldane’s point, should we not be thinking along the same lines about societies ?
Perhaps it would not be the best thing for humanity if every human society has the same
organization, being perhaps a copy in miniature of the United States or another of the
western democracies ?
. In the fifty-fourth Galton Lecture Dr. Halsey has given us some splendid illustrations
of the importance of sociological ideas for understanding biological processes. This is a
marriage of ideas that must be fruitful. We are greatly in his debt, and all of us will wish
to give him our warm and sincere thanks.

CONTROL OF WORLD POPULATION

IN A PAPER delivered to the Manchester Statistical Society last January, Dr. Wallis Taylor
referred to the problem of rapid and excessive population growth and the possibilities

ER—L 149
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of fertility control. He quoted some interesting economic assessments made by Enke,*
according to which an adequate control programme might cost as little as 10 cents per
person per annum. Enke’s argument that economic resources of a given value would be
much more effective in raising per capita incomes if the resources were devoted to control,
rather than to raising production, is one that was heard at the World Population Conference in 1965. On that occasion some strong emotional reactions were provoked by
this argument which was then advanced, perhaps, without the maximum of tact; yet if
properly expressed it seems a reasonable enough thesis. Enke also considers that cash
bonuses could and should be paid to women who remain non-pregnant.

Dr. Taylor referred briefly to questions of motivation, which could well prove to be
more intractable than matters of economic cost. He was able to quote some hopeful
findings of a population survey made in Turkey in 1963, which showed that more than
one-half of Turkish couples want a small family. In 1964, Dr. Taylor became consultant
in demography to the Turkish State Planning Office. In 1965, the law prohibiting family
planning was repealed, and now determined efforts are being made to reduce population
growth. On the basis of this experience, Dr. Taylor is hopeful that motivation and communication problems will not prove a serious bar to fertility control.

WHO WERE THE FIRST HOMINIDS?

DR. MICHAEL H. DAY writes: The early history of man, as revealed by the palaeontological
record, is slowly being written. The remarkable discoveries of Professor Raymond Dart,
Dr. Robert Broome and Professor John Robinson in South Africa have been followed by
those of Dr. L. S. B. Leakey and his wife in East Africa. From both these African sites
Lower and Middle Pleistocene material has accumulated over the past thirty years to allow
a picture to be built of the general hominid evolutionary situation during the Pleistocene
period. Taxonomic wrangles aside, it is clear that by the beginning of this epoch critical
hominid features such as dental reduction, facial shortening, skilful hands and bipedally
adapted hind limbs had been acquired. Whilst much remains to be done in order to clarify
the situation created by new material from this period, it is not surprising that some
researchers have turned their attention to the preceding Pliocene and Miocene periods;
for it is in deposits of these epochs that the fossilised remains of higher primates showing
the earliest signs of hominid adaptation are most likely to be found.

In 1961 the reappraisal by Professor Elwyn Simons of a fragment of upper jaw
(Ramapithecus brevirostris) from the Mio-Pliocene deposits of the Siwalik hills of India
led him to suggest that the rounded dental arcade, short face and small canines of this
form could allow its inclusion in the family Hominidae,®6 an idea originally put forward
by Lewis in 1934.4 Subsequently a second maxilla and several mandibular fragments were
referred to the same genus, Ramapithecus, and the genus was formally placed in he family
Hominidae.7: 8 Meanwhile from Fort Ternan, East Africa, Leakey had reported the
discovery of a portion of maxilla from early Pliocene (Pontian) deposits.2 The fragment
was described under the generic name of Kenyapithecus, with wickeri as the specific name
of the genotype, and later accepted as a hominid. Subsequently the dating of this specimen
was revised to the Upper Miocene, since the associated fauna proved to be rather more
primitive than at first believed.

Despite the fragmentary nature of both the Indian and East African specimens and
the complete lack of post-cranial evidence, some authorities appear to have fully accepted
the hominid status of these forms. Perhaps it is worth recalling that Oakley,5 whilst
considering Australopithecus, said that at least two determinants are necessary in order

* The Economic Aspects of Slowing Population Growth. The Economic Journal, March 1966. 76, 44.
150
NOTES OF THE QUARTER

to place a specimen in the family Hominidae—an essentially human dentition and a pelvis
which permits of upright walking. At least one of these determinants is wholly lacking
in both instances, And yet Simons 8 and Simons and Pilbeam 9 have gone further by
suggesting that R. brevirostris and K. wickerii are synonyms for the same hominid species,
a conclusion rejected by Leakey at both generic and specific levels.3

Simons and Pilbeam came to their conclusion in the course of a comprehensive and
detailed study of the sub-family Dryopithecinae, a family almost exclusively represented
by dental material. They suggested, in the light of a full review of the literature and personal
examination of the majority of specimens, that nearly thirty genera and fifty species have
been created to accommodate these Miocene and Pliocene pongids since Lartet described
Dryopithecus fontani in 1856. In their revision of this profusion of taxons, three genera
and nine species have been retained, two genera within the family Pongidae and one genus
within the family Hominidae 9 (Table 1).

TABLE 1
FAMILY GENUS SPECIES
Pongidae Dryopithecus fontani
laietanus
indicus
sivalensis
africanus
nyanzae
maior
Gigantopithecus blacki
Hominidae Ramapithecus punjabicus

Thus the genus Dryopithecus is said to contain the European, Indian and Asiatic
dryopithecines and the African proconsulids as seven separate species, yet the genus
Ramapithecus is said to be monotypic and to include in one species material from each
of these regions as well as China. It is held that the morphological evidence for this revision
is strong, yet the given statistical evidence is unconvincing.

Early this year Leakey announced the recognition of new material which is derived
from early Miocene deposits at Songhor and Rusinga in Kenya, East Africa.3 In 1951
a small maxillary fragment was described from Rusinga which was said to differ markedly
both from the East African proconsulids and the dryopithecines from Europe and Asia.
However, because of some resemblances to specimens known as Sivapithecus sivalensis,
this fragment was regarded as the type of a new species within the genus Sivapithecus
and was named Sivapithecus africanus.1 This specimen has now been reappraised and is
regarded as the type specimen of a new species of the genus Kenyapithecus and has been
named Kenyapithecus africanus.1 (In Simons and Pilbeam’s classification all the Sivapithecus material, including Sivapithecus africanus, is grouped within a sub-genus of the
genus Dryopithecus.) In addition to the type specimen, Leakey allocated seven other
specimens from Rusinga and Songhor to the new species Kenyapithecus africanus; these
include fragmentary mandibles, maxillae, isolated teeth and part of a clavicle. A single
upper first molar from Maboko has been referred to Kenyapithecus sp. indet.

In the discussion which follows Leakey makes clear his reasons for rejecting the view
of Simons and Pilbeam that Kenyapithecus wickerii and Ramapithecus punjabicus are
synonymous and also that Sivapithecus africanus and Sivapithecus sivalensis are identical
In addition he argues that the deposits at Rusinga and Songhor are probably of Lower,
or at latest Middle Miocene age and therefore that Kenyapithecus africanus is distinctly

151
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

older than both Kenyapithecus wickerii and Ramapithecus, so qualifying as the oldest
member of the family Hominidae known at the present time.

Finally, it is suggested by Leakey that certain limb bones, formerly attributed to
Proconsul, from Rusinga, Songhor and Maboko must now be in doubt since none of them
was very closely associated with unequivocal Proconsul remains.1 Clearly this post-cranial
material is of critical importance since good evidence of hominid locomotor features in
these bones would underpin the attribution of dental material from the same deposits
to the family Hominidae.

To summarize these recent advances it can be said that the search for Miocene and
Pliocene higher primate fossils, with hominid features, is meeting with some success;
curiously not only in the field but also on the shelves of museums. Reappraisal of known
material, when seen with new eyes, can be as rewarding as an expedition. It must be said,
however, that pre-Pleistocene evidence of the family Hominidae rests upon a handful of
dental specimens, none of which approaches a complete dentition. Nevertheless individual
hominid features of teeth and jaws have been clearly demonstrated by both Simons and
Leakey; these are important advances. Although it is admitted that some of the earlier
and more primitive members of the family Hominidae may be found to lack some of
the accepted characters shown by established members of the family Hominidae, further
evidence from the skull, the limbs and the pelvic girdle is needed before these new attributions can be unreservedly accepted.

REFERENCES

. Le Gros Clark, W. E., and Leakey, L. S. B. 1951. The Miocene Hominoidea of East Africa, Fossil Mammals
of Africa No. 1 (Brit. Mus. nat. Hist.)

peal L. S. B. 1961. A new Lower Pliocene fossil primate from Kenya. Ann. Mag. nat. Hist. Ser. 13,
. Leakey, L. S. B. 1967. An early Miocene member of Hominidae. Nature, 213, 155.

. Lewis, G. E. 1934. Preliminary notice of new man-like apes from India. Amer. J. Sci. 27, 161.

Oakley, K. P. 1951. A definition of man. Sc. News, 20, 69.

Simons, E. L. 1961. The phyletic position of Ramapithecus. Postilla, Yale Peabody Museum, 57, 1.

. Simons, E. L. 1963. Some fallacies in the study of hominid phylogeny. Science, 141, 879.

. Simons, E. L. 1964. On the mandible of Ramapithecus. Proc. nat. Acad. Sci. 51, 528.

. Simons, D. L., and Pilbeam, D. R. 1965. Preliminary revision of the Dryopithecinae (Pongidae, Anthropoidea). Folia Primat. 3, 81.

WONIANRW N

LECTURES ON GENETICS IN NEWCASTLE UPON TYNE

MRS. BARBARA BOSANQUET has sent us the following note from a member of the Faculty
of the University of Newcastle upon Tyne: In the current academic session 1966-67 in the
University of Newcastle upon Tyne, where considerable curricular development of genetics
is taking place both in science and medical faculties, a series of public lectures was given
under the title of Genetics for Everyman. Devised and presented by Professor J. H. Burnett,
Professor Watkin Williams, and Dr. D. F. Roberts, the series outlined, at a level acceptable
to a lay audience the present state of knowledge of genetics and illustrated the application
of this knowledge to some present-day human problems. The titles of the lectures were:

. Genetics—the new biology (given by Watkin Williams).
. What is a gene? (J. H. Burnett).

. Transcribing the gene (J. H. Burnett).

. Genetics and food supplies (Watkin Williams).

. Genetics and human disease (D. F. Roberts).

. Genetics and society (D. F. Roberts).

An & Wb —

152
NOTES OF THE QUARTER

. The audience was thus introduced by stages from the fundamentals of molecular
structure of DNA and how it affects the developing organism, through the well established
principles of genetics, to their applications in plant and animal breeding to improve stock
and increase production. The foundations were laid for a discussion of the impact of these
genetic principles on man himself, a matter of particular interest to readers of this REVIEW.

The fifth lecture reviewed the enormous contribution of human genetics to medicine.
It illustrated the different types of genetic disease and showed how new explanations had
emerged for old diseases; it indicated how increasing knowledge of genetic mechanisms
was able to suggest new therapeutic approaches, successfully followed. It introduced the
concept of genetic balance in the population, showed the extent of the burden of hereditary
disease in the present population, and how its contribution to total morbidity and mortality
is likely to increase. It stressed the importance of increased education in the principles of
human genetics in the senior forms of schools, perhaps as part of courses in elementary
hygiene and physiology, as a step towards containing the load.

The final lecture concerned some of the problems arising out of man’s partial emancipation from the biological laws of genetics, problems in which more genetic investigation
than is currently pursued could well be profitable. It explored the analogy between social
and biological organization, discussed the attempts to measure social as distinct from
biological fitness, and reviewed the little work, so far done, on the genetic basis of a—social
behaviour. It showed how the pattern of selection is changing in sophisticated populations,
demonstrated the increasing importance of differential fertility in directing the present
path of natural selection, and sought pointers as to the direction which the new selection
was taking. This intentionally provocative lecture has been published by the University
of Newcastle.

OBITUARY
G. Aird Whyte, M.C.

THE DEATH OF Mr. Aird Whyte has been recorded with regret in a previous issue of the
REVIEW. He was a Life Fellow of the Eugenics Society, and was elected Chairman of
Council in 1949. He served as Chairman until 1957 but, on the retirement of Mr. Geoffrey
Eley in 1954, he also assumed the office of Honorary Treasurer and acted in this capacity
until 1961.

DR. C. P. BLACKER writes: Aird, who died on 4th January 1967, was our Treasurer from
1954 to 1961. Having been brought into contact with the Society by his brother-in-law,
Clinton Chance, himself a former Treasurer, Aird Whyte quickly disclosed himself,
particularly to the members of his small finance committee, which met quarterly, as a
capable and conscientious guide on financial policy. And so he remained till the end,
thereby putting the Eugenics Society in debt to him.

But it was his warmth and courage which will be remembered by those who knew him
best. As will be seen from the following account, a severe illness, sustained in childhood,
produced lameness; and during the first world war he was shot through both legs. But the
ensuing disability, latterly involving almost continuous pain, did not prevent him diving
fully clothed into the sea to save the life of a boy. This is just what anyone who knew
him well would expect him to do.

A LIFE-LONG FRIEND writes: Aird was born in Edinburgh in 1888 the fifth of the eight
children of Dr. Alexander Whyte, Minister of Free St. George’s Church and Principal of
New College. The home at 7 Charlotte Square was a centre for both church and other

153
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

fields and Aird acquired an interest in the Arts, painting, sculpture, music, architecture,
fine furniture and literature which developed in later life, old Chinese jade and porcelain
being his special love. He also appreciated both old and modern silver. He had a fine
voice with a wide range, but resisted suggestions that he should have a musical career.

The gracious old-world atmosphere of this beautiful city at the beginning of the
century had a profound influence on his personality and life.

His childhood was dogged by illness and in his teens he became lame spending a year
on a Thomas splint. After this he went to the famous co-educational school, Bedales.
His lameness did not deter him from many out-of-door pursuits. He sailed the western
seas, roamed Scotland and the Hebrides and later Hampshire on bird watching expeditions.
He skied in Switzerland and Norway and was a Founder Member of the Scottish Ski
Club and of a riding club in Edinburgh.

During his university course the Balkan war broke out. He was on holiday on the
Dalmatian Coast when he received a plea from a Bulgarian friend to help with the appallingly understaffed hospitals. He went to a casualty clearing station and undertook any
and all duties from disposing of the dead to anaesthetist, giving the anaesthetic at the
first operation he attended, an amputation. This was followed by a period in Sofia where,
French being spoken among the intelligentzia, he obtained an insight into Balkan affairs.

It was after taking his degree in Forestry at Edinburgh University, with the medal
for Forest Botany, that he first developed an interest in investment; but at the outbreak
of the 1914-18 war he volunteered for service, joining the Scottish Horse and becoming
a Major and working as Billetting Officer where he obtained an insight into property
matters. However, seeing no prospect of going overseas with the Horse he obtained a
transfer to the K.O.S.B. He was gassed and later shot through both legs; one of these
wounds resulted in severe pain and disability in the last years of his life. He was shy of
mentioning his M.C. as they “‘came up with the rations”.

After the war he worked with his brother-in-law, Clinton Chance, on investment
business at 199 Piccadilly and saw the unhappy vicissitudes of the slump. When Clinton
moved to the City Aird remained at 199, building his own firm, a decision which suited
his independent spirit. During the war and after he assisted in many ways those who
fled the Continent, giving some of them financial support he could ill afford. Himself a
man of integrity, he did not expect chicanery in others or easily recognize the rogue and
the charlatan. He gave the benefit of the doubt and forgiveness and hence suffered sadly
from disillusionment and betrayal of trust.

In the second world war he was Post Warden and Senior Fire Guard and afterwards
had to start again to rebuild his small crashed world. He never recovered from the loss of
his son in action with the Royal Air Force, and took a keen and fatherly interest in Coastal
Command. His leisure was largely devoted to wide reading and whilst still active, attending
concerts, ballet, theatre and art exhibitions. Although he spent holidays abroad, he most
enjoyed Speyside (and incidentally the osprey nest) and the Western Isles. In 1945 he
dived into Tobermory Bay, fully clothed, to save a small lad from drowning, receiving
the Honorary Testimonial of the Royal Humane Society.

154
