REVIEWS OF BOOKS

work with the families of schizophrenics is of great importance. The present tendency is to
encourage schizophrenics to live at home rather than in hospital. This inevitably puts a
great strain on their families, and it is vital that we should increase our knowledge of how
the parents may be helped to manage their sick and probably very difficult children. The
subject of the schizophrenic and his family has recently been most ably reviewed.*

JOHN PRICE

ANIMAL BREEDING

Lerner, I. Michael and Donald, H. P. Modern Developments in Animal Breeding. London
and New York, 1966. Academic Press. Pp. xi+294. Price 63s.

MICHAEL LERNER HAS, already, a substantial reputation as an author and when it became
known that he was collaborating with Hugh Donald to write another book on animal
breeding there was pleasurable anticipation as to the results that this association of Berkeley
and Edinburgh would produce. It is unlikely that many who have been awaiting this book
will be disappointed, because it represents such a highly successful attempt to relate the
theory of animal breeding to its practice. More than this, the relationship is achieved in a
context of the demands that are now being made on agricultural science and technology to
meet the increasing pressure on world food supplies. The economic and social perspective
that has been created gives this book a very different character from that of any other
that has been written on animal breeding and the consequence is that it is going to be
expecially valuable reading for students of animal science. It is true that they will get more
genetic theory from other books but it is unlikely that they will find reading which will give
them a better sense of the challenge that faces them in their professional careers.

There is another group which will also benefit from reading this book; it consists of
those who have a responsibility in framing policies in animal breeding, government officials,
for instance, livestock authority employees and members of breed society councils. One of the
useful features of the book is that it is written in such a way that Part II, which relates to
the theory of animal breeding, can be skipped by those who lack the training necessary for
its full comprehension, without detriment to their understanding of subsequent chapters
which are primarily concerned with the practice and future of animal breeding.

It is interesting in this connection that members of the British Cattle Breeders Club
were advised to read Chapters 5-7 to provide a background for the discussions at their
recent winter meeting. It is to be hoped that they all read Chapter 7 for it is such a wellbalanced account of the functions and failings of breed associations and of the possible
parts they can play in future developments of animal breeding. Certainly it is a critical
account but it is not written in a manner to give offence, even to the reactionary unless he is
completely lacking in a sense of logic.

There is at least one very interesting statistic in the book. It takes 625 lb. of algae to
make 1 Ib. of Eskimo with a loss in the attenuated food chain of 99-84 per cent of the original
available energy. It is possible that this figure compares favourably with that for the grassbeef-human chain when one takes in account all the breeding overheads in specialized
beef production. One wonders, when there are 5,000,000,000 mouths to be fed, whether we
will be able to afford the luxury of anything but by-product beef. Certainly the prospect for
the year A.D. 2000 is a grim one unless we really get down to the twin tasks of family limitation and more efficient land use. This book makes a very worthwhile contribution to the
second of these tasks in giving a balanced account of the breeding problems that are associated with the development of more efficient livestock systems. It is bound to be widely read
throughout the English speaking world. M. MCG. COOPER

* Brown, G. W. 1967. In Recent Developments in Schizophrenia (Ed. A. J. Coppen). Ibid.
125
