PRIMITIVE EUGENICS
By A. E. CRAWLEY, M.A.

BEHIND the stories of a Golden Age and a Garden of Eden
there is a biological truth. By his own act man banished himself from the life natural; he is now trying to find his way back
again “ carefully and with tears.”

The life of savages to-day is rarely pure; it is generally
contaminated by some Western influence, by the missionary no.
less than the whiskey dealer, but from it we can infer something
of the life of primitive man. The age before history was not an
age of gold, but neither was it an age of shoddy.

This life, so close to nature, so far from civilisation, exhibits.
several conditions which belong to Nature’s eugenic system.

There is, first, the general environment, which need not be
described, except by saying that the only drawback to its eugenic
perfection is a certain irregularity about meals.

We shall consider here some primitive conditions which
favour (1) the best unions, and (2) the best results for birth and
for rearing.

Sexual selection among savages is a very interesting process.

Marriage is the rule; the idea of celibacy is as foreign to the
Savage as is the idea of libertinage. But though every man
marries, it is the best men who win the best women. It is.
remarkable how high in physique and capacity the average 1s;
there are very few degenerates or incompetents in a savage
tribe. But the man’s eye for a woman is very shrewd; and
it will generally be found that the best man physically takes
the best woman, the next best takes the next best, and so on.
An old and influential man, the terms are almost synonymous,
frequently accumulates young wives; at his death they are taken
by younger men.

Courage and strength, dexterity and cunning of hand and
276 A. E. Crawley :

eye are the necessary qualifications of a bridegroom; the qualifications of the bride are, in the same way, her secondary
‘sexual characters. Practically, he must be a man, she must be a
‘woman, a ‘‘fine” woman, but a womanly woman, and possessed
‘of ‘‘ housekeeping ”’ capacity.

The result is that the few “ failures’’ in each sex pair, with
very little chance of lowering the standard of the tribe.

This kind of “natural” selection is emphasised by what I
thave called ‘sexual tabu.’’ Segregation of the sexes has a twofold effect ; it deepens the difference of secondary characters,
and the psychical result is a deepening of the male preference for
female, andthe female preference for male, characters. Manliness
and womanliness are raised to a higher power.

But this general form of selection is qualified by marriage
law, the savage rules of kindred and affinity. I do not propose
to introduce the thorny subject of exogamy or the only less
thorny subject of the results of in-breeding, but I may safely
mention some connected facts.

A general survey of human marriage shows the predominance
of what is known as the “ law of parity.” According to this law
the majority of persons are sexually attracted by similarity of
characteristics, dark is attracted by dark, fair by fair, and so on.
Now this preference is curiously encouraged by, or, more
correctly, coincides partially with, a very common division of the
tribe into two intermarrying sections. The nucleus of this bi‘section Is a pair of families the children of which are first cousins,
and this relationship will be general throughout. A man must
not marry in his own section, but he must marry in the other.
The usual marriage, that is to say, is between cousins. It
actually happens, of course, that there is only one set of first
cousins, the children, that is, of a brother and a sister, not those
of two brothers or of two sisters, who by hypothesis are in the
same section. I omit various developments of the system.

The system is extremely simple, and the use of names makes
its practice easy. We need not here inquire, though the subject
possesses eugenic interest, why man originated bars to marriage
at all, especially what may Nave been the first, namely, the
prohibition of marriage between brother and sister. What is
PRIMITIVE EUGENICS 297

interesting is that in the majority of natural communities inbreeding is the rule, but it is not allowed in the narrowest circle,
uterine brothers and sisters.

Here we undoubtedly have an artificial method of fixing the
type, and of preserving those variations which constitute and
produced it. There is also a no less constant, though limited,
proportion of crossing.

Such rules are in the form of tabus, and the term serves to
introduce the second set of conditions, those namely which favour
the best results for birth and rearing. The term also serves to
describe the serious side of savage life. When we analyse
the phenomena of tabu we find that it is a result of will, that is,
of attention concentrated on physical crises. The emotions
which follow such concentration are negligible, though some
have attempted to derive tabu from them, putting a result before
the cause. Such physical crises are pregnancy, birth, puberty
and marriage.

The practical result of this concentration, which is expressed
‘as tabu, 1s to surround those circumstances which are connected
with the creation of a new generation with an armour of triple
—respect. As compared with the sentimental variety prevalent
in civilised life, this early form of respect deserves the style of
scientific. It is the respect of the medical eugenist rather than
of the ethical or religious sentimentalist.

Those who have described some of the curious practices
which are connected, for instance, with the establishment of the
pubertal processes, have rarely penetrated beneath their curiosity.
I will not describe these, but will merely emphasise their import
and their result.

They help enormously, as one writer on the Maoris has put
it, to preserve the fount of life from contamination and abuse.
By emphasising isolation, when Nature demands it, and no less
‘by emphasising union, as in the preparations for marriage, they
keep a perfect balance between tumescence and detumescence,
and their results.

In connection with this principle of natural regulation, may
‘be mentioned the traces of a primitive pairing-season, and the
well-established fact that so far from licentiousness being an
278 A. E. Crawley =

attribute of savage life, as was once supposed, the sexual life of
savages is rigidly controlled both within and without. Its energy
is normal and periodic. Not the least beneficial of these tabus is.
that which secures to the savage mother a period of some years.
for suckling a child, without the risk of having another. Again,
such infanticide as occurs in savage societies is the result of
forethought. Better, argues the savage, not rear a child at all,
than “drag it up” under hopeless conditions, to be a weakly
and degenerate specimen of the race.

One typical example of the results of these conditions may
be cited, namely, the Fijians, who marry their cousins and have
a well-developed system of sexual tabu. They are physically an
extremely tall, well-built, healthy and competent race. The fact
that such peoples do not survive when pitchforked into civilisation, so called, or when the blessings and the bacilli of the sameare disseminated among them, is no argument that they are
unfit. On the contrary they are fit, though, now, alas! but few.
It may be that it is we who are both unfit, unfew. Men like the
Maoris, Polynesians and Fijians are handicapped merely because:
they have not run the gauntlet of civilised squalor, misery, and
disease for a thousand years or so. Consequently they are not
immune even against measles, not to speak of other endemic:
fermentations, including industrial competition. Yet in health,
physique and physical pride they are superior to all but our best
specimens; their mental qualities are equal to ours—they only
seem inferior because of that thousand years or so of training in
the illegitimate use of analytical language, whose symbols are
regarded as concrete realities and adequate casus belli, theologorum
vel poltticorum.

Meanwhile, we ourselves are becoming—what ?—‘“‘ A race of
men, small, tll-formed, disease-stricken, hard to kill.”

We have referred to the interesting way in which early
societies kept the balance between in-breeding and crossing.
That balance was kept by exogamy, which involves a considerable
amount of cousin-marriage.

A development of exogamy, seen in Australia and known as.
the sub-phratry system, has another result, which it would be well
if it could be applied to-day in Europe. Let us take the case of
PRIMITIVE EUGENICS 279

the southern tribe of the Arunta. Instead of the familiar
bisection of the tribe into two intermarrying sections, as in South
and East Australia, we have four. Cross-cousin marriage is not
forbidden, the only result of the change is that marriage is
confined to the same generation. This isa codification of Nature’s.
protest against the marriage of December and May. Even
wealthy old savages have a pull over the youthful aspirants to
matrimony ; here is a law which does something to prevent their
monopolising the young women.

It may have little importance for eugenics, but it has much
for politics, that attempts should be made to reduce the friction
so easily produced by the struggle for matrimony. In the system
of four phratries, a man’s choice is limited to a quarter of the
women. In the Warramunga and Northern Arunta development.
of eight phratries, his choice is still further reduced to one-eighth..
Each man knows where to look for a wife; the field is small,
and fighting is much curtailed, with its danger to the tribal
solidarity.

Lastly there is a detail which is unique in anthropology,
and perhaps even in eugenic science. Some attempt is being
made to supplement the researches of Huth and Sir George
Darwin on the question of the deleterious nature or otherwise
of cousin-marriage. They left the question undecided, but with
a recommendation in favour of the harmlessness of such unions..

The Fijians were, at least up to the time, still recent, of Mr.
Basil Thomson, a particularly fine race. Yet the majority of
the tribes have practised cousin-marriage, as the usual form of
marriage, for ages. So, we may add, have two other fine races,
the Kafirs and the Jews.

Mr. Thomson was so much struck by the dual exogamy of
the Fijians, and its result “‘ of a race of men habitually marrying

heir first cousins,” that he undertook a careful census and
examination of the natives. The results obtained were checked
by comparison with those provinces of Fiji where the practice:
did not prevail.

The main result of his enquiry was that the ‘ concubitants ”
or rather “‘ marriageables ’* (the native term for those following
the dual exogamous system), were “in every respect the most.
‘280 A. E. Crawley:

‘satisfactory marriage-class. We have here,” he says, “a
phenomenon probably unique in the whole range of anthropology.
—a people who for generations have married their first cousins
cand still continue to do so, and among whom the offspring of
first cousins are not only more numerous but have greater vitality
than the children of persons unrelated. Nay more, the children
of concubitants—of first cousins whose parents were brother and
sister ’’—(this, by the way, is the only first-cousin-marriage
allowed by the dual exogamous system, to which it is the
‘key, and is known as cross-cousin-marriage)—‘ have immense
advantages over the children of first cousins who are the
-offspring of two brothers or two sisters respectively. In no other
part of the world does there exist so favourable material for
investigating the phenomena of in-breeding among human beings.
Is it possible that we have stumbled upon an important truth in
our physical nature? Is there really a wide physical difference
between the relationship of cousins who are offspring of a brother
.and sister respectively and that of cousins whose parents respectively were two brothers or two sisters ? Ought marriage in the
one case to be allowed or even encouraged, and in the other
case as rigidly forbidden as if it were incestuous ? ”’

It is this latter detail that I referred to as unique; this
‘apparent superiority of the offspring of a pair of cousins, children
of a brother and of a sister. This kind of marriage is very
common in early society all over the world. There are a few
exceptions, for instance the Malagasy allow the children of
brothers to marry, but not the children of sisters. Why, I do
not guess. :

It would be of immense interest if someone would undertake
ithe examination of the question of cross-cousin-marriage.
