PREVENTION OF HEREDITARY BLINDNESS

A Survey of Professor Franceschetti’s Proposals

By J. MYLES BICKERTON, FR.C.S.Eng.

T the request of the International
Association for the Prevention of
Blindness, Professor Franceschetti

read an illuminating paper at their Annual
Congress in London this year.

It is impossible to do justice to his work
in a short summary. He considers that
the following six measures would reduce the
incidence of hereditary blindness, and expresses the opinion that a committee should
Pe set up to study the means of realizing
them.

1. Collection of precise and complete
statistics.

2. Training of physicians (especially of
ophthalmologists) in genetics, and education of authorities and the public.

3. Extension of facilities for pre-marital

consultation, and the general intro
duction of the pre-marital certificate.

Increased use of social workers.

Decrease in consanguineous marriages.

. Decrease of the transmission of heredi
tary eye diseases by making sterilization available to the patients.

np

His paper is divided into four sections.
The first describes the hereditary eye diseases
and their modes of transmission ; the second
deals with the relative incidence of hereditary
and acquired blindness ; the third refers to
the social consequences of blindness; and
the fourth deals with prevention and describes certain medical, hygienic, and medicosocial measures that are necessary to prevent
blindness as often as possible in hereditary
eye diseases. I propose to deal with this
section here.

The theoretical measures which would
reduce the numbers of the hereditary blind
are “the prevention of carriers of pathological genes from having children.’”’ Under
practical measures he suggests :

1. ‘‘ Education in the facts of heredity.”
Here he stresses ‘‘ the importance of
ophthalmologists having a training in
genetics, and also that the public should
receive some instruction.”’

2. The improvement of statistics by the
following means: (a) adopting an
international standard of classification ;

(0) having the patients examined by
oculists competent in genetics, and so
improving the literature that readers
of a future generation may be quite
sure of the diagnosis; (c) organization
of a central register.

3. Prevention of hereditary eye disease :
(a) by the diminution of consanguineous
marriages ; and (0) prevention of procreation in certain diseases.

Procreation would be forbidden absolutely
in the following conditions :

(a) Patients with serious dominant disease,
e.g. congenital cataract, aniridia, microphthalmia (dominant type), retinitis
pigmentosa, glaucoma (eventually congenital optic atrophy).

(0) Patients with concomitant hereditary
diseases of other organs. Transmission
of eye diseases is particularly to be
apprehended when there are concomitant hereditary diseases of other
organs, particularly oligophrenia, deafmutism, or nervous or mental diseases. In Franceschetti’s opinion procreation
must be prevented even in sporadic
cases of this type.

(c) Patients with sporadic dominant diseases, or who have affected children.
(2) Normal patients who have more than
one child with hereditary eye disease.
The case arises principally for the
recessive diseases of which the most
frequent are: buphthalmia, retinitis
I02Z

pigmentosa (recessive type), and total
colour blindness.

(e) The sisters of patients with sex-linked
diseases—Leber’s disease principally.

Abstention from parenthood is recommended in the following conditions: ‘“‘ (a)
Cases of serious recessive diseases. As the
children of. these patients are ordinarily
unaffected, it is difficult to demand abstention from parenthood, at least for the present.
The difficulties are particularly great for the
relatively frequent diseases like myopia.
Despite the fact that myopia is the most frequent cause of hereditary blindness, the
attempt to prevent its transmission would
lead us too far afield. The only thing we can
do at present is to advise a patient with high
myopia not to marry a person similarly
affected, for then roo per cent. of the children
will be myopic. (6) Carriers of serious
recessive diseases. Wegner (1934) proposed
the prevention of parenthood in the children
and even in the sisters of patients with serious recessive diseases. I do not think it
possible to go so far. I do not concur in the
opinion of Fleischer (1934) who believes that
in families practising in trades calling for perfect sight (sailors, painters, dyers, hunters),
the transmission of anomalies of colour vision
may be prevented by eugenic measures.”

APPLICATION OF MEASURES TO
PREVENT THE TRANSMISSION
OF BLINDNESS

1. Celibacy

‘“‘ The need for celibacy in hereditary blindness must be explained early in the schools
for the blind. It must be recalled that the
blind often show a lack of understanding,
and marry other blind individuals. It is
apparent that the offspring of such marriages
run a greater risk of being blind (sometimes
even 100 per cent.).

In England the blind may earn their living
in private institutions only so long as they
remain celibate. Even if the blind do not
marry, there is always the possibility of
natural children, and the transmission of the
disease. Birth-control also aims at prevent
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

ing the transmission of hereditary diseases
by preventing the increase in the number of
children in poor families, particularly where
there is danger of deficiency in the children.
It is hoped thereby to lighten the financial
burden of these families, and permit the
parents to take better care of a smaller number of children.

2. Segregation

It is only for the blind with mental diseases
that segregation is necessary.

3. Sterilization

The great advantage of voluntary sterilization is that, in leaving the decision to the
patient, there is no implication of moral
inferiority. It is obvious that an educational
campaign among the blind must be organiized to explain the necessity of sterilization.
Special committees exist in England to study
eugenic problems. According to Usher,
sterilization has been practised in several
cases of hereditary blindness, and in individuals with one or more children with
hereditary eye diseases. In the United States
it seems that a patient may have himself
sterilized if he so desires. It must not be
forgotten that in certain countries sterilization for eugenic reasons is not authorized. It
is principally in these countries that a campaign in favour of voluntary sterilization
must be organized, for it is our most effective
weapon against hereditary blindness. Needless to add, sterilization should be available
free to poor patients.”

GENETICS OF EYE DISEASES

In section 1 of his paper, Franceschetti
describes the mode of transmission of the
various eye diseases.

(a2) ‘“‘In man, as in animals, the normal
characters depend upon a considerable number of genes (polygenetic). The human race,
however, is not prolific, and it is almost
impossible to determine the genotype of the
individual. It is established that hereditary
pathological conditions are generally due to
the modification of a single gene. Waardenburg has very rightly insisted, however, that
these hereditary diseases are not caused by
PREVENTION OF HEREDITARY BLINDNESS

the alteration of a single gene, but that, as
for normal characters, the other genes play a
part. It is nevertheless undoubtedly true
that, in general, it is sufficient that a single
gene be modified for the pathological condition to appear.

The hereditary diseases of the eye are
also, in general, caused by the modification
of but one gene. There are, however, certain
ocular affections whose mode of transmission
is not in accord with the laws determined for
the inheritance of monogenetic defects. If
two or three genes are modified, the determination of the genotype becomes very difficult.
It has been possible to make a digenetic
classification of certain ocular defects.

(6) The determination of the genotypes
becomes extremely difficult for those anomalies in which the normal condition is subject
to wide physiological variations (size of the
cornea, refraction, etc.). It is probable that
the refraction is determined by the interplay
of a great number of genes. Thus, in the
cases of high myopia, for example, these
genetic factors play such a part that it is
almost impossible to determine the influence
of the pathological gene or genes.

¥ven for the defects which are very easy
to diagnose (coloboma, cataract, etc.) there
are often abortive forms which would pass
unnoticed were they not discovered by the
study of the genealogical tree.

We do know a considerable number of
hereditary eye diseases whose mode of transmission has been established. To make a
prognosis in children whose parents or
relatives are affected with hereditary anomalies, it is indispensible to know the mode of
transmission of the various ocular defects
which may lead to more or less complete
blindness. ”’

EUGENIC PROGNOSIS

Franceschetti then shows how the modes
of transmission affect the prognosis for the
descendants.

I. Regular Dominance

“We are generally concerned with a
marriage between a _ heterozygous, and
therefore diseased, individual and a normal

103

individual. According to the Mendelian
formule, 50 per cent. of the children should
be affected. The prognosis can, therefore,
be made quite easily.”

2. Ivregular Dominance

‘The prognosis is more difficult to make
since the heterozygote may be apparently
healthy. The genotypic affection, therefore,
does not manifest itself, although theoretically dominant. These variations of the
phenotype are particularly frequent for the
colobomata. The frequency with which a
normal or pathological character manifests
itself in a heterozygous individual is denoted
by the term ‘ penetration.’ Unfortunately,
there are no statistics in ophthalmology
which shed any light on this problem. In
psychiatry, where they are more advanced,
the following figures have been obtained:

Mental Debility, 100 per cent. penetration ;

Dementia przcox (Schizophrenia), 66
per cent. penetration (quoted from Luxenburger).

The importance of irregular dominance is
that the descendants of apparently healthy
parents may be affected, which does not
occur in regular dominance. The probability
that a descendant of an individual subject to
a disease transmitted by irregular dominance
will be also affected is equal to half the
penetration percentage.

3. Recessive

A recessive defect generally manifests
itself in one-fourth of the children if the two
parents are heterozygous. The children of the
diseased individual are generally (although
all heterozygous) apparently healthy. This
is only true of the relatively rare defects.
For the more or less frequent anomalies, like
high myopia, the number of heterozygous
individuals in the population is considerable.
(One per cent. of heterozygous individuals
corresponds to 18 per cent. of heterozygotes
in the population.) Thus, in practice, the
heterozygous offspring of a diseased individual are very likely to marry another
heterozygote. In this manner the defect
104

reappears in the second generation. Moreover, if the diseased individual marries a
heterozygote, 50 per cent. of the children
will be diseased.

Even for the rare recessive hereditary
defects, the prognosis must be guarded. I
have personally observed a case of a man
affected with congenital buphthalmia from
both sides, whose first child, a girl, also
presented a bilateral buphthalmia, despite
the fact that there was no consanguinity of
the parents.

It is obvious that in an absolutely healthy
family, consanguineous marriages may even
protect against degeneracy introduced into
the family by non-consanguineous marriages.
The genes recessive for general or ocular
defects are, however, so widespread in the
population to-day, that consanguinity must
be considered dangerous, as is proven by
the already mentioned figures. Moreover, it
must be remembered that the danger is not
only that eye diseases, but that a number of
general, and particularly cerebral, anomalies
may be manifested, given the number of
pathological genes in the population. It is
obvious that two heterozygotes may fortuitously marry. The chance of finding two
altered genes in the same individual is, however, much greater in the offspring of consanguineous parents.

4. Sex-linked recessive

(2) From the patient by his daughters to
his grandsons.

(b) By the sisters of the patients to their
sons, or by their daughters to their
grandsons.”

Franceschetti refers to exceptions in sexlinked anomalies :

‘‘(a) The manifestly diseased heterozygotes.
(b) Exceptions to Lossen’s law, e.g. transmission by men in hemophilia.
(c) Among the sisters of the diseased there
are too many carriers, and among the
brothers too many diseased.

5. Digeneticism

It has long been supposed that certain
hereditary diseases in man were due to the

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

modification of two or more genes (polygeneticism). Two dominant genes are in play
if a family disease generally appears in a
single generation without consanguinity.

I am convinced that it will be possible
sooner or later to show for a number of
defects whose mode of transmission now
seems. obscure—cranial anomalies, etc.—
that polygeneticism is involved.

6. Sex-linked Dominance

Nystagmus is often transmitted as a sexlinked recessive defect, but it is also transmitted, and occasionally in the same family,
by irregular dominance. It is for this reason
that Lenz has suggested that it is transmitted
not by simple dominance, but rather by sexlinked dominance.

According to the formule, were this true,
we should find twice as many women as men
affected, which is not the case. For Lenz,
this is explained by the fact that the dominant sex-linked gene manifests itself only
in 30 to 50 per cent. of the heterozygous
women, or in other words that the penetration of the sex-linked gene is from 30 to 50
per cent. in the female. In my opinion, there
is in practice no difference between sexlinked dominance with 50 per cent. of penetration, and the sex-linked recessive mode
with change in dominance in 50 per cent.
There is, however, a distinct difference
between simple and sex-linked dominance.
In the latter, as opposed to the former, the
disease can never be transmitted from father
to son.

7. Homochronous and homologous mantfestations of hereditary diseases

The tendency to confuse congenital and
hereditary diseases is all too frequent even
to-day. There are nevertheless a number of
defects which only become manifest after
birth. In the members of one family, and
especially of the same generation, these
diseases appear at nearly the same age
(homochronous manifestation).

The ocular defects which appear late are,
especially, late ptosis, keratoconus, cataract,
tapeto-retinal degeneration (macular defects,
PREVENTION OF HEREDITARY BLINDNESS

etc.), juvenile amaurotic family idiocy,
glaucoma, and a number of senile diseases.

Some diseases, though congenital, only
appear long after birth, either because the
symptoms pass unobserved (night blindness),
or because they are progressive (retinitis
pigmentosa, myopia). The malformations
are ordinarily manifest at birth, the abiotrophies generally appear after birth.

We speak of homologous manifestation
when a hereditary disease appears in the same
generation in the different branches of the
family. Homologous manifestation is especially observed in diseases of nervous origin.
In ophthalmology, this is principally the case
for cataract in dystrophia myotonica, and
certain tapeto-retinal degenerations (family
diseases of the macula).”’

8. Anticipation

Professor Franceschetti concludes this
section by saying that the principal difficulties and exceptions arising in the application of the Mendelian formule to man are
the following :

(a) Irregular dominance.

(6) Different modes of transmission for
defects with the same clinical picture.

(c) Late manifestation.

In section 2 he refers to single cases of
hereditary diseases.

“For the majority of hereditary diseases
of the eye, the mode of transmission has
been determined by the study of the family
trees. The single cases of diseases ordinarily
hereditary have been neglected by the investigators. The appearance of single cases
may result from several causes :

I. Recessivity, defective expected 1 in 4.
2. Single cases in dominant disease,
(2) by mutation ;
(b) by manifestation of latent genotypic defects ;
(c) owing to exogenous factors, idiokinetic influences.

3. Polyphenia, syndromes resulting from
a single gene or group of genes.

4. Mistaken diagnosis.
Statistics are wanted to show,

105

1. The infrequency of isolated cases
in proportion to family cases ;

2. The proportion between presumably
hereditary isolated cases and family
cases ; and

3. The occurrence of hereditary diseases in the population.”’

CRITICISM OF STATISTICAL DATA

According to Franceschetti the statistics
with regard to hereditary blindness are vague
and unreliable for the following reasons :

“ry, They are concerned with selected
material based upon the number of
patients institutionalized in homes for
the blind, or seen by a physician in his
practice.

2. The official statistics on blindness ordinarily make no distinction between
hereditary and acquired blindness, or
they are based solely upon the assertions of the patients.

3. The evaluation of the number of hereditary affections is often based upon
the frequency of congenital anomalies.
There is much evidence that not all
hereditary diseases are congenital. The
result is that the figures given for the
hereditary diseases are generally too
low.

4. The statistics based upon the observations of an oculist in his practice are
more valuable without, however, being
more exact. This is due to the fact that
the differential diagnosis of hereditary
from acquired disease is very often
difficult to make without a general
examination of the patient (Wassermann reaction, etc.) and of the other
members of the family. This difficulty
is of the greatest importance for tapetoretinal diseases, atrophy of the optic
nerve, and diseases of intra-uterine,
and therefore exogenous, origin. Nevertheless, despite these difficulties, it
should be possible to establish much
more accurate statistics than we now
possess.”’

Discussing the definitions of blindness,
which vary considerably in various countries,
106

he says: “It is obvious that the statistics of
hereditary diseases should include not only
complete blindness, but incomplete blindness
and amblyopia. This is all the more important, because a large proportion of the
patients suffering from hereditary diseases
are only partly blind. This is principally
true of the myopics, who are often classed
among the amblyopics.’’:

With regard to the incidence of hereditary
blindness, he gives figures of 15 per cent.
for congenital blindness, and of these he
suggests that 43 per cent. are hereditary
(Waardenburg suggests 43 per cent. also),
and that the number of hereditary cases is

certainly even greater for incomplete or —

partial blindness. For the partially blind at
Zurich some 88-5 per cent. of the cases are
probably hereditary. He considers that 33
per cent. of the blind are so from hereditary
causes. He concludes that roughly :

“I. 15 per cent. of the blind are so at birth.

2. 50 per cent. of blind children are so

congenitally. The percentage is even
higher for amblyopia.

3. 50-60 per cent. of congenital blindness
is hereditary.

4. 40 per cent. of juvenile blindness is
hereditary. Here, too, the percentage
is higher for amblyopia.

5. 33 per cent. of blindness is hereditary.

It is obvious that these estimates are only
valid for those countries in which trachoma,
smallpox, and ophthalmia neonatorum rarely
cause blindness. For the other countries,
allowance must be made for the infectious
diseases.”’

He then reviews the most common hereditary blinding diseases, and his figures
demonstrate that myopia is the principal
factor in the etiology of complete and, above
all, of incomplete post-natal hereditary
blindness.

At this point he asks “‘if we have any
figures to show the frequencies of hereditary
diseases in the descendants of patients suffering from hereditary blindness, and can make
a prognosis for the children of patients whose
pedigree is unknown to us. Unfortunately

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the answer is no, we have no such figures,”’
and he proceeds to show that the calculation
could be made if we had such figures as are
available to psychiatrists.

Wilson’s figures show that two myopic
parents have 100 per cent. myopic children,
and that one high myope parent will transmit the myopia to 44 per cent. of the children.

“According to suppositions made, a
patient suffering from hereditary blindness
has sixty times as many chances of having a
blind child as a normal individual has.”

But he adds the following :

‘* All these calculations are obviously only
of relative value. My purpose was rather to
show how the necessary calculations should
be made had we complete statistics, and not
approximate estimates, in order to advise
persons contemplating marriage, than to
arrive at necessarily arbitrary conclusions.
Let us hope that it will be possible, in the
near future, to base our counsels upon
statistics of this type.”’

PRACTICAL PROPOSALS

In section 3 of his paper Professor Franceschetti discusses the social consequences of
blindness. He considers them from (a) the
point of view of the blind individual, and
(b) a more general point of view. He agrees
with Waardenburg that most of the blind
are of normal intelligence, and of high moral
principles. ‘It is not their affection that
oppresses them so much as the social diffhculties created by the difficulties of earning a
livelihood.”’

He stresses the special difficulties with
regard to education and training of the blind.
He considers compulsory education necessary
for blind children, mentioning the value of
partially sighted classes (Bishop Harman),
and considers that the partially blind and
blind require entirely different training.

From the general point of view he mentions the serious financial problem and the
eugenic problem. Here he points out that
the weak-minded in Munich have 64 per cent.
more children than the normal, and in Berlin
100 per cent. more than the normal. He says
PREVENTION OF HEREDITARY BLINDNESS

there is a high infant mortality among those
subject to certain of the heteditary eye
diseases. He entirely agrees with Waardenburg that the eugenic measures must be
considered not only from the social but also
from a purely humanitarian point of view.
He then gives in section 4 the measures
which would reduce the numbers of the blind
with hereditary eye diseases. His suggestions
are very similar to my own, and his figures
correspond fairly closely with many of those
that I stressed in my paper published in

107

What is the significance of these facts?
They show that the present position is
terrible, but that, if certain reforms are
carried out, immense improvement and relief
of suffering is possible. They also show that
large numbers of the blind are made blind
by a callous indifference to suffering, engendered by social and religious prejudice
and by ignorance. They show that much
money spent on relief and care of the blind
would be better spent on prevention. Professor Franceschetti has shown us what to

1932. do ; let us see that we do it.

~~

 

PUBLICATIONS OF THE
ROYAL ANTHROPOLOGICAL INSTITUTE

52 UPPER BEDFORD PLACE, W.C.1

Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute

IN HALF-YEARLY PARTS FIFTEEN SHILLINGS EACH

Vol. LXIV. 11 contains among other matter the following :

NOTES ON A HERO CULT FROM THE GULF OF CARPENTARIA, NORTH QUEENSLAND
(Plates XXVI-XXVIIT). DONALD F. THOMSON, D.Sc.

INDONESIAN INFLUENCE ON EAST AFRICA CULTURE (XXXVITI-XLIT). JAMES HORNELL.

EYEBROWS AND EYELASHES IN MAN :, their different forms, pigmentation and heredity
(with Preface by Prorgssor Suk). F. ROZPRYM.

Man

A MONTHLY JOURNAL OF ANTHROPOLOGICAL SCIENCE. Annual Subscription,
£1; monthly numbers, 2s. net.

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVII, No. 9.
