THE PHYSIOLOGICAL FACTORS
GOVERNING THE PROPORTIONS OF
THE SEXES IN MAN.

By A. S. Parkes, M.A., Ph.D.

(Beit Memorial Research Fellow.)

IT .—-INTRODUCTORY.

It is searcely necessary to justify a discussion of the factors governing the proportions of the sexes in man, their importance is very evident, but the direct bearing of the subject upon eugenics may be emphasized.

The social and economic effects of the proportions in which the
two sexes occur can hardly be exaggerated but at the same time the
subject scarcely seems to have received the attention which it would
appear to deserve. The whole social system as far as it concerns the
sexes is founded on the fact that the two sexes are produced in approximately equal numbers, and any large variation from equality would
have cataclysmic results. If for example, one sex or the other began
to be produced in overwhelming numbers the principle of monogamous
marriage would have to be modified if hopeless chaos were to be avoided.

As a matter of practical interest it can hardly be supposed that
any such great preponderance of one or the other will occur naturally,
but the lesser variations in the sex-ratio (whether springing from natural
or other causes) have repercussions in social directions which are of
considerable importance. The excess of females among adults which
was evident before, but accentuated by the war, has been not the
least important factor in the emancipation of women which has
been a feature of the last decade.

If the excess had been of males rather than of females it is to be
doubted whether the emergence of the women into publie life would
have been as rapid or as extensive, for, while the motive force of the
movement may have been partly intellectual, necessity cue to this
exess has without doubt been the chief incentive. The eugenic importance of the many issues influenced by the sex-ratio makes a study
of the factors which govern the sex-ratio of practical importance.

It is clear that the sex-ratio must originally be conditioned by
the nature of the determination of sex, and that the factors which determine sex must be bound up with those which determine the initial proportions of the sexes. Originally, of course, the sex-ratio and its
variation was used as evidence regarding sex determination, but the
complexity of the factors governing the sex-ratio makes this a dangerous proceeding, and the best approach to the study of the sex-ratio is
to consider sex determination from a genetic and cytological standpoint and to discuss the sex-ratio in the light of this more accurate
basis.
276 EUGENICS REVIEW.

II.—TuHE DETERMINATION OF SEX.

Until recently the most commonly held theory of sex determination was that the sex of an embryo was determined during gestation by
the conditions under which development took place. The forerunners of the essential parts of the reproductive organs of both sexes
are present in all normal embryos, and this fact gives colour to the
view that embryos are potentially hermaphrodite, or are neuter, as
regards sex, and that environmental conditions, particualrly those of
nutrition, can accentuate one set of organs at the expense of the other
set, or can sway neutrality to the male or female model. The result
of such mechanism would be that in certain conditions an excess of
males would be produced, while under other conditions females would
preponderate. This theory, was therefore, inextricably connected
with the earlier interpretations of the variations in the sex-ratio, and
with the early analyses of the causes of these variations. Chief among
the factors bearing upon development is, of course, nutrition and it was
about this factor that the theory chiefly hung. As usually stated the
theory was that good conditions accentuated the proportion of females
and bad conditions the proportion of males. It is obvious, however,
that there are many grave objections to thishypothesis. In the first
place, considering the great variations in nutrition to which an embryo
is subjected, one would have expected from this theory to find a very
much greater amount of variation in the sex-ratio than actually occurs.
No enormous variation is found; As Pike (41) says, ‘“Through periods
of war and of peace, of famine and of plenty, and under a great variety
of racial and climatic conditions’’ the variation is usually very small.
Also one would have expected that, where a number of embryos are
developed together in a multiple gestation, these embryos, being developed under similar conditions, would be of the same sex. In polytocus
animals this is clearly not true and the same applies to multiple births
in what are normally monotocus animals. In addition, in animals
which normally only have one at a birth, twins must each individually
have less nutrition than a single embryo, and from this fact twins
should tend to be mostly males. Again, there is no evidence that this is
so. Fourthly, some light is thrown on the subject by a consideration
of abnormal pregnancies. It occasionally occurs that extra-uterine
pregnancies, such as ovarian, tubal, and abdominal gestations are produced. Such pregnancies must of necessity be extremely badly
nourished, and in some cases it has been possible to get the sex of the
products of such gestations. Rauber (45) reports that nothing
abnormal is found in the sex-ratio, and the fact that no excess
of males is observable suggests that the malnutrition has no effect upon
sex. Fifthly, the fact that the sex of an embryo is histologically
observable at a very early stage of development, before the embryo
makes any great call upon the mother for nourishment, seems to show
the time during which the environmental conditions of nutrition can
have a chance of acting is very short.

In the circumstances, however, the most damaging evidence
against this theory is the evidence which tends to show that sex is
determined not later than at fertilisation. Chiefamong these evidences
PROPORTIONS OF THE SEXES IN MAN. 277

are the facts of polyembryony. In certain cases it is known that a
fertilised ovum may split into two or more fragments and that each
fragment may develop into a normal individual in the same ioetal
membranes. In these cases all individuals developing from a single
ovum are found to be of the same sex, and the only explanation for
this is that somehow or other sex is determined when the individual
comes into being at fertilisation. In the human subject an appreciable proportion of twins are developed from a single ovum. These
are known as identical twins and are of the same sex. Im the case of
the four-banded Armadillo identical quadruplets are the normal thing,
and here again the four individuals are always of the same sex. In
certain Lepidoptera polyembryony runs to its extreme form, and in
some cases several hundred of individuals, always of the same sex, are
developed from a single fertilised ovum. We may conclude therefore
with Heape (18) ‘That the latest moment at which the sex of the offspring can be determined is at the time of fertilisation and that no
influence exerted later can alter the sex.’

It is not proposed here to deal with any more of the very numerous.
theories which have at one time or other been put forward relating to
sex determination, but to pass on tothe theory which is now generally
accepted, namely, the chromosome theory of sex determination. The
nucleus of the living cell at certain stages divides up into rod shaped
bodies of chromotin called chromosomes. The number of these is
constant in any given species of animal. These bodies are normally
in pairs, one of each pair having been derived from each parent. In
many cases, however, one pair is not complete, one of the pair being
either rudimentary or else absent altogether. These odd pairs appear
to be connected with the determination of sex. It is found that in one
sex only is an odd pair found and in the other sex all the pairs are complete. In different groups of animals a different sex possesses the odd
pair; thus in birds and Lepidoptera the female possesses the odd pair,
while in Mammals and Diptera, on the other hand, the male has the
odd pair. :

When the germ cells are formed the number of chromosomes is
reduced, otherwise the number characteristic of the species would
be doubled every generation This reduction is normally brought
about by one of each pair passing into one germ cell and the other of
each pair passing into another germ cell. As regards the main body
of the chromosomes which are in the pairs, the two germ cells receive
the same number and same type of chromosomes, but when it comes
for the odd pair to separate and pass into different germ cells it is clear
that the two gametes will be differently constituted as regards the
chromosomes derived from this odd pair. This means that in Birds
and Lepidoptera the ova are dimorphic, while in mammals and
Diptera the spermatozoa are of two kinds. |

At fertilisation, in the mammal, an ovum may meet a spermatozoon of either type, and the nuclear constitution of the resulting
embryo will depend upon which type is met.

If N represents the autosomes of the germ cells and X and Y the
278 EUGENICS REVIEW.

heterochromosomes, a diagram of sex determination in the mammal
may be made as follows :—

Male Parent. Female Parent
Soma 2N XX 2N XY

|
Y
Gametes (N NX) NN a (N X)_
(NX) 27 _ Wy

2(2N XX) Females.
2(2N XY) Males.

Fertilisation thus gives rise to approximately equal numbers of
2N XX (female individuals) and 2N XY (Male) individuals.

The theory which has been outlined above depends in its origin
upon cytological evidence, but two other lines of research have given
strong support for the view that sex is in some way associated with the
chromosome constitution of the embryo. Firstly., it is found that the
inheritance of certain characters follows a course which is linked with,
or limited to, one sex. Hemophilia and Daltonism are two such
characters. These diseases are inherited in the following manner.
Except in the rarest cases, the male only is affected and the disease is
passed on not to his sons or daughters, but to his grandsons through his
daughters. The sons of an affected male do not show or carry the disease and the daughters themselves carry it but do not show it. How,
since a male derives his Y-chromosome from his father, whereas he
may derive his X-chromosome from his grandfather through his mother,
it is to be concluded that these sex limited diseases are brought about
by a factor which is in some way carried by the X-chromosome and that
an affected X-chromosome is recessive to a normal X-chromosome. In
any case the great point about the manner in which these diseases are
inherited is that it provides very definite evidence in favour of the view
hat mammalian spermatozoa areof two types, whereas the ova are all
similar.

Secondly, if some spermatozoa have one chromosome less than
the others, or have one rudimentary chromosome, it might be expected
that the spermatozoa heads would show different sizes according to
the presence or absence of the accessory chromosome. In many cases,
it has actually been demonstrated that a frequency polygon for spermatozoa headlengths is dimorphic, which shows that in these cases the
spermatozoa heads tend to fall into two main size groups, although the
variation in each group results in overlapping.

For our present purpose the most interesting thing about the
chromosome theory is the implications regarding the sex-ratio which
may be drawn from it. These are as follows :—
PROPORTIONS OF THE SEXES IN MAN. 279

(a) Since the two types of spermatozoa are produced in equal
numbers, it would be expected that the two sexes would be
conceived in equal numbers.

‘(b) Since sex is determined at fertilisation, it is possible to speak
of a sex-ratio this time onwards right through gestation to the
oldest ages to which individuals live.

(c) The only changes which can come about in the sex-ratio must
be brought about by mortality .*

TIT.— VARIATION IN THE SEX-RATIO DURING THE LIFE CyYcLr.

Since a sex-ratio exists from the time of conception, it is of considerable interest and utility to examine the ratio and its variations
during the whole of the life cycle. With the possible exception of
mankind, however, sufficient material does not exist for this undertaking and the best that can be achieved up to the present is to examine
the ratio at prominent points in the life history. Three convenient
points to take are conception, birth. and maturity. In practice the
ratio at birth is the only one about which any really accurate data can
be obtained. The ratio at maturity can in many cases be roughly
obtained, but such factors as emigration and immigration all disturb
the accuracy of any compilation relating to the proportions among
adults. At the other extreme it is as yet quite impossible to observe
even roughly the sex-ratio at conception and the only way in which a
rough estimate can be arrived at is to observe as accurately as possible
the ratio at birth and to endeavour to ascertain what change, if any,
has taken place during gestation. Since change can only come about
as the result of mortality, an examination of the mortality will supply
a clue to the change. To take an example, if at birth 104 males are
produced to 100 females, and it is known that for this 204 individuals
produced at birth thirty males and twenty females have died during
pregnancy, it is clear that 134 males and 120 females were conceived,
giving 111.5 males at conception to 100 females, instead of 104 as was
found at birth. The two factors, therefore, which govern the change
taking place between conception and birth are:

(a) The amount of pre-natal mortality.

(6) The sex incidence of this pre-natal mortality.

Since the ratio at birth is the basis from which all calculations of
the ratio at conception have to be made, the general nature of the
ratio at birth must first be considered. Inthe human subject, in cases
where a large volume of accurate data can be obtained, the keynote of
the sex-ratio at birth is equality between the sexes. Very few authen
* This statement overlooks the possibility of complete sex reversal. It is
known of course, that even in mammals, the differentiation of sex does not always
follow the chromosome constitution, and that in some cases the mechanism of
differentiation becomes deranged and intersexes are produced. It is very doubtful
however, whether any complete reversals to the opposite sex can occur in mammals,
although the possible occurrence of this on a large scale has been suggested by
Huxley (21) as an explanation of certain variations in the sex-ratio. It does not
seem probable that complete sex reversal can be sufficiently frequent to materially affect the sex-ratio and as a working hypothesis the statement made above may be taken as accurate.
280 EUGENICS REVIEW.

tic records are to be found for any considerable amount of material
showing a ratio of more than 110 males per 100 females, or less than 90
males per 100 females.* _

It is proposed now to deal with the estimation of the two factors
which determine the change in the sex-ratio during gestation. Todeal,
firstly, with the amount of pre-natal mortality, the death of an embryo.
is followed in the human subject normally by abortion and the entire
evacuation of the uterus. In the lower mammals where a number of
embryos are developed at one time, the death of one embryo is usually
followed by autolysis and reabsorption and it is not impossible that
the death of an embryo in a young stage even in the human subject,
may be followed by a similar process and not result in abortion. It is.
very probable, therefore, that even were it possible to compute the
entire amount of abortion, the full figures for prenatal mortality would
not be available. Since it is not possible even to compute the full
amount of abortion, and since during the first three months of pregnancy, abortion is not a necessary result of mortality, it is quite
obvious that any figure which it is possible to arrive at for the amount
of pre-natal mortality must fall far short of the true amount. However, the amount which it is possible to compute serves as a rough guide:
and the following table summarizes the considerable number of estimates which have been made.

TaBLE I. AMOUNT OF ABORTION IN MAN.

   

Percentage.

AUTHORITY.
of births. Of all pregnancies.

Priestly (43)
Whitehead (53)
Williams (54)
Franz (14)
Malins (32)
Taussig (51)
Pearson (89)
Auerbach (1)
Rauber (45)
Parkes (34)

From this table it may be seen that even the amount of mortality
which it is possible to compute is very considerable and is quite enough
to influence materially the sex-ratio if the sex incidence Js at all
peculiar. As regards this point, the following table is a compilation
of the various estimates which have been made of the sex-ratio of abor
tions.

* A word may be said here with regard to the manner of calculating the sexratio. In most biological literature the method of.calculating the number of males
per hundred females is used, whereas most statistical authors calculate the percentage of males in the given data. A still further method is to give the male.
proportion as a decimal of unity. The first of the systems has the almost prohibitive disadvantage for original papers that no reliable probable error can be calculated for the ratio, and the last system is somewhat elaborate. Probably the
most convenient method in new work is to calculate the percentage of males occurring and this has the advantage that a reliable probable error can be calculated for
the percentage.

|
|
Routh (46) |
|
|
|
PROPORTIONS OF THE SEXES IN MAN. 281

TABLE II. SExX-RATIO OF ABORTIONS.

                
 

Authority. Age of Abortion. Number. Sex-ratio.

      
    
  
  
  
   

Lenhossek (28) 3—6 mth. 156

Carvallo (7) Up to 4th mth,
’ K6résy (27)
| Pinard and Magnan (40) |

Rust (47) Ist 6 mths.

Rauber /45)

These figures are the ratios for the aggregate pre-natal mortality,
but Auerbach (1) gives the following table (Table III.) showing that
the excess of males in pre-natal mortality increases very considerably
going back towards conception. |

FasBLe TIL. SeEx-RATIO OF ABORTIONS ACCORDING TO AGE FROM AUERBACH.

 

 

Numbers. Males. Females. |  Sex-ratio. |
“ath month 750 402 | 348 116
- 6th month. | 943 506 437 116
5th month. 1041 645 396 1638
4th month. 1333 938 405 7 229
4—7th m | 4067 e4g1 sds 86 156-4

A similar fact has been shown as regards the gross amount of mortality. Giinther (17) has calculated that the curves for both the
amounts and sex-incidence of pre-natal mortality follow a logarithmic
formula back into gestation. This means that the early wastage of
males must be very great and considerably more than it is possible to
calculate. Using, however, the imperfect figures which are at our
command, various authors have endeavoured to calculate the initial
sex-ratio of conception. The following table sums up the figures which
have been arrived at for this ratio.

TaBLE ITV. ESTIMATES OF SEX-RATIO AT CONCEPTION.

 

Author. | Ratio.
Bernoulli (4) | 108-2
Jendrassik (24) | 108 -7
Lenhossek (28) 111-90
Auerbach (1) 116-4

Dawson (10) 110-0

 
282 EUGENICS REVIEW.

These estimations are probably of no great accuracy, but it is safe
to maintain that a very considerable excess of males is conceived as
compared with that born. This conclusion is supported by the fact
that in other mammals it has been found possible to examine the sexratio in utero, with the result that males have been found in far greater
excess than occurs at birth. |

The amount and nature of pre-natal mortality find direct continuation in the nature of still births. The question of stillbirths is, however, complicated by the fact that two factors play a part in determining their frequency. In the first place, there are the still-births which
are dead when parturition sets in, and, secondly, there is the class of
still-births which is caused purely by labour troubles. It is possible,
however, to differentiate to some extent between these two. If stillbirths were mainly due to labour troubles, they would be most frequent when labour troubles are most common, namely among firstbirths. I have shown elsewhere, (34), however, that this is not so,
and that still-births, like abortions, occur predominantly at later
pregnancies. Hence still-births are presumably not mostly due to
labour troubles, and must be largely dead before parturition occurs,
If this is the case, one would expect still-births to be roughly due to the
same causes as abortions, and therefore to present similar features.
In the first place, the percentage of still-births is very considerable, and,
as in the case of abortions, the sex incidence is unequal and falls largely
upon the males. The following table sums up the large number of
estimations of the sex-ratio of still-births,

TABLE V. SEX-RATIO OF STILL-BIRTHS.

    

Authority. Locality and Date. Sex-ratio.
Bodio (5) 1887—1895
Italy 131-1
France 142-2
Germany 128-38
Austria 132:1
Hungary 130-0
Switzerland 135-0
Belgium 132-0
Holland 127-1
Sweden 135-0
Norway 124-6
Denmark 132-0
Dawson (10) 138-0 |
King (25) America 131-06
Nichols (33) 131-6
Lewis (29) Europe 120-—170
Heape (19) Cuba 144-45
Hirsch (20) Germany 127-9
Davis (9) United States 137-1
Dising (11) Prussia 129-09
Quetelet (44) 133-5

 

These ratios all centre very closely round 185, which figure, though
below the ratio for abortions, is considerably above the ratio for live
births. The greater mortality of the males is maintained after birth,
through each month for the first year of life the sex-ratio of mortality
PROPORTIONS OF THE SEXES IN MAN. 288

sinks. The following table gives the ratio of mortality by three
monthly periods from the time of conception to the end of the first year
of life. It will be noticed that the ratio shows a continuous decline.

TABLE VI. SEX-RATIO OF MORTALITY FROM CONCEPTION TO END OF FIRST YEAR

OF LIFE.
Time. Sex-ratio of mortality. Authority.
§ 0—4 months
= 4—T7 months 156-5 Auerbach (1)
S 7—9 months 138 Average figure
0—8 months - 131-5 Registrar Genera]
38—6 months 12] Registrar General
3 6—9 months 120 Registrar General
9—12 months 113 Registrar General

When this table is graphed it will be seen that the curve for the
decline in the sex-ratio of mortality is very nearly linear and it is
tnteresting to project back this curve to the time of conception, and
ihus to arrive at a presumable ratio for the sex ratio of mortality during
the first three months of gestation, a time for which no actual figure
can be observed.

Fic. I. Sex-RATIO OF MORTALITY FROM CONCEPTION TO END OF FIRST YEAR OF
LIFE.
118 :

{60

$3

Sex Antie yd

iad

 

O-— ger 9 ee ee be)
Geslation Post - natal dupe
284 EUGENICS REVIEW.

On the basis of this graph it would seem that the sex-ratio of
mortality for the first three months of gestation is probably 166-168.

Attention may now be turned to the nature of the mortality during
individual life and for this purpose we may examine the figure given by
the Registrar-General for 19138, the last pre-war year. During the
first five years of life, the sex-ratio of the mortality was 113-4. During the fifth to tenth years this ratio has sunk to 100-7, while in the
next five years, it sinks still further to 93-3 and this period is the only
one during the whole life cycle at which more females die than males.
From fifteen years onwards the sex-ratio of mortality rises steadily to
the age of fifty, when a slight decline sets in. The excess of females
dying between ten and fifteen is a subject of some interest, and is very
probably explained by the greater severity of the onset of puberty in
the female than in the male. Schultz (48) puts the actual proximate
cause down largely to tuberculosis ‘‘For which disease the common
occurrence of anaemic and chlorotic conditions at the time of puberty
furnishes an excellent soil.” Stewart (50), also, found that between
the ages of ten and twenty years the deaths from pulmonary tuberculosis show a huge excess of females, while at other times males preponderate. This seems to support Schultz’s suggestion.

Turning to the actual effect of the mortality upon the sex-ratio, we
find that for living individuals the ratio, which at birth was 104, is
reduced at the end of the first year to 102, while at the end of the
second year of life further reduction has taken place to 101-5. In the
third to fifth years this has decreased to 100-3 the average for the first
five years of life bemg 101. From five to ten years of age, the ratio is
further decreased to 99-9, while during the following five years a
urther decrease to 94-2 takes place. For the fifteen to twenty years of
age, however, a rise is seen, following upon the increased mortality of
females during the previous five years. From this point the proportion
of males shows a continuous decline, with one small exception, right
on to old age; the exception is a slight rise between 40 and 50 years of
age following the slightly increased mortality of females at 40 to 45
years of age. During old age the excess of females is really striking,
and at the age of 85 and over the sex-ratio of about 65,000 individuals
is only 55-2.

It thus appears that during the entire life cycle, with one or two
minor exceptions, the males die more readily than the females, and we
are entitled to ask why this should be so. Two main ideas have been
put forward relating to this problem. In the first place it is suggested
(for instance by Huxley) that certain sex-linked semi-lethal factors
which reduce vitality may exist in mammals and even in the human
subject in the same way as they have been demonstrated for certain
invertebrates. The other group of ideas relates to the alleged great size
and presumably greater requirements of the male foetus. It is not
quite certain, however, as far as the human subject is concerned, whether
the male foetus actually is largerthan the female. Males are certainly
bigger at birth than females, but it has been suggested that this is due
to the probable greater age of the male foetus at birth. In any case
this hypothesis does not explain why even after birth the males are
PROPORTIONS OF THE SEXES IN MAN. 285

nearly always dying faster than the females. Lillie (80) suggests that
the greater mortality among the male foetuses is due to a disturbance
of the equilibrium which protects the males from the sex hormones of
the mother. This idea, however, is open to the same objections as the
previous ones, namely, that it does not explain why the same thing
still occurs after birth. All that can be said at present is that-for some
reason or other the male seems to possess an inherently inferior vitality
to the female, a conclusion summed up by Carvalloas ‘‘les gareons sont
les plus fragiles.’’

Although the actual figures for the sex-ratios of entire populations
considered in the aggregate have very little biological meaning, a table
quoted from Balz* (2) is given below for the sake of completeness showing this figure for the chief nations of the world.

TABLE VII. SEX-RATIO OF ENTIRE POPULATIONS.

   

Country. Males per 100 Country. Males per 100
females. females.
Great Britain 93-5 Belgium 98:4
Norway 94-0 Italy 99:0
Denmark 94°5 Poland 100:5
Sweden 95:3 Greenland 101-5
Spain 95-3 Japan 102-0
Austria 96-6 India 104-1
Germany 96-9 Bulgaria 104°5
European Russia — «97-2 Serbia 106-0
Switzerland 97-2 Siberia 106-0
Hungary 97-7 Caucasus 111:°0
France , 97-9 Korea 113-0
Holland 98-2 Asiatic Russia 117-5
Ireland 98-3 China 125-0

 

IV. Tae VARIATION IN THE SEx-RATIO at BrrTa.

It has been mentioned above that the only ratio for which a
considerable amount of reliable data can be obtained is the ratio at
birth, and it is of interest therefore, to endeavour to analyse the causes
of the variations which are found from time to tyme, from place to
place, and from one set of conditions to another, inthe proportions of
the sexes at birth. This can only be done by considering the two
factors which govern the proportions of the sexes at birth and by endeavouring to locate which one, if not both, has contributed the
particular variation under discussion.

* The original table given by Balz shows females per 100 males, but the ratios
have been recalculated here as males per 100 females to bring them into line with
the rest of the paper.

From what has been said above, it is clear that two factors govern
the sex-ratio at any given time. These are
(a) The initial sex-ratio at conception.
(b) The amount of mortality and the sex incidence of mortality
between conception and the given time. |

Hence the factors which govern the sex-ratio at birth are the
286 EUGENICS REVIEW.

sex-ratio at conception and the amount and the sex-ratio of the prenatal mortality.

This means that variation in the sex-ratio at birth may be caused
by a variation in either or both of these two factors. Thus, a heavy
foetal mortality produces, other things being equal, a low proportion
of males at birth, while a low mortality during gestation decreases the
excess male wastage, and raises the proportion of males at birth. On
the other hand, where the amount of intra-uterine death is more or less
constant, the sex-ratio at birth will be determined by that at conception. If both of these two factors vary together, however, the variation
may be cumulative or compensating. Thus a high ratio at conception
coupled with a low mortality during gestation will raise considerably
the ratio at birth, whereas coupled with a high mortality it will produce
a more or less normal ratio at birth. Conversely a low ratio at conception in conjunction with low foetal mortality will produce an ordinary
ratio at conception, whereas in conjunction with a high mortality will
produce an abnormally low ratio at birth.

The sex-ratio at birth varies fairly definitely and it is attempted
below to discuss the authenticity of some of these variations and their
probable causes.

Racial Variation.

It is not proposed here to discuss the variation among European
and other white races. This has been considered by a considerable
number of authors already, and little good can be obtained from further
discussion. I propose, however, to touch upon the strangely high sexratio of Jews in all parts of the world. The following table summarises the records which are in existence of the proportion of the sexes
among the Jews. :

TaBLE VIII. SExX-RATIO OF THE JEWS.

Sex-ratio. Authority.

Prussia Von Fircks (18) 1820—1867
Posen Von Bergmann (3) 1819—1873
Prussia Diising (11) 1875—1887
Livonia Carlberg and 18738

Lenhossek
Prussia Darwin (8)
Breslau Darwin (8)
Livonia Darwin (8)
Pearl (38)
Austria Jacobs (22) 1861—-1870

 

It will be seen that all these ratios are above the ratios for the
general population of the given area and this fact has been a subject of
much discussion. Four explanations have been put forward. (a)
That it is fictitious and depends upon faulty registration. (b) That
it is connected with over maturity of! the ovum consequent on the
Mosaic law forbidding intercourse for six days after menstruation..
(c) That it is due to inbreeding. (d) That it is due to a decreased
amount of foetalelimination. (a) need not be considered. It has been
PROPORTIONS OF THE SEXES IN MAN. 287

conclusively shown that faulty registration cannot account for the facts.
(b) has been disproved by Pearl and Salaman (38) who found that
‘“There is no evidence that in the human race the time of fertilisation
of the egg relative to the catamenial period has any influence on the
sex-ratio exhibited by the offspring.’’ (c) is in itself no real explanation at all, and in any case there is no true evidence that such amounts
of inbreeding as obtain in the human subject, even among Jews, have
any influence at all on the sex-ratio. (d) apparently supplies the real
explanation. The great care taken by Jewish women during pregnancy
must have the effect of lowering the pre-natal mortality. As a result,
the pre-natal excess male wastage will be decreased and the proportion
of males at birth correspondingly raised. .

A further point upon which I wish to touch is the difference which
appears to exist between the sex-ratio of coloured and white races as
groups. The real analytical approach to this subject is to consider
eases where coloured and white races liveside by side under the same
topographical and climatic conditions. The following table comprises
a number of records of instances of this kind.

TaBLeE I. SEX-RATIO OF WHITE AND COLOURED RACES.

 

Authority. Locality. Ratio for Whites | Ratio for coloured races.

La a TT |

 

Heape (19) Cuba 108 -42 101-2

Little (81) U.S.A. (1st births) 115-51 93-61

Nichols (33). | Columbia 106-2 103-0

Jastrzebski 28| Cape Colony 105-4 102-6
»» US.A. 105-7 100-0 (just under)
»» New York 104-5 101:6 .
» New Orleans 102-0 98-2
as Columbia 105-0 100-0

 

It will be seen that in every case the ratio for the black races is
lower than that for the whites, and the generality of this phenomenom
suggests that it has some real basis. It has been contended by Thomas
that the wide range of variation in each group prohibits a general statement that the sex-ratio of coloured races tends to be lower than that of
white races, and while his objection to such a statement is not unreasonable, yet on the basis of the above table which contains all the
records I have been able to gather of the two races living side by side,
it is clearly correct to say that under similar conditions colouredraces
seem to have a lower sex-ratio than adjacent whites. The explanation
of this, I tentatively suggested in ‘‘Man’’ (1928, 97) to be a greater
pre-natal mortality among the blacks. This explanation is also taken
exception to by Thomas, but in the absence of an alternative one, it
may be considered as a working hypothesis. It is supported by the
288 EUGENICS REVIEW.

‘fact that Nichols (88) reports that in Columbia the abortion and stil]birth rate is double in the case of the negroes, as compared with the
whites. —

Annual Variation. |

Under the stable conditions which now exist in most civilised
countries, it would hardly be expected that the sex ratio would show
any very: great annual variation, and in practice it is found that the
proportions of the sexes is remarkably stable from year to year. In
England and Wales the fluctuations in the ratio at birth between 1838
and 1913 was between 105 -4 in 1843 and 108°2 in 1898, with the average
of 104-0 coming near the lower figure. Since 1864 the variation,
excluding the war period, has been between 103-2 and 104-3 only.
This variation is remarkably small. Figures given by Diising (11) for
Prussia between 1749 and 1849 show a variation between 102-9 and
106-6 for this period. This range is wider than that for England, but
it is still remarkably small considering the probable errors of compilation in those days. Gini (15) gives very full tables for the ratios
of most countries of the world year by year, so far as can be obtained,
and these tables again emphasise the fact that annual variation in the
sex-ratio is of no great dimensions. In the case of the records for
England and Wales, the really interesting fact is that the variation is
not round equality between the sexes, but is about a point above
equality, the mean of the extremes being 103-75. This shows that
there are two factors at work. One which constantly causes these
males to preponderate, and another which causes the excess to vary in
amount from year to year.

Tn view of the small amount of annual variation, little good can be
obtained from discussing its probable cause.

Age of Parents.

That the age of the parents has some influence on the sex of the
offspring is one of the oldest of all theories of the sex-ratio. The age
of the mother, the age of the father, and the relative age of the parents
have all been credited with an effect on the sex-ratio. A large volume
of literature has grown up around the third point, but since it is all
contradictory it may be supposed that the relative age of the parents
has no definite result upon the sex-ratio of the offspring. In the same
way, the investigations dealing with the age of the father have given
very eontradictory results, and here again any definite influence may be
doubted. It seems, however, that the age of the mother has some
effect upon the sex-ratio at birth, and it is generally agreed that the
proportion of males decreases as the age of the mother advances. At
first sight, this appears to be in conflict with the chromosome theory of
sex determination, but as I have shown elsewhere (34) this result is
probably brought about by the increased pre-natal mortality
which occurs with older mothers. The increased mortality results in
an increased wastage of males and the maternal influence is exerted
purely after conception and leaves intact the chromosome theory.
Parity .*

I have pointed out elsewhere (34) that there is a casual relationship
PROPORTIONS OF THE SEXES IN MAN. 2389

between the age of the mother and the parity. Thus first births largely
take place in younger mothers and the higher parities are usually
associated with older mothers. One would expect therefore that the
proportion of males would sink in consecutive births, and this is
actually found to occur. The explanation appears to be the same as in
the case of the age of the mother, and to rest upon the varying amounts
of pre-natal mortality.

Hybridisation.

The effects of hybridisation upon the sex-ratio is a subject of con
siderable anthropological interest. Three types of hybridisation are
possible; hybridisation between white races, hybridisation between
coloured races, and white and coloured crosses. As a result of a most
careful investigation of the effect of hybridisation, Little (31) came to
the conclusion that hybrid white matings give a significant excess of
males over pure white mating, and that hybrid coloured matings give a
significant excess of females over pure coloured matings. This is confirmed by Lewis (29) who found that unions of Spanish, Italian, and
French male emigrants with native born Argentine females produce a
higher masculinity than pure Argentine alliances or pure alliances of
any of these nationalities in Buenos Ayres. Also, unions of Argentine
males with females of foreign nationalities give a higher sex-ratio than
pure Argentine matings. Pearl (37) came to the same conclusion. In
the case of black and white hybrids it is stated by Powers (42) that there
is a large excess of girls among half breeds in California, and Kohl (26)
notes that in the northern parts of the United States females preponderate in the progeny of French men with Indian women. In
another human bybrid, the Mulatto, Starkweather (49) found 12 to 15%
excess of females, while in the whole population males were in excess.
Gortz (16) reports an excess of females among the offspring of Dutch men
and Malay women in Java, a fact which has been confirmed by Wait}
(52). Jastrzebski states that in New York City he found for the years
1910-15 the following ratios of males to 100 females; white 104-0,
negroes 99:9 and mulattoes 97-9. Bugnion (6) notes that ‘‘lorsque
les blancs s’etablissent dans une colonie et forment avec les negresses
une race mulatre on observe dans les premiers temps une enorme surproduction des filles.’’ It seems therefore possible to formulate three
deductions as to the effect of hybridisation upon the sex-ratio. (a)
That crosses between white races produce an excess of males over pure
white mating, (b) that hybridisation between coloured races produces an
excess of females above pure coloured matings, (c) that hybrids of white
and coloured races show an excess of females above the pure matings of
either race.

V. THe DETERMINATION OF THE SEX-RATIO AT CONCEPTION.

We have seen that the sex-ratio at birth is usually slightly above
equality, and also that the ratio at conception is still more above
equality, being in the case of man probably about 120 males to 100
females. This fact requires bringing into harmony with the theoretical

* The word Parity is a convenient expression for the chronological number of the
pregnancy.
290 EUGENICS REVIEW.

expectation that equal numbers of the sexes would be conceived. It
has been mentioned that the male producing and female producing
spermatozoa are formed in equal numbers, and should thus produce
males and females in equalnumbers if the equilibrium were not disturbed. It is to be supposed, therefore, that by some means or other
the balance between the two types of spermatozoa is disturbed between
the time of formation and the time when fertilisation occurs. There
are two ways in which the balance might be disturbed. In the first
place the spermatozoa are known to live for considerable periods and it
may reasonably be supposed that the fittest survive in the greatest
majority. In this struggle for existence one type or the other may have
a slight advantage and, therefore, survive in the greatest number.
Secondly, there may be a difference in mobility between the two types
and a basis for this is provided by the slight difference in size between
the two types which has been noticed above. In addition, the spermatozoa have a very considerable way to travel by their own powers of
locomotion before fertilisation can be accomplished, and this longer
journey provides an admirable basis for the operations of selective
factors. What really happens is an unconscious race to the ovum and
the smaller type may have an advantage owing to their smaller bulk.

It would seem that any differential mobility and vitality which
exists between the two types of spermatozoa must act in favour of the
small headed male producing ones, and this probability explains more
reasonably than any other hypothesis the fact that more males are conceived than females. It is to be admitted that this explanation is
very largely inductive, but the experimental aspect offers fascinating
possibilities.

VI. Discussion.

Before it is possible to make any practical applications of our
knowledge of the factors which govern the proportions of the sexes it is
necessary to have some idea of what would constitute an optimum sexratio. The ratio during infancy is clearly only of practical importance
in so far as it will affect the adult ratio of future years; the ratio of
essential practical importance is that of marriageable adults. At first
sight it might appear desirable that adults of marrying age, should be
equal in numbers, but this is probably scarcely accurate. Under ideal
conditions where the sex-ratio permitted everybody not disinclined to
get married it would probably be found that owing to the various
factors (absorption in profession, etc.,) more males than females would
remain single, and thus an optimum ratio would allow for a slight
excess of males. |

In the light of this premise the most important conclusions which
can be drawn from the facts discussed above are :—

(a) That at birth a slight but definite excess of males occurs.

(b) That during infancy and adolescence the excess male mortality over females reduces the male percentage to a point.
where a definite female excess exists by the time maturity is
reached.
maturity become.

10.
11.

12.

138.
14.

15.
16.

17.

18.

PROPORTIONS OF THE SEXES IN MAN. 291

(c) That no means of controlling the proportions of the sexes produced can yet be formulated.

It is thus clear that if the adult ratio could be the same as the ratio.
at birth something approaching the ideal condition would exist, and
since it is the large amount of infantile mortality which causes the
difference in these two ratios, it is apparent that the more infantile
mortality can be reduced the nearer to the ideal will the ratio at

Thus though no actual means can be seen of regulating at will the
proportions in which the sexes are produced, something approaching an
optimum maturity ratio could be obtained by cutting down to a
minimum the early mortality which so reduces the male proportion
among adults.

AUERBACH

BALz

BERGMANN

BERNOULI

Bopio ..

BUGNION

CARVALLO

DARWIN
Davis

DAWSON
DuSING..

DUSING..

FircKs
FRANZ ..

GINI
GoOrTz ..

GUNTHER

HEAPE...

BIBLIOGRAPHY .

1912

1911

1841
1895

1910

1912

1871

1918

1921
1884

1890

1898
1898

1908
1853

1923

1908

‘*Das Wahre Geschlechtsverhaltnis des Men-.
schen.’’ Archiv. Rassen-u-Gessellschafisbiol. Vol. ix.

‘*Die Verhaltniszahl der Geburten in verschiedenen Landern.’’ Korrespondenxbl.
deutsch Anthro. Ges. Vol. xlii.

Zur Geschichte der Entwickelung deutscher,
polnischer und jiidischer Bevolkerung derProvinz Posen. Tubingen. .

Handbuch der Populationstatistik.
‘‘Movimento della Popolazione,’’ Cofronti
Internazionali.

‘*Les cellules sexuelles et la détermination
du sexe.’’ Bull. Soc. Vaud. Sci. Nat. Vol.
xIvi.

‘‘La Masculinité dans _ les _ naissances
humaines.’’’ Compte rendu Ass. franc pour
U avancement des Sciences, Vol. xli.

Descent of Man. London.

‘*Birth statistics for the Birth Registration
Area of the United States, 1916.’ Bureau of
Census. Washington.

The Causation of Sex. London, 8rd Ed.
‘“*Die Regulierung der Geschlechtsverhaltnisse bei der Vermehrung, etc. Jenaische
Zeitsch. Vol. xvii.

Das_ Geschlechtsverhdlinis der Geburten in
Preussen. In ‘‘Staatwissenschaftliche
Studien’’ series. Vol. iii. Jena.
Bevélkerungslehre und Bevélkerungs politik.
Leipzig.

‘*Zur Lehre des Aborts.’’
Geburtsh. Vol. xxxvii.

Il Sesso dal Punto di Vista statistico. Milano.
Reise um die Welt in den Jahren 1844-47.
Stuttfart. 3 vols.

‘‘Letaldisposition und Sexualdisposition.’’
Naturwissenschafiliche Korrespondenz. Jahrg
I

Beitrage zur

“Note of the proportions of the Sexes in
Dogs.’’ Proc. Cambs. Phil. Soc. Vol. xiv..
292

19.

20.
21.

22.
23.

24.

25.

26.

27.
28.

29.
30.

31.
32.

33.
34,
35.
36.
37.

38.

39.

41.

REESE

EUGENICS REVIEW.

Heape ..

HIRSCH...

HuxLrEY

JACOBS
JASTRZEBSKI

JENDRASSIK

KING

KoHL

Kor6sy

LENHOSSEK

Lewis, C. J.andJ.N.

LILLIE we
LITTLE

MALINS..

NICHOLS

PARKES

PARKES.. oe

PARKES... ..
PEARL, M. & R.

PEARL & SALAMAN

PEARSON oe

PINARD ET MAGNAN .
PIKE

POWERS
PREISTLEY
QUETELET
RAUBER

1909

1922

1891
1919

1911

1921

1859

1898
1903

1906
1916

1920

1908

1907

1924

1924

1921

1908

1913

1908

1907

1877

1900

‘“The Proportions of the Sexes produced by
White and Coloured peoples in Cuba.’’ Phil.
Trans. B200.

‘*Ueber das Verhaltnis der Geschlechter.’’
Centr. f. Gyn. Vol. xxxvii.

‘*A Statistical Method of Testing the Biological causes underlying the Excess of Male

Births due to the War.’’ Hug. Rev. Vol.
xiii.

Studies in Jewish Statistics. London.

‘‘The Sex-Ratio at Birth.’ Hug. Rev.
Vol. xi.

‘‘Uber die Frage des Knabengeburtenuberschuss und tber andere Hereditatsprobleme.’’ Deutsche mediz. Wochenschr.

Vol. xxxvil.

‘*Birth mortality in the rat and in man.’’
Anat. Rec. Vol. xx.

**‘Bemerkungen uber die Bekehrung canadischer Indianer zum Christenthum und einige

bekehrungeschichten. In Das Auland.
XxXxii. :

Die Sterblichkeit der Hauptstadt. Budapest.
Berlin.

Das Problem der  geschlectsbestimmenden
Ursachen. Jena. Fischer.

Natality and Fecundity. London.

‘*The Theory of the Free-Martin.’’ Sci. N.S.
Vol. xliii.

‘‘Note on the Human Sex-Ratio.’’
Nat. Acad. Sct. U.S. Vol. vi.
‘*Antenatal waste of life in nature and
civilisation.”’ J. of Obst. and Gyn. of
British Empire. Vol. iii.

‘*The numerical proportion of the Sexes at
Birth.’? Mem. Amer. Anthro. Assoc. Vol. i.
‘Studies on the Sex-Ratio and Related
Phenomena.’’ (2) The Influence of the age of
the mother on the Sex-ratio in man. Jour.
Gen. Vol. xiv.

‘*Some Aspects of Reproduction Considered
in Relation to Eugenics.’’ Eug. Rev. Vol.
xv.

‘*Sex Heredity.’’ Sci. Pro. Vol. xv.

‘‘On the Relation of Race Crossing to the
Sex-Ratio.’’ Biol. Bull. Vol. xv.

‘*The RelativeTime of the Fertilisation of the
Ovum and the Sex-ratio amongst Jews.’’
Amer. Anthropologist. Vol. xv.

The Chances of Death and other Studies in
Evolution. London.

‘‘Sur la fragilité du sexe male.’’ Comptes
rendus hebdomadaires des séances de lV académie
des Sciences. Vol. clvi.

‘*A critical and statistical study of the
determination of sex, particularly in Human
offspring.’’ Am. Nat. xli.

Tribes of California. Washington.

Quoted by Routh (46).

Quoted by Bugnion (6).

Der Ueberschuss an Knabengeburten und seine
biologische Bedeutung. Leipzig.

Proc.
46 .
47.

48.

49,
50.

PROPORTIONS OF THE SEXES IN MAN. 298

RoutTu
Rust

SCHULTZ

STARKWEATHER
STEWART

TAUSSIG

WAITz ..
WHITEHEAD
WILLIAMS

1914
1902

1918

1883
1910-1

1910
1859

1912

‘‘Ante-natal hygiene.’’ Brit. Med. Jour.
Das Geschlecht der Fehl-und Totgeburten.
Strassburg.

**Studies in the Sex-ratio in Man.’’ Biol.
Bull. Vol. xxxiv.

The Law of Sex. London.

1 ‘‘The Sex and Age Incidence of Mortality
from Pulmonary Tuberculosis in Scotland and
in its groups of registration Districts since
1861." Proc. R.S. Edin. Vol. xxxi.
Prevention and Treatment of Abortion. St.
Louis.

Anthropologie der Naturvélker. Leipzig.
Quoted by Routh (46).

Obstetrics. New York.
