THE EUGENICS REVIEW

DR. CARTER writes: Though not the author of the Note of the Quarter on the Facts
article to which Mrs. Cadbury refers I would like to comment on her letter. Although she
has perhaps misunderstood some phrases now topical in Britain, such as “top” and
“competitive”? and finds prejudice for class and race where none exists, she does raise a
most important issue.

Taking first the misunderstandings:

a. The advantages both in health and educational progress of children born into
the upper socio-economic classes and the handicap of children born into the lower socioeconomic classes are fully documented in Britain, recently for example, for health in the
Perinatal Mortality survey, and for education in the Newsom and Plowden reports. One
may not agree as to the extent to which these advantages and disadvantages are genetically
or environmentally determined, but their existence is not in dispute and is distressing.
Much thought is rightly now being given in Britain (and no doubt across the Atlantic)
by the appropriate Government departments on ways and means by which to reduce
the handicap of children born into lower socio-economic groups—improvements in
antenatal care, preferential allocation of maternity beds, the special provision of nursery
schools, a special allocation of teachers in primary schools in under-privileged areas.
However successful such measures may in time prove to be one must surely welcome the
trend by which an increasing proportion of the country’s children are born into homes
(which will include some homes in the lower socio-economic groups) where such handicaps
do not exist.

b. It is of course true that in estimating an individual’s worth to the community one
must strike a balance between what he puts in and what he takes out. No educated
Englishman would equate “‘top”’ with “rich”. Mrs Cadbury refers to Winchester scholars.
They tend to become “‘top people” in the sense of The Times advertisements. The professions
they enter are useful and influential, including University and school teaching, the civil
service, the Foreign Office, the armed services, the National Health Service, the Church,
the Catholic priesthood, but they are not, at any rate in Britain, a source of riches. Few,
and this is perhaps to be regretted, take up careers in business.

c. Most readers of the REVIEW will know approximately the degree of assortative
mating for intelligence. The resemblance between husband and wife is of the same order
as that between sibs. Even if there were no assortative mating for intelligence, the children
of one very intelligent parent would still have a mean intelligence well above that of the
population mean.

d. Many very able women do not find that a career and having four children are
alternatives. They successfully manage both. There are some notable examples in the
medical profession.

The important issue Mrs. Cadbury raises is one of priorities. Should “top”? people
set an example of limiting their families, or should they, when they wish to have a family
size above replacement rate, feel justified provided that their children are likely to put
more into the country than they take out. The point is arguable and the correct answer
may be different in different countries. In Britain top people set the example of small
families a generation ago. It is now uncertain whether the population will even be at
replacement rate when improved family planning cuts out the perhaps 10 per cent of
babies born in excess of desired family size. There is probably no need therefore, for any
reduction whatever in the proportion of planned large families where parents can offer
their children full opportunities for healthy mental and physical development. The biologist
knows that variation in family size is desirable, perhaps essential where infant mortality
is very low, to provide opportunity for evolutionary advance. Responsible parenthood
implies planning for an overall average family size at about replacement level, but also
planning for considerable variation about the average related to the prospects for the
children provided by likely genetic endowment and environmental opportunity.

218
