PROFESSOR MAX WESTENHOFER ON THE
PROBLEM OF MAN'S ORIGIN’
By S. FRECHKOP, D.Sc.

(Institut royal des Sciences naturelles de Belgique, Brussels)

AX WESTENHOFER, M.D., ProMic: Emeritus of the University of

Berlin, was born at Ansbach, some
25 miles south-west of Nuremburg on
January goth, 1871. He has on several
occasions expressed strikingly individual
views regarding the origin and evolution of
man. These were first published in the form
of a series of papers in German medical
periodicals, as well as in the Zeztschrift fiir
Saugetierekunde, and subsequently in Spanish
in a number of South American scientific
journals.

His ideas were brought together in a small
book of 106 pages, the second edition of which
appeared almost two decades ago.1® Seven
years later this was developed into a more
substantial volume about four times as
long as its predecessor.1! The advent of the
last work in the middle of the second world
war was hardly propitious for the diffusion
in his native land—and still less in the
occupied countries of Europe—of the
author’s concepts. Had it not been for the
friendship that had existed between us since
1937, when Westenhéfer on his return from
Chile paid me a visit in Brussels, I should
have been acquainted only with the epitome
of his views published in 1935. But sympathy,
born of certain scientific opinions held in
common, caused him to make available to

* Translated by R. Crewe-Clements, Esq. In 1953
Dr. Frechkop was responsible for a 52-page condensed
and annotated French edition of WestenhGéfer’s Das
Problem der Menschwerdung under the title of Le
probleme de la genése de l’Homme (Editions Sobeli, Rue
du Boulet, Brussels). Otherwise, apart from a review
by Professor Vallois in L’A nthropologie, Vol. 54 (1950),
pp. 127-9, of Die Grundlagen meiner Theorie vom
Eigenweg des Menschen, the opinions of this unorthodox
but stimulating thinker do not seem to be generally
known in Western European countries.—EDp.

+ A full bibliography of his publications on the subject

of human evolution up to and including 1942 is given 
in Westenh6fer (1948), pp. 254-5.1?

me a copy of his work of 1942 during the
military occupation of Belgium. After the
war, still imbued with his ideas, he wrote a
new book in which were set out the bases of
his theory of the intrinsic course (Ezgenweg)
of human evolution. In 1951 an augmented.
Spanish version of this was published in
Santiago, where WestenhOfer has now settled,
under the title of El camino propio evolutivo
y el origin del Hombre. As I have indicated,
however, the essence of his doctrines is to be
found in the brief exposition he gave of them
in 1935, and the object of the present review
is to bring these, even more summarily,
to the notice of English readers who may not
be aware of Westenhdéfer’s novel outlook
on anthropogenesis.

General Considerations

Westenhofer’s researches have led him to
dissent from the current view of what might
be called the simian origin of humanity,
and to hold that man comes from a stock
peculiar to himself. The trunk of this would
be directly connected with the root from
which all mammals have sprung and would
differ but slightly from their prototype.
Westenhéfer finds support for his notion
of the structural “ primitiveness ’’ of man
in the development of the brain and the skull.
In 1935 he voluntarily restricted. himself
to a consideration of structure, at the same
time recognizing the importance of the
philosophical, psychological, and cultural
approaches to the problem of man’s origin.
The work published in that year is thus an
essay on human morphogenesis. The first
part of it is largely concerned with the brain
and the skull, and with the carriage of the

head and the posture of the body in man.

A study of the human chin leads the author
to suppose that mammals are committed,

42
THE PROBLEM OF MAN’S ORIGIN 43

as it were, to an evolutionary path tending
towards the formation of a large brain ;
this tendency is countered in proportion
as dentition becomes more powerful. Here
Westenhofer cites Fick,2, who had observed
(just over a hundred years ago) that, in
the initial stages of their development,
all mammals display an _ organization
superior to that which is achieved with
completed growth. According to Westenhofer, this is not too difficult to explain:
of all:organs, it is the central nervous system
that grows least during the period between
birth and adulthood; the jaws, on the
other hand, undergo their greatest development in the course of the same _ period.
Consequently the respective degrees to which
the brain and the face have been developed
are in inverse proportion among the majority
of mammalian forms. In other words, the
greater the development of the brain, the
less that of the face, and vice versa.*
Granted that the brain case and its contents
have developed at the expense of the facial
skeleton or ‘‘ snout,’’ would it not be strange
if Nature had facilitated in advance the
development of such a snout? As long as
man’s evolutionary past continues to be
represented in the manner of Thomas Henry
Huxley* by a simple series comprising the
skeletons of the gibbon, the orang-utan,
the chimpanzee, the gorilla, and Homo
sapiens, then it is clear that not all the
peculiarities of the human bony frame will
be taken into account. On the other hand,
the fact noted by Virchow that the likeness
between the anthropomorphous apes and
man is never so marked as it is during their
extreme youth, should not be underestimated.

In conformity with the inverse ratio
between the brain case and the jaws, the
supply of blood to these different parts of the
head must be unequal in man and in the apes.

_ * This is well illustrated by a series of sagittally
sectioned skulls of man, the orang-utan, the chimpanzee, and the gorilla, such as Professor Westenhéfer
was shown in the Liverpool Free Public Museum on
his return voyage from Chile to Germany at the end of
November 1932. A photograph of the exhibit, given
to him by the Curator, Dr. Douglas A. Allen, is reproduced more than once in his writings.

And as a matter of fact, the cerebral arteries
are developed to a greater extent in the
human brain than in that of any other
mammal. A more plentiful blood-supply
has thus made man’s exceptional cerebral
development possible. The well-known
odontologist P. Adloff attributed the progressive reduction in the number of teeth
during the rise of the vertebrates to the passage from an aquatic to a terrestial existence,
and this, according to Westenhofer, carries
the problem back to the very early stage in
the evolution of the vertebrate line. In
short, the study of human morphogenesis
ought logically to begin at the beginning of
the lower vertebrates and not at the stage
reached by the apes. Its start, then, should
be an animal such as the lancelet or
Amphioxus,t which, while lacking a head
in the accepted sense of the term, already
possesses an archencephalon or enlargement
of the anterior extremity of the neural
tube. Among the vertebrates the development of this part of the nervous system
observes the following rule. It is known
that where a part of the body can develop
freely, without hindrance from adjacent
parts, it assumes a shape that will enable
it to attain its maximum functional efficiency
in a minimum of space ; expressed otherwise,
the greatest volume consistent with the least

surface area, or the form of a sphere. This

is precisely the case in the primordia{ of
the sensory organs and of the encephalon
or brain. Now, the globular form of the
embryonic encephalon determines the flexion
or bending, in a ventral direction, of the
anterior proximity of the dorsal chord..
In the embryos of all vertebrates, flexion
of the base of the skull (bastkyphosis) is
observable, even though it may later on
undergo modification. Among the lower
vertebrates the various flexions of the neural

+ Amphioxus (literally ‘‘ pointed at both ends ”’)
lanceolatus, a fishlike marine creature about 5 cm. or
2 in. long, is found in shallow sandy reaches of the sea
coasts. It is almost transparent, and although it has
no jointed vertebral column an unjointed dorsal
stiffening rod or ‘‘ notochord ’’ runs the length of its
body.

{ The “ primordium”’ (Fr. ébauche, Ger. Anlage) is
the first recognizable but structurally undifferentiated
stage in the development of an organ.
44
tube eventually disappear and the curved
base of the skull] becomes straightened. In
the case of the higher vertbrates, however,
the flexion of the cranial base persists.
The striking resemblance shared by the
embryos of al] amniotic or land-dwelling

vertebrates is likewise shown in the primordium of their nervous system.

SITTING HEIGHT

SITTING HEIGHT

GIBBON ORANG -UTAN

Fic. I.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

course of the growth of man and the anthropomorphous apes are admirably summarized
in Fig. 1, which is taken from a remarkable
study by Professor Adolph H. Schultz.*¢
In Westenhéfer’s opinion ‘this schematic
representation alone should be _ sufficient
for an unbiased mind to discount any idea
of simian antecedents in man’s ascent. While

  
   

 

GORILLA

CHIMPANZEE J} fu

Bodily proportions of the anthropomorphous apes and man in the
foetal and adult stages (after Schultz, 1926).

The foetuses (above) are arranged

in the same order as the adults (below), all being given identical vertico
perineal sitting heights.

gibbon and gorilla foetuses are in corresponding stages of development.

The human foetus is in the fourth month, and the

The

orang-utan and chimpanzee foetuses, however, are slightly more advanced
in growth.

As far as the mammals, in particular,
are concerned, the earlier the embryonic
stage the greater the similarity in appearance
among the different kinds: head round and
capacious in relation to the body; jaws,
mouth, and nose, i.e. the snout, projecting
slightly if at all from underneath the brain
case; and, most significant according to
Bolk, the primordia of the teeth “ orthodont”’
or vertical. During intra-uterine life the
relation between the head and the body is
gradually altered, and this process continues
after birth until the adult stage has been
reached. The changes in proportion in the

the apes exhibit, if not degeneration, at
least a sort of aberrant development due to
exaggerated unilateral specialization of the
forelimbs for progress by swinging from
branch to branch in the trees, man preserves
to the fullest degree the fundamental
relations of growth.

* Readers of the EUGENICS REVIEW may be interested
to learn that Professor Schultz, for many years Director
of the Laboratory of Physical Anthropology at Johns
Hopkins University, has returned to his native Switzerland to occupy Rudolf Martin’s chair at Ziirich on the
retirement of its distinguished holdér, Professor Otto
Schlaginhaufen.—ED.
THE PROBLEM OF MAN’S ORIGIN 485

It is widely recognized that the marked
development of the part of the mammalian
skull that houses the brain is closely connected with the volume of the cerebral
hemispheres and with the extent of the
neopallium, the name given to the cortical
area of associative memory by the late Sir
Grafton Elliot Smith,’ who has also discussed
both the role it played as an essential factor
in the rise of the mammals, and the problem
of its origin. ®° The volume of the brain
in turn determines the degree of flexion of
the angle at the base of the skull and the
size of a second angle formed by the vertebral
column with the basal portion of the
occipital bone (occzpital kyphosis). As the
snout lengthens to outstrip the cerebral
part, so retarding its development, these
angles become modified and tend to disappear, in consequence of which the head is
carried in a way that demands eventual
realignment if the quadruped is to see in
front of it and not to have its vision firmly
fixed on the ground. The most suitable
carriage of the head is a product of the sense
of sight: the direction of the optical axes,
which are situated in a plane almost parallel
to that of the palate,* determines the position
of the head. If quadrupedal animals can
keep their optical axes in the horizontal
plane, as man does in his bipedal posture,
this is to be attributed to modifications of
the vertebral column which they undergo
in the course of embryonic development.
To walk tetrapodally “on all fours,’ however, man must throw his head back,
exaggerate the cervical curve of his spine,
‘look upwards, and wrinkle his brow. At the
same time his thigh is brought close up to his
belly; his knee becomes bent, his heel is
raised from the ground and his foot therefore
digitigrade, and his typically human lumbar
curve (lordosis) becomes convex backwards
or a stoop (kyphosis). The organs of the
senses of postural activity or balance,
situated in the petrous part of the temporal
bone, and particularly the lateral semicircular canal, also influences the carriage

 

* There are some exceptions to this rule, for instance
the baboon, in which the plane of the palate forms quite
a sensible angle with the visual plane.

of the head and the posture of the body.
Problems of this nature have been raised
in the past, and Westenhofer is mindful
of the fact that the celebrated anatomist
and surgeon Sir Charles Bell? had considered
them more than a century before him.t

The Brain

The second part of Westenhofer’s Das
Problem der Menschwerdung deals more
exclusively with the brain. In it he expresses
the opinion that a comparative series of
animal brains proves nothing in regard
to the genetic affinities of their respective
possessors. All likenesses or unlikenesses,
whether in the coarsest or the most delicate
cerebral structures, are related far more
to the particular characteristics of the different animals than to the bonds of relationship
that unite them. Substituting for the
anatomical dichotomy of the nervous system
into peripheral and central parts, a kind of
fourfold physiological subdivision, the control
of the functions of which is situated in the
central nervous system (a point of view in
agreement with the Judson Herrick theory
of nerve components’), Westenhdofer says
that the behaviour or mode of life of an
animal depends on the functioning of its
brain and vice versa. In this way a number
of otherwise incomprehensible facts can be
explained: for example, the fact that the
cerebral cortex is often more developed
in fishes than it is in amphibians but never
so much as it is in reptiles. Morphologically,
the changes in the archipallium (palencephalon) are expressed by different modifications in size and structure. Thus the
thalamus or receiving region of the midbrain, which is the principal link between
the great cerebral hemispheres and the most
deep-seated parts of the central nervous
system on the one hand, and the sense-organs
on the other, harbours a very variable
quantity of ganglia or nerve centres: their

+ ‘‘ Bell on the Hand”’ is the fourth of the famous
eight Bridgewater Treatises ‘‘On the Power, Wisdom,
and Goodness of God, as manifested in the Creation,”
for the authors of which the last Earl of Bridgewater
left£8,000 to be paid by the Archbishop of Canterbury
and the President of the Royal Society of London.
46 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

number steadily increases until the stage
attained by the monkeys is reached, and
it falls abruptly to about a quarter in the
chimpanzee and man. In the hypothalamus,
or portion of the mid-brain concerned with
emotional expression and visceral response,
there is an area which regresses considerably
in the ascending series of mammalian forms,
the number of ganglia dropping from thirty
in the rabbit to only two in man. The
perfection of the intelligence, therefore,
corresponds to a decline in the importance
of the instincts whose centres are situated
in the mid-brain.

Westenhofer then proceeds to show by
examples that the study of brain weights,
whether absolute or relative, is of no avail
in contributing to the solution of the
problem of inter-specific relationships. Similarly, the respective numbers of convolutions
do not express the functional potentialities
of the brain. Among the lower vertebrates
the cerebral cortex is composed of two layers
of cells, while among the mammals, at least
in the “ neo-cortical’’ zone, it is composed
of six. But no transition occurs from the
two layers of the fishes, amphibians, and
reptiles and the six layers of the mammals,
apart from the whales, which have four.
The structure of the cerebral cortex ought
thus to be recognizable at an early stage
of embryonic development. In regard to the
structural delicacy of the brain, the ape,
when compared with man, appears to be
rather a vestige of man’s ancestral line
than his predecessor. Professor Winthrop N.
Kellogg’s experiment with his ten-monthsold son and a chimpanzee of the same age
seems to Westenhdofer to provide an indirect
confirmation of this view: for eighteen
months the chimpanzee showed itself to be
a veritable “ infant prodigy,” and not until
after this time was the ape overtaken by
the boy. :

The differences in mentality and in conceptions of the external universe among men
does not depend on the size of the brain but
on the minutiz of its structure and on the
development in it of “ channels of association” (neurobiotaxis). So-called “ savage ”’
peoples are no less intelligent than civilized

As a characteristic human feature,

ones: the brain, the instrument, is there,
and it remains only to know how to use it.
Of the same order of ideas, it is clear that
language, as Westenhdfer stresses, is not
inherited but has to be learned anew,
generation after generation, by each individual. On the other hand, progress is not
attributable to the mass but always to
individuals who nevertheless differ in certain
respects from the majority, and it is often
achieved at the cost of a desperate struggle
between such individuals and the mass.
the
intellect has perhaps been less important
than the newly acquired capacity to subdue
the desires and instincts, the capacity to
develop as much for his own as for the social
good a usefully directed will and activities,
the capacity to form his character and to
become himself a “personality.” In
Westenhofer’s eyes, character and will are
to some degree constant elements, guardians
of the brain and, in general, of the entire
personality.

The Skull

The third part of the work that is summarized in this article relates almost wholly
to the skull. The cranial base plays an
extremely important role in the development
of the facial portion of the skull. A child’s
head in sagittal section reveals the cartilaginous junction between the basi-occipital
element and the sphenoid bone, the second
of which is itself made up of two parts united
by cartilage. Without the existence of these
cartilaginous “joins,” the growth of the
base of the skull would not be possible.
Coinciding with the successive shifts of the
occipital bone, its squama assumes an almost
horizontal position, and in the more rounded
shape of that of the infant and the female
Naef® saw the future form of the human
skull. According to him and to Schindewolff,
the male skull has preserved the simian aspect
of the forehead; for Westenhofer, on the
contrary, it has acquired this. Judged by the
dimensions of the inter-orbital breadth, man
has remained more primitive than the apes.
In the newborn child, too, the masticatory
THE PROBLEM OF MAN’S ORIGIN 47

arcades are semi-circular, whereas among
the brutes they lengthen and acquire first an
ellipsoid shape and finally that of a V.
The arrangement of the folds of the mucous
membrane of the hard palate is correlated
with this process of events. Like Bolk,
Westenhofer considers that the chinless

‘opposition to current belief, he holds that the
prognathism found in apes must be accepted
as having originated from less prognathous
conditions. The orthodonty of man’s permanent incisor teeth represents a state that
functionally precludes the formation of a
snout.

 

Fic. 2.

Profile sketches, not to scale, from photographs of the heads of (left)

a still unweaned young male Congo chimpanzee, Pan troglodytes schweinfurthi
(giglioli), and (right) an old animal, also from the Congo, of the same subspecies and sex (after Naef 1926).

mandible comes from a lower jaw having a
well-developed chin, the mental ossicles
being primitive elements.*

As Bolk has emphasized, the majority
of mammals in the embryonic stage exhibit
a condition in which the teeth are implanted
vertically in the jaws (orthodonty). Among
the monkeys and apes, and more especially
the anthropomorphs, those of the milk set
are vertical, and it is only after they have
been replaced by the permanent dentition
that alveolar and dental prognathism is
established and the resemblance borne by
these animals to man diminishes (Fig. 2).
As far as the human canines are concerned,
Bolk thinks it impossible to regard them
as secondarily simplified teeth, and, in

* WestenhGéfer claims that man is the sole possessor
of a chin, but its sporadic occurrence in Symphalangus
syndactylus or the siamang gibbon, which is confined
to Sumatra, has been noted both by Bolk and, somewhat later, myself.

The Origin of Man

In the final part of his book Westenhéfer
discusses the problem of anthropogenesis,
considering that in the organization of the
brain alone the possibility of achieving a
higher development lay open to all the mammals. This, however, reached its most
complete expression only in man. The
explanation of man’s special nature is consequently to be sought in his cerebral
development, and here account must first
of all be taken of the original combination
formed by a primordial brain and a bipedal
posture, as well as of the visual plane corresponding to bipedalism. Now, the orthograde
position can be attained only if the rest
of the bodily structure makes it possible:
conformity of the hind (in man the lower)
limbs ; a characteristically arched primitive
foot and a calcaneum or heel touching the
ground ; an upright vertebral column with a
48 | THE EUGENICS REVIEW

lumbar curve* ;
flattened in the transverse direction; a
hand retaining the primitive form that is
still found in the embryonic stages of
monkeys and apes (Klaatsch); teeth also
showing primordial features (Klaatsch,
Adloff, Bolk) ; head resting without special
muscular support on the vertebral column,
a fact which enables the brain to conserve
a shape and relative volume that are almost
foetal.

Westenhdfer believes that all the mammals
were originally but transitorily orthograde
in the course of evolving from ancestors that
resembled amphibians ; in other words, he
accepts an initial mammalian bipedalism.
The assumption of a bipedal gait liberated the
hand from its role as an organ of support
and locomotion, and the importance of this
freedom has always been taken at its true
worth (Anaxagoras, Galen, Sir Charles Bell).
As the result of his manual liberty, which
made the use of tools possible, and the
development of his brain, man has been able
to shake off his dependence on the environment and modify this according to his will.
The acquisition of articulate speech is in
harmony with the freeing of the hand. The
array of facts and considerations this set
forth leads Westenhéfer to regard man

* Lumbar curvature, as well as an arched foot, are

not sufficiently developed in the tarsier, the gibbon, etc.,
for their bipedalism to be as complete as that of man.

a thorax which is not.

alone of all the mammals as the least
removed, morphologically speaking, from
their hypothetical prototype.

REFERENCES

1. Bell, Sir Charles. (1833.) The Hand: Its
Mechanism and Vital Endowments as Envincing
Design. London: William Pickering.

2. Fick, Ludwig. (1853.) Ueber die Architectur des
Schadels der Cerebrospinalorganismen. Arch. Anat.
Physiol., Lpz. 48 (i.e. Muller’s Archiv, 20), 88-136.

3. Herrick, C. Judson. (1899.) The Cranial and First
Spinal Nerves of Menedia. A Contribution upon the
Nerve Components of the Bony Fishes. Utica, N.Y.:
State Hospitals Press. Published simultaneously in
Arch. Neurol. Psychopath, 2, 21-319, andin J. Comp.
Neurol. 9, 137-455.

4. Huxley, Thomas Henry.
Man’s Place in Nature.
Norgate.

5. Naef, Adol f. (1926.) Uber die Urformen der
Anthropomorphen und die Stammesgeschichte des
Menschenschadels. Naturwissenschaften, 14, 445-52,

(1863.) Evidence as to
London: Williams &

472-7
6. Schultz, Adolph H. (1926.) Fetal Growth in Man
and other Primates. Q. Rev. Biol. 1, 465-521.

7. Smith, G. Elliot. (1901.) Notes upon the Natural
Subdivision of the Cerebral Hemisphere. J. Anat.
35, 431-54. ,

8. Smith, G. Elliot. (1911.) Apud Discussion on the

Origin of Mammals. Rep. Brit. Ass. (Portsmouth),
424-8. |

9. Smith, G. Elliot. (1919.) A Preliminary Note on
the Morphology of the Corpus Striatum and the
Origin of the Neopallium. J. Anat. 53, 271-91.

10, Westenhdfer, Max. (1935.) Das Problem der
Menschwerdung. 2nd ed. Berlin: Nornen Verlag.

11. Westenhdfer, Max. (1942.) Der Eigenweg des
Menschen. Berlin: Verlag ‘‘ Die Medizinische
Welt.”

12. Westenhéfer, Max. (1948.) Die Grundlagen meiner
Theorie vom Eigenweg des Menschen. Heidelberg :
Carl Winter.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLVI, No. 1
