SAFEGUARDS IN EUGENIC STERILIZATION
By EDWARD MAPOTHER, ™_D., F.R.c.P.

| ‘O me it seems that the chief need of
the eugenics movement is patience.
The only matters one wants to make
quite sure about are that some progress is
occurring and that it is not in the wrong
direction. The spirit of the time is wholly in
favour of man taking control of his destiny,
unchecked by anything except reason. One
thing that is more likely than any other to
arrest progress and provoke reaction is an
attempted replacement of general vetoes by
general compulsions based on_ half-baked
science. We must avoid driving into opposition the people with truly scientific minds.
These are the general principles in the
light of which must be decided what is
reasonable and politic to propose about
sterilization in connection with mental
disorders. I shall confine myself to the
forms of these disorders, usually termed
psychoses, which, whatever the extent to
which they depend on inborn factors,
become manifest after infancy.

STERILIZATION LIMITED TO SEVERE
DISORDERS

In the first place, I should say that it is
only in connection with personal liability to
really severe mental disorder, or the liability
to transmit such, that at present one should
advocate that sterilization be legalized. I
am fully aware that many persons suffering
from neuroses and minor grades of mental
inefficiency which disqualify them for employment show a complete incapacity to
limit their families to a size that would be
in the best interests of the parents, the
children and the community. But the
dividing line between neuroses and minor
grades of mental inefficiency on the one hand,
and normality on the other, is almost
indefinable. If one is to concede at all that
limits to the permission of sterilization are
necessary, one must recognize that in

15

practice restriction would be unworkable if
the presence of neurosis or liability to this
could be pleaded as an adequate ground.
The first group of grounds for sterilization
in connection with severe mental disorder
may be called the therapeutic (implying the
immediate or future benefit of the individual
sterilized). This might include cases in which
not only the brief strain of pregnancy or
childbirth has been shown liable to produce
a breakdown, but also those in which a
severe psychosis seems likely from more
prolonged troubles, such as fear of pregnancy,
or the economic stresses involved in bringing
up a growing family. Such forms of sterilization for the direct benefit of the patient
hardly need discussion here, because such
operations are legal now, granted that evidence of the dangers is sufficient. It is to be
hoped that no legislation will interfere with
existing rights to sterilize for therapeutic
reasons, or subject this to fresh safeguards.

SCIENTIFIC GROUNDS FOR STERILIZATION

The two main grounds for sterilization in
connection with severe mental disorder
which really need discussion have as their
common basis the liability of the offspring
themselves to be affected with such mental
disorder. Of these two, one, the truly
eugenic ground, consists in fact that true
inheritance of the liability to psychosis tends
to occur. The other consists in the possibility that the offspring of the psychopathic
are themselves likely to become psychotic in
virtue of contact with the psychopathic
parent and other conditions of upbringing.

Taking together the evidence for sterilization in connection with mental disorder on
these two latter grounds, it seems to me,
first, that this evidence renders the present
wholesale veto justifiable ; secondly, that
it fails to prove that any form of compulsion
16 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

would at present be justifiable ; and thirdly,
that it strongly favours legal voluntary
sterilization with safeguards.

The next question which arises is this.
If it be granted that some form of voluntary
birth control is to be permitted or even
encouraged though not enforced, why will
not contraception suffice? The following
are reasons for legalizing voluntary sterilization as well as contraception: (1) All
contraceptive measures to be taken at the
time of coitus are distasteful to many
persons, and those who feel this (if permanent sterility of their marriage is certainly
advisable) are entitled to have their preference considered. (2) There is no form of
contraception at present known which does
not at times fail, and fear of such failure may
be very detrimental. (3) Contraception is
useless in the case of irresponsible persons
who can be got to see their duty sufficiently
to accept voluntary sterilization, but cannot
be trusted successfully to carry out contraceptive precautions.

PITFALLS TO AVOID

The possible dangers in connection with
sterilization against which safeguards might
have to be provided are the following :
(1) The danger that application might not
truly be voluntary or might be thought not
to be so. (2) The surgical dangers. (3) The
danger that, to save trouble, one, or both,
of a young couple might be sterilized in
haste and repent at Jeisure. (4) The danger
that even collaboration between operator
and another doctor, such as is now customary
in respect of therapeutic abortion, might not
guarantee sufficiently expert opinion as to
chance of psychopathic inheritance. (5) The
danger that if sterilization were Jegalized in
connection with liability to occurrence of
severe mental disorder in offspring, this
permission might be misused for reasons not
within the meaning of the Act; in other
words, sterilization might possibly be fostered for mercenary reasons, or that at least
the prevalence of such a practice might be
suspected, and thus bring sterilization into
disrepute.

THE PROPOSED SAFEGUARDS

It seems to me that all dangers would be
met if the following principles were observed.
Sterilization of one or other party to an
actual or intended marriage should be
permitted upon the written application of
both parties to it, provided, (1) That two
medical certificates were obtained vouching
for the fact that, in the light of the best
scientific evidence at the time available, the
mating of the two parties was likely to
result in a supernormal proportion of mentally disordered offspring. (2) That such
medical certificates were submitted to an
established authority, for example, a department of the Ministry of Health or the Board
of Control. Let us consider the dangers and
the safeguards against them one by one.

(a) I believe that in order to ensure in the
fullest degree that application for sterilization is voluntary, it should never be permitted
in the case of patients under any order
sanctioning detention, nor upon premises
where other patients are detained. Not only
compulsion but pressure, and the very
suspicion of either, should be avoided. On
the other hand, it should certainly be permitted to those who are carriers of psychopathic inheritance as well as to those who
have definitely had a breakdown. Otherwise,
the prospect of anything but the most
trivial influence upon incidence of psychoses
is negligible.

(b) Surgical risk should be almost eliminated by giving the central authority power
to insist on operation by a surgeon of
recognized standing and on approved premises. Here it may be said that the necessary
operation might be performed with consent
of either party to a mating or of both,
regardless of through which the transmission
was likely ; and the idea should be encouraged that it is preferable to have the man
sterilized owing to the greater simplicity
and freedom from danger of the operation on
the male. Of course, this would alter if a
simple method were discovered in the case of
women.

(c) The danger of what one may term
frivolous sterilization would disappear if there
SAFEGUARDS IN EUGENIC STERILIZATION 17

could be devised a method of securing temporary and repeated sterilization (applicable at
times other than that of coitus). In absence
of such method the danger can be met by
requiring medical certificates to be submitted
to a central authority.

(2) The danger that the medical evidence
required might not adequately indicate the
necessity of sterilization could be met as
follows. One of these certificates should be
from the usual medical attendant or family
doctor of that one of the couple who was the
probable transmitter ; the other should be
from a psychiatrist of recognized standing.
It might well be required that he be specially
approved as for the purpose of the Mental
Treatment Act. If so, the approving authority might also require that he should hold
a diploma in psychological medicine or an
equivalent qualification. This would ensure
that knowledge of the kind needed to qualify
for such approval was given in the course
and tested at the examination for the
diploma.

(e) Submission of medical certificates to a
central authority seems to me advisable as
a safeguard; it would protect not only
patients but practitioners. The question has
been discussed whether certificates should
merely be submitted for registration, or
whether the actual approval of the central
authority should be essential. I see no
objection to the latter arrangement provided
it can be ensured that approval shall not be
unreasonably withheld. The question would
also arise whether the approving authority
should be the Board of Control or the
Ministry of Health for questions involving
mental deficiency or disorder. The Board of
Control might seem obviously more suitable,
but patients who had never been certified
might object. Further, the Act might legalize
sterilization in connection with liability to
transmit physical diseases, which would be
out of the province of the Board of Control ;
possibly a joint body representing both the
Board and the Ministry would be best.

NO RIGID STANDARDS

No explicit definition should be attempted
as to what constitutes an adequate ground

for permitting voluntary sterilization in
virtue of the probable quality of offspring
beyond that already indicated. The criterion
should be the elastic one that in the joint
opinion of the two certifying doctors, one an
expert, and the central authority, and in the
light of best scientific knowledge of the time,
the facts pointed to the probability that an
abnormal proportion of the offspring from
the mating in question would be mentally
disordered in a serious degree. This would
make qualification for voluntary sterilization a matter for contemporary expert
judgment (as certifiability is now) and allow
of practice being progressively adapted to
increasing knowledge.

The one thing above all others to be
ensured, and not only for tactical reasons,
is that sterilization shall be voluntary in the
fullest sense of the word.

These two principles—namely, that all
eugenic sterilization shall be voluntary and
that the decision as to suitability should be
made in each case on its own merits, i.e. on the
individual pedigree, underlie the practice of
sterilization in Switzerland, which has there
been legal for 50 years and is almost a model
of how it should be done. In Nazi Germany
the general principles applied are compulsion
and selection of cases according to their
exemplifying some clinical syndrome. This
almost perfectly illustrates how not to do it.

THE GERMAN LAWS CRITICIZED

It should be noted that just as voluntary
sterilization and individual decisions are
related so are compulsion and general rules,
for compulsion necessarily involves proclaiming certain classes to whom the law must be
applied. But definition of such classes in a
way that is scientifically defensible is at
present impossible. The conditions which in
Nazi Germany render a person liable to
compulsory sterilization are: mental deficiency, schizophrenia, manic depressive psychosis, Huntingdon’s chorea, deaf mutism,
and severe alcoholism. Let us confine our
attention to the first three categories.

Of mental deficiency it leaps to the eye
that it is not a unity, that it includes cases
that are of germinal and environmental
18 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

origin, and that sterilization of the latter on
truly eugenic grounds has no scientific
justification whatever. I venture to suggest
that in the case of mental disorder exactly
the same is true of each of the clinical
syndromes, manifestation of which renders
the patient liable to compulsory sterilization.
We should speak not of schizophrenia but
of the schizophrenias as we should of the
epilepsies. Likewise, we should speak not of
manic depressive psychosis but of the
syntonic syndromes. It is quite certain to
my mind that each of these groups—the
schizophrenias and the syntonic psychoses—
is heterogeneous, including some cases in
which an hereditary factor plays a very
large part, and others in which it is negligible.
Schizophrenia, as I have said, is not a
unity. The anomaly may be present in such
a mild degree that it may be said that there
is every gradation from normality to its
grossest degree, and it would be very hard
to decide as to its presence or absence. It
may often co-exist with and colour other
forms of mental abnormality. Its clinical
course is extremely variable. Though most
commonly insidious and progressive, it may
come on abruptly; and then usually the
patient recovers, at least for a considerable
time. It is not only possible but almost
certain that such differences of course
correspond to differences of causation, as,
for example, do similar differences in acute
poliomyelitis on the one hand and progressive muscular atrophy on the other.
Investigations as to the incidence of
schizophrenia have appeared to show that
this is unduly high among the offspring of
selected schizophrenic parents. But this
might be due to perfectly honest and
unconscious selection of those very schizophrenics in whom heredity was the main
causal factor, and ignoring of others in whom
it was otherwise. Such an error might well
occur as the result of the very attempt to
ensure that the schizophrenic nature of the
illness in the parent was unquestionable.
It is to be noted that the proportion of

cures in which inheritance of liability to
schizophrenia is found has never been
reconciled with any Mendelian formula, and
this might well be due to the fact that
figures are drawn from a_ heterogeneous
group. It has even lately been suggested
that in a proportion of schizophrenics the
condition may be the result of infection with
a modified form of the tubercle bacillus, in
the same sort of way as general paralysis of
the insane results from infection with the
spirochete of syphilis. Most of what I have
said applies with little modification to manic
depressive psychosis or to use the better
term, the syntonic syndromes.

SOME RESULTS OF COMPULSORY
STERILIZATION

I am given to understand that the results
already seen in Germany even in anticipation
of the law which became effective on January
Ist, show the disastrous effects of compulsion.
This renders liable to sterilization every nonsegregated person suffering from amentia,
schizophrenia, manic depressive psychosis,
severe alcoholism and certain rare conditions.
It makes it obligatory upon any doctor
diagnosing one of these conditions, even in
consultation outside an institution, to notify
the case just as a doctor is obliged to notify
infectious diseases here. Such notification,
if the patient is not segregated, must be
followed by examination at a court composed
of a judge and two doctors, with a view to
sterilization. At the same time there has
been passed a law legalizing castration of
criminal sexual perverts.

The results of this legislation are briefly
these. The two laws are being confused and
sterilization is being regarded as punishment.
Diagnosis in private practice is being entirely
falsified. Patients with mental disorder are
being frightened out of recognized institutions and are being treated in secret wherever
this is possible. All inquiry as to heredity is
impossible and accurate information upon
which scientific practice might be based is
becoming unobtainable.

* a OOO

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVI, No. 1
