270 EUGENICS REVIEW.

among the most disgraceful defects of our education; and this is true
from the top of our social scale to the bottom. If people cannot be
taught continence, they can at least be taught to go and get diseases
cured. The lesson of self-interest is readily learned. If they must fall
into the ditch, let us see to it that they do so open-eyed; then it would
be their own fault; now they are blind and can hardly avoid it.

How such teaching is to be given is hardly the subject of this article;
but it can be done, and is being done, by specially gifted and qualified
teachers, with excellent results.

Let us not be deceived. It is no light or small task that the
medical profession to-day are calling on the nation to undertake. It
will be laborious; it will be expensive. But it is worth while: for it is
nothing less than the cleansing of the portals of life.

DOUGLAS WHITE.

EUGENICS AS A BRANCH OF MEDICAL SOCIOLOGY.

At the 81st annual meeting of the British Medical Association,!
held at Brighton, on July 23rd, 24th, and 25th, the section of medical
sociology devoted three mornings to the consideration of questions of
wide general interest. Their hospitality in inviting laymen particularly
concerned with the subjects discussed to read papers and participate
in the discussions was taken advantage of by a very large number of
those specially interested in “ Eugenics,” “Crime and Punishment,” or
“The Hospitals in relation to the State, the Public, and the Medical
Profession,” which occupied the attention of the section on the three
mornings mentioned. In his introductory address the president of the
section, Dr. R. J. Ryle, quoted the definition of sociology accepted .by
the Association, namely, that it is the scientific study of society and of
all the phenomena it exhibits, including the various forces and processes
at work within and upon it. He emphasised the fact that for the solution of the problems thus defined the work of the medical profession is
coming more and more into demand, and he concluded by saying a few
words on the history of eugenics and on the meaning attached by Galton
to the word. The discussion on eugenics was inaugurated by the
reading of three papers, which are here given in abstract in the order
in which they were read.

I. Sehuster, EpGar, D.Sc. The Scope of the Science of Eugenics.
There is a sort of antagonism between medicine and eugenics which
has been recognised for some 2,400 years. It consists in the fact that,
in Plato’s words, medicine may “lengthen out good-for-nothing lives ”
and thus enable “ weak fathers to beget weaker sons.” In spite of this
the eugenist is not antagonistic to the labours of the physician, but
expects him to make use of his special opportunities for helping onward
the science of eugenics. A brief analysis of some of the principal
problems of eugenics is useful to indicate these opportunities. The study
of the inheritance of disease must be, in so far as the collection of data
goes, almost entirely in the hands of the doctor. In particular, the
hereditary factor in the causation of tuberculosis is in urgent need of
investigation at the present moment. The careful observation of tuberculous families is the only way of setting about it, and the doctor who
attends them is the only person competent to do it. As the experience
of one man would never provide sufficient material, co-operation is
called for. :

1 The British Medical Journal for August 2nd, 1913, pp. 223-231, contains
the three papers on eugenics printed in extenso and an abbreviated report of the
discussion which followed.
EUGENICS AS A BRANCH OF MEDICAL SOCIOLOGY. 271

Human qualities are affected not only by heredity, but also by the
environment, so the action of the environment must next be considered.
The problems to be met under this head may be classified according to
the period in the history of the individual considered at which the action
of the environment makes itself felt. First comes the period before conception, when he has a merely potential existence as so and so much germplasm. How does the environment affect it? The question of alcoholic
poisoning of the germ-plasm comes up under this head. It is essentially
a medical question. Next it is alleged that various external circumstances working at the moment of his conception may affect the individual. To what extent and to what way is this true? Thirdly, we
come to the period after conception but before birth, when all those
things which may affect the health of the mother must to some extent
act also on her child. The problems concerning the alcoholism and
other poisoning of the mother, the nature of her employment and habits,
are to be placed in this class. Fourthly, what takes place during the
process of birth may have some eugenic significance.

The environment acting on the individual after birth hardly comes
within the purview of the eugenist, except in so far as it selects one
type rather than another for parenthood. It acts selectively when a
widely prevalent disease is more fatal to persons with certain definite
characteristics than to others. Primarily a disease will tend to weed
out those types or races which are not resistant to it, but the lack of
resisting power may be coupled with other characters which are in
consequence also weeded out to some extent. Environmental selection
may work in many other ways also, all of which must be studied by the
eugenist.

II. Campbell, Harry, M.D. (Physician, West End Hospital for
Nervous Diseases). Eugenics from the Physician’s Standpoint.
Natural selection is still playing an important part in human evolution.
First, with regard to mind, although it has ceased to influence the
intellectual development of neo-civilised man, it is still in active operation on his moral nature by eliminating the morally defective. “The
lazy, intemperate, the dishonest, the aggressively anti-social, those who
love not home life, those who shun the cares and self-sacrifice demanded
of fatherhood and motherhood—these are one and all being eliminated,
while their opposites are surviving, and the attributes which secure their
survival are becoming racially accentuated.”

Secondly, with regard to the body, natural selection is called upon
to adapt the human race to the new conditions imposed by civilisation.
Two of the more important of these new conditions are the increased
danger from attacks of pathogenic microbes and the fact that our vegeable food is taken in a pappy or semi-pappy form. The former is due
particularly to the habit of wearing clothes and congregating in towns
and of meeting in large numbers under one roof. As a result those with
deficient powers of resistance to microbic attacks tend to be eliminated.
The latter is the cause of a long array of digestive disturbances from
ulceration to appendicitis, and produces a large mortality, which would
no doubt, in the course of thousands of years, adapt the human race to
our modern dietetic methods. “Even if no attempt is made to obviate
by eugenic means the deterioration which is taking place in civilised
man owing to interference with natural selection, such deterioration has
its limits, which, if not already reached, very soon will be, for natural
selection is still actively at work upon him, and may safely be relied
upon to prevent the human race from falling appreciably below the
present standard.”

The aims of the eugenist have a solid basis in fact, but as the
encouragement of the marriages of the fit can scarcely be considered as
a practicable policy at the present day, the physician can do most good
272 EUGENICS REVIEW.

eugenically by the prevention of unfit marriages. In attempting to do
so he assumes a serious responsibility, and requires to have a practical
knowledge of the principles of heredity. In certain cases there can be
no doubt as to his course. Phthisis, organic heart disease, epilepsy, insanity, chronic Bright’s disease are obvious bars to marriage. In the
opinion of the author, rheumatic fever and most cases of acute Bright’s
disease also come within this category, as do serious congenital defects
of sight or hearing.

Strangulated hernia, fulminating appendicitis, and ovarian cyst are
not generally regarded as obstacles to marriage but should be, and
those who suffer from functional nervous disorders should also be
advised to remain single. “The neurotic man is often advised to
marry on the ground that wife and children will draw him out of himself; and so far the advice is doubtless good, but I fail to see what
right we have to sacrifice the prospective wife and children. I have
seen too much home misery caused by neurotic parents to connive at
such an arrangement.”

In order that the advice of the physician may be followed we must
“foster the development of the eugenistic conscience in the community.
To this end the public should be educated in the elementary principles
of evolution, and be taught to realise the more glaring facts of heredity
They must be made to realise that the responsibility of making a life is
scarcely less tremendous than that of taking one.”

III. Mackintosh, J. Stewart, M.D., M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P. The
Migratory Factor in Eugenics. The main object of this paper is to
draw attention to the fact that what appears to be degeneration in a
family or in an individual may not be due to any real deterioration of
their germ-plasm, but to the fact that, being adapted. to certain definite
conditions of food, climate, or habits of life, they no longer live under
these conditions, but have migrated.into surroundings of an entirely
different type. “The population of the British Isles may be regarded
as primarily composed of two elements—a native element and an intrusive element.” The more important constituents of the intrusive
element are “the blonde race of Northern Europe.” “ The broad-headed
Alpine race of Central Europe, the Jews, the gipsies, etc.” The Jews
show a proclivity to catarrhs of all kinds, enlarged tonsils, adenoid
growths, and other conditions commonly associated with exposure to
damp, and it may be that the explanation of this lies in the fact that
they were evolved in a warmer and drier climate than that of North-West
Europe, namely, South-West Asia. They are, consequently, not adapted
to the conditions under which they live in England. The blonde race
also appears ill adapted to life in this country, since blondes are more
prone than dark-haired people to suffer from “acute rheumatism, tonsilitis, heart disease, osteoarthritis, and catarrhs from the various
mucous membranes of the body, and a variety of ills secondary to
acute or chronic conditions of catarrh.” These diseases are also caused
by exposure to damp, and the liability of the blonde race to suffer from
them may be due to the fact that it was evolved in the regions bordering
the Baltic Sea, which are somewhat colder and drier than Great Britain,
and with a sandy subsoil.

The Jews have the advantage over the Northern blonde race, under
present day conditions, that they have long been accustomed to live in
towns, and so being adapted to it can support it, whereas the blonde
race, not being so adapted, cannot do so nearly as well.

The migrations within the limits of the country have been during
the last century predominantly into the towns. The percentage of people
engaged in agriculture has been reduced since 1811 from 35 to 88, and
the complexity of life has vastly increased. This means that enormous
numbers must be living under conditions to which they are not racially
EUGENICS AS A BRANCH OF MEDICAL SOCIOLOGY, 273

adapted, and many cannot accommodate themselves to the change, “ not
because they come of an essentially degenerate stock, but because they
are specialized and localized types—that is specialized for certain pursuits, for certain social conditions, localized for particular climatic
conditions, including soils.”

The question then arises how the adaptation of man to his surroundings can best be secured. The movement which has for its watchword
the cry “ Back to Land ” is in the right direction, “ but an indiscriminate
urban exodus into a promised land of small holdings is not going to
restore the national physique to the extent some of its advocates anticipate.” “It is in the discrimination of individual needs that social
salvation lies, and this discrimination can only be attained by a keener
appreciation of the biological basis of social phenomena and the peculiar
relationship of man to his environment.” In order to obtain the necessary knowledge in which to work, the eugenist should turn his attention to
the effects of intermigratory movements and make a statistical study of
them before the necessary data are lost.

It is impossible to give briefly an intelligible summary of the discussion which followed, as it was somewhat discursive and did not turn
about any very definite questions. Among the speakers were Sir James
Barr, Mr. E. J. Lidbetter, Miss Kirby, Dr. Saleeby, and Prince
Kropotkin. EDGAR SCHUSTER.
