HENRY TWITCHIN

same mental make-up would probably have
limited their families fifty years ago.
Nevertheless if Dr. Fisher is on the whole
correct, civilization can only be saved by a
very radical change of opinion and practice.
And in particular much of the propaganda
of eugenists will prove to have been misdirected. ‘To quote his own words: ‘‘ The
reformer must expect to encounter deepseated opposition in the classes on which
he would naturally rely for an intelligent
anxiety for the future of their country.”’
One conclusion is fairly clear. Before the
eugenic movement commits itself on the one
hand to the further encouragement of the
social promotion of infertility, or on the

117

other to subsidizing the breeding of undesirable groups, a really thorough investigation should be made of the causes of
differential fertility. ‘There can be no doubt
of its existence or of its undesirability, but
several opinions are possible as to the most
hopeful method of combating it.

Dr. Fisher’s book, then, must be read.
But it is not easy reading. It is greatly
to be hoped that within the next ten years
the sections dealing with evolution and
eugenics will both be rewritten in a form
which demands less intellectual effort in its
readers, ‘Till then it is likely to remain the
best discussion of its subjects so far
written.

SO) Oe”

HENRY TWITCHIN

Some Notes on his Family History
By W. T. J. Gun, F.R.Hist.S., F.S.G.

tions to the account of our benefactor

by Major Darwin in the REviEw for
July 1930, and Mr. Leonard Jessop Fulton
has very kindly supplied me with information that he collected some few years ago
in connection with Mr. Twitchin’s pedigree.

Nothing further has been ascertained with
regard to the maternal family, the Lovelocks, nor with regard to the descent of the
Northways, to whom the paternal grandmother belonged. It is to be noted, however, that on this side Henry Twitchin possessed a relative, Edward Northway Butt
by name, who was in business as a chemist
and acquired a considerable fortune. It is
probably from the Northway strain that
Henry ‘Twitchin’s business ability was
mainly derived.

| gens « been asked to make some addi
With regard, however, to the male line
descent some interesting facts have been
brought to light by Mr. Fulton. The direct
ancestry cannot, it is true, be definitely
traced back further than Henry’s grandfather, Andrew ‘Twitchin. The name
Andrew is however significant, as it is frequently found to occur in conjunction with
that of Twitchin in various individuals of
the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries,
yeomen farmers for the most part or men of
similar status, residing in Berkshire or its
immediate neighbourhood.

Having regard to this rather uncommon
Christian name, and very uncommon surname, there can be little doubt that Henry’s
grandfather was descended from a certain
Andrew ‘Twitchin, of Inkpen in Berks,
whose will was proved November 22nd,
118

1657. The immediate ancestry of this
Andrew Twitchin is to be found in a
recently published History of Andover
Grammar School, by Arthur Bennett and
Edmund Parsons.

About the year 1547 Alexander Twitchin,
whose parentage is unknown, was born at
Tingewick in Bucks, about three miles from
the town of Buckingham. Winchester College owned estates at Tingewick, and in
consequence those of its inhabitants who
could qualify possessed a claim to scholarships at the College. Alexander was so
qualified and entered the foundation at
Winchester in 1558; his name under that
date is to be found in Kirby’s Winchester
Scholars. We learn from the New College
Register that in 1566 he was admitted to a
probationer Fellowship at that College, and
in 1568 to a full Fellowship. On February
6th, 1581, Alexander was appointed first
headmaster of the newly established Free
School at Andover, and held that position
till his death in 1611. He was in every
respect an important citizen, Councillor in
1599, Bailitf (Mayor) in 1604, and from that
date till his death Chamberlain, the term
then (and occasionally still) used for the
Borough Treasurer. One of his sons-in-law
was Vicar of Andover, and subsequently
headmaster of the school, while another succeeded to the living thus vacated.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Alexander had a son, Andrew, who
matriculated at Hart Hall, Oxford, but
did not enter any of the learned professions.
He became a millowner at Andover, and,
like his father, served as Bailiff of the town.
He was father of the Andrew Twitchin of
Inkpen, to whom reference has already been
made, This Andrew was apparently a yeoman farmer, and the family were evidently
not keeping up in the world. In this there
was nothing remarkable ; there was certainly
a tendency at that, and indeed at other
times, for the descendants of scholars to
decline in social status. We have every reason, however, to suppose that the stock
remained sound.

On the balance of probabilities Henry
Twitchin was descended from Alexander the
schoolmaster, and it is curious to reflect
how a certain note was attained in the sixteenth century, and again in the twentieth
while the intervening generations ‘ bloomed
unseen.’ ‘There must be many similar
cases: in fact, it is probable that most of
the successful men of the present day, however obscure may be their immediate origin,
are descended in some line or another from
successful men of two or three hundred
years ago. In most instances, however, particularly when the surnames are more common than that of Twitchin, accurate research
is difficult, if not altogether impossible.

i a

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIII, No. 2.
