“ EUGENICS |
AND IMPERIAL DEVELOPMENT.”!

THE CHAIRMAN: Ladies and Gentlemen, it is but a short time—about
20 minutes ago—since this Society did me the honour of electing me as
its President for the ninth time, and perhaps it would be a little ungracious
of me to suggest doubts as to the wisdom of that proceeding; but I cannot
help feeling that a new President would have felt a little less like an
extinct volcano in the matter of presidentia] addresses, and would not
have rejoiced as I do that we are to have a discussion rather than a
solitary sermon on my part. Under these, to me happier, circumstances,
all I have to do is, I think, to state as well as I can what in broad outline
is our subject of discussion for to-day.

We eugenists are all on common ground in regarding every grown
man and woman as the outcome of an individual originating germ and a
particular set of surroundings, and in attaching great importance to both
these factors in the making of mankind. Many people appear to find it
extremely difficult to grasp this distinction between nature and nurture.
Yet when it has once been grasped it seems to meet one at every turn
when discussing social problems.

When we are endeavouring to inculcate this lesson, we may liken
human beings to marble statues, the perfection of which depends bothon
the quality of the stone and the skill of the sculptor. The marble might
be held to represent our inborn qualities, and the form of the statue may
typify the effect of environment; and just as the quality of a stone cannot
be altered after the artistic shaping is commenced, so it is with those of
us who have begun our life on earth. We must admit that the germ is
unalterable and we cannot hope to change our inborn qualities. Hence
we are al] tempted to turn our whole attention to the sculptor, environment, who is for ever chipping at us and altering us in mind and body
all through our lives.

In imperial matters we are too apt to consider only such questions as
making the best of the territories which have to be occupied, or educating
and training our citizens to fill innumerable situations which they will
be called upon to fill; for this is the only thing we can do with regard to
those of our fellow citizens who, as I have said, have begun their life on
earth. But if we look to the future, surely we ought to consider whether
we cannot improve, as it were, the marble of which the nation of the
future will be composed. As things are, there is a rea] danger that inferior
stone will be used in the coming days, and that the nation will slowly
deteriorate as time goes on.

1 A Discussion held, after the Annual Meeting of the Society, under the
Chairmanship of Major Leonard Darwin, Sc.D., at Bedford College on July
8th, 1919.
“EUGENICS AND IMPERIAL DEVELOPMENT.” ~ 125

The foregoing is the eugenic problem stated in broadest outline, and
in popular language; and we are here to-day to consider how this method
of regarding public affairs ought to affect our imperial policy and the
great and scattered confederation of highly diversified people over whom
the British hold sway. Immigration and emigration certainly stand first
for consideration amongst imperial problems, for we all see the importance of keeping up the quality of the human marble which we are
constantly exporting to the Overseas Dominions, and of seeing that this
export does not reduce the quality of the human stone which will have to
be used in future for the building of our own nation. No doubt it will be
urged by some that we should discuss all such themes on a purely cosmic
basis without reference to the interests of separate countries. Altogether
to avoid looking at these problems from a national standpoint would, in
my opinion, be a great mistake, even with regard to international
interests; for the world progresses best if each nation and each man pays
most attention to his own interests, provided, of course, that moral precepts in regard to our duty to others are always held in view. In any
case, we may safely prophesy that the Overseas Dominions and all other
countries will become more and more careful, as time goes by, as to the
class of immigrants they will accept. In future the emigrants we send
out will therefore have to be of good type, whether we wish it or not; and
if we continue to promote the import of inferior human marble, in the
form of undesirable immigrants, the average quality of the stone of our
people will naturally deteriorate, and we shall be like a sieve catching
everything which is rejected by other Governments.

Granted the imperative necessity of paying greater attention to the
quality of our immigrants, we at once find ourselves faced with the
difficulty of judging of their qualities; and from the eugenic point of
view it must be admitted that this problem is, at present, largely unsolved.
We can judge of the quality of the finished statue with comparative ease,
but we often cannot say whether its defects are due to flaws in the marble
or to faulty workmanship on the part of the sculptor; and in the same
way we do not always know whether the defects of human beings are due
to heredity or environment. Now the Liberals of old, animated by a
spirit which I for one greatly admire, would have had us admit every
sufferer craving admittance from a foreign land; but this attitude they
adopted in the full belief that all the defects of these would-be immigrants
were due to the inferiority of their home life in the country of their birth,
and that the children, therefore, would be capable of indefinite improvement. But even if this were correct, it would be doubtful whether we
ought to expose our own fellow citizens to the moral contagion of contact
with immigrants of inferior type; but at is not correct. The inferionty of
low-grade immigrants may be due to the inferiority of the marble of their
inborn qualities, in which case the amount of possible improvement in
their progeny is strictly limited. All immigrants ought to be subject to a
most rigid examination, both in mental and physical qualities; and
admittance should always be refused, in my opinion, if they do not come
up to a fairly high standard.
126 EUGENICS REVIEW.

There are several other racial problems connected with immigration
which I must pass by almost in silence. To change my simile somewhat,
if human beings are compared to cast metal statues, the Overseas
‘Dominions and Crown Colonies are like moulds of many different shapes,
needing metals of very different types or kinds in order to form good
castings; and we ought to be careful to give each locality the appropriate
human material. Again, in sending out our best stocks, we ought to
secure conditions of living for them which will enable them to multiply
rapidly. If our best men cross the seas and our best women stay at home,
the whole Empire will be damaged.

Here, then, are a number of eugenic questions urgently demanding
attention from statesmen, and for this purpose it seems to me that the
Government ought to make their central emigration authority as strong
and as representative as possible.

Beside emigration there are several other racial questions affecting
imperial politics which need careful consideration, but of these I shall
mention only one. The British Empire is peopled by human beings of
very diverse types, and—to employ the same simile as before—the metals
of which these humam statues are cast are being mixed together with
hardly any knowledge of the character of the human alloys which are thus
being produced; and this indiscriminate mingling is going on whilst we
are all crying out that our social policy ought to be based on a solid
scientific foundation. We know that in our Crown Colonies a great
admixture of races is taking place, but our knowledge is based on mere
vague statements, unsupported, for the most part, by statistical] facts.
Though confident assertions are made, in no case do we know for certain
whether the human alloy is better or worse than either of the constituent
races taken separately. We do not even know if this alloy, to continue
my simile, will remain always an alloy, or whether in future castings the
human races will separate out and appear again in their pristine purity.
In short, what is urgently needed is a thorough scientific study of the
mental and physical characteristics of mixed races, and of the laws of
human inheritance governing their reproduction.

In order to select a right policy, something more than facts, however,
is needed ; for there are certain subjects also urgently demanding attention.
For example, if it were to be. proved that two races blended perfectly,
that is to say, that the blend was just as much superior to one parent
stock as it was inferior to the other stock, would this method of making
the human race more uniform be a blessing or the reverse? Does the
improvement of one human stock justify the deterioration of another
stock? Do these two things compensate each other? My own belief is
that uniformity is not the goal to be aimed at, but I should’ like to see this
question discussed much more thoroughly than I have ever seen it
discussed. |

Then again, if certain mixed races are especially suitable for certain
kinds of inferior labour much in request, is this a legitimate reason for
encouraging miscegenation? The question whether we are justified in, as
it were, attempting to breed human beasts of burden, seems to me to open
out rather an appalling vista of difficult ethical problems. But the
“EUGENICS AND IMPERIAL DEVELOPMENT.” 127

immediate point I suggest for your consideration is that the Overseas
Dominions and the Mother Country between them are responsible for a
very large proportion of the population of the earth, and that in the whole
history of the world there is hardly any parallel to the way in which these
diverse people are now being brought together and mixed within the
boundaries of our Empire. It is the greatest racial experiment that has
ever been made, and it is being carried out with a careless ignorance of
the facts.

I suggest that it is our duty as a Society to demand that more light
should be thrown on this most difficult situation. I have brought this
before you rather as typical of the kind of way in which I suggest that
the subject should be approached by the eugenist. The environmental
point of view is extremely important, but we eugenists want the public to
recognise the importance of looking, also, to the actual inborn qualities
of a race. (Applause.)

PROFESSOR ARTHUR KEITH, F.R.S., said :—Mr. President, Ladies and
Gentlemen, I am extremely indebted to you for giving me the opportunity
of discussing a topic which JI admit, with you, is one of the most important
which face the British Empire at the present time.

It so happens that I was born in a part of Scotland where we were
accustomed to breed cattle of which we were very proud, for we sent them
over to the Paris Exhibition and they were awarded the first prizes against
the whole of Europe. So that this is a matter which I have been watching
all my life, and in my boyhood I saw all the horses of that wide
rural district improved out of knowledge by breeding. But without knowing it I was also the witness of a very much bigger experiment in eugenics,
because, to put it crudely, the district to which I belong manufactured
human goods for the colonial market. Every year that region turned out
20 to 30 men who emigrated to New Zealand or Australia, sometimes to
Canada, and even to the United States. Often they went to the big cities.
By breeding fine men we were unconsciously building up the British
Empire. And I have lived long enough to see the sons of those young
fellows come back to fight for the Empire. I mention that fact to you,
because I can conceive of no better conditions for the making of men for
our Colonies than those which prevailed in that area, in which eugenics
was quite unknown; and in taking positive measures eugenists must
not only devise new means for accomplishing their objects, but also make
use of these old ones.

I say nothing about the effects on the stock left behind by the em:grants. To the best of my knowledge it is there still. The people come
in from neighbouring parishes, but I believe the stock you see there to-day
is the same that you would have seen 200 years ago. The outgoing movement had been proceeding for 200 years, ever since the time of Elizabeth,
not perhaps so much in that part of Scotland, but in England. It was
not meant to be eugenic, but it proved to be so in practice. Hitherto all
the great eugenic movements have been spontaneous in the same way;
and I can hardly imagine any influence but education turning them into
purposive undertakings to improve the race. Certainly Acts of Parliament would not do so. Perhaps, after all, the simplicity of life which
128 EUGENICS REVIEW.

results from lack of education produces finer men than scientific guidance
would.

After witnessing these emigrations I] spent four years in the Malay
Peninsula, where I found out there was such a thing as race caste. Most
people in England who live at home do not understand this, but those who
have been abroad know something of what I mean by it. A great number
of thinkers at home will tell you it is a superstition, but Nature does not
work in that way. As a rule she breeds a superstition for some very
definite purpose. To return to miscegenation, which I found at work in
the Malay Peninsula, I there came to know of certain qualities of the
machinery of the human being which must be taken into account in any
proposal we make to improve the race.

Not only then, but for centuries before, Chinese junks had come
drifting down that coast, and hardly a junk came to the Siamese villages
without leaving a Chinaman behind, so that in all the seaports you come
across Siamese with a great mixture of Chinese in them; and I think that
physically and mentally the hybrid is probably better than the Siamese,
perhaps better than the Chinaman. At any rate, you would nearly always
find the leading men of the village were of this hybrid kind. Well, there
was a case where hybridism was not acting badly.

Then I struck the other and much more difficult problem of the
mixture that was springing up between Europeans and native races; and
there again, of course, one’s expectations got upset somewhat. We are
really very badly educated for a great Empire—we know so very little of
the people who are fellow citizens, as it were, in that Empire. When I
went to Siam I was under the impression that I was going to a land of
barbarians, but it was a land, as I discovered, of old civilisation. The
people had a different creed from ours, and looked at things in a different
way; but they were not by any means to be despised. Between them and
the white men I found there was a curious antipathy, which arose from
race caste. But the sex instinct proved even stronger than this racial
feeling. When Britishers, Frenchmen, and Malays were isolated intermarriages nearly always took place between them: and then if children
came the instinct of parenthood was brought into play; and it was very
rare indeed that a white man, once he had broken through all these
obstacles Nature had set up, would leave that part of the world. But in
communities where the British and the Europeans were numerous intermarriages with the natives seldom took place, because there the herd
instinct, which is part of the race instinct, became strong and insistent.

Later I came across other races and race-mixtures in the Pacific. Of
the former I have met with only one, of a different colour from our own,
the members of which, by their manner and bearing, almost break through
the natural antipathy that subsists between the white and the coloured
folks. I mean the Maoris, who are not unlike Europeans in their habits
and outlook.

I thought many a time, as I travelled, how great and how unintended
an experiment the founding of the British Empire was. We looked upon
the people in the countries we had conquered as inferior, so inferior that
it was doing what appeared the will of God to wipe them off the earth
“ EUGENICS AND IMPERIAL DEVELOPMENT.” 129

and occupy the land; and in that way we became heirs of the whole of
North America and of New Zealand and Australia. My travels also suggested a comparison between the British and the Spaniards and Portuguese as colonisers of America. The British went to the poor, country
districts; whereas the Spaniards and Portuguese went, in search of gold,
to the most thickly populated areas, and they got drawn into that civilisation and drowned.

Sometimes I have traced the difference between these gold-seekers
and our people in this country, because the more I study our own origin,
the more I am sure that we, the British people, are part of what I may
call the great North Sea race. We have sprung up mainly round the
shores of the North Sea, on the east as well as the west coast, and we are
all the same people for the greater part, with very little Mediterannean
blood. To call us a Mediterannean people is one of the great fallacies of
the times. We are very different from the people in the South of Europe
in one way, at any rate—the sense of race purity is much stronger in us.

I myself have a slight feeling, sometimes, even in Wales, which
arises from this instinct. My explanation of this deep-seated instinct 1s
that it is one of Nature’s instruments for evolving a new species. She
spreads among the people a spirit of a locality, gives them the feeling of
unity, and makes outsiders more or less enemies. The tendency is,
therefore, to marry inside the district and preserve the distinction effected
by this isolation. National spirit is really a modified form of racial feeling, which becomes stronger still when peoples have dealings with one
another who are altogether different in feature and colour. I am arguing
all through that the race instinct is a most valuable property not to be
bred out, but rather to be encouraged. You can see I am not preaching a
doctrine that is likely to help on the League of Nations very much, but we
must be straightforward and truthful and look the world in the face. I
cannot even think of a League of Nations which would involve intermarriage between some of our Allies and ourselves.

I am afraid I have not helped you very much to any solution, except
this, that you have to take into account, in all your endeavours in breeding human races, of the very strong instincts which are in us concerning
race purity. (Applause.)

PROFESSOR E. W. MAcBRIDE, F.R.S., said :—I have listened to the
remarks of my friend, Professor Keith, and with a considerable portion
of them I agree. I think that in the few minutes which fall to me in
this debate, the most valuable thing I could do would be to deal with
the small part of the problem that has come out of my own immediate
knowledge. I have had the good fortune to spend more than ro years in
our greatest Dominion—greatest both in population and extent of territory—and in the course of those 10 or 12 years I travelled from the
extreme east to the extreme west. I married in Canada and had children
born there; and I think I know it from inside about as well as anyone
who has spent that time in the country could know it. Now I agree with
Professor Keith that one of the greatest links that has bound this Empire
together is the export of fine men and women from these islands, and
more especially, may I remark, from the part of the islands to which
130 EUGENICS REVIEW.

Professor Keith has referred. Certainly in the thistory of Canada the
export of men and women from that part of the world has played an
overwhelming part in building up the Dominion. Wherever you go, if
you take two or three generations, you find the leading Canadians sprung
from Scotch stock, and from the stock which has been raised on the land,
and which had the deepest interest in the rearing of cows and horses and
sheep. It is those people who have built up Canada. Now atthe present
time there is a tremendous amount of false sentiment abroad amongst us.
We feel we have lost large numbers of men in the war, and we think in
some way a huge gap has been made in our ranks. It is an entirely
mistaken feeling, because so far as we have this island alone to consider,
the best thing that possibly could happen to us would be the blotting out
of existence of about 15,000,000 people, so as to reduce the population
from 40,000,000, which is enormous for this area, to about 25,000,000.
But since what binds the Empire together is the emigration of men and
women of good stock to the Colonies, the excuse for the encouragement of
fresh interest in these questions is the possibility of sending out more such
people. We read in our papers frenzied appeals to our sympathies to
save the babies of the slums. Actually it has been proposed to tax the
thrifty folk for the unfit, people who want to have their children educated
free, to get their food below cost and have everything done for them, so
that they can have more babies. The question I wish to put to you is:
Are people of that kind ever fit to improve the Empire? So far as Canada
is concerned, absolutely no. They are the very last people who are
wanted there. If they do go they are an unmitigated curse.
Consequently I consider all these efforts at stimulating the growth of
population amongst the poorer classes in our towns as dysgenic. If we
want to prepare a good product we must try to encourage the rural,
thrifty, self-supporting population which Professor Keith commended.
Let me tell you what some of the first settlers endured in Canada, not
those who were transported to the great prairie lands which have been
opened up by the Canadian Pacific Railway, but those who arrived
between 1837 and 1840, and laid the foundations of the province of
Ontario. They were planted in the middle of wooded districts, and found
that the summer sun barely thawed down more than a foot or two. Below
that all was frozen; and the small crops they raised were largely killed
by summer frost. For several years after their arrival they were very
nearly starved, but they did not give in. First of all they burned down
the forests, because, of course, they had no means of dealing with such
large quantities of timber in any other way. Thus they thoroughly exposed
the land, a good deal of which was marshy, to the rays of the sun, and
succeeded in drying it. Then they set fire to the underlying turf, so that
the sun managed to penetrate through the ground which, in all probability,
had been frozen since the glacial epoch, and they got down to clay soil
beneath. The sons and grandsons of these pioneers are to-day among the
most hardy and prosperous inhabitants, ready to endure hardships of that
kind. Only people of their sort will help to build up a great Empire and
should be encouraged, for that purpose, to increase their numbers. If you
are going to build up a stock of that kind, you cannot enlarge your
“EUGENICS AND IMPERIAL DEVELOPMENT.” 131

Dominions with the mushroom speed with which, for example, certain
settlements in the United States have grown. Now a great many patriotic
Canadians were unable to reconcile themselves, I am sorry to say, to the
slow, steady growth. The situation was trying to them. They saw next
door to them this apparently colossal expansion caused by millions of
emigrants pouring into the great Mississippi Valley from all parts of
Europe and evolving races like those which Professor Keith mentioned.
To my thinking this indiscriminate inflow and mingling of peoples is a
menace to health and peace in America. But the Canadians thought
otherwise and tried to get more than the 50,000 to 60,000 immigrants who
were coming to their country each year. In the year of grace 1887 a
tremendous effort was made, control was relaxed, and any out-of-work,
any loafer, any person whom the steamboat companies got hold of, were
shipped off to Canada. About 207,000 were sent out that year. As a
result we had a perfectly awful time in the succeeding winter. We had
thousands of people on the verge of starvation. The municipalities made
extraordinary efforts to keep these people alive; and in the largest city
of Montreal there was an outbreak of burglary and crime which had no
precedent in the history of the city. Fortunately, it is easy to get into a
Canadian city in the winter time, but very difficult to get out. The
avenues of escape are few; and tramping along the roads, under four or
five feet of snow, is, of course, impossible. Consequently the police were
able, after some time, to track these criminals, who, it proved, had come
from the City of London. They were people of Teutonic origin who had
come from Germany, practised their trade in London, and' been exported
to Canada. That year was enough for indiscriminate immigration in
Canada. The Dominion Parliament, in my opinion with great wisdom,
brought in restrictive legislation and exercised a much stricter control.
Now, after the war, we have had an outbreak of Bolshevism in Canada, a
totally unheard-of thing, because Socialism is not popular in Canada.
There was a so-called Socialist Party in Montreal, but it would have taken
a microscope to discover them. The agitators, the Government found,
were gentlemen from Russia whom the authorities had imported in their
haste to increase the population. If you are going to create sound
colonies you must fill them with the best stock raised on the land both in
Scotland and in England. We have to give that stock the best chances
of reproducing itself and discountenance the increase of the other population; and I would much rather that a large portion of the offspring of
our town population died in infancy than live to grow up into what our
Premier has called C3 men. I am afraid these views will sound somewhat
reactionary to some members of the audience, but I think they are sound
eugenics. Let me close by giving you a Canadian problem—and that a
Canadian rural problem. A farmer who was sending his son into the
city to engage a farm hand said to him “Get a man. If you can’t get a
man, get a Frenchman ” (that is a French Canadian, a different race from
any of the stock I have spoken of). “If you can’t get a Frenchman, get
two Englishmen.” (Laughter and applause.)

MR. LIDBETTER said :—Mr. President, Ladies and Gentlemen, whenever a problem such as we have before us this afternoon crops up, I
132 EUGENICS REVIEW.

always feel that one ought to look on the practical side and emphasise the
“education ” which, to me, is the essential part of the title of our Society.
Immigration is a complicated subject, and before one’s theories with
regard to it can be put into practice a great number of other questions
must be answered.

As the last speaker has pointed out, restrictive immigration laws
are now in force in Canada. Similar laws have been passed in the British
Dominions and America; and since 1908 certain minor regulations of
the same kind have existed in this country, but they are so framed that
they cannot be carried out. All these laws without exception, however,
miss the eugenic ideal entirely. They are based upon the immediate
condition of the would-be emigrants and immigrants and have no relation
to economic circumstances. They do not take family history into account
at all, and nowhere that I know of do they make any limitation as to race.
It should surely be part of the object of this Association to get the eugenic
ideal incorporated into all these regulations; and to that end it is necessary for us to move in the educational direction, in order to give a lead
as to the sort of persons who should be admitted, apart from the immediate
physical and mental condition. That is an absolute necessity, and it must
be the key-note of any advice that this Association can offer on the eugenic
question with regard to imperial troubles.

If we are to maintain stock from which emigrants who are worthy of
our Colonies can spring, we must keep up the quality and tone of our
own population. Here we have to consider problems which demand much
more knowledge than we possess at present. I would mention a case to
you now that I dealt with in about 1913. It is that of an Eastern
European who had become insane in London. Enquiries brought out the
fact that this man had been in England only four days. He had come
with his father and brother, and on the fourth day after their arrival in
England they presented themselves at the offices of a travelling agent,
asking for tickets to go to America. The agent looked at the three and
said, “ Yes, you can have a ticket, and you can have a ticket for America,
but that chap can’t go.” The man was good enough to get into the
country, but not good enough to get out. He was in custody in England
for several months, and was finally repatriated to the country of his
origin at considerable cost. There are many more like him. What is
more, if that man had managed to dodge arrest for 12 months, you could
not have got rid of him at all. He would have remained here, the head
of a family that would have had to be maintained at the public expense.

A still broader question which arises out of immigration is that of
race. I think no one who is conversant with East London at the present
time can doubt the real danger in which we stand of vitiating the British
stock through marriage alliances with Asiatics who make a very undesirable blend with our own people. It is the mixture that is the peril rather
than the presence of the original community, the members of which, by
themselves, have many good points, including a fairly high standard of
health.

For the prevention of such admixture much information is necessary.
One of the many subjects relating to emigration on which more light is
“EUGENICS AND IMPERIAL DEVELOPMENT.” 133

greatly needed is that of the types of men and women that are the most
useful for the Colonies. Surely it should be possible for some branch of
this organisation to be established in the Colonies, the secretary of which
would advise us not merely as to the best immediate types for emigration,
but as to what the result of one or two generations in the new countries
was likely to be.

Another subject on which knowledge is needed is that of inter-marniage
between English folk and foreigners in London. Extensive enquiry should
be made into it, and the investigations should be so organised as to bring
the facts which they elicit before the general public. To my mind, this
enquiry is a very urgent thing.

I think that the main thing for us to do is to preach the eugenic
principle in such a way that everybody will inevitably think of it in discussing and dealing with passenger movements, both inwards and outwards. Until it is thus incorporated with all our thoughts and actions
with regard to the incomings and outgoings of population, the eugenic
ideal will be of no great value to the Empire. (Applause.)

Mrs. A. C. Gotto, O.B.E., said :—Mr. President, Ladies and Gentlemen, we are always being criticised as eugenists for having no practical
policy. I think the subjects that have been raised this afternoon show
what very practical questions do underlie the eugenic principle, and also
what very practical alterations are needed even if the present amount of
knowledge of eugenics is to be usefully applied. The problem to me
seems to fall into three different lines. We first have the consideration
of the alterations that are immediately necessary in our own immigration
laws. We also have the questions which will concern the new imperial
emigration authority which has just been set up by the Colonial Office.
In this new department no steps have been taken, as far as I know, to
secure the selection of types of emigrants who are suitable for different
colonies.

Then again, we know that although the numerical difference between
the sexes in the various Dominions may not be as great as most people
suppose, the difference in numbers between men and women belonging to
the same social tradition is very great indeed. From the eugenic and
imperial point of view that disparity is, of course, most regrettable. The
opportunity which the war has given to a large number of the best
Dominion men to select wives of their own social tradition from this
country is one of the few good things which have come out of evil. I
believe there are between 35,000 and 40,000 New Zealand, Australian and
Canadian officers and privates who have married since they have been in
this country. These marriages are going to be a very important eugenic
step forward for the Dominions. But there are quite a number of other
colonial problems for which a solution is required. If we are to have a
good home tradition in all parts of the Empire, we shall have to see that
the right sort of women are attracted to the Colonies by the offer of
suitable employment.

Our responsibility for our tropical Colonies opens up another group
of questions.
134 EUGENICS REVIEW.

For those regions we select the very best of our University men as
administrators in the naval, military, police and medical services. Many
of these places are now so much improved that it is quite possible for
white women to live and rear families there; but such are the conditions
of service that in the majority of cases it is impossible for the men to
attain a financial position which will enable them to marry until they are
between 35 and 4o. That is an absolutely anti-eugenic position. If we
are going to choose the very best of our young men for responsible work
which will shut them off from their own kind and favour the sex at the
expense of the race instinct in such a way that the purity of the race is
imperilled, there is an added reason why the conditions of the colomial
service should be such as to encourage men to take wives to those parts
of the Colonies where it is possible for white women to live. (Applause.)

As you see, there is quite a number of really practical eugenic points
that this Society would do well to take up and press home now. Government departments are always very nearly strangled by red tape; but the
war has done something to relax some of the knots, and one feels that if
pressure can be brought to bear now, before the knots are tightened up
again, we may make some impression. Therefore I do hope we shall
come forward during the next year and press these three practical points :
That we—

(1) Ask that our own immigration laws shall be carefully
scrutinised with a view to checking the ingress into this country of people
we cannot get rid of again, because they fall below the standards accepted
by any other country. That is the largest step to take, but I cannot see
any practical reason why it should not be taken. (Applause.)

(2) Approach the Colonial Office and put as much pressure on
them, and on Parliament, as we possibly can, to secure a general review
of the conditions of service for our own administrative staffs in the
Colonies and Protectorates as would encourage the young men who serve
there to marry.

(3) Bring to the notice of the Colonial Office the need for careful
eugenic consideration of the problems concerning the immigration within
the Empire of the different sections of our own race.

Another whole group of subjects relates to scientific research. We
have just seen the Medical Research Committee established. This, I
believe, is to be under the Privy Council, which is an independent body
capable of undertaking research on imperial lines. Is not the ascertaining
of the facts with regard to miscegenation a very practical portion of the
white man’s burden that we are assuming? We are responsible for the
settlement in far countries of sections of our own white race; and it is
incumbent on us to obtain the best results from the countries and the
peoples under our care. I am not now considering the question of the
crossing of whites and blacks, but of inter-marriage between the members
of races between which the differences are not so great. In such cases
the product of the blending may be good. For instance, there is some
evidence to show that mixtures between different brown and black peoples
produce a fitter race than either of the two from which they sprung, and
that the children as they grow up can live better and produce more com“EUGENICS AND IMPERIAL DEVELOPMENT.” 135

fort for themselves, because they are better workers than the original
natives of the tropical groups of islands from which they come.

On these matters we ought to have positive knowledge; and I submit
that this Society should urge the responsible authorities to obtain it, and,
through the Press, should bring home to our own people the necessity of
discovering the effect of race mixture and not approaching this important
question with prejudiced minds.

I agree that our whole instinct warns us not to allow arosses to be
made between races which differ widely from one another; and I certainly
hope that science will prove this instinct to be correct, because although,
like a good many other people, I am quite ready to look upon the
coloured races as our brothers, I do not want to look upon them as our
brothers-in-law—I think that is a very different matter. (Laughter.)
When we move the thing from the ethical to the physical position, I
think we shall probably find that science will confirm our racial instinct
in this respect, but whatever the reply, we have not the information, yet,
on which to base action, and I think we should get it. Therefore I urge
that we should take practical steps, in these four directions, to bring
imperial administration more into accordance with existing knowledge of
eugenics and the recognised means of obtaining knowledge than it is at
present. (Applause.)

THE CHAIRMAN :—Sir Harry Wilson cannot be present, but I will read
you an extract from a letter he has written. “I was going to say a few
words on the way in which migration and land settlement are likely to
affect the problem of imperial development. The marriage of so many
Canadian, Australian and South African soldiers with women belonging
to the Mother Country is an interesting factor in the situation. Of the
Canadian Forces alone some 38,000 have married on this side of the
Atlantic; and as Colonel Avery said, when, at the Overseas Nursing
Association Annual Meeting, he was estimating the total number of such
marriages at over 50,000, they are probably only the vanguard of a great
army. He emphasised the need for more and better maternity nursing in
the outlying parts of the Empire, particularly in the prairie provinces of
Canada and the back blocks of Australia and South Africa. This seems
to me to be a problem which directly concerns this Society.”

We have now had an hour and ten minutes, and I think we had better
bring our discussion to a close. I quite agree with Mrs. Gotto that we
must try and pick up the threads of it and bring it to some practical issue.
(Applause. )
