COMMENTS ON GENERAL OSBORN’ 5
ADDRESS

By SIR CHARLES DARWIN, K.B.E., F.R.S.

Federation General Osborn has criticized

rather strongly some of the views I have
expressed in my book, and I am glad of this
opportunity for comment on his remarks, the
more so as I have the warmest sympathy
with much that he says. I wish that things
might happen that way, and my disagreement
is not with his wishes but with the prospects
for their accomplishment. In my book I was
not concerned with what we should like in an
ideal world but with what I believe will
happen in the actual world during the long
ages to come.

The difference between us arises mostly
from the fact that we are thinking about
different things. Osborn is telling people
what to do now, and I judge that he is giving
good advice in the sense that it may make
many people happier during the near future,
perhaps even during the next century or so.
I do not wish to dispute this, since it is not
my concern ; from my point of view a single
century is unimportant. The policy he
advocates would only become important to
me if he could show that it would so change
the biological forces governing humanity that

| N his address to the Planned Parenthood

a final position of stable equilibrium was .

reached that was radically different in all
its qualities from anything that has been
experienced hitherto. In putting it in this
way I am of course including among the
biological forces man’s capacity for reasonableness and good sense, but that is only one
of his qualities and it has to compete against
selfishness, sentiment and unreasoning impulse. Osborn seems to expect that reason
will inevitably triumph over these other
qualities, but I cannot persuade myself that
there is any evidence for this.

The new thing that has recently arisen is
the possibility of easy limitation of populations
through birth control, which might at first

sight be expected to be capable of keeping
numbers down to a degree that would provide.
a secure living for everybody. That would be
good sense, but I cannot see any grounds for
expecting that man will show himself more
amenable to good sense over this than he has
in the past over many other things recommended to him on the basis of reason. There is
nothing new about appeals to reason as the
best guides to human conduct, but how seldom
have they been successful ? Thus for thousands of years all the religions and philosophies
of the world have been steadily inculcating
the importance of virtuous conduct, and yet
we still require systems of criminal law, and
police to enforce them. Even if the limitation
of population is—as I believe it is—one of the
chief things that will make for the good or ill
of the world, it is hardly the one that from
day to day impresses mankind with its.
importance. If then man has failed to amend
his conduct in the all-pervading things of life,
is there much likelihood that he can be
persuaded to do any better over a matter that
cannot appear to him of such. cardinal
importance ? It will not appear so because it
will not be perpetually with him, but will only
arise on a few occasions in his lifetime. Some
people of a philosophic cast. of mind may

recognize the importance of the matter, but

not the majority whose conduct is. mainly.
dictated by habit and their day-to-day
experiences.

The developments of birth control in recent
years are facts of great importance, but I
cannot believe they will make any permanent
difference when viewed in the perspective of
the long ages of world history. It is rather as
though a new drug had been placed in the
hands of a doctor who was responsible for the
health of an elderly patient ; the drug might
ease the patient’s declining years, and it might
perhaps prolong his life a little, but he would

161
‘162

die in the end all the same. It is to be regarded .

as a palliative, not as a cure. In considering
the consequences of contraception in the long
run, it is quite irrelevant that at the present
time the available methods are neither
convenient nor very reliable. Even now much
work is being done to discover a contraceptive
that it would be easy for everybody to use ;
call it a “pill.” In view of the wonderful
developments of biochemistry it seems possible
—I should say even probable—that at no
distant date the pill will be discovered in a
cheap form that would make it available for
the whole of mankind, no matter what their
level of intelligence or culture. In considering
then the influence of contraceptives in the far
future, we may as well assume that this
discovery has been made, since, if it never
should be made, the results would be even
less important. The only difference that the
discovery would make is that we should
possess a rather more efficient palliative.
What in fact will be the effect of the
pill? It may perhaps be accepted that
even in the free world there would be an
enforced administration of it to the feebleminded and to hardened criminals. This
would be a benefit to the quality of the race,
but not a very great one, because the fraction
concerned would not be very large ; it is even
possible that it would not be worth while to
face the odium of the compulsion for such
small results. It is the effect on the rest
of the population that calls for consideration.
Making due allowances for the operation of
pure chance, it would be expected that those
who used the pill would tend to have smaller
families than those who refused to do so.
There is thus, biologically regarded, a strong
premium in favour of refusal. It is true that
the children of the smaller families will have
the advantage of better upbringing in times
of general prosperity, but the very fact of that
prosperity will tend to preserve the actual
lives of the others as well, so that a larger
preportion of population will come from the
large families than from the small ;. in times
of misfortune there will surely be disorders,
and the mere fact of greater numbers will give
them the advantage. In view of this it
would seem probable that the most con
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Spicuous result of the pill would be a tremendous reinforcement of any religious creed
that regarded its use as immoral, because the
faithful of such a creed would tend to have
the largest families, and most children adopt:
their parents’ creed and so would do the same
again. However, setting this point aside, it 1s
at least doubtful whether the universal use of
the pill would tend to remove disparities in
standards of life. Parents would use the pill
when they were dissatisfied with the standards
of life that they expected their children were
going to experience, but there is no absolute
standard to judge this by, and those accustomed to a hard life, such as prevails in
backward countries, would regard as being
tolerable conditions that would be regarded
as insupportable by the inhabitants of more
fortunate countries. It would seem then that
to achieve any sort of equality of standards a
great deal of compulsion would have to be
used, and this raises the question of the
contrast between a free world and one
composed of autocratic slave states; it is an
interesting subject but I shall not go into it,
beyond noting that autocracy seems to provide
yet another biological mechanism which would
be likely to work against the desired stability
of population. ° !

Osborn has an interesting discussion on the
demography of France, but I am not very
sure what conclusions he draws from it. As is
well known, the leading French demographers
maintain that the complete acceptance of
voluntary family planning will lead to the
extinction of the race, as it threatened to do
in the past, and they therefore oppose the
facilitation of contraceptive practices. However, the grant of family allowances by the
state has recently overcome this tendency ;
it might reasonably be argued that this is
only another form of family planning. The
French experience does show the interesting
fact that by a suitable taxation policy a
country can do something to control its
numbers, at any rate for a time. Osborn
seems to approve of all that has happened in
France, both the earlier decreases and the.
present maintenance of numbers, but he
quotes with equal satisfaction the rapid
increases in the United States which are
COMMENTS ON GENERAL OSBORN’S ADDRESS

happening now, and which are apparently
“most marked among those who do practise
contraception. If these two examples are
adduced in evidence on the question of what
the general effects of the widespread use of
contraceptives would be, they seem to cancel
out and leave us much where we were before.
If they suggest anything, itis that in the long
run it is not the use or the non-use of con
traceptives that really determines population.

numbers. And when we look beyond these
two examples, we must not forget that
practically all the other countries of the world
mark any increase in prosperity that they
experience by a positively menacing increase
in population.

Osborn later claims that the whole business
of the regulation of populations will look after
itself on a purely voluntary basis by everyone
planning his family just exactly as he pleases,
though he qualifies this by saying that “ the
task will require all the brains, all the sincerity,
all the sense of purpose which you can
muster.”” The two halves of his statement
seem to me to contradict one another, in view
of the very mixed qualities of the human
character to which I referred earlier. The

whole of the address leaves me with the ©

impression that among all the things of life
Osborn gives very much the highest value to
individual liberty, and that everything else
has to be forced to fit in with this. I too put
individual liberty among my highest values,
but in the past many things have happened
that go against this value, and I reckon it
certain that a great many more will happen
in the future. It is, therefore, surely best in
estimating the future as far as one may to
forget one’s preferences. So with regard to this
part of the address I would say that Ihope most
warmly that he will succeed in doing all that
he hopes to do, but that I can see hardly any
reason to expect it.

In my book I referred to the probability of
a slow change in human instincts owing to the
developments of contraception. With this
also Osborn disagrees, and I would like to
make some remarks on the subject. If it
should prove that contraception does not have
the effect of limiting families—as apparently
is the case just now in America—then my

163

argument falls to the ground, but if the
French demographers are right, then it
becomes important. It is, anyhow, a long-range
forecast, applying only thousands of years
ahead, and so it has a different quality from
the more immediate questions that mostly
concern Osborn. It has, so to speak, to
be a “ thermodynamic ”’ argument, based on
general principle rather than on immediate
experience.

This is the argument. The higher animals
have been endowed by natural selection with
strong sexual and parental instincts for the
sole purpose of ensuring the perpetuation of
the race. Man has also got both these
instincts, and even if we are not ready to go
the whole way with the Freudian school of
psychology, we have to admit the tremendous
potency of the sexual instinct in nearly all
the human race. The parental instinct is of
course also strong ; it is different in quality,
and the two cannot be equated, but in its
day-to-day emotional intensity it could hardly
be disputed that the sexual instinct plays the
stronger part for most people. The new
developments of contraception have now
rather suddenly freed man from paying the
price of his sexual instincts, so that Nature’s
chief mechanism for ensuring the perpetuation
of the race has broken down. As witness of
this, consider how many people there are who
are now content to have one or two children
only. The parental instinct of such people is
satisfied by producing a family that is below
the replacement level. The ingenuity of man
has defeated the primary reproductive mechanism of Nature, and it is to be considered
what secondary mechanisms will arise to
replace it. Among these the most direct, and
so presumably the most effective, is the direct.
instinctive wish for children. It is already held
by many people, but to very varying degrees,
and those having it most will presumably ,
have most children, so that there will be a
bias all the time increasing the proportion of
the population that have it. Unlike many of
the operations of natural selection which are
apt to be brutal and painful, this would be a
painless process, which would pass almost
unnoticed. It would be a little like the
painless secondary sexual selection that has
164

endowed so many of our birds with their
beautiful plumage. Such a development will
only occur in so far as it is needed; if it
should prove that, in spite of contraception,
Nature’s old mechanism still works, then it
will not occur at all. But if the contrary is
found, then the instinct for having children
will be reinforced, and it will probably be
done in the untidy extravagant way that
Nature mostly uses—for example our sexual
instincts would seem to be quite unnecessarily
strong for the mere purpose of securing the
perpetuation of the race. It is likely that the
instinct would take the form: “ It is time for
me to have another child,’ and not merely :
“ T do not feel that two children are enough.”’
In so far as it is permitted to express wishes
in such a matter—and it is really quite
irrelevant to do so—I may say that I regard
as one of the deadliest menaces to the human
race the danger that such an instinct should

grow to an intensity something like the.

present intensity of the sexual instinct, for if
it should do so it would destroy all prospects
of general prosperity among the human race.
However, it is unlikely that things will go as
far as that, because a much smaller change

THE EUGENICS REVIEW |

should be quite enough to maintain the.
race. | |

It will I hope be seen from what I have
written here that I have the warmest
sympathy with most of the things that Osborn
wants to do. I would like him to succeed in
them, but I am very unhopeful about it.
Man’s whole manner of living has altered
several times since he was first evolved, and
it will no doubt be altered again many times,
but something very much deeper would be
needed to bring about the changes that
Osborn desires. It would call for the establishment of a new mechanism of Nature, if the
result is to be a stable state of the world
radically different from the one produced by
the crudé but efficient mechanism used by
Nature hitherto. None of the proposals put
forward seem to me to have this tremendous
quality. So I am only ready to regard the
things proposed by Osborn as palliatives,
which may enable our present golden age to
last rather longer than it otherwise would.
I am afraid I do not think that will be very
long, but I am all in favour of palliatives, and
I hope that Osborn’s efforts will be attended
with success. |

Eugenies Review, Vol. XLV, No. 3
