FREDERICK OSBORN

American Eugenics Society

Biological Aspects of Social Problems
A REVIEW

THE SIXTEEN PAPERS in this Symposium vary
in interest if not in quality. The material on
population and on medical genetics is already
familiar, but the clarity and conciseness of the
articles in these sections amply justify the
reader’s time. The sections on Social Mobility
and Education and on various Aspects of Fertility
Control contain much relatively new material.
There are introductions by Sir James Gray, Sir
Sydney Caine, L. S. Penrose and Sir Julian
Huxley. Most are concerned with the single
aspect of too rapid growth. Huxley seems best
to grasp the significance of the papers as a
whole.

Of the papers in the demographic series,
Population Trends, that of J. M. Tanner of the
University of London reports on a subject little
discussed in the US, namely the trend towards
earlier physical maturation in the past fifty years.
Age at menarche is down from seventeen in
Norway in 1850 to thirteen in the US in 1955.
The adolescent spurt in growth starts with girls
at ten and with boys at eleven instead of at
twelve or later as in the not distant past. Menarche is earlier with the well-to-do, later with
the poorer classes, earlier in the cities than in
the country. In 1940 menarche was six months
earlier among Negroes in New York than among
Negroes in the south. The larger the family, the
later the menarche. Is there a genetical explanation? Does heterozygosity make for earlier
menarche? Dahlberg thought the bicycle might
be the cause of increased heterozygosity in
Europe. If so, then the auto, by increasing outbreeding, might be thought the cause in the US!
Tanner’s material, which has aroused much
interest in England, should get more attention in

* Meade, J. E., and Parkes, A. S. (Editors). Biological
Aspects of Social Problems. Eugenics Society Symposia,
ee 1. Edinburgh, 1965. Oliver & Boyd. Pp. x+228.
Price 50s.

182

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, December 1965, 57, 4.

the US, for its possible effect on age at marriage
and size of family.

In the section on Social Mobility and Education, John Gibson and Michael Young correct
the idea that old studies of social class differentials in births offer proof of dysgenic trends.
A pilot study in England confirms the findings
of Higgins and Reed in Ann Arbor and of
Bajema in Michigan; in the low intelligence
groups the large proportion of siblings who never
marry offsets the high birth rates of their married
brothers and sisters.

Interest continues to rise with the paper on
Education and Social Movement by J. W. B.
Douglas. “‘As the educational process becomes
more effective in sifting out the able from the
less able, so the possibilities of social movement
for an individual become concentrated in the
school years and limited after that... . The more
education, the greater the likelihood of moving
up socially. . . . The educational system was
designed to give all an equal opportunity... .
But the General Certificate Examinations are
only partially successful; they show a consistent
picture of unequal opportunity and wasted
talent. . . . The sifting out process is hampered
by a number of enumerated advantages accruing
to the upper classes.”” Whether this is equally
true of American education is something to be
considered. Here is a matter affecting fertility,
and perhaps the quality of future generations.
This section, Social Mobility and Education,
closes with the paper by J. M. Thoday, which
can be summarized as follows: The doctrine of
fixed abilities is nonsense. Environment determines how much of the genetic potential will be
realized in the process of development. Each
individual is unique, therefore each has his own
optimum environment. This is not the same
environment for all; it retards development to
put a low IQ in a high IQ environment. It is
BIOLOGICAL ASPECTS OF SOCIAL PROBLEMS

necessary to understand the concept of genotypeenvironment interaction in development. Everyone knows these things. But they have not
entered into our thinking as they should. The
section on education suggests some much needed
re-orientation in educational policy, which might
indeed improve trends in fertility as well as
improve the educational system.

The section on Genetic Aspects of Medicine
presents a direct confrontation of the views of
Penrose in the Introduction and those set forth
in authoritative articles by Mather, Montalenti,
Ferguson-Smith and Fraser Roberts. Penrose
presents views widely held by many in the past.
He warns against the so-called ‘eugenics’ of
Hitler. He is unafraid of an increase in the
genetic load so long as the medical profession
can find a cure. He thinks that eugenics is still
in a search for the “‘ideal’? man. Thus he can
write ““Changes [of the gene constitution] are
deleterious only if the ideal constitution is
considered to be that required for life in an
uncivilized wild condition”. He does not understand that the present aim of eugenics is to provide conditions in every environment which by
their effect on births, will maintain, and hopefully, improve man’s ability to cope with the
many complex environments which civilization
demands he live in. We do not know what the
present trends in human evolution are, but there
is certainly no evidence that the present distribution of births in most civilized countries is
maintaining, let alone improving, the genetic
factors necessary for the development of abilities
appropriate to present conditions. Following
Penrose, Kenneth Mather gives a concise picture
of what happens when the mutation rate is
raised, as by an increase in radiation, or when
the previously unfit survive, as by improved
medical procedures. In achondroplasia, mediated
by an autosomal dominant gene, the frequency
could be reduced to the mutation rate if there
were no marriages between achondroplasiacs.
Phenylketonuria is due to an autosomal recessive
gene. It has at present an incidence of 1 to
40,000. It would ultimately disappear (except for
new mutations) if heterozygotes were recognized
and not allowed to marry. But at present rates
of marriage, if medical techniques, now saving
a few phenyls for reproduction, were to save all

of them, then the frequency of this condition
in the population would slowly but inexorably
increase by the addition of new mutations. In
both these examples the defect is due to a single
gene. When he considers the effect of polygenic
systems where many genes are involved in
determining a particular result he finds continuous variation of quantitative rather than
qualitative character, showing every degree of
expression within wide limits. Selection may be
stabilizing or directional. Readjustments are
slow but they are (now) going on as a result
of preventive or curative medicine. One may
also infer that readjustments are going on with
respect to intelligence, though on this the
geneticist has as yet no evidence.

In a paper on Infectious Diseases as Selective
Agents, G. Montalenti takes the advanced view
that ““Man represents very good material for
studies on population genetics’. He believes
that “For the experimentally minded geneticist
of to-day it is essential to demonstrate, and
possibly to measure, at least some of the selective
factors which are active in man’. Montalenti
believes that ‘““‘We have entered an era in which
rapid changes are occurring not only in our
environment, but presumably also in our gene
pools .. .”’ Ferguson Smith in Chromosomal
Aberrations and Their Transmission reports that
about 20 per cent of spontaneous abortions, 11
per cent of high grade male sub-fertility and
about 6 per cent of institutionalized mental
defectiveness have chromosomal abnormalities.
Two factors are known to increase their frequency; increasing maternal age, and exposure
to radiation. He therefore advises to have
children while you are young, and avoid radiation. He stresses the importance of heredity
counselling, especially in cases where there is
already one mongoloid child in the family.

Continuing with further practical applications,
J. A. Fraser Roberts recommends early diagnosis
as important, especially in diseases of infancy
and childhood. Rapid progress is being made in
the detection of carriers, now possible in certain
types of diabetes and of progressive muscular
dystrophy and other defects. When we know
more, screening might be considered but at
present the most useful thing to be done is to
provide genetic advice for those needing it. He

183
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

and C. O. Carter have been running regular
genetic clinics at Great Ormond Street since
1946. Almost all the women who have had one
defective child are worried. They are deterred
from having more children when the risk is too
high, but when the risk is as low as one in twenty
most people don’t worry too much.

The last section was introduced by Julian
Huxley with a fine plea for help to the underdeveloped countries, and a statement of the
social costs of a large family in countries whose
national income must go almost entirely to the
bare sustenance of its people. P. Sargant
Florence notes that five studies in Great Britain,
sponsored by the Eugenics Society from 1948
to 1950, showed five children or more among
48-5 per cent of the problem families as against
only 2-65 per cent of such large families in the
population at large. In England public funds are
available to meet this problem. But in the underdeveloped countries with population increasing
at 3 or 4 per cent a year, and with masses of
people moving into the cities, it is hard to find
the funds for child care, let alone for education.
The experience of Taiwan shows that Asian
peoples will use the new plastic coil, and
that it may be highly effective in reducing
births.

Mary Peberdy reports a study in Newcastle
upon Tyne of problem parents who had had
four or more children. Their average number of
pregnancies was 6:3. Forty per cent of the women
were physically ill, 23 per cent mentally unstable.
Though unwilling to visit clinics, they accepted
contraception when methods were taught to
them at home. In the third year of the experiment
when the pill was offered it quickly became the
most popular method of control, and the most
reliable, with a failure rate of 9 per hundred
years of exposure compared to more than 30 for

184

the older methods. The pregnancy rate before
survey was 130-2; during the survey it was 23-7.
Failures were due to patient failures. At end of
survey, out of 150 couples, seventy-six were on
contiaception of whom forty-one were on the
pill and twenty-nine had been sterilized. In
Southampton, Dorothy Morgan made a similar
study of 150 women who could be reached only
through home visits. In the three years prior to
the study there were 142 births. In the three
years 1961 through 1963 when birth control was
available, there were thirty-two births. The
total saving on 110 children who were not born
was £5,874 per year, in maternity services, child
care and child allowances. In the final paper A. S.
Parkes considers the future of fertility control.
The limiting factors of famine, pestilence and
war now have little effect as a result of advances
in medical and related sciences. The IUCD may
be the answer. It is not abortifacient since
conception takes place on implantation, not on
fertilization. The parental urge must be further
diverted from quantity to quality.

Sir Julian Huxley concludes that many animals
have destroyed their own habitats by over
feeding when man has upset their ecological
balance. Man is on the road to doing the same,
for the same reasons. What we all should be
engaged in is a co-operative attempt at world
development. We have not got an international
ecology going. That is our next job. The population explosion is part of a great world crisis.
Our own evolutionary advance (which goes on
primarily by cultural means) is reaching what
may be a point of no return, owing to our
abusing the world’s resources and destroying
our own habitat. The realization of this fact is
going to mark the next decade. One wonders
whether some period in the future might also
see us at a point of no return in gene resources.
