JOHN ROCK

Rock Reproductive Clinic, Inc., Brookline, Massachussetts, U.S.A.

Sex, Science

gynaecology, medicine had precious little to

offer infertile wives. Therefore, I chose to
devote what time and effort could be spared
from earning money to the study of human
reproductive functioning, that I might get as
many of these unhappy women as possible
pregnant. Primarily to that end, for forty years
I have studied, researched and tried to solve
problems in Man’s pervasive sexuality, the
biological requisite for species survival.

[a 1921, WHEN I began the practice of

Sex, Fear and Religion: “The Natural Law’’
Common to most animals is some form of sex
for propagation. A few species reproduce merely
by fission, like the amoeba; or by budding like
jelly-fish in cold water; or by differentiating
growth of the single ovum, called parthenogenesis, as in the water flea. There are also some
varieties, such as many of the worms, in which
sex functions in two different organ systems, but
in a single organism. In most animals, however,
seX appears in two separate individuals—male
and female. For propagation, the germ cells of
each must unite. In the mammalian class, this is
accomplished by some manner of copulation.
Hence it is that Man is equipped (we cannot in
our present dilemma unqualifiedly say
“endowed”, and most of us are not yet willing
to say “cursed”) with a powerful urge to
copulate.

The gynaecologist has much to do with Man’s
copulatory urge. Inevitably analysis of it has led
into consideration of the family, to sociology,
and thence to population. Being a Roman
Catholic, dealing medically and scientifically
with sex and its social implications, understandably, I think, I became involved with
theology. None will deny the interrelationship

* The seventh Oliver Bird Lecture delivered on
December. 9th, 1963, at the London School of Hygiene
and Tropical Medicine.

and Survival

of sex and morality, nor of morality with religion,
and, thus, theology.

In addition to his sex instinct, Man, in his
ascent from bestial ancestors, took with him,
also, the strong emotion, fear. This is so vital a
part of the instinct to survive that often we hear
of “the basic instinct, fear’, as we do of “the
instinct, hunger’, another component of the
survival complex. Elaboration of the anthropoid
nervous system blessed Man with his peculiar
attribute, intellectuality. Gradually, his apperception expanded into imagination; and instinctive fear spread from things seen, felt, heard,
tasted or smelled, into the immaterial world
about him. He became aware of himself as a
human being, but also of some outside Force
pervading the universe that, deep within him, he
felt ruled over all, including himself.

Primitive Man, overawed by what little his
mentality could interpret of the manifold external manifestations of this Force, feared it.
To protect himself, he constructed religion, the
frame of his beliefs about it, on which he could
build principles of behaviour, so that his acts
would conform to its laws, as he was able to
discern them. His realization of the universal
Almighty, and of his subservient dependence
upon Him, marks the indefinable particular
spirituality of Man. Indeed, may this spirituality
not be in Man the evidence, perhaps even the
essence, of the universally intrinsic Force of
which Man (of all animals) is aware, and, in our
language, calls God? Those of Judaeo-Christian
culture attempt to know His law by interpretation of Revelation in the light of science when
this is available, and by speculation when it is
not.

Science is but the product of the careful application of the intellect (with which God endowed
Man that he might know Him, love Him, and
serve Him) to that which his senses present to
him. His religion gives Man a moral code by

67

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, July 1964, 56,2.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

which he aspires to obedience to God’s law—
and particularly to that aspect of God’s law, the
eternal law, which determines in Man the nature
of his every part with due regard for its proper
use. Man therefore strives by science to know his
own nature. If his doings were utterly controlled
by the physical, chemical, or electronic qualities
of each component of his structure, as are the
acts of a robot, of a computer, even of all his
distant relatives, the unintellectual mammals,
and—to a large extent—of his nearer kinfolk,
the anthropoid apes, he would have no choice
but to act like one of them. As yet, psychology
has not proved to all of us that he has no choice.
It still appears that, within his species-particular
intellect, he has Reason and Free Will, the latter
of which is strongly influenced by his utterly
peculiar spirituality. By Reason and Will he can
select actions in conformity to or in defiance of
what we call “natural law.”

_ The Christian concept of this derives from St.
Thomas Aquinas, a Dominican friar of the
thirteenth century. He was the theological giant
who produced the Swnma Theologica, and in
Question XCI, Second Article, defined natural
law as the “participation of the eternal law in
the rational creature.”’ Man applies his reasoning
intellect to learn the nature of all his parts; and,
then, if he would exist in comfortable submission
to God, he wills to act only in conformity to the
natural law which governs these parts.

Thus must the biological and medical scientists, including the gynaecologist, when dealing
with human sex, deal also with religion. They
strive to discover the exact nature of human sex
in order to supply the scientific facts that will
enable moralists correctly to interpret what God
has often enigmatically revealed of His law that
governs sex. It is these gradually accruing facts
that moral theologians use to rectify whatever
erroneous interpretation of Revelation or tradition, to meet the needs of the times, has been
built into religion in lieu of the appropriate
scientific insight, contemporaneously missing—
as Pope John might say—to achieve “aggiornamento.”

What things are and how they work, in our
universe, comprise the essence of eternal law. As
Aquinas put it: “. . . all things subject to divine
providence are ruled .. . by the eternal law...”

68

It is from this “they derive their respective
inclinations to their proper acts and ends.”
Regarding Man, he says, you remember (v.s.):
“this participation of the eternal law in the
rational creature is called the natural law.” As
the light of science extends and grows brighter,
we ever more accurately recognize this law to
which all creation is subject.

The Struggle for Human Welfare:

Interpretive Theories versus Science

When science pertinent to any aspect of religion
is unavailable, the imaginative mind of Man
speculates on what he reads in revered texts and
on what little he is able to perceive in the world
about him, and evolves interpretive theories
which, historically, have been made to serve as
facts. These theories, perforce, are then used to
direct his desired conformity to natural law as he
interprets it. In primitive and much later cultures
—as even in our own—in lieu of facts, theories
have sometimes acquired majestic, dogmatic
authority.

Against entrenched theories, great benefactors
of mankind—St. Paul, Copernicus, Galileo,
Galen, Aquinas, da Vinci, Columbus, Pasteur,
Darwin, Jenner, Newman, and many, many
others were forced to contend. They resembled
Sisyphus in their uphill struggles against the
boulders of theories—theories habitually, yet
mistakenly, attributed to a celestial origin by
men truly dedicated to human welfare and
trying hard to improve it.

Humanitarianism far antedated scientific
medicine and therapeutics. It called for action in
the face of need; so pestilences that decimated or
wiped out whole populations were attacked by
religious theories. Long after science provided
truer insight into the nature of disease, these
futile concepts were zealously upheld, and only
after unremitting exposition of science were they
reluctantly relinquished.

The Triumph of Medical Science:

Population Increase

Were it not for our efficient humanitarian
application of what science has been able to
discover about the causes of death and of how to
avoid or neutralize them, we would not be so
perilously numerous, and—with confounding
SEX, SCIENCE AND SURVIVAL

speed—becoming more so. During untold
centuries before the last few, science laboriously,
and against great odds, struggled to discern the
actual nature of disease, its causes, and their
susceptibilities to discoverable means of removal
—to learn the eternal law that must govern the
multitudinous factors of disease, just as it does
all the attributes of Man and their functional
interplay.

Happily, during the last three centuries, in
spite of obfuscated tradition, the common sense
of the people in the civilized world—awakened,
perhaps, by desperation—brought them gradually into allegiance with the medical sciences.
Death rates began their still persisting, increasingly steep decline. More, more, and yet more
persons survived into and during adulthood, to
exercise their copulatory urge. Conceptions
soared. Babies lived. Population growth, which
is but the difference between births and deaths,
rose sharply throughout the world. The Population Reference Bureau in Washington}* reports
that not until after untold hundreds of thousands
of years did the human race number its first
billion—about 1850. But merely eighty years
later, in 1930, it reached two billion; in the next
thirty years, the third billion was attained. In
only fifteen years more, in 1975, the fourth
billion will be on hand. In the year 2000—only
thirty-six from mnow—according to United
Nations!® estimates, there will be not only the
fifth billion of people in the world, but probably
at least six billion—unless we apply immediate
stops.

Dangers of Population Increase

Physical Aspects

I doubt if any ecologist will deny that theoretically this planet could feed, clothe and house
a population twice the size of to-day’s—but not
before the year 2000, only thirty-six years from
now. Time is what is running out, not plankton
in the vast reaches of the ocean, not nitrogen in
the air about us, nor usable minerals in the earth,
nor atomic energy to run enormous distilleries
to furnish fresh water for the multitudes, or to
run fertilizer factories, or to make agricultural
machinery. No, too large a part of earth’s
peoples have not now material enough to feed,
clothe and house their present numbers ade
quately, much less to supply surplus wealth to
invest towards a rapid increase in national
products.

Stephen Enke,’ a former professor of economics at Duke University, has again called attention to the fact that high birth rates cause a very
high proportion of the total population to be
children, who naturally consume but are too
young to work. If there were fewer children than
must now live (for short or perhaps longer
periods) in hunger and squalor and spiritual
stagnation, what those properly unconceived
would consume could be invested as capital for
irrigation, transport and education. Real
economic development might result, so that
surviving children and their parents would not
be obliged to live miserably and with little chance
of any spiritual uplift for them and their
successors.

Nor, experts tell us, have we, of the comparatively rich nations, sufficient excess of money,
goods, brains and facilities adequately to augment our efforts to help the underdeveloped
emerging nations to increase their rate of
national products so as to meet the enormous
requirements made by their explosive growth
rates.

Lester R. Brown? of the U.S. Department of
Agriculture writes:

Although the projected flow of food from North
America to the less developed regions in future
decades will be much larger than at present, it will
be rather small when compared to the growing
needs of these regions.

Our humanitarianism, as yet gloriously viable
and even becoming stronger, forbids our
increasing the death rates that it has sent
tumbling down.

Calmly judicious, practical scholars see no
alternative to an immediate slash in the birth
rates.

Psychological Factors: Stress
The appalling danger that threatens mankind
may be even worse than one of far-and-wide
starvation and an abysmal decline in standards
of living. Our very humanity may be at stake.
Man has moved up the steep, tortuous,
obstructed incline of civilized humanitarianism
by use of his divinely bestowed Reason applied

69
ER—-3
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

to his divinely permitted, but only indirectly
empowered perceptiveness. Apperception is left
to his freedom to use his mind without duress.
It is apperception and Reason that we will
sacrilegiously destroy if we inadvertently or
stupidly allow such crowding as will surely
subject us to an invincible degree of disruptive
stress.

Stress is that demonic state of being disorganized. By it, our finely articulated, speciesspecific mental processes are thrown out of
gear, so that we think and act irrationally. It
also unbalances the natural proportionment of
the grosser biochemical agents, including the
hormones, that render our physical parts able to
function co-operatively. One or another debilitating form of stress reaction has been scientifically observed and described in a great many
species of vertebrates.

Hoagland” has recently recalled studies of the
jack rabbit population in Minnesota. When
their numbers rose to a certain point, and in
spite of plenty of food and the absence of
predators, a high death rate, associated with
hypoglycemia and convulsions, ensued. While
no specific disease entity could be diagnosed,
autopsy revealed abnormal adrenals, along with
liver damage, atherosclerosis, and other signs
of acute stress. The same has been found among
deer. Sometime during the 1920s, one buck and
one doe were placed on an island in Chesapeake
Bay. When, after some years, their descendants
had reached a density of more than one deer per
acre, and “in spite of adequate food and care”’,
the animals began to die off. Again autopsy
disclosed the classic signs of the stress syndrome.

Widely reported are the frequent, aperiodic
mass migrations of the Scandinavian lemming.
In mad desertion of over-crowded feeding
grounds and living quarters, about every seven
to ten years, they rush to their deaths—if not
under the wheels of automobiles in the streets of
Swedish cities and towns, then by drowning in
the cold waters nearby. Kessler’ has cited
numerous other examples of self-regulatory
mechanisms in the control of vertebrate populations.

Somewhat slighter, but similar madness is
commonly evidenced, temporarily, by human
crowds in our larger cities, as by university

Jo

students who, instead of studying, indulge in
panty raids and other ridiculous if not shameful
stunts, sometimes even wanton destruction of
property. Only after dispersion of the irrational
mob, does each member realize the silliness of
his behaviour. In too many lands, dispersal—
freedom from rubbing elbows—is rapidly
becoming impossible.

Comparative biology also suggests that, if the
highly developed mentality of Man is not to be
disorganized by the stress of crowding, human
populations might spontaneously decrease, as
eventually do those of some other vertebrates,
simply by stressful loss of sexual potency, or
marked lowering of fertility. Even by the tiny
minority who would welcome it, the breeding
out in Man of such deeply implanted qualities
cannot be expected, at present levels of real
harassment, in the few years allotted to us
before disaster overtakes us. It were well for us
to anticipate that the informed and aspiring, but
increasingly congested and stressed, “have-nots”
of the world may be impelled, perhaps even
martially, to express their not surprising nor
unexpected covetousness. Stress may move them
madly to grasp for that which we, the “have”
nations, will be unable to protect in their
interest and ours, unless, in practical and
charitable common sense and sacrifice of
unessentials, we prepare ourselves.

Cass Canfield,* the distinguished editorial
chairman of Harper & Row, has stated:

The nations of the world live today in an
historic intimacy. To an unprecedented degree,
the richer countries are putting their skills and
substance at the disposal of the newer nations.
The tragic irony of the present situation is that,
despite all this investment of wealth and effort,
population growth will in many areas abort plans
for economic and social development.

In nation after nation, the anticipated economic
gains resulting from carefully planned programs
have brought little, if any, rise in the standard of
living of the individual family. Gains are being
drained off into the job of maintaining existing
standards for more and more people. Few of the
newer nations have been able to keep ahead of
population growth. The rising hopes of their
people for a life free of want are being frustrated.

We must keep ourselves strong without the
least decrease in our humanitarianism which,
for our integrity as humans, demands, among
SEX, SCIENCE AND SURVIVAL

other things, that we give all possible aid to the
despairing “have-nots”.

This is a tough but imperative task. Survival
of our culture, if not of ourselves, clarions us to
action at once. As Lawrence Lowell is said to
have observed, when he was President of
Harvard, ‘““What must be done to-day, should
have been done yesterday”. I pray that we have
not delayed too long.

Proposals for Action

Re-evaluation of Religious and Speculative Concepts

How can we do it? We of the technologically
advanced nations must immediately move to
hold our own birth rates, especially, but not
only, in urban areas. There has been enough
talk. It is time for action. In addition to food,
there must be available space, including ample
areas for stress-preventing recreation. Our
numbers must not be more than can be respectably housed, and be afforded superior
educational facilities. In the present, as in the
years ahead, we must hold our births within
the requisites mentioned: food, space, housing,
schools. We must move fast, boldly but accurately, to insure them to our present population.
This job in the larger cities of our country is of
enormous proportions.

What have I to offer—a Catholic gynaecologist with some knowledge of the scientifically
demonstrated facts of human sex: facts now well
recognized by biologists and sociologists? I can
call them to the attention of others with the
fervent hope that scientific facts will immediately
supplant the theories concerning human sex
which were doubtless of use in times past. The
cruel delay in the middle ages of such substitution of fact for speculation in the case of
astronomy, of disease, of even commercial
practices, I believe is unwarranted in the matter
of imperative birth control. Several speculative
assumptions are even to-day so firmly ingrained
in the minds of numerous influential teachers as
to make the effective change-over very difficult.

I am convinced that the time has come when,
if there are obscurities in the natural law of
human sexuality, as it has been inferred and then
extrapolated from sacred texts, that impede
proper and utterly necessary lowering of birth

rates, these texts must be re-examined in the
light of what is presently known of human
sexual physiology. These facts our God-given
perceptiveness has made evident long after
pertinent speculations were necessarily employed by ancient moralists. Careful application
of our also divinely derived Reason and common
sense to physiologic and sociologic facts will
bring Prudence. This is the practical wisdom that
will furnish our consciences with directives more
nearly in accordance with the facts of our created
nature. Thus we will know the Good we are to
do, and the Evil that we are to avoid.

Support from Theology: Good versus Evil

One of the brilliantly able young Catholic
philosophers, Fr. Eric D’Arcy,* in his good little
book, Conscience and its Right to Freedom, has
this to say anent the necessity of recognizing
what is good:

. .. the good in question is indisputably supreme:

the sovereign end of the human person. One of the

conditions for attaining this is substantial fidelity
to moral duty; and this . . . consists in following

one’s conscience. (pp. 214-16).

Later he translates and paraphrases some
authoritative comments of St. Thomas Aquinas
in these words:

A man’s moral fulfilment and stature is measured above all by the performance of his will; .. .
But the proper object of the will is not the good as
it exists objectively, or as it is known to some
moral genius with a skill and an insight superior
to one’s own: it is the good as apprehended and
presented to a man by the judgement of his own
reason. (p. 215).

Then, perhaps, with what I would call—not a
bow, but a respectful glance, at his clerical
superiors, Aquinas continues, according to
D’Arcy:

Of course, one of the elements of the decision
[as to what is good] which one’s reason ultimately
makes will be the guidance of authoritative and
skilled moralists whose standing we accept; [however, he went on to say:] but it has to be the
individual’s judgement of conscience that this is an
authority which we may safely accept. (p. 216).

Man in the Image of God

Constantly, in this question of birth control, we
hear repeated God’s words in Genesis®: “And
God created man to his own image,” that is (as

yi
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

explained in a footnote in my Douay-Rheims
version), ““This image of God in man, is not in
the body, but in the soul; which is a spiritual
substance, endued with understanding and freewill.”” And then follow the words, very significant
to our subject, ““And God blessed them” [Adam
and Eve], (who, we are told, were endued with
understanding and free-will), “‘saying: Increase
and multiply, and fill the earth, and subdue
it...” |

It is clear to most ecologists that we have
filled the earth, at least to the limit of our present
capacity to fulfil the second command, “‘to
subdue it.”’ As I said before, given time, we may
increase our subjugation and utilization of
earth’s resources. It would seem that only after
we have done this, may we in conscience resume
procreation, with certitude that we can, by
commensurate rearing and education, also
“multiply” ourselves.

I would call your attention to the critical
difference between procreation—bringing forth,
begetting—and reproduction, that is, making a
copy, a likeness. My Bible suggests to me that
the words, ‘““God created man to his own image,”
mean that man and woman were created with
the endowments of “understanding and freewill.” It was such, He said, were to be increased
and multiplied. Intellectually mature human
beings do not reproduce, do not multiply themselves, when they merely beget. The job is not
done, nor can it be done, until such parents have
produced sons and daughters with understanding
and free-will.

Welfare of Progeny
The human infant has but the potentiality of
understanding and free-will. In good health he
must be educated in order to make kinetic this
potentiality. Roman Catholics, at least, should
look to Canon 1013 of the Code of Canon Law
which defines the primary purpose of marriage
as “‘the procreation and education of children.”
I wonder if anything but the fusion of these
obligations constitutes “reproduction”, the
primary end of the sacrament of matrimony, as
it is also one of the two ends of coitus.

In his book on family planning, the eminent
Jesuit, Fr. Stanislas de Lestapis,® the professor

92

of family sociology at the Catholic Institute in
Paris, wrote:

... the Catholic Church . . . teaches that there is,

in principle, a right, or better, a duty, to practise

a on os regulation based on careful thought
Earlier in the same chapter, he stated:

Every couple owes it... to God... to itself, to
the community, to procreate those children whom it
will be able to bring up and to prepare adequately
for life. There is an optimum number for each
niet -— each family alone can judge what it is.
Statements of another authoritative moral

philosopher, recently deceased, Dom Gregory
Stevens!® of the Catholic University of America,
are similarly instructive:

Indiscriminate procreation is no moral ideal
but mere irresponsibility, for the family must make
prudent provision for the future welfare of the
children both spiritually and physically. The
Church considers the primary goal of the natural
institution of matrimony to be that of responsible
parenthood.

In other words, reproduction should be our
goal—not mere procreation; rather, multiplication of able adults, equal to what the good
of the times demands.

Scientific Aspects

Biological Basis of Human Sexuality
Contemplation of the social significance of
stifling population growth rates, as scientifically
proved by demographers and ecologists, forces
the gynaecologist into thoughts of human
sexuality, for surely the copulatory urge is a
positive factor in population growth. If that
comprised all of the indomitable sex instinct of
Man, there would be no hope for mankind but
to breed himself into crowded degeneration.
But the sciences of psychology and social
anthropology discover that this coital urge is
not all of the human sex instinct.

To adjust sexual forces to true reproduction
and not animalistic begetting, the mature adult
should know the actual forces in Man’s inborn
sexual nature. The more clearly he knows these,
the more able he is to recognize that aspect of
eternal law which participates in the natural law
to which his expression of sexuality must submit; for natural law is but the inclusion, the
participation, as Aquinas puts it, of eternal law,
SEX, SCIENCE AND SURVIVAL

the Mind of God. It is the job of scientists to
expose the true nature of human sex. Only by
knowing this, can improvement be made in what
perforce formerly had to suffice—namely, the
patristic, speculative nature of sex.

Science evolves from scrupulous observation

of what happens under known conditions
affected by known factors.
The Coital Urge

After a rather intensive study of pertinent
zoological and anthropological scientific literature, and filtering what I had found through the
screen of my years of dealing with human sexual
behaviour, I wrote the following, about a dozen
years ago, and in substance would write the same
at present. It was this:

The sexual core of the human primate today is,
in all probability, quite as it was among our very
remote original human ancestors, who—emerging
from beastdom—preceded by eons even the most
primitive races of our times. Therein is the fundament from which students of today derive comprehension of human sexuality. The basic normal
male, stripped of social, experiential, and—shall
we say—spiritual repressions, is as sexually promiscuous and dominative as any ape; and, like the
ape, he is only very temporarily satiated. He is
physically superior, and is ever desirous and
potent. For untold centuries, moralists have used
whatever social pressures they could bring to bear
on the human male’s coital urge in efforts to
restrict its expression outside of marriage. Current
news media clearly reflect the degree of their
failure. The problem is complicated further by the
fact that, basically, the normal woman, if similarly
bereft of social, experiential and spiritual inhibitions, although weaker physically, has deep within
her an ever-present willingness, and often, like the
male—an urge to copulate.

Love of Mate and Love of Young

To temper the savage anthropoid core of sexuality
described above, sex, in the human being of today,
has a very strong, very significant peculiarity. It
consists of that indefinable but no less actual
human attribute called “love.”

In the evolution of the hominid from his apelike
progenitors, and to a large extent directing his
development, there arose, from the complex of
bestial impulses and emotions, not only the powerful coital urge but also the utterly particular
emotional quality of love. I dare say there are few,
if any, of us who would dare try to define what
Christ taught is the greatest of the three virtues:
faith, hope and charity—which is love. Yet we are
all aware that, in various forms, it characterizes us
as human beings.

Inseparable from our human sexuality, because
it is an integral part of it however obscured, is love:
love of mate and love of young.**

Only when love of mate suffuses coitus does
orgasm reach its natural fullness of ecstasy.
And it is the love of young which motivates
informed, intelligent, responsible, mutually
loving parents to reproduce instead of merely to
procreate. Forethought, directed by Reason, and
utilizing science, will enable them to do this in
the kind of good conscience defined by St.
Thomas Aquinas.

Monogamy: The Modal Social Unit

The Moral Measure of Sexual Behaviour

I would suppose the inherency of love within the
human sex instinct is responsible for the near
universality of monogamy. The archaeologists,
the anthropologists, the sociologists report the
recognizability of the essentials of this mating
form in practically all races, in all places, and all
times. It seems quite clear that monogamy is the
modal social unit of the human race.*°

Could it not be that, through long ages,
intelligent Man learned that monogamous
marriage of loving mates offers the best opportunity for perfect expression of the peculiarly
human qualities of the sex instinct? In monogamous marriage of loving mates, they can both
best find full gratification of the two inseparable
components of their instinct—the coital urge,
and the love that unites them and that impels
them healthfully to rear and productively to
educate their offspring.1?»15

Believing—as I do—that, except for those who
can and do become willing celibates, only
monogamy suffices for full expression of the
human sex instinct in conformity to the natural
law, as we are permitted to know it, I wonder if
monogamy cannot be used as the test by which
to judge the goodness of any sex act. If a manner
of sex expression conduces to, is compatible
with, and strengthens monogamy, it would be
considered good; if it is not favourable to this
natural as well as fundamental social format, it
would be adjudged bad.

By this standard, may one not measure
masturbation, homosexual behaviour, prostitution, premarital coitus, adultery, divorce, and—
what is powerfully involved in the sufficiency and

73
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

promptness of birth limitation, our immediate
obligation—intramarital continence, as well as
several other effective methods of contraception?

Prolonged Intramarital Continence

It has been pointed out that responsible, intelligent parents will have a child only if and when
they feel they can bring it to healthful physical
and mental adulthood. Clearly the frequency of
coitus which is evoked by, and which nourishes
love, has biologically resulted, and would continue to result, for most parents, and for society,
in more children than is good. Yet prolonged
intramarital continence does not conform to
monogamy, except in the exceedingly rare
marriage of two who are both graced with an
unusual degree of spiritual fortitude. I would
question, therefore, if, for the vast majority of
married mates, this is not for them an unnatural
and, if so, a sinful practice.

We must not fail to realize that there are,
usually among older couples, some whose
mutual love, supplemented by God’s grace, can,
when fully accepted sound reasons motivate
them, force mutation of their carnal natures into
a kind of angelic companionship. The infrequency of such couples in our time excludes
extended intramarital continence from any list
of practical methods for the immediate reduction
in births that is our inescapable obligation.

Short-term Intramarital Continence

Short-term intermittent intramarital continence,
for one reason or another, is usual in practically
all cultures, even the most primitive, and does not
militate against monogamy. As a contraceptive
measure, it is useful and harmless, but only to
those couples who can define accurately, and
willingly respect, those few days of the ovulation
phase that would require only short-term sexual
restraint.®.1”

It may become more generally applicable
when science supplies us with a true indication of
just when the egg will emerge from the follicle.
Massive effort should be made immediately by
money and brains to resolve this uncertainty.
Spermatozoa cannot fertilize much more than
forty-eight hours after placement at the entrance
of the womb; and the egg is fertilizable only
about twelve hours after escape from the ovary.

74

Five days of continence would preclude conception if only the couple knew which were the five
days. We have not the time to wait for this
knowledge.

In the Germ Cells lie the Only Solution

*‘Non-humanness”’ of the Gametes

In the meantime, we should note a few other
details of reproductive physiology which science
offers as possibly helpful towards reformation of
older speculations that have given rise to some
of the restrictive stipulations against effective
contraceptive measures.

The egg, once it leaves the ovary, is in fact a
foreign body. It cannot even reproduce itself. It
has only potential value to either the female or
society. It disintegrates within a day or two,
unless it happens to be invaded by a spermatozoon. In such event, what were nonentities
individually become in unity a human being.
Although a parasite in the mother, this is
entitled, as a human being, to full benefit of our
humanitarianism which makes repugnantly forbidding the destruction of human life. It must be
remembered, however, that as a human being it
is a member of society; and, like all human
beings, it will owe allegiance to the good of
society which humanity’s experience has recognized as for the welfare of all.

One may wonder if spermatozoa, likewise,
have any clearer title to humanity than the
separated unfertilized egg. They, too, are but
cast-off cells—all but a miniscular few of which
are intrinsically expendable are doomed to die
promptly, like desquamated cells from tissues
other than that lining the tubules of the testis.
In fact, even during the few hours the egg, or the
spermatozoon, lives, neither can be regarded as
wholly human, for each has only one-half the
nuclear chromatin material which specifically
characterizes normal human cells.

Recapitulation
But procreation depends on the union of one of
the numberless nonhuman spermatozoa with
the nonhuman egg. It is coitus which makes this
possible, but certainly does not decree it. Those
who can believe that simple procreation—
begetting—is the indispensable natural end of
coitus, cannot, in deference to this much.
SEX, SCIENCE AND SURVIVAL

debated concept of natural law, tolerate wilful
prevention of this effect. Yet, by the nature of
Man, unimpeded conception is comparatively
rare in comparison to the frequency of coitus,
although now much too common for the welfare
of mankind. It is worth while to note that,
according to scientific studies, normal coitus of
normal mates, when the egg is free and available,
results in conception in probably not much more
than 25 per cent of instances.® Nature seems not
to have recognized fertilization as an indispensable end of coitus.

If we believe that natural law stipulates not
begetting, but reproduction of able adults, as
one purpose of coitus, and the expression and
enhancement of marital love, as an equally valid
end, we are bound, by the natural law that
commands us to do good and avoid evil, to
approve of intramarital coitus that is evoked by
and embellishes love and that will result, however often love calls it forth, in only the number
of children proper to the particular family.

Many informed parents honestly forsee the
likelihood that, instead of strengthening the
family, the final product of conception will but
weaken the family and thus society. Because of
the frighteningly precarious condition of
humanity to-day, it has become quite clear to
most informed and reasoning adults that such
parents, when their properly formed and free
consciences approve, are not only permitted but
obliged to do their best to prevent conception.

The vast majority of informed and intelligent
men and women think it to be the humanitarian
duty of such parents to allow the only potentially
human but dangerous egg to give back to the
woman, as do the numberless other ova, its
molecular borrowings—perhaps even while
within the ovary. This is where thousands of
other usually immature eggs do this. When the
body of a disabled female is made aware, by
internal evolutionary mechanisms, that danger
threatens it, even mature eggs are reabsorbed
while confined in the ovary. When the internal
mechanisms are, by their nature, incapable of
sensing danger to mother, family, or society,
from an ill-advisable conception, the human
intellect, provided for protection of parent and
mankind, must act as best it can.16

An increasing number of moralists and lay

scholars agree with this. These scientifically
up-to-date non-Catholic mentors are well aware
that to advise prolonged continence is but a
pious evasion. They teach that right-minded
parents should be instructed in how to prevent
escape of the potentially dangerous egg from the
follicle. They hold, also, that, if justified mates
lack the means or the ability to do this, they are
entitled to know how, by one method or
another, which does not disturb coitus, they may
permit all desquamated sperm cells in any
ejaculate to undergo intravaginal disintegration.
This is the natural destiny of all of them anyway,
with the only occasional, but possibly disastrous
exception of one.

To most wise leaders, the now urgently
required restriction of births inescapably calls
for the more general use, by loving, monogamous mates, of effective, harmless, acceptable
contraceptive methods. These would have to
conform to the normal pattern of coitus, and be
used when temporary continence would not
suffice, when extended continence would be
disruptive of loving equanimity, and when
properly formed untrammelled consciences
approve. Only by religious adherence to the
natural law pertaining to sex, as our God-given
intellect makes it evident through science applied
to theology, can married mates to-day express
their true sex nature, while fully meeting their
responsibilities as parents.

Like the best informed ecologists, demographers and agriculturists, I can see no other
way to avoid the impending hunger and stress
which will turn our humanitarianism back to
bestiality. Only by the good use of sex, can Man
escape stress and insure the survival of his kind,
so that healthy, educated descendants may grow
in the wisdom that will more surely enable them
to know, to love, and to serve God.

REFERENCES

1. Aquinas, T. Summa Theologica. Part II.

2. Brown, L. R., 1963. Man, Land, and Food. Looking
Ahead at World Food Needs. U.S. Department of
Agriculture, Economic Research Service, Regional
Analysis Division. Foreign Agricultural Economic
Report No. 11.

3. Canfield, C., 1963. Circular Letter, November 21.
Planned Parenthood/World Population.

4. D’Arcy, E., 1962. Conscience and its Right to Freedom. Sheed and Ward, New York.

75
THE EUGENICS
5. de Bethune, A. J., 1963. Child spacing: the mathe
matical probabilities, Science, 142, 1629.

. de Lestapis, S., 1961. Family Planning and Modern

Problems. A Catholic Analysis. Herder, New York.

7. Enke, S., 1963. Bonus vasectomy plans and negative

11.
12.

76

value infants: a novel proposal to raise per capita
incomes in poor and over populated countries. Paper
prepared for the NATO Conference on Operational
Research in Economics, Palermo, Italy, May 20-28.

. Genesis. 1857 Edition (Douay-Rheims Version).

Chapter 1 : 27, 28

. Hertig, A. T., Rock, J., Adams, E. C., and Menkin,

M.F., 1959. Thirty-four fertilized human ova, good,
bad and indifferent, recovered from 210 women of
known fertility. A study of biologic wastage in early

human pregnancy. Pediatrics, 23, 202.

. Hoagland, H., 1963. Cybernetics of population

control. Human Fertility and Population Problems.
Proceedings of the Seminar sponsored by Amer.
Acad. Arts, Sciences, p. 5. Ed. R. O. Greep. Schenkman Publishing Company, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

Kessler, A., 1963. Population control among vertebrates. Rockefeller Inst. Rev., 1, 1.

Miller, G. S., Jr., 1931. The primate basis of human
sexual bahavior. Quart. Rey. Biol., 6, 379.

13.

14,

15.

16.
17.

REVIEW

Population Reference Bureau, 1963. Too many
people in the world? A look into the future. U.S.
News & World Report, p. 60, September 16.

Rock, J., 1951. Human sexuality in the light of comparative biology. Paper presented at the 19¢h Annual
Meeting of the Central Association of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists. Detroit, Michigan, September 20.
Rock, J., 1963. A personal view of human sexuality.
Chapter 7, p. 63. The Time Has Come. A Catholic
Doctor’s Proposals to end the Battle over Birth
Control. Knopf, New York.

Rock, J., 1963. The pill. Chapter 14, p. 159. Ibid.
Rock, J., 1964. The rhythm or periodic continence
method of birth control. Manual of Contraceptive
Practice, p. 222. Ed. M. S. Calderone. Williams &
Wilkins, Beltimore.

. Stevens, G., 1961. Is rhythm permissible, advisable,

obligatory? Paper presented at a research meeting of
the Family Life Bureau of the National Catholic
Welfare Conference, Oxley, Ontario, August 21-23.

. United Nations, 1958. The Future Growth of World

Population. Department of Economic and Social
Affairs. Population Study No. 28.

. Zimmerman, C. C., 1947. Family and Civilization,

p. 122. Harper, New York and London.
