MENTAL DEFICIENCY—I

Some Family Histories of an Unselected Group

By PROFESSOR R. J. A. BERRY, M.D., E.R.C.S., E.R.S.E.

(Director of Medical Services, Stoke Park Colony, Stapleton, Bristol.)

HERE are, in this Institution, some

1,700 certified mental defectives of

all legal grades, of both sexes, of all
ages, and from practically all parts of England and Wales. They may, therefore, be
regarded as a random sample of the subnormal population of this country and, perhaps, not altogether unjustly, as something
of a satire on modern population.

Though it is not claimed that the results
herein described have been attained by the
rigour of scientific method, or even that they
prove anything, yet they are sufficiently
arresting to afford food for necessary, even
if unpleasant, thought.

It has to be remembered that many
mental defectives are illegitimate, and the
parents have disappeared, consequently it
need cause no surprise that in 185 of the
350 cases no information was available of
the parental or familial ancestry. In the
remaining 165 cases (47°2 per cent.) local
and other authorities furnished the information, of which what follows are
examples. A careful analysis of this information seemed to show that the 165
cases divided themselves quite naturally
into three groups as follows :

Group I.—The parents were said to be of
‘normal ’’ mentality in I5 cases, or 9'I
per cent. |

Group II.—The parents were of doubtful
mentality in 51 cases, or 30°9 per cent.

Sub-Group A.—One or both parents
mentally weak, but not certified
defectives.

Sub-Group B.—One or both parents
of criminal type, but not certified
defectives.

Sub-Group C.—Patients with mentally
abnormal brothers and/or sisters
(sibs), but mentality of parents not
specified.

Group III.—The parents were definitely
of defective or insane mentality in 99 cases,
or 60 per cent.

Sub-Group A.—Parents said to be
mentally defective.

Sub-Group B.—One or both parents
believed to be insane.

Of these groupings the following are
typical examples :

GROUP I. PARENTS SAID TO BE OF
NORMAL MENTALITY

Example 1.—S.G.2429 F.  Imbecile.
Chronological age 18°6 years. Binet mental
ratio 6°5 years, Porteus 4 years, combined
Binet-Porteus I.Q. 35. Cannot read or
write. Sulky, untruthful, dishonest, lazy,
excitable.

Family History.—Father and mother
said to be normal. One brother also said to
be of normal mentality.

GROUP II.
MENTALITY

Sub-Group A.—One or both parents
mentally weak but not certified defective.

Example 1.—S.G.2333 F. (Sister of following patient). Microcephalic, low-grade
feeble-minded. Chronological age 22°8
years. Binet mental ratio 7°4 years, Porteus II years, combined Binet-Porteus I.Q.
57. Incapable of carrying a message, lacking in comprehension, dull and stupid.

Family History. — Father a casual
labourer, said to be ‘‘ dull.’’ Mother also
reported ‘dull and incapable of managing her
children. A sister is at Stoke Park and a
brother is defective and in another institution. An elder sister has had two illegitimate children. The home is very poor and
the family has been in receipt of parish
relief for many years.

PARENTS OF DOUBTFUL

285
286

Example 2.—S.G.2186 F. (Sister of previous patient). Microcephalic, low-grade
feeble-minded. Chronological age 16°3
years. Binet mental ratio 6°10 years, Porteus I1°6 years, combined Binet-Porteys
I.Q. 57°5. Very limited educational attainments. Poor vocabulary.

Family History.—As in previous case.

Example 3.—S.G.1550 F. Microcephalic
imbecile. Chronological age 22°9 years.
Merrill-Palmer mental ratio 6°6 years. No
educational attainments. Dull, dirty, and
stupid.

Family History.—Both parents dead,
both said to be of low mental type. Patient
is one of a family of 8 or 9. A brother is
at Stoke Park Colony and another brother
in the Royal Albert Institution, Lancaster.
The whole family have been under the care
of the Public Assistance Committee.

Sub-Group B.—One or both parents of
criminal type, but not certified defectives.

Example 1.—S.G.2436 F. Macrocephalic,
low-grade feeble-minded. Chronological age
18°10 years. Binet mental ratio 6°10 years,
Porteus 4°6. Cannot read or write.

Family History.—Father a German, said
to be of criminal heredity, present whereabouts unknown. Mother a _ laundry
worker, unmarried. Patient illegitimate.

Sub-Group C.—Patients with mentally
abnormal brother and/or sisters (sibs), but
mentality of parents not specified.

Example 1.—S.G.2090 F. Certified as a
‘“ high-grade feeble-minded patient, unreliable owing to added psychosis, unstable.
This is shown in her variable application to
industrial work.”’

Family History.—Mother earns her living by making and repairing umbrellas and
selling them in the market-place. Home is
in a thickly populated part of Birmingham,
with two bedrooms upstairs and one room
downstairs. ‘Two brothers living at home
in exceptionally bad surroundings. One
sister is a convicted prostitute and thief and
underwent 12 months’ imprisonment. Inc1dentally, two brothers-in-law were also
undergoing 18 months’ imprisonment (in

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

addition to being flogged) for robbery with
violence in a brothel.

Patient admitted to Stoke Park in April
1919 under the Children’s Act, having been
charged with ‘“‘ living in circumstances
calculated to cause the seduction of the
child.” At this time patient’s age was
about 12 years.

GROUP III. PARENTS DEFINITELY STATED
TO BE EITHER DEFECTIVE OR INSANE

Sub-Group A.—Parents said to be mentally
defective.

Example 1.—S.G.1719 F. Microcephalic,
medium-grade  feeble-minded. Chronological age 22°8 years, Binet mental age
8°4, Porteus 10°6 years. Patient suffers
from spasmodic torticollis. Said to be untruthful, dishonest, and cannot be trusted
out of doors.

Family History.—Patient born in wedlock. Father dead, killed in the War.
Mother said to be feeble-minded, but has
married again.

Example 2.—S.G.2399 F. (Sister of following patient). Microcephalic imbecile.
Chronological age 24°7 years, Binet and
Porteus mental ages 3 years. Patient cannot read, write, or count. Does not know
her age. Speech almost unintelligible,
requires supervision in washing and dressing.

Family History.—Both parents are subnormal and are incapable of controlling
children. A brother aged 10 years is mentally defective. There are three other
children at home, also three illegitimate
children of the eldest daughter. The
home consists of a living room and two bedrooms, and there are seven people inhabiting
them. At one time the home conditions
were reported to be appalling, the house
being described as a dirty hovel and the
parents dirty. Father a labourer earning
30s. a week.

Example 3.—S.G.2400 F. (Sister of previous patient). Microcephalic.. Low-grade
feeble-minded verging on  imbecility.
Chronological age 22°8 years, Binet mental
ratio 8 years, and Porteus 6°6 years.
Patient cannot read, write, or tell the time.
MENTAL DEFICIENCY—FAMILY HISTORIES

Fairly good worker under _ supervision.
Depraved habits.

Family History.—As for previous case.

Example 4.—S.G.2094 F. Microcephalic
imbecile. Chronological age 23°2 years.
Binet mental age 6°6, Porteus 4°6 years.
Patient said to be lacking in all moral
sense, and cannot wash and dress herself
properly.

Family History.—Father reported to be
feeble mentally and weak physically.
Mother immoral. Patient is the third of
five children and at the time of her admission had an elder sister at a Rescue Home.
The Matron of the Poor Law Institution,
Westbury-on-Severn, says ‘‘ the family is
bad ; elder sister is in a Rescue Home—she
is untruthful, immoral and when at school
had to be kept away from other children on
account of her immorality.”’

Example 5.—S.G.1884 F. Mierocephialic, medium-grade feeble-minded. Chronological age 34°1 years. Binet mental ratio
8-7, Porteus 9 years. Patient youngest of
4 children, can read and write a little. Precocious, facile, cannot tell the time or give
correct change.

Family History.—Father a fireman.
Mother an inmate of the Frome Road House
Imbecile Ward, Bath.

Example 6.—S.B.2394 M. Microcephalic,
low-grade feeble-minded. Chronological age
I1‘rzr years. Binet mental ratio 6°10
years.

Family History—Mother — sub-normal
mentally, physically, and morally. Unmarried. Has five illegitimate children, all
of whom are imbeciles and three are notified
by the L.E.A. as such. Mother has two
sisters, one of whom is feeble-minded, and
the other has two illegitimate children.

Sub-Group B.—One or both parents believed
to be insane.

Example 1.—S.B.2375 M. Idiot. Chronological age 6°10 years. Merrill-Palmer
mental ratio 2°5 years. Cannot talk.

Family History.—Father has a sister
and an aunt insane. Mother had a brother
and an uncle both insane. Seven children
in family, one of whom is also (in addition

287

to present patient) mentally defective and
is in Cirencester Mental Home.

Example 2.—S.B.2024. M. Microcephalic
imbecile verging on idiocy. Chronological
age 22°6 years. Binet mental ratio 7,
Porteus 4 years.

Family History.—Father is dead, mother
mentally unstable. Mother was put under
permanent detention in the Gateshead
Union Hospital in December 1915, but
absconded in February 1925 and _ has
recently reappeared. Patient is youngest of
21 children, but at the time of his admission to Stoke Park it was reported that only
6 were alive.

BIOLOGY AND THE LAW

For the benefit of those who may not be
very familiar with mental deficiency as
defined by English law, it may be stated
that four grades only of defectives are
recognized — namely idiots, imbeciles,
feeble-minded, and moral defectives. Such
a classification is entirely artificial and
without any scientific or natural basis, and
is not in accord with biological facts.

Under these artificial conditions it follows that the methods of diagnosis are often
almost equally artificial. It will, however,
be observed that, in the foregoing cases,
more than one method of estimating the
mental ratio has been employed and many
other medical and biological tests have also
been made. Any ordinary child should
have a combined Binet-Porteus intelligence
quotient of from 80 to 110, but none of the
foregoing are anywhere near it. Further,
some of them are so hopelessly retarded
mentally that it has been necessary to
estimate their mental ratio by the MerrillPalmer scale, ordinarily used for normal
infants of from 3 to 6 years of age. It will
also be noticed that almost every one of
the foregoing cases have abnormally small
heads, an additional biological, though
not legal, suggestion of an imperfectly
developed brain. In only one of the above
cases is the head macrocephalic, and even
then it is pathologically abnormal.

But a study of the histories of the inmates
288

of this institution reveals other factors of
interest to the student of heredity. ‘There
are no fewer than so families represented by
either two or three defective children. Of
these 50 families the following are examples.

SOME SAMPLE FAMILIES

1.—Two imbecile half-sisters both over 30
years of age, have a mental ratio of between
4 and 5 years, and a combined BinetPorteus intelligence quotient of 33, and
their family history reads as follows :

The father was killed in the war. The
mother is deaf and by ‘‘ no means intelligent.”” The grandmother is deaf and
‘“simple.’’ An uncle also is ‘‘ simple.’’
An aunt is an imbecile in a home for defectives. The elder of these step-sisters is
also illegitimate, but curiously enough the
mother was anxious to get the child placed
in a home in case she (the illegitimate
daughter) should ‘‘ disgrace’’ her (then
unmarried) mother. Another brother is
‘not sharp.’’

2.—Another family has three children in
this institution—all imbeciles, with mental
ratios in no instance equal to that of a threeyear-old normal child, but with chronological
ages ranging from 15 to 21 years of age.
Further, all display other abnormal neurological conditions, often believed and stated
to be due to “‘ birth injuries,’’ but more
probably owing to a rotten ancestry and a
worse parentage.

3.—Iwo more adult sisters of different
mentalities—one with a combined BinetPorteus intelligence quotient of 29, and the
younger sister with one of 48, are the children of gipsies, and the father is now in
a mental hospital. The elder sister, now
over 30 years of age, has also had an
illegitimate child, and is believed to have
another feeble-minded relative in the institution.

4.—Of two adult feeble-minded sisters,

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

with a combined Binet-Porteus intelligence
quotient of 57 in each sister, both the
parents are said to be ‘‘ dull.’”? The father
is a casual labourer, and the mother quite
incapable of managing her children. An
elder sister has had two illegitimate children, another brother is mentally defective,
and the family has been in receipt of parish
relief for many years.

5.—In another family represented in this
institution by two sisters, the father is
dead, the mother is in receipt of Poor Law
relief, and the patients are the fifth and
sixth of thirteen children, two more of
whom are reported to be ‘‘ mental.’’

CONCLUSIONS

It is not improbable that any critical.
reader with an acquaintance with the
elementary principles of Mendelism will
realise that many of the foregoing examples
so strongly suggest heredity as the real
basis and origin of the mental deficiency
as to make it a practical certainty that,
though not certified, the parents themselves
are feeble-minded, or suffer from a grossly
enfeebled nervous system. For one who,
like myself, sees similar cases and family
histories almost every day, it is difficult to
understand why heredity should not be
much more generally accepted than it
actually is, as the cause of much, if not
most, mental disorder; nor why politicians
should still go on regarding adult suffrage
as the universal panacea for all human ills,
when it is indisputable that there are far
more dull and feeble-minded folk outside
institutions than in them. Lastly, advocates of sterilization may possibly realize
from these facts, always provided extended
and independent research multiplies them,
that it is the non-certified parents, rather
than their segregated and defective offspring, whose sexual instincts require some
form of public control. |

. C: |

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIV, No. 4.
