NICEFORO ON THE HIGHLY SUPERIOR
GERMAN.

By G. P. BALzarotTti and C. S. Stock.

THE author of ‘‘ I] Germani’’? makes no slight contribution to
the intellectual clarity of non-German Europe by his account
of the origin and growth of a racial myth, replete with sinister
suggestion and working still with malefic power. As a study
in self-hypnotism—not entirely confined to the Germans—it is
well worth close attention. The writer lays bare the roots of a
truly Gargantuan error and traces its growth towards that fatal
fruition which has involved us all.

We shall follow him closely in the general argument,
especially in its anthropological bearings, dwelling little upon
detail.

It cannot be denied that victory may open out a way to the
realisation of the highest aspirations. The record of history is
not without examples, nor do we turn its pages in vain for
instances of victory satanic alike in means and aims. In victory
an eminently successful nation has found encouragement to seek
domination, and by degrees has come to believe that this is the
mission it is fated to fulfil. The Pan-German creed is well
known. The doctrine of a nation fated to conquer, the doctrine
of the supremacy of the German race, rapidly became an article
of the most absolute faith. Appearances were in its favour; daily
submission to it, ceaseless planning for its realisation, and the
attainment of some of its objects, lent an appearance of reality,
and strengthened faith in the superiority of the race and in its
mission to the world. We propose to trace in broad outline the
evolution of this grandiose and menacing theory.

The birth of the idea is to be found in Mommsen’s introduction to the History of Rome, where he deliberately denies
the existence of any connection between ancient civilisation and
modern, or any influence of the one on the other. On one
side stand the Mediterranean peoples and their civilisation ;

they flourished and died out. On the other stands a
***©T Germani,” by Alfredo Niceforo. Societa Editrice Periodici. Rome, 1917 ;
pp 87; lire 3.50.
NICEFORO ON THE HIGHLY SUPERIOR GERMAN. 31

new people, coming from afar, now living on the shores of
the Northern Ocean, creators of a new and quite independent
civilisation, the modern. .

In the search for origins we must next consider Nietzsche,
to whom many theories and assertions have been wrongly
attributed. Nietzsche presents himself to us in his works and
studies, chiefly as a poet, full of contradictions and breathless in
the search for truth. It has therefore been easy, by careful
selection of his statements and ideas, to set up a definite type
quite unlike the nebulous ideal which he was striving all his life
to put into concrete form. How could he be the creator of the
German type as we know it, when he so often pronounced
himself proud of being a Pole, and so often denounced all race
hatred and unreasonable nationalism? Although at times he
makes some approach to a scientific and philosophical system,
his work is really a collection of lyrics, mainly the expression
of sufferings which branded themselves on the soul of a poet
and which often show him to us as a pessimist. In his works
the superman stands out as a mighty figure; we must, however,
ask whether he has the characteristics attributed to him by the
Pan-German theory. Firmly as Nietzsche may believe in his
own Creation, it cannot be gainsaid that owing to the contradictions by which his soul is always agitated, he cannot
clearly see the outlines of the type he has created, for sometimes
he speaks of him as the being who should overstep limitations,
despise small virtues, petty prudences, and the crawling, insectlike masses of mankind, and sometimes he figures him as a
perfect man, the result not of blind destiny, but of a process
of conscious evolution. From man will come the superman, as
man himself has risen from his ape-like ancestors. In some
passages we read that the higher man of to-dav should be
allowed to overstep the limitations of morals, and in others, that
he must impose sacrifices upon himself and renounce happiness
and pleasures, his egotism being encouraged only so far as it
may help towards the birth of a better humanity. On this last
view Nietzsche’s superman is not really a type of cruelty and
brutal force, but one who ought to deny himself, and to disregard anything which might weaken his yearning for improve32 EUGENICS REVIEW.

ment. Perfection is to be sought rather by sacrifice on his own
part than by sacrifices imposed upon others.

On the whole we find in his works, not high moral
teaching, so much as a philosophy of energy and dignity; that
noble individual dignity which might be unfavourable to small
successes and mean satisfactions, but without which life is not
worth living, and in this sense Nietzsche’s lyrics are a noble
inspiration. We cannot reasonably find in him the source of
Pan-Germanism, nor can we consider his work as a preparation
for that gross edifice. |

Side by side with the idea of political and economic
dominance as outlined by Mommsen and encouraged by national
success, there arose the theory of the superiority of a people
based on purely physiological causes. This meant putting the
Pan-German view on a scientific basis. It meant finding an
unimpeachable justification for a policy of conquest. Let us
see how this idea was elaborated. Durand de Gros, in a short
paper, read before the Paris Anthropological Society in 1868,
showed that town dwellers differed physiologically from country
folk, especially in the shape of the skull. The former being
D', and the latter B?. There appeared to be a similar difference
between the upper and lower classes of society, and while this
writer put down such difference to environment and _ habits,
others soon referred it to a selective process ; the D ’s having
risen to the top as the result of successful competition. In
the view of these students the groups represented different races,
the D , fair-haired, blue-eyed, being the superior, and the
B——, brown-haired, dark-eyed being the inferior. This was
the small spring from which a great river flowed. Add to it
the identification of the D , fair-haired, blue-eyed type with
the superman and we have the fundamental misconception
before us. The facts may be clear enough, but the theory
based upon them may be quite false and this is the view of
our author.

We need not pause here, what we want to explain is how
the idea of the racial superiority of the German has been

 

 

 

developed.
« D—, dolicocephalic.
7B , brachycephalic.

 
NICEFORO ON THE HIGHLY SUPERIOR GERMAN. 33

Naturalists have found dolicocephalic man belonging to
the Neolithic age in many regions of Europe, so that no special
nationality can be claimed for him. German scientists, however, having discovered specimens of this type on German soil
belonging to three different ages, looked upon it at once as
Germanic, and what should have been included in the general
classification D——, was narrowed down to represent the
German physical type, and by a further process the pure type
of the present German nation. This ndtion was kept alive by
German anthropologists.

The confusion of social rank wit racial difference is
implicit in the premises of the argument. Physical differences
between higher and lower social classes undoubtedly exist.
Are they due to race? Is the structure of classes caused by the
dolicocephalic type coming to the top? To answer this we
must ask how social classes arise. What are the causes of
inequality ? They are a complex interlacement of hereditary
and environmental influences, and we can never say that race
is the only essential reason for class difference. The wellknown fact of the rise and fall of families supports this view.
Having identified the German with the D-——,, fair type, found by
de Gros to be successful in class struggle, the theory was soon
widened to embrace the strife amongst nations, and so we pass
easily to the vision of a nation, master of the Universe. |

The present distribution in Europe of the D——, fair type,
makes plain another fundamental misconception. How is it
possible to prove that *‘ D , fair men ”’ is merely another way
of writing ‘‘ German people,’’ when this physical type has inhabited so many different parts of Europe from prehistoric
times? Why German in a national sense, seeing that other
nations of Europe, such as the Norwegians, Dutch, Belgians,
English, Russians, and inhabitants of N.E. France, are largely
composed of such a type, and further, that at the present time, in
Germany the D , iS represented by a minority. It is
extremely doubtful, too, whether Germany was its original
home. |

Here is another question raised by the Pan-German theory.
Can the history of civilisation be described as the history of the

 

 
34 EUGENICS REVIEW.

 

German race? Whilst the false identification of D , fair,
with German type, race, and at last nation, was being developed,
de Gobineau’s book on the inequality of human races was resuscitated. This writer formulated, on a purely literary basis,
his theory that the rise and fall of all civilisations was due to
the appearance and disappearance among the different nations
of a particular race which alone was capable of success; but
he did not define the characteristics of this race, he simply
called it the white race, and he laid stress on the fact that it
was fair, citing the Greek gods in support. The Pan-Germans
were well pleased with the book. They at once put down the
making of all history to the D , fair, blue-eyed race. Carlyle
said that history was chiefly made by heroes; add to this fairhaired heroes of the German type and you have the new theory,
according to which these heroes in the shape of Franks,
Normans and others, created European civilisation, the Middle
Ages, the Papacy, Renaissance, and even the French Revolution
and Napoleonic era. And to-day it is this race that beats out
the higher civilisation upon the anvil of war.

Houston Chamberlain may serve as our guide ‘on the next
stage towards the completed myth. We must first notice his
incredible mistake of identifying the three types, German, Kelt
and Slav, which differ considerably in physical characters from
the so-called German type, the Slav, for instance, being notably
B——. As the journey from London to Rome is the passage
from fog to sunshine, so, says he, is it the passage from
civilisation to barbarism. The German, up to yesterday a
barbarian, is represented as developing the Communes in Italy,
which made a new starting point in history, and as the cause
of the Renaissance which, it seems, should be called, not a rebirth of Graeco-Roman civilisation, but simply the birth of a
new Civilisation—the German. There is no proof that all the
barbarians were of the D , fair type.; we have, in fact, strong
reasons for believing the contrary. Italian decadence, we are
told, began when the German type in Italy began to disappear
this being due partly to the mating of Germans with the local
population, and partly to the destruction of German nobility
in civil strife, vendettas and duels. For what are the Italians

 

 
NICEFORO ON THE HIGHLY SUPERIOR GERMAN. 35
5 .

of to-day? They are not, according to this doctrine,
descendants of the Graeco-Romans, nor of the Germans, but
sprung from the mating of innumerable slaves brought to Italy
from Africa and Asia, belonging therefore to an ethnic chaos.
Let us not minimise the fundamental error of these assertions,
for statistical records based upon 200,000 Italian recruits show
that the race is fairly homogenous, such slight differences as
there are being very regularly distributed among the different
regions. How can one fairly speak of ethnic chaos in Italy when
statistical records show much the same state of affairs in the
German lands?

In support of these arguments the Pan-Germans set out
to show that all great Italians were of German origin. By
philological arguments they attempted to establish the view that
the names of all the great Italians were of probable German
origin. Here are some of them: Giotto (Jotte), Boccaccio
(Buchatz), da Vinci (Winke), Raffaello Sanzio (Sandbt),
Buonarroti (Bohnrodt), Bruno (Braun), Tasso (Dasse), Alfieri
(Elfer), Verdi (Werth), Garibaldi (Kerpolt). It would be
equally easy to show that every great German name came from
a similar Italian one, and that the Germans had their origin in
Italy. By studying the physical type as shown in paintings,
statues, and literary descriptions, they then endeavoured to show
that these men were the D , fair, blue-eyed type. Such researches hardly lend themselves to any conclusions about the
shape of the skull, nor can one fairly argue from fair beard
to fair hair in cases of baldness, and again it is unsafe to argue
from eye colour in portraits to eye colour in the original subjects,
and from fair hair to D skull, since this form of skull may be
exhibited by the dark type and colour of hair is a characteristic
of secondary importance. In the case of certain investigators,
we may admit some seriousness, but we must again object to
the levity of Houston Chamberlain in his efforts to show that
Dante was of German descent. It is enough, said he, to walk
through the Berlin museums to see this, and he adds that his
type is to be found among the Tyrolese, who, by the way, belong
toaB , dark race. He uses Balzac’s description of the wonderful frontal development of Dante, to rush to the conclusion that

 

 

 
36 EUGENICS REVIEW.

he had a D—— skull, and he finds aclose relationship between the
physiognomy of Dante and that of Luther, for Dante had very
expressive features crowned by a cupola-like forehead, while
Luther had also a very expressive countenance, set upon a
strong-willed jaw, thus, though the two faces are perfectly
different, by unscrupulous literary juggling they are shown to
possess great racial affinity, and between these two, Houston
Chamberlain places all intermediate German types. We can
now see why the Germans, having thus appropriated Dante, are so
interested in him; the reason is that in their view Dante went
further than Charlemagne in his ideas as to the modern
relationship between Church and State, and in him and not
in the fall of the Roman Empire they find the turning-point
from ancient history to modern. According to the PanGermans the D , fair, type not only created the Italian
Renaissance, but ancient civilisation as well. Their researches
in ancient literature showed that the Greeks depicted their gods
and heroes as fair, but the Germans, who claim this discovery,
never referred to the eminent Italian scholar', who, in his Greek
studies, had pointed out the fact several decades before. We
must note, however, that szanthos, which is taken to mean
fair, is used in connection with so many objects of different
colours that its precise meaning is doubtful, still, even
admitting the evidence for fair hair to be considerable,
this is not the case of blue eyes and the two adjectives
glaukos and Kuaneos although taken by many _ people
to mean blue, are by sound critics considered simply to
mean bright. Were gods and heroes alone fair, or were
the great men also, or perhaps even the whole nation?
We have no proofs, but the Germans make use of a phrase of
Polemon, who speaks of fair Spartan women, to uphold their
contention. Our author maintains that fair hair is attributed
by the Greeks and Romans chieflv to deities and heroes as
such, that is to say to types created by the imagination, and he
suggests the following hypothesis to account for it. Is it not
likely, he says, that the esthetic ideal of a nation would include
those elements which are lacking in the majority, thus a dark
nation would idealise the fair type, and véce versa and probably

 

1 Ugo Foscolo.
NICEFORO ON THE HIGHLY SUPERIOR GERMAN. 37

the Greeks, in common with most Mediterranean races of a dark
type, pictured their heroes fair for this reason. In Rome where
poets sang of fair mistresses, we have an indication that
fair hair was prized for its rarity in the frequent use of fair
wigs. There are thousands of instances in Italian poetry also
where the poet insists on speaking of fair hair; thus anyone
who did not personally know the usual type of Italian women
would infer from literature that they were fair; but what shows
that this does not depend on a pre-existing type but on the
cult of rarity, is the fact that fair hair is always coupled with
waviness, a much more unusual characteristic. Another point
to show that poets sang of that beauty which was exceptional is provided by descriptions of black eyebrows and
black eyes, coupled with fair hair. Nor can anyone argue
that Italian women were fair from the fact that most
Madonnas and angels of the ‘Renaissance were represented
as being so. During the Renaissance, bleaching of the
hair was very common. Let us go farther. It is a
fact shown conclusively by statistics that the dark type does
not constitute the majority of the French nation. To what
conclusion would a man be led who tried to discover the usual
type of French women from the pages of Balzac, who is preeminent in powers of description. Of all France, Paris is the
region where women are mainly of fair hair and eyes. Balzac,
in nearly all the descriptions of his heroines, pictures them
as very dark. Only a very small percentage are described
as fair, and then only when they are to be contrasted with some
other principal character of dark type. Here again what is
really a preference for rarity would lead to wrong conclusions
about the generality.

De Gobineau had compared human history to a pattern
tissue continually in process of transformation, and he said that
the lower varieties of the human species, i.e., black and yellow,
might be considered as the background for this tissue. The
lower types of European families would form the silk warp and
weft, while the Aryan group were likened to the silver and
gold thread which lent beauty to the whole. It was sufficient
to look at those regions where Aryans were most numerous to
38 EUGENICS REVIEW.

see also the greatest development of civilisation. | Houston
Chamberlain used the same argument, putting instead of Aryan
his pure German D , fair, type. Scientific treatment of the
subject is extremely difficult. Civilisation must be defined.
Some index numbers must be provided to measure the outward
manifestations of civilisation in order to construct a'geographical
chart showing the different degrees of it throughout Europe.
Then it would be necessary to compare the intensity of these
manifestations at any point with the distribution of racial types
in order to establish any correlation. No such system has ever
been successfully employed. Houston Chamberlain’s chart of
Europe, to show the correlation between German physical type
and civilisation, is practically valueless, and he himself says
that physical type cannot be measured wholly by the callipers
of the anthropologist—a general impression is wanted. He
does not state with precision the boundaries of the modern
area where the superior civilisation is to be found. De
Gobineau, although lacking all anthropological data, and
not using such a system as we have outlined, does at
least try to give a definition of civilisation, and marks out very
accurately the boundaries of what he considers the higher
civilisation corresponding to the frequency of occurence of his
higher type. De Gobineau’s definition of civilisation is neither
satisfactory nor clear—a state of relative stability in which
multitudes strive to obtain satisfaction of their needs peacefully,
and to improve their intelligence and habits. His boundaries
run thus:— Sweden, Denmark, Hanover, along the Rhine up
to Basle including Alsace and High Lorraine, reaching the
Seine, following it to the sea and taking in Great Britain; such
a zone is inhabited largely by B——,, dark, peoples, who, according to the Pan-German theory, belong to an inferior type. It
also leaves out a great part of present Germany. Thus, if we
must believe in the superiority of the D , fair, type, we must
throw up De Gobineau’s theory, and vice versa.

An absolute conception of civilisation must be given up in
favour of a relative one. It will not do to set civilisation over
against barbarism; thev represent two different levels of the
same thing, and civilisation is not perpetually rising, its move
 

 
NICEFORO*ON THE HIGHLY SUPERIOR GERMAN. 39

ment is undulatory. The several components of civilisation
and progress must be defined, and the attempt to compare
different populations in respect of civilisation by means of index
numbers may well appear hopeless. . Theoretically, a single
index would be desirable, but there is no single human manifestation which can be taken as a measure of civilisation, since this
must be considered under at least three categories, material,
intellectual and moral. Not all of these are easily translatable
into numbers, and even if they were, we should still have to
establish a proportionate value between them. The material
and intellectual factors of life can be expressed to some extent
in a numerical way, but it is very difficult to do this in the case
of moral factors. Criminality is the only aspect of the moral
life, the study of which has yielded satisfactory numerical
results, but when we have these before us it is difficult to appraise
their value, for an increase. in crime may coincide with a
proportionately greater increase in more desirable manifestations. Our author believes that by measuring civilisation
according to the three categories, a student would soon see that
the region of highest civilisation coincides neither with De
Gobineau’s map, nor with localities exclusively inhabited by
D , fairs; for it takes in a larger area than either of them,
_and it leaves out some provinces included by them since it would
comprise the zones inhabited both by D , fairs, and B——,
darks, embracing such populations as, for example, those of
Switzerland, part of Italy, and even some of the B , dark,
regions of Germany, thus showing that the zones inhabited
by B , dark people, compare quite favourably with those
inhabited by the so-called higher type. It seems strange
that in France, where there are very few D , fairs,
civilisation should have attained one of its highest standards
simply owing to the small minority of that type, while in
regions where it forms the majority the standard of civilisation
is at best no higher.

As to the genius for organisation which the Germans
attribute to themselves, this may be taken in three ways. Either
as the power of producing men of genius capable of organising
the collective life, or simply as a readiness in the masses to obey

 

 

 

 

 
40 EUGENICS REVIEW.

orders, that is to be easy of organisation, or both things at once,
a people formed of leaders and followers. Whichever interpretation be taken we must first note that the greater part of the
German people are B——-, dark, the qualities of which are stated
to be discipline and cohesion without genius, characteristics
exactly contrary to the D , fairs, or in other words to the
German type to which German superiority is referred. If this
genius for organisation is due to the presence of many D——,
fairs, then there are other countries where the type is more
numerous, and genius for organisation cannot be described
as simply German. And if it depends on a D , fair,
minority leading the B , darks, then the phenomenon
should occur wherever the two types are found, and again,
that will not be solely in Germany. The only solution remaining is that this genius for organisation depends upon docile
masses easy to organise. This, however, has been found to be
the chief characteristic of the B——,, darks, therefore it is clear
that the Pan-Germans must choose between their prerogative
of organisation and the D , fair, type. Another prerogative
of the German race would seem to be that of observing facts
accurately, and of creating science, for we are told by them that
the Greeks themselves did not possess such powers. We might
note here that even stupid men can be made to observe accurately
by careful attention to method. The Pan-German proof that
the foundations of science were laid by Germans rests upon the
statement that such men as Nicold Tartaglia of Brescia and
Cardano of Milan were pure descendants of Goths and Langobards. Pascal is accounted for by saying that he was of
Frankish origin. Finally, even admitting the superiority of
the D——, fairs, why assume that they must have been the
creators of ancient civilisation. Homo Mediterraneus remains
to be explained. The best authorities on the subject believe
that no fundamental anthropological difference exists between
D——., fairs, and the D——, darks, known as ‘‘ Mediterranean
man.’’ To admit the excellence of the one is to admit also
that of the other. The D , fair, type, is Aboriginal European
and has no right to any national description; he might be
called D , fair, Neolithic. At some point in prehistoric

 

 

 

 

 

 

3)

 

 
NICEFORO ON THE HIGHLY SUPERIOR GERMAN. 41

 

time, the migration of B , dark, Asiatics inserted itself as
a wedge stretching to the Pyrenees and separating the D Ss
to the north and south where, according to the different climate,
or to mere geographical isolation, they became slightly
differentiated in some of their minor characters, such as
pigmentation. It would not perhaps be altogether unreasonable
to say that the earlier European civilisations were due to the
dark type, and supposing the superiority of the D , fairs, to
be granted, that modern civilisation is due to them.

No further argument is necessary to reach a conclusion.
The idea of the necessary dominance of the German type rests
merely upon sentiment, although on the surface it might seem
to have some rational basis, but all its weak points are powerless
to kill the attraction which this myth has for its believers, for
sentiment cannot be killed by reason, especially when a nation
believes itself to be the natural superior of others by virtue of
its strength. .It is well to remember, however, that strength
can only lead to success when informed by wisdom. Thus the
author concludes.

By the fierce light of war we perceive unsuspected depths
and shallows in our foes as in ourselves, and although we may
fairly reject as mere vulgar combativeness any sweeping condemnation of German science in general, yet we cannot but
admit that some particular developments of it are very curious.
Anything more thoroughly unscientific and indeed almost
frivolous than the Pan-German theory of racial superiority we
can hardly imagine. Our author uncovers the quicksand upon
which an imposing edifice has been reared. Englishmen are
no great students of the German tongue and withal love to have
faith in their fellow men; thus it comes about that the ‘‘ bubble
reputation ’’ is allowed to cover gross and palpable errors.

For our part we have an hypothesis to offer. It is this :—
that a new type has arisen in Germany from the mixture of the
D , fairs, and B , darks. We propose to call it
“* Gedicephalic,’’ in plain English, swelled-head. In the
general uncertainty as to what form of cranium really does
belong to the pure German type, this hypothesis may be helpful.
That the Teuton idol has feet of clay does not concern us here,
our quarrel is with the other end of it.

 

 

 

 

-_
