REVIEWS

rapidly acquired speech, and his IQ score rose.
At eight he entered a school for the blind, and at
sixteen the Royal Normal College for the Blind.
At eighteen he was a well-poised young man
with considerable charm and good looks, and
wide interests. The remarkable change in mental
and emotional development was due to skilled
teaching, warm interest and affection.

HILDA LEWIS

Aspects of Family Mental Health in Europe.
By various authors. Public Health Papers,
No. 28. Geneva, 1965. WHO. Pp. 124. Price
8s. 6d.

THIS BOOK, CONTAINING papers written by
psychiatrists, therapists and other workers from
a number of European countries, is evidence of
the current widespread interest in the family.

The first paper is a stimulating account by
Dr. H. Hoffmeyer of the work done for the
mother and the family particularly in Scandinavian countries, through family protection
schemes, and specifically in Denmark through
the famous “Mothers’ Aid Centres”. These
centres provide legal, social, medical and
psychiatric services for unmarried as well as
married women. They have a duty to interview
and help women seeking abortion: to provide
contraceptive advice, to supervise adoptions,
to support with financial and other aid overburdened mothers, and to help resolve family
discord. There is much in these schemes which
is relevant to the revision of our own abortion
laws and the Seebohm Committee’s inquiry into
better ways of integrating our local authority
and personal social services.

Among the papers dealing with practical
social welfare, there is an interesting account by
a psychiatrist of the slowly changing situation
in the employment of women in Spain—a
country particularly late in making use of this
reservoir of labour and talent. Various supportive schemes and centres to protect the family
from breakdown have already been found
necessary, although at the same time the
cultural value of widening the women’s horizons
has been recognized.

OF BOOKS

Monsieur A. Isambert describes the development of the well-known “Schools for Parents”
which have been successfully developed in
France since the last war, having been founded
in 1929 as part of a scheme to overcome the
indifference of parents to their children’s sexual
and emotional problems. The school in Paris
at first concentrated on teaching parents about
child development, based on psychoanalytic
principles, but was later drawn into much
broader fields of educational psychology and
sociology. It also provides personal psychological
help for the parents themselves, marriage
guidance, and advice for young people. M.
Isambert enumerates similar organizations in
other European countries, but comments on the
relatively slight interest shown in Britain.

Among other papers dealing with the role of
individual and group psychotherapy in clearing
up family upsets, an account by Drs. Jirina
Knoblochova and Ferdinand Knobloch of the
methods practised at the Psychiatric Department
of the University Polyclinic, Prague, shows how
far such efforts have advanced in Central
Europe.

The British contributions include an account
of the Family Discussion Bureau at the Tavistock
Institute of Human Relations, and of the Child
Therapy Clinic at Hampstead, described by
Mrs. L. Pincus and Dr. Joseph Sandler
respectively. a

HILDA LEWIS

ABORTION

Abortion: An Ethical Discussion. London, 1965.
Church Information Office. Pp. 70. Price 4s. 6d.

THIS REPORT IS the work of a committee set up
by the Board for Social Responsibility of the
Church Assembly of the Church of England,
under the chairmanship of Canon I. T. Ramsey,
Nolloth Professor of the Philosophy of the
Christian Religion at Oxford, the secretary being
the Reverend G. R. Dunstan. It is lucid, impartial,
and thorough, and presents a cogent argument
for a limited reform of the present law, while
stopping short of the proposals made by Lord
Silkin in the Bill which has recently been before
the House of Lords.

167
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

It is a typically Anglican report, valuable for
its endeavour to understand and do justice to
both sides, and for its attempt to reconcile them
in a practical, moral, and humane solution of
this pressing problem of the termination of
pregnancy. Both the extremes, of uncontrolled
liberty and of absolute prohibition, are rejected,
and an ethical mean is established which pays
regard to the rights of the foetus, the health
of the mother, and the good of society. While
relying no longer upon traditional beliefs about
the point at which the “soul”? was thought to
animate the body, the committee is firm in its
recognition of the moral significance of the
foetus as potentially a human life which should
be destroyed only for the weightiest reasons.
Its “‘broad conclusion” is that “in certain
circumstances abortion can be justified”—that
is, if it could be “reasonably established that
there was a threat to the mother’s life or wellbeing, and hence inescapably to her health”—
the existence of such a threat being decided by
the doctor: concerned, in full consultation with
those competent to advise him upon the different

professional and personal issues involved. In
particular, such consultation would be important
in cases of rape or incest, or where there seemed
to be a risk of a defective or deformed child
being born; always the decision taken should
be grounded upon the “prognosis concerning
the mother as affected by the pregnancy in
question’’—and in this connection it would be
wrong to take insufficient account of the
capacity of persons to respond to the challenge
of difficult circumstances. Suggested amendments to Lord Silkin’s Bill indicate the means
by which reform could most satisfactorily be
attained, though the Report stresses the importance of supplementing legal reform by education.

Should a second edition of the Report be
called for (and it is to be hoped that it will be)
consideration might be given to the claim that
emotional stress during pregnancy may adversely
affect the unborn child (pp. 37 and 46); many
experts in the field involved would not accept
such a claim on the basis of the authorities
cited.

SHERWIN BAILEY

OTHER NOTICES

Barish, Natalie. The Gene Concept. London,
1966. Chapman and Hall. Pp. xi+116. Price
10s. 6d. Paperback.

THIS LITTLE PAPERBACK is one of the
‘Selected Topics in Modern Biology” series.
The series editor, Peter Gray, describes it as a
‘background book’”’ designed to help the young
student in his introductory biology course.
Naturally, the author (of Chatham College,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania) starts off with a
chapter on “‘Mendel and his famous peas” and
carries the reader along with her in her enthusiasm for all the “intriguing”? and “exciting”
discoveries which have been made since then.
There are plenty of good, clear diagrams—a
few of them reproduced from the classics of
genetic writing—a very full glossary and a good

168

index. Altogether the book is a “‘must” for the
student who has not got a clue—he will soon
have one.

K. H.

Delevoryas, Theodore. Plant Diversification.
Modern Biology Series. New York and London,
1966. Holt Rinehart and Winston. Pp. vii+145.
Price 18s. Paperback.

THIS LITTLE BOOK is an introduction to the
study of plants. It is written from a new point
of view in which fossils and classification,
breeding systems and physiology are all brought
in to play. The illustrations, both diagrams and
photographs, are a pleasure to see.

Cc. D. D.
