THE STATE OF THE NATION

As Deduced from recent Vital Statistics

General,' ? ° one each of the Ministry

of Health* and the Board of Education’ and one of the Board of Control*® provide almost as complete a survey of the state
of the English people as is possible during
the inter-censal period.

The first of these publications, the Text,
1928, is in many ways more useful than the
two other parts, Medical and Civil, published the previous year, since it not only
gives most of the essential tables, but also
discusses the validity of its own statistics,
the movements of population, mortality
rates by age and cause, etc., and generally
surveys the present state of the country in
the light of the past. The bulk of the two
others (1929) is occupied by detailed tables
for the various counties and districts of
England and Wales. The one important
criticism of the Text is its tardy appearance
—practically two years after the time to
which it refers. Probably, however, this is
inevitable without a larger staff. Sometimes,
also, the style of the writing is somewhat
too involved to render the distinctly solid
subject easy of digestion.

The estimated population of England and
Wales at the end of June 1928 is given as
39,482,000 persons—18,896,000 males and
20,586,000 females—which means that we
have now well passed the density figure of

| 'HREE publications of the Registrar
 

1 Statistical Review of England and Wales for

1928: Text. Pp. vii+187. Price 5s.
2 Ditto for 1929. Tables. Part I, Medical.
Pp. iii+505. Price 7s. 6d. Part II, Civil.

Pp. iv+128. Price as.
3 Quarterly Return of Births and Deaths (third

quarter) and Marriages (second quarter). Pp.
vili+25. Price od.

4 On the State of the Public Health in 1929.
Pp. 240. Price 3s. 6d.

5 The Health of the School Child in 1929.
Pp. 152. Price 2s.

* Sixteenth Annual Report (for 1929): Part II.
Pp. 403. Price 6s. 6d.

All published in London, 1930, by the Stationery
Office.

one person per acre (England and Wales=
37,340,338 acres). By June 1929 the total
figure had risen to 39,607,000, comprising
18,969,000 males and 20,638,000 females.
The Quarterly Return does not give these
figures for the middle of 1930. The rate of
natural increase was 5.0 per 1,000 in 1928—
a slight rise above the 4.3 of 1927—but
dropped in 1929 to 2.9, which is the lowest
figure recorded in the history of registration.
The crude birth and death rates (per 1,000
of population) responsible for that figure
were :

Year. Births. Deaths.
1928 16.7 11.7
1929 16.3 13.4

But, as both the Text and the volume on
Public Health point out, these crude rates
are misleading and cannot be considered
apart from the sex and age constitution of
the population. The latter is the most important and, naturally, is constantly changing. At the last census (1921) the average
age of all males was 29.9, and of all females
31.2; by the middle of 1928 these figures
had risen to 31.1 and 32.7 respectively.
While, therefore, our population is increasingly composed of old persons who must
before long die off, there are comparatively
few girls—the important sex in this respect
—growing up to replace the women who are
passing out of the reproductive age. In any
case, we cannot expect the death rate,
already remarkably low, to fall much more,
and it is bound to rise before very long;
while the present low and falling birth rate
is, when standardized, even lower than it
appears. Unless women actually become
more fertile, our crude birth rate will in a
few years fall short of the crude death rate.

While the standardization of birth and
death rates, with the light it throws on
future population increase, have been considerably discussed of late, the Text sets
out the whole matter very fully, with con
265
266

crete examples, besides indicating how standardization radically alters not only the
general death rate, but also those of specific
diseases.

THE “ BIRTH-STRIKE ” SLACKENING ?

In a recent wireless talk,* however, Dr.
R. A. Fisher pointed out that in one very
important sense the mere number of births
may be a better guide to the movement of
fertility than the more refined mathematical
methods. Using the Registrar-General’s
data, he shows that while births are still
falling, the rate of fall is now slackening.
He therefore tentatively suggests that what
the Germans call the ‘“‘ birth-strike ’’ is
nearing its end, and that practically all
those who are willing to use contraception
have now taken to it. He thereby implies
that there is a considerable residuum of
those who won’t use it (as distinct from
those who can’t) and who may be expected
before long to make their influence felt by
doing most of the nation’s reproduction and,
eventually, by pushing up the birth rate as
the infertile die off.

The 1928 Text also shows that the sexratio is becoming more masculine. Were
this a natural phenomenon, it might be
alarming (vid. Pitt-Rivers in this REVIEW
of April 1929), but it seems only to be the
beginning of the return to normal after the
slaughter of the War. Indeed, an increase in
masculinity beyond the normal scarcely
seems probable at present, since the sexratio at birth remains fairly constant, while
excess male mortality is higher than ever.

‘* ‘The excess of male mortality, 25 per
cent., in 1928, has grown very steadily
from less than ro per cent. in the middle
of last century. It was increased during
the war by deaths of combatants occurring in this country, but even the 24 per
cent. excess of 1916-20 is now (for the
first time) exceeded. At all ages under
15 the male excess for 1928 is the highest
recorded in the table, as also at 45-55 and
75-85. The period of male advantage at

 

* Since reprinted in the December

toth, 1930.

Listener,

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

5-15 in the later years of last century
seems to have definitely disappeared, the
rate being, for the first time, substantially higher for males at every age in
1928, though indeed it was actually
higher in some degree at every age in
each of the three previous years also ”’
(Text, p. 3).

Much space is devoted in the Text to the
sex differences in mortality from various
diseases : they are very interesting, but cannot be condensed into a summary. Equally
interesting are the changes which are occuring in the causes of death in both sexes,
but the subject is rendered dangerous
ground by variations in diagnosis and certification.

Infant mortality, as need scarcely be said,
is still falling, though with a slight upward
fluctuation from 65 per 1,000 live births
in 1928 to 74 in 1929; in the third quarter
of 1930, however, it dropped to 45, which is
9 below the figure for the corresponding
quarter of the previous year.

The Civil volume is mainly concerned
with the places, ages, and conditions of marriage, with divorce, migration—as far as
possible—Parliamentary and Local Government electors, and with certain Empire and
foreign vital statistics. The Medical volume
gives many tables comprehensively analyzing mortality by place, age, cause, and
sex.

THE DIFFERENTIAL BIRTH RATE

Beyond these broad details of those who
enter and leave this country by the ports of
life and death, the Registrar-General’s publications give few data on differential birth
and death rates. Both the Medical (Table
14) and the Civil (Table E) volumes, however, yield a rough glimpse of the progress
of the class-differential rates of increase, in
their separate statements of the vital statistics of the various London boroughs.

In the following small table I have combined Bermondsey, Bethnal Green, and
Poplar, to represent the poorest wage-earning class; Fulham, Lewisham, and Marylebone, the ‘ middle’ class; and Hampstead,
THE STATE OF THE NATION

Kensington, and Westminster, the wealthy
‘upper middle’ class. This classification
is, of course, very rough, since no London
borough is entirely homogeneous, and all of
the last six must include a certain proportion of the poorest class. Births, deaths,
and natural increase are per 1,000 of population; infant mortality is per 1,000 live
births. The last column I have myself
calculated by deducting the total number of
infant deaths from the total number of
births and giving the result, surviving
children, per 1,000 of the population living
in the districts. It may, perhaps, give a
more accurate idea of the relative rates of
increase than does the ordinary natural increase, a figure which is liable to distortion
by deaths in hospitals, age constitution, etc.

I ought to add that Kensington, which I[
have made an ‘ Upper Middle’ borough,
has a higher birth rate (14.5) than Marylebone (12.0), a ‘ Middle’ borough—a result
which may be significant, but is equally
likely to be due to my own choice of representative boroughs. The lowest birth rate
is that of Westminster, with 10.5. Marylebone has a natural decrease of 2.2, and all
the ‘ Upper Middle’ boroughs show natural decreases. But the greatest anomaly is
that the highest rates of infant mortality
occur in what have usually been reckoned
the three wealthiest residential London
boroughs. The lowest rate of any is that of
Lewisham, 44, a figure which greatly reduces the average of the three ‘ Middle’
boroughs. Stoke Newington, with 47, comes
next. Both these results may be due to the
existence of maternity hospitals.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Class of Nat’rl |Deaths| Children
Population |Births |Deaths; In- | under |Surviv’g
crease | I yr.

Lower... 51 70 17°8
Middle 1-2 65 13°9
Upper Middle 14°6 |—2°5 72 IIl'5
All Classes :
England and |

Wales 2°9 | 74 16

 

267

If the figures in the foregoing table could
be taken as reliable indications of population movements, then we should be forced to
conclude that the poorest class of 1929 had
a rate of natural increase almost double that
of the country as a whole, which, in its turn,
was more than double that of the ‘ Middle ’
class. Meanwhile the ‘ Upper Middle ’ class
is fast dying out. But the mere facts that
my ‘ Lower’ group has an infant mortality
rate below that of the nation, and my
‘ Upper Middle’ group a general death rate
above the country’s average, indicate that
we are dealing with selected populations. It
does therefore seem probable, as I expected
before making the table, that the last
column is most truly representative of the
relative rates of increase—with the poorest
class somewhat above the average, the
middle class a little more below it, and the
wealthiest class not even ‘ placed.’ The average children surviving to all three groups
together is 14.4, which would probably rise
to about the country’s average if due weight
were given to the numerical preponderance
of the poorest class.

THIRTY YEARS AGO

This rough—and, indeed, necessarily
hasty—analysis of current statistics was
made as far as possible on lines comparable
with Heron’s famous study* of London
boroughs in 1851 and 1901. He found that
while the ‘ lower ’ classes were more fertile
than the ‘ upper’ even in 1851 (Stevenson
considers that the opposite was the case
some twenty or more years before), the disparity had increased by the beginning of the
present century. Heron’s was a thorough
study, and he was able to define the comparative wealth of his boroughs in measurable terms, whereas I have had to rely on a
purely personal, and therefore inaccurate,
knowledge of the districts. None of his
figures, therefore, are strictly comparable
with mine, since even his birth rates (legitimate) are given per 100 wives aged 15-54.

* Heron, David, M.A.: On the Relation of
Fertility in Man to Social Status. . . . London,
1906. Dulau & Co. (Drapers’ Company Research
Memoirs).
268

But I have been able to choose from his
material exactly the same nine boroughs as
in the foregoing table, and their relative
social and economic status is probably much
what it was thirty years ago.

Births Children Infant
Class of (legit.) | aged 13-15| Mortality
Population per 100 per 100 per 1000
wives 15-54/wives 15-54} births
Lower ... 22°15 40°7 162
Middle ... 17°45 33°9 129
Upper Middle ... 13°57 33°1 134

It is not possible, of course, to compare
the birth rates in this table with those of
1929; but it seems as if, in the general
fall in fertility, the three groups still stand
at almost exactly the same distance from
each other as they did thirty years ago. The
infant mortality column is put in more for
curiosity’s sake than for any other reason,
since it cannot indicate relative net survival.

The middle column, however, of children

aged 13-15, does afford a very rough comparison with the children surviving infant
mortality in 1929. It suggests that the relative survival value of the poorest class is
now even greater than it was, that the
‘ Middle ’ class still occupies a central position, while the wealthiest group has dropped
yet further below the others. If, however,
the 1929 figures were those of children aged
13-15, they might well show little or no
change.

OUR WEAKLY CHILDREN

On turning now to the reports of the
Ministry of Health and the Board of Education, one notices a rather striking difference
in their general tone. The first, on the
State of the Public Health, is mainly concerned with adults, and concludes that the
health of the nation is ‘‘ relatively sound ”’
(p. 206), while the second, on the Health
of the School Child, strikes a note of warning, if not of pessimism, when it concludes,
“*.. we cannot fail to recognize that the
present generation of school children may be
relatively lacking in physical stamina and

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

powers of resistance. In other words, the
maintenance of the population in this way
[differential birth rate and falling child
mortality] and from its present sources is,
with all its advantages, one of the factors
which, for the present, is tending to modify
the physical and mental character of the
people... .”’

Both reports and both quotations are the
work of the same man, Sir George Newman,
whose two annual ‘ leading articles’ on
national health have now taken a welldeserved place among the important events
of the year.

The second passage occurs in the ‘‘ Conclusions ”’ (p. 72) of the Child report, where
Sir George discusses the failure of all the
increasing efforts of his two departments to
effect any appreciable improvement in the
real health of the children. Another passage (p. 71) is significant : ‘‘ First it should
be observed that this great mass of disease
affects about a quarter of the children only,
the remaining three-quarters are healthy
normal specimens of humanity.”’

Biologically, that is exactly what is to be
expected in a population subjected to a
steadily improving environment and consequently a steadily falling death rate. The
health of the majority would naturally improve, but the general betterment would be
gradually offset and obscured by the increase in the numbers of the constitutionally
unfit—or else, as the ‘‘ Conclusions ”’ indicate, would be only temporarily maintained
by ever greater efforts. Sir George seems
half to recognize this, but flinches from the
logical conclusion that the constitutionally
unfit must somehow be eliminated. He
calls, instead, for yet more efforts to keep
them alive and in health.

The taxpayer, we expect, will eventually
have something to say to this; and the
idealist may some day raise his voice against
the befogged sentimentality which, in the
name of the Child, makes a cult of degeneracy. But our only business here is to point
out that the process cannot go on indefinitely : we doubt if Sir George would expect
or want it to, if he drew a clearer distinction
between healthy surroundings and healthy
THE STATE OF THE NATION

people. While he comments, as I have
quoted, on the falling death rate as a cause
of unfitness, he also looks to yet further
environmental improvements to build a
healthier race—-see both these ‘‘ Conclusions ’’ and those in the Public Health
report, especially the reference in the latter
to “‘ the dysgenic and destructive influences
of disease.’’

AND OUR TOUGHER ADULTS

The figures in the Child report do not
run far enough back to enable comparisons
of value to be made between 1929 and previous years (indeed, we would beg for a few
full tables covering a fair range of years,
and especially for one like that of the London County Council, giving the percentage
of A.1-ness in the children). But, generally,
infectious diseases are declining, environmental conditions are improving, and constitutional inadequacies still seem to be fluctuating about the same mark, some a little
up and some a little down. Sir George,
though, has reason to think that the general
health of the children is at any rate no
better—and possibly worse—than it was;
and it is instructive to compare this with his
view of the ‘‘ relative soundness ’’ of the
adult population. The majority of the latter
were born before the immense reductions in
infantile mortality ; many had passed their
early years before the general child mortality had fallen more than a point or two;
and a few, whose great age makes them unduly important statistically, survived an era
with a very high death rate. All these have,
in varying degrees, been selected for toughness, and now—witness the high proportion
of aged people—they blossom forth like
a hardy plant in the spring sunshine. But
the children are—well, children, of a prosperous and hygienic age, and they have been
subjected to comparatively little selection.

But in this connection, it is well to recall
both Sir George’s own remarks a year or
two ago on the unfitness of the adolescent,
and a recent discussion in the House of
Commons. Answering a question, the Secretary of State for War said (November

209

25th) that the Army was below strength
owing to a shortage of recruits. Replying
to a supplementary question, he added that
there was no lack of applicants, but that
too few of them were up to the mental and
physical standard required.

Since this standard is not very high, except for certain regiments, the implication
is that the youthful male physique of the
nation is depressingly low. In a time of
prosperity and little unemployment it would
be possible to avoid that implication on the
ground that only the rejects from all other
jobs would have recourse to the Army. But
it is impossible to put forward such an argument in these times, of unexampled unemployment, when those without jobs must
largely consist of normally constituted and
employable men, and when the Army offers
a better career than it ever did before—as
it has progressively done for many years
past.

But while the War Office has steadily
tried, practically ever since the Boer War,
to attract a better and better type of man,
it has equally steadily been forced—contrary to general belief—to lower its standard
of acceptance.

It should be noted that the present deficiency of physically and mentally adequate
recruits cannot be attributed to the War,
for the men who now apply were children at
that time. Born, roughly, between 1905 and
IQII, they are the predecessors by but a few
years of the children now under Sir
George’s care. America seems to be experiencing much the same difference between
old and young—see ‘‘ Sickness and the Life
Curve ’’ in these Notes and Memoranda.

The last volume, Part II of the Annual
Report of the Board of Control, is one of
those solid publications that it is better to
possess than to review. The slimmer Part I
(reviewed in our October number, p. 213)
contains, in its text and tables, the distilled
essence of the facts and recommendations,
while the present volume is the accompanying and essential book of reference.
Alienists and general practitioners will also
find much of value in the supplement on
“* Scientific Research Work in Mental Hos270

pitals.”’ But while the reports in this section throw light on the physiology of 1insanity and amentia, the genetics of the subject, if mentioned at all, are usually compressed into ‘‘ Father alcoholic’’ or
** Mother and aunt psychotic.’’ Could not
the Board persuade their contributors to
supply pedigrees of such patients as they
subject to special examination? They must

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

often possess practically all the relevant
data, or be able easily to obtain it from
social workers. Quite apart from the crude
question of its inheritance, the immediate
causes of mental disease will never be
properly understood until the physiological
factors are differentiated by the clinician and
their inheritance traced by the general
geneticist. E. M.

 

THE GALTON DINNER

will be held at

THE REMBRANDT HOTEL
SOUTH KENSINGTON

on Monday, February 16th, at 7.15 p.m. for 7.30

The Galton Lecture.

WARNINGS FROM NATURE

will be given by

PROFESSOR SIR J. ARTHUR THOMSON, M.A., LL.D.

The Very Reverend the Dean of St. Paul’s will be in the Chair

Fellows and Members are requested to get their
tickets (10/6) from the Secretary as early as possible

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXII, No. 4.
