SOCIAL BIOLOGY
The Address at the Inauguration of the New Chair

Biology, Professor Lancelot Hog
ben, delivered his inaugural lecture
at the London School of Economics and
Political Science on the afternoon of October
23rd, a lecture that sparkled with compressed epigrams directed sometimes at the
Socialist and sometimes at the ‘ Die-hard,’
at the rationalist and the Christian, at social
worker or at pure biologist, and even at
ourselves, the eugenists, with, of course,
equal thrusts at those who doubt the animal
nature of man. Indeed, his rapier glanced
among all mankind and left his hearers sure
that, whatever else might characterize the
new Chair, it would lack neither intellectual
brightness nor literary grace. The following summary but poorly illustrates these
characteristic qualities.

THE DESCENT OF MAN

Darwin’s Descent of Man, said Professor
Hogben, was a challenge to the complacent
dualism which had permitted utilitarian
science and humanistic philosophy to pursue
an independent course from the days of the
schoolmen to the middle of the nineteenth
century. ‘To-day it was evident that the
social sciences could no longer progress
within the framework of a_ philosophical
tradition brought into being by the conditions of the city state and nurtured from
Abelard to Kant in servile association with
the requirements of apologetics. Economic
science had already severed its moorings to
moral philosophy, and there was a growing
disposition among the other branches of
social science to do the same.

To-day the application of scientific method
to the study of human society was philosophically guaranteed by the generally
accepted conclusion that millionaires and
metaphysicians, statesmen and seventh-day
adventists were products of the same secular
agencies as had fashioned the rest of the

| ' HE first English Professor of Social

brute creation. The far-reaching implications of the change in outlook which Darwin’s doctrine had brought about were becoming more apparent in our time, because
biologists were now undertaking the
analysis of the characteristics of conscious
behaviour in animals, and the behaviourist
school of psychologists was applying the
new methods to man himself.

ANTS AND ANTIQUARIANS

Man was an animal as the ant was an
animal, and he had a natural history of his
own as the ant had a natural history of its
own. The biologist as a biologist confined
his attention to those characteristics which
ants and antiquarians had in common, while
the sociologist confined his inquiries to certain characteristics which distinguished men
and women from ants and all other animals.
Their respective fields of investigation overlapped in the attempt to define what characteristics of human society were determined
by those characteristics which men share
with all other animals, and what characteristics of human society were referable to
characteristics which distinguish men as one
species of animal from all other species of
animals.

We must be prepared to recognize that
issues which made the first claim on the
attention of men like Huxley, Galton and
Spencer were no longer topical. ‘The misguided opposition of the churches compelled
biologists of Darwin’s generation to concentrate on emphasizing the characteristics .
which we shared with other animals. Social
biology had now to undertake the task of
defining in biologically significant terms the
characteristics which distinguish man as one
species of animal from all other species of
animals. The work of physiologists like
Sherrington and Pavlov was opening the
way to a biological interpretation of those
peculiarities which are most diagnostic of

249
250

the human species. A well-balanced view of
the role respectively played by inheritance
and social tradition in determining the
differences which distinguished different
social groups would only be possible when
the biological study of behaviour and the
methods of the geneticist could be brought
into working harmony.

RESEARCH AND PROPAGANDA

The great danger lay in undue haste to
establish conclusions which could be made
the basis of legislation. The genetic basis
of occupational and racial stratification in
human societies was a problem which called
for discipline, detachment, and restraint.
Nothing could make the exercise of these
wholesome virtues more difficult than to
bring issues which were still problematical
to scientists before the forum of political
controversy. Much research directed to
elucidating genetic variations in human communities had been vitiated by a failure to
envisage the complexity of the problem. A
genuinely scientific analysis of genetic variation in human society would have to be sustained by the recognition that human society
is an unique biological phenomenon, inasmuch as the family is a unit for the
cumulative communication of old and new
environmental stimuli, as well as a group
delimited by genetic affinity. The preeminent need of the moment was investigation rather than propaganda. The first task
of the social biologist was not to advocate
the sterilization of the unfit, but to undertake the sterilization of the instruments of
research before operating on the body
politic.

In our own generation the population
problem embraced a variety of issues in
which the sociologist and the biologist had
a common interest. A clear appreciation of
the biological issues necessitated the prosecution of research into the physiology of
reproduction, the genetic basis of human
behaviour, and the incidence of changes in
fertility. The analvsis of this intricate problem would not be facilitated by an unduly
alarmist attitude. The sceptical inquirer
might approach the differential fertility of

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the social classes which has accompanied the
decline in the birth rate as a conundrum
rather than a catastrophe. We had inadequate scientific evidence to justify the belief
that extensive genetic differences distinguished the social classes. If we had such
knowledge it would be necessary to ascertain
how such differences were transmitted before
justifying the belief that a temporary disparity in fertility would necessarily produce
significant social consequences. The German
and Swedish data suggested that contraceptive practice was rapidly spreading to all
sections of the community ; so that differential fertility might be a problem which
would solve itself without legislative interference.

On the other hand, if this transpired to be
the case, it was possible that European communities would be faced with a rapid decline
in general population, which would create a
new constellation of social problems for
legislative treatment. The decline in the
birth rate brought us face to face with the
fact that human society was entering upon
what Mr. J. B. S. Haldane had called the
era of biological invention; and the institution of a chair of social biology was an implicit recognition of the impending change.
The rapid progress now being made in
physiology made it likely that in the near
future human society would be in a position
to regulate the reproductive process to an
extent and in ways hitherto unimagined and
unimaginable.

In many directions it would be necessary
for the social biologist to co-operate with
pure sociology in ascertaining the significant
factors which operate in determining the
growth of human populations. On the other
hand, social biology could not develop fruitfully if it isolated itself from the methods
of experimental inquiry. By the very complexity of the genetic problem social biology
was committed to create a framework of
biological research and teaching in which a
new type of social psychology could develop.
For the same reason it was entrusted with
the experimental analysis of aspects
of the physiology of reproduction too
long neglected by medical science.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXII, No. 4.
