I0Z

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

*(4quo €%-SE6x) coues,y

 SoVEI-YIEEp Tey} Foao] soyer-GING + oquyar eyeq] “ONINTTORG] *
21uv290

“PIUCUISE ‘puereez MON ‘eTeIjsny

9Goingq

‘WSN = sunsoup

“puelory ‘eTuoysy ‘elajey] ‘uapams ‘AeMION ‘yTeuIUAC

‘ermeaorsoyoez9 ‘Aresuny ‘euysny ‘puepiez}1Ms ‘Aueuliey ‘UNIS[eq ‘UleyLIg 3eAI5)
: Ayrun ynoge Zutyenjzonpg
 oqelor eyed

seyer-uorjonpordex yeu: Mol 430q sayei-Yyeep pue YING

‘AUVNOILVLS MOT °

“eyetmmezyens) pue eorewel ‘aptqg ‘Aensnig, ‘quryuaziy ‘eyseTy ‘epeurey syotsaup
"eOLIyY qyNoS jo uoIUQ

t age 1s

Surpuedxe Apres 94} ul paced aq ssopJqnop plnom ows ‘poplAIp-qns j1 : ajoqM
B se uaye} ae WOlUL) }eIAOS 9y} Jo szred oneIsy oy) ‘uedef pue uolug yatAoS
‘sdnoid 0M} 3x9U 9q} UT SatzjUN0D yda0xe jUaUT]UOD BONA,

: OMOT AT}UAISISUOD SazeI

qyeap YM ‘Buryey sozel-yjyeop pue yI11q

wnafpy

wisp
agoang

ww

> SIQeIfeIUN sauUITZIUIOS e}eq ‘ONIGNVdXY] ALV] ‘€

“SFULUISEL PUL PULTVOT MeN ‘eTTEIYSNY 3deoxe spuEtsy Og} ITY

' “eTEUIEZUN) pues evoreuref
Aensniy) ‘euyuesry oq} ydeoxe eoweury qyNoS pue fer}Ue) jo 3TO"UM,
*(Zurpuedxe 9387)

eolyy q}ynos jo uoruy pue (AreuorzeS Sty) eruisskqy ydeoxe JUSTIZUOO sJoU A
‘aseyd Zurpuedxe 93e] 04} Ul axe YO

uedef pue oy jelA0S pure ‘I Japun Perequinu SapI}UNOD 4da0xe UaI}UOD BJOU MA
> [Jef 02 Sulpua} pue sazeI-q7.Nq UeYq}

IaMO] AT}U9zSISUOO SoqeI-qyeOp : Bayes Attpeays yOu ‘o"'I—sTqe1S A[ITe} pue—JIAO 10

‘armD

puesnoy} sod A310j—YSIy soze1-YyIIG : s[qeiferun pue AjURDS UdzO EEG “ONIGNVAXY ATUVA *

"elutssAqy ¢

‘eISIOg : "eIqery 2 ‘uRysTURYyssy 2 “JOqIT pue eur)

: $9781-G7IIq UL, soul SuTjeNnjong

$oze1-4}e9p [ITM Jnq ‘19q}0 yors aupuryeq Ayoyeurtxosdde pure ‘puesnoy} 10d 44103

J0AO—YSIY Y30q SoyeI-Y}eop pue YRIq : AJUeIS AIDA JO 4U9}SIXO-UOU BYE, “AUVNOILVIS HOI *I

Il ‘9

 

( Sunmen ) 2G

 

Si
wT

an!

hears, lll]

Punpuvdey

ore]

¢ Seta,

Pit

Tt
ov NA

 

Areuctye

BMIYSIO
svntssuey
vnafy

wispy

x

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXXIX, No. 3

wnafy
vsy

oy

PSC. n
ee GU
THE MEASUREMENT OF SOCIALLY

VALUABLE

QUALITIES

By H. J. EYSENCK

Psychological Department, Maudsley Hospital

wrote a book in which he described a

eugenic Utopia, called Kantsaywhere.
In this imaginary country “a system of
competitive examination for girls, as well as
for youths, had been so developed as to
embrace every important quality of mind
and body ”’; on the results of this examination depended the status of the individual,
as well as the number of children which he
would be permitted to raise. Reproductive
functions were to be regulated by an oligarchy selected by tests; social status was
decided by four tests which together took
only four hours. Plato’s republic, with the
philosopher-kings selected by psychological
tests—this is not an, unfair description of
Galton’s Utopia.

Kantsaywhere was projected into a distant
and visionary future when scientific methods
of psychological assessment had not only
been statistically validated, but also generally recognized and accepted. The present
paper, written some thirty-five years after
Galton’s fantasy, may be regarded as a
progress report ; it attempts to answer the
question—just how much nearer have we
come to a state of knowledge which would
make Galton’s Utopia more than an attractive but utterly impracticable conception ?

The answer to this question must be partly
in an optimistic, partly in a pessimistic, vein.
On the one hand, psychology has to record
tremendous advances, both with respect to
methodology and to factual knowledge.
While the advances in knowledge have been
made mainly in the field of intelligence testing, advances in methodology extend to the
fields of temperament and character as well.
We now know what are the important questions to ask, and what are the methods of
investigation which will enable us to return
the correct answer.

io the close of his life Galton

But on the other hand, certain debits must
also be recorded. There has been a failure for
psychology to become socially recognized,
and in consequence of this failure there has
been an almost absolute lack of public support. A mushrooming of pseudo-scientific,
“intuitive,’’ subjective, literary ‘‘ depth”
psychologies has succeeded in attracting the
attention of a public eager for plausible
“explanations ”’ of its present ills, and unwilling to bear with the cautious, restrained
and complex views of more scientific workers,
phrased in terms of probability rather than
of prophetic certainty.

’ Such public neglect has had certain inevitable consequences. The old view that good
scientific work could be done in laboratories
run on the “ shoe-string and sealing-wax ”’
principle might have been applicable fifty
years ago in physical science, but in these
days when shoe-string is rationed and
sealing-wax is only sold under the counter
the maxim loses much of its force. This is
particularly true in the social sciences, which
demand large-scale planning for the solution
of any of the complex problems they may
be asked to attack. |

As an example of this necessity for largescale research in the psychological field let
us take the measurement of a set of relatively simple, straightforward abilities, viz.
those involved in accurately aiming a bomb
at a target. The selection of bomb-aimers
was one of the tasks which psychologists were
called upon to perform during the war, and
they finally succeeded in this task beyond
expectation. Yet the solution of even such a
relatively simple problem involved the expenditure of millions of dollars, the participation of hundreds of psychologists, and the
testing of hundreds of thousands of subjects.
It is easy to see that the much more complex
problems involved in the measurement of

103
104

“civic worth,” say, or of the severity of
mental disorders, or in the inheritance of
nervous stability, would involve large-scale
organization of research in order to make
successful solutions possible. Yet for every
pound given to the physical sciences for research of one kind or another, the social
sciences obtain a miserly few pennies, hedged
round with restrictions, and devoted as often
as not to severely practical problems of no
fundamental importance. Under these conditions the promises held out by our advances in methodology may turn out to be
only dead fruits in our hands.

What then are these advances in methodology? Ultimately they stem from the
original inquiries of Galton, Pearson and
Spearman, and relate to the solution of one
of the most fundamental psychological problems in the field of personality measurement.
The problem in question is that of the
existence of psychological qualities. To the
layman, whose mind is conditioned by the
semantic training of medieval “ faculty ”
psychology, this question may appear nonsensical—of course, he will answer, there are
qualities such as honesty, imagination, suggestibility, intelligence, memory, intuition,
and so forth. To this assertion a powerful
and influential school of psychology, composed of believers in the specific nature of
conduct, has answered that ‘“‘ there are no
broad, general traits of personality, no
general and consistent forms of conduct
which, if they existed, would make for consistency of behaviour and stability of personality, but only independent and specific
stimulus-response bonds or habits.’”’ In other
words, a person may behave in an honest
manner on one occasion, in a dishonest
manner on another, depending on the specific
nature of the situation in question; it is
denied that there is any mythical quality of
“honesty ”’ or “ dishonesty ’’ which prompts
his action.

This view, which grew out of the “‘ transfer
of training ’’ experiments of William James,
has much to be said for it- James, and many
others after him, showed that the ancient
belief that certain “ faculties ’’ of the mind,
such as memory or logical aptitude, can be

THE EUGENICS. REVIEW

trained by making the child learn by heart
innumerable lines of Virgil, or by training
him in the supposedly logical Latin language,
is definitely false, and that training has results which are very specific. A child trained
to learn by heart stanzas from Milton’s
Paradise Lost would in all probability be
better in the future at learning by heart more
stanzas from Paradise Lost, or possibly even
from Paradise Regained, but he would not
improve in his ability to learn by heart
Swinburne’s Atalanta in Calydon, or Grey’s
Elegy, or Shelley’s Prometheus Unbound.

The extension of this belief in specificity
of learning to the sphere of conduct was
made by Thorndike, Watson and other behaviourists ; it found an apparently com-plete proof in the investigations of the
Character Education Enquiry. In this enquiry hundreds of tests were administered to
thousands of school children, in which they
were given the opportunity to lie, to cheat,
to steal, to behave in a co-operative or a
competitive fashion, to behave in various
socially desirable or undesirable ways. The
children were under the impression that their
actions were not being observed, and consequently acted as if social sanctions for
undesirable behaviour had been removed for
the time being. In actual fact, of course,
every detail of their activities was strictly
controlled by extremely ingenious experimental procedures.

When the data of this enquiry were
analysed, it was found that the correlations
between different tests were very low on the
average ; in other words, the child who
cheated in one type of situation showed very
little tendency to cheat more than any other
child in a second or third type; the child
who told the truth in one set of circumstances
was almost as likely to cheat, or to steal, as
the child who told a lie. In other words,
behaviour was shown to be specific to an
extraordinary extent.

This conclusion has been criticized on two
main grounds. In the first place, it has been
suggested that the traits studied were
wrongly chosen ; that honesty is an ethical
and a social, not a psychological, concept,
and that therefore the conclusions arrived at
THE MEASUREMENT OF SOCIALLY VALUABLE QUALITIES

on a basis of analysing honest and dishonest
behaviour may have no relevance to more
psychological types of variables. In the
second place, it has been pointed out that
traits such as honesty are presumably
acquired through social learning, and that
such learning has not had much time to take
place, and to create a firmly integrated type
of character, in a young child; conclusions
based on young children may not be true for
adults. Experiments have shown that indeed
for adults correlations are very much higher
than for children, and that for them at least
the doctrine of specificity only applies to a
relatively small degree. |

These results appeared to favour the
school of “‘ generality,” i.e. those who believe
in the existence and importance of those
broad, general traits of personality which the
“ specificity ’’ school deny. Theories of
generality have in the main taken two forms
—that of “type ’’ psychology on the Continent, and that of “ trait ’’ psychology in the
U.S.A. The differences between these two
ways of systematizing one’s thinking about
common or general factors in behaviour
have been much over-stressed in polemical
writing; they are of no great practical
importance.

The outcome of this great battle between
“ specificity ’’ and “ generality ’’ has been,
as so often in scientific matters, a recognition
that -both schools were right in what they
asserted, and wrong in what they denied ;
human conduct is both specific and general.
Our acts are determined both by broad,
general traits of personality, and by the
specific features of any particular situation ;
our problem is to find out (a) what are the
proportions in which specific and general
elements are active in any particular situation (test), and (b) what precisely are the
general factors we have to deal with, and
how can they be measured. Both these tasks
can be accomplished by the use of a statistical
technique called “factor analysis,” and
various subsidiary developments of this
technique, such as analysis of variance, for
instance.

It is impossible in the compass of this
paper to describe in detail the nature of these

105

techniques, but it is perhaps not too inaccurate to say that factor analysis attempts
to argue from the pattern of relations found
between a number of tests to the underlying
causes which may have been instrumental
in originating a pattern of such a kind. It is
thus firmly based on John Stuart Mill’s law
of “‘ concomitant variation,” deducing causal
relations (though not necessarily direct and
obvious ones) from significant co-variations
of different tests. Put very simply, the factor
analyst argues that when he finds that a
number of tests all using verbal problems
correlate very highly together, while another
group of tests all using non-verbal material
of the perceptual type also correlate highly
together, and that these two groups of tests
are themselves correlated to a significant
but rather lower degree, then it appears
likely that all the tests concerned involve a
rather general type of mental ability, and
that in addition the verbal group requires a
more specific “ verbal’ ability, while the
non-verbal group of tests requires a visuospatial type of ability.

In the intellectual field several such
factors, covering certain areas of considerable
breadth, have been discovered in addition to
Spearman’s general factor of intelligence,
called “‘ g.”” The pioneer work in connection
with these less broad, but equally important,
so-called “group factors” or “ primary
abilities ’’ was done by Sir Cyril Burt ; confirmation has recently come from American
workers like Thurstone and Holzinger. Thus
there appears general agreement that there
are broad abilities making for proficiency in
dealing with spatial relations, perceptual
speed, verbal relations, attentive processes,
word fluency, numerical relations, mechanical or practical problems, esthetic judgments,
and so forth. The isolation of these qualities,
which are undoubtedly “ socially valuable,”
is one of the proudest achievements of
modern psychology.

When it comes to the application of factorial methods to non-intellectual problems,
we find a much less developed state of affairs.
Here again, Spearman and Burt were the
first to give a broad survey of the field ;
Webb, one of Spearman’s students, Burt, in
106

a paper written at the time of the first
World War, and Garnett, in a re-analysis of
Webb’s data, showed that we may reasonably regard the non-cognitive field as structured around two main independent axes,
factors, or general qualities. First, we have
a scale of integration, leading from the highly
stable person, through the ordinary, run-ofthe-mill type of person, to the highly unstable, neurotic patient in the mental hospital. Secondly, we have a scale of extraversion-introversion, also leading from one extreme, through an intermediate belt of relatively ambiverted persons, to the other
extreme. Thus the réle which Spearman’s
““g’’ plays in the cognitive sphere is played
by the general factor of ‘‘ neuroticism ’’ in
the conative, and by the general factor of
“‘ extraversion-introversion ”’ in the affective
field (Eysenck, 1947). It is likely that other
broad general factors may still remain to be
discovered, and indeed in a recent book
entitled The Description and Measurement of
Personality, R. B. Cattell (1946), has shown
good reason to believe that about a dozen
altogether have already been identified with
sufficient accuracy to permit of attempts at
measurement.

With respect to measurement, it may be
said that here we have reached a stage rather
less advanced than that of the intelligence
tester. While in the field of personality
integration and extraversion-introversion we
are still in the strictly empirical sphere, intelligence testing has succeeded in elaborating principles (e.g. Spearman’s neo-genetic
principles) which permit of more rational
methods of test-construction. At the moment we can measure such a factor as personality integration with relatively high
accuracy ; however, our tests are not based
on any fundamental, rational, underlying
principle, but are merely of an empirical
kind, i.e. they are tests which have been
found in trial-and-error practice to give discriminative results.

This trial-and-error method follows rather
closely the validation methods of the intelligence tester. Just as he starts out with
a group of children of known dullness, and
compares them with a group who are known

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

to be bright, throwing out all those tests
which do not differentiate adequately between the two groups, so in the field of
temperament and character also the experimenter starts out with groups of known
neurotics and known “ stable ’’ persons, say,
trying out tests which to him appear likely
to differentiate between the two groups.
Successful tests are retained and improved ;
other tests are discarded. In this fashion it
is possible to build up a battery which in
efficiency of diagnosis is hardly inferior to
intelligence tests. Similar considerations
apply also to the measurement of introversion-extraversion.

The writer (1947) has given detailed
accounts of the more usual tests which are
used in this connection in his book Dzmenstons of Personality.

Unfortunately they cannot be described
in brief, but reference to just a few of them
may make clear the rationale on which they
are built. Thus psychiatrists tell us that
neurotics, particularly hysterics, lack persistence in pursuing their aims, and are easily
‘diverted from the steady work required to
reach these aims. A miniature situation is
therefore created in the laboratory in which
the subject may or may not show persistence
when diverted from the pursuit of some
arbitrary task by fatigue, boredom, or positive counter-attractions. To take but one
instance, the task may be that of “-word
building,’’ in which the subject is given a
number of letters and has to build up as
many words as he can from these disjointed
letters. No time limit is set, and it is found
that while the non-persistent hysteric gives
up after a few minutes, the persistent person
may go on for a very long time indeed.

Or again, it is often said that neurotics are
more suggestible than normal persons, and
consequently the psychologist may devise
a miniature situation requiring the subject to
react in some way to a frequently repeated
suggestion. Thus the suggestion may be that
the subject is falling forward; although he
tries to stand still and erect the neurotic is
found to be incapable of resisting this simple
suggestion, and in quite a high proportion of
cases actually falls forward, or at least sways
THE MEASUREMENT OF SOCIALLY VALUABLE QUALITIES

violently. The normal person usually has

little difficulty in resisting the suggestion.

Other types of tests involve the measurement of the reaction of different subjects to
experiences of success and failure, or the
measurement of the neurological concomitants of emotional excitement. Others again
rely on the tendencies of individuals to
“project ’”’ their own desires, wishes, and
problems on to others; the subject on being
presented with a picture showing some
rather indefinite situation involving a man
and a woman is likely to invent a story based
to some extent on his own personal experiences and difficulties when asked just what
he thinks is happening to the people in the
picture.

While we can thus measure our main personality factors, we know little about their
genesis, their distribution in the population,
their connection with age, sex, social status,
birth order, and so forth. Indeed, it is probably one of the main research tasks which
face us here: to make use of the newly
acquired methods of measuring personality
variables, and conduct. crucial and fundamental experiments into the factors which
determine the position of a given individual
on these trait-continua. The methods for
carrying out this research are at hand;
given the requisite social support there is

little doubt that within a few years psych
107

ology will have succeeded in giving at least
a preliminary answer to these burning questions—questions fundamental to psychiatry,
sociology, and indeed all the social sciences.

This, then, is the conclusion of our
progress report; psychology has made
astonishing progress in the few years since
Galton wrote. It has shown that the slogan
under which it began its career—‘ Everything that exists, exists in some quantity,
and can therefore be measured ’’—applies
equally to the mental as to the physical
world, equally to the field of character and
temperament as to that of intelligence.
These advances may rightly give us grounds
for satisfaction ; at the same time they must
not blind us to the enormous complexities
and the terrifying extent of the field still to
be investigated. The methods for solving
these problems are fairly well understood,
and their spheres of usefulness known ; it is
up to society to use them, and to help
psychology to advance to a state where
Galton’s vision will not appear a remote
prophetic dream, but merely a statement of
the obvious!

REFERENCES
Cattell, R. B. (1946). The Description and
Measurement of Personality. New York:
World Book Co.
Eysenck, H. J. (1947). Dimensions of Personality. London: Kegan Paul.

 

PHYSIOLOGICAL ZOOLOGY

In the July 1947 issue:
SOME RELATIONS BETWEEN TERRITORY, SOCIAL HIERARCHY AND LEADERSHIP IN

THE GREEN SUNFISH. By BERNARD GREENBERG.

EFFECTS OF CERTAIN

INDICATORS IN HYDRA. By C. M. CuiLtp

DEPRESSING AGENTS ON INTRACELLULAR OXIDATION

OF

y
AN ANALYSIS OF THE FACTORS INFLUENCING GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT OF THE
MAMMALIAN REPRODUCTIVE TRACTS. By Dorotuy PRICE.
ORIGIN OF PIGMENT CELLS FROM THE NEURAL CREST IN THE MOUSE. By Mary E.

RAWL
THE EFFECT OF TEMPERATURE ON THE INTERSEX CHARACTER OF DAPHNIA. By

KATHERINE K. SANFORD.

Edited by W. C. ALLEE, Professor of Zoélogy, The University of Chicago.
Quarterly by the University of Chicago Press.

English Agents: CAMBRIDGE

Published
Subscription: 57s. 6d. per year.

UNIVERSITY PRESS

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXXIX, No. 3
