REVIEWS OF BOOKS

GENETICS

Sonneborn, T. M. (Editor). The Control of Human
Heredity and Evolution. New York, 1965. The
Macmillan Company. (London, Collier-Macmillan.) Pp. xiii+-127. Price 15s. Paperback.

THIS INTERESTING LITTLE BOOK is the edited
record of a symposium held at Ohio Wesleyan
University in April 1963. It consists of three
parts, each consisting of formal lectures followed
by discussion. The lecturers in Part I were
Professor Luria, one of the leaders in viral
genetics, and Dr. Tatum, who with Beadle,
founded what we may call biochemical genetics.
Those in Part II were Dr. DeMars, a leading
authority on the genetics of human cells in tissueculture, and Professor Pontecorvo, famous for
his penetrating analysis of what genes are and
do. The single lecturer in Part III was Professor
H. J. Muller, an outstanding specimen of that
rare organism the all-round biologist. In addition
to his brilliant work on Drosophila genetics,
starting as a member of T. H. Morgan’s famous
pioneer team, and his outstanding discovery
that mutations can be artificially induced, he
has kept up with every aspect of evolutionary
biology, from its directive mechanism of natural
selection, to its results in the shape of detailed
adaptation and long-term trends. Among the
four discussants was Dr. Klein, the authority on
tumor-genesis, including genetic predisposition
and host-tumour relationships.

Parts I and II deal with the molecular and
cellular aspects of what may be called analytic
biology, whose primary aim is to analyse biological phenomena into their elements in evergreater detail. Its subsequent aim is to discover
how those elementary facts are built up to produce more complex organizations: but it must
be confessed that this has not yet penetrated
very far up into the almost incredible complexity
of a higher vertebrate or even an insect.

In this book we are given fascinating examples
of how DNA operates, how genes can be
functionally subdivided, how they are related to
enzymes; and of how viruses and bacteria work

28

and reproduce, how genetic transduction and
transformation operate (in viruses and bacteria),
how different mutagens may cause specifically
different kinds of mutations, how normal
human cells in tissue-culture can be made to
differentiate in different ways, including the
pathological way of becoming malignant, and
even to conjugate. These are all exciting and
theoretically fundamental discoveries. But,
frankly, they are a long way from any practical
application in animal breeding or human
eugenics.

Dr. Atwood repeats the hoary slander that
selective eugenics involves “forcing people to
breed in a directed manner’’, which merely shows
that he hasn’t listened to Muller’s lecture. He
does, however, envisage the possibility of ‘“‘really
complete technical mastery” over genes and
their operation in development, and goes on to
say that this would permit us to bypass the
“limited evolutionary process of stepwise mutation” (hardly any of the analytic biologists
mentions the fact that recombination is much
more important than mutation as a source of
variation), and achieve a goal directly without
worrying whether the intermediate stages are
disadvantageous. The examples he cites are pure
science fiction. Before we can dream of anything like this, we must master the complexities
of development, or epigenesis as Waddington
calls it, and must in all humility recall the fact
(elementary to the evolutionary biologist) that
every character depends on many genes, and
that small alterations in the constellations of
modifiers can produce large changes in the
phenotype: and in evolution, it is the phenotype
that counts.

Evolutionary (or organismal, or integrative)
biologists like Muller, on the other hand, know
this, and know that in any elaborate process,
each kind of organization must be studied
separately on its own level, before we can hope
to achieve an understanding of the process as a
whole. No one could have deduced the facts and
principles of evolutionary specialization and improvement from those of neo-Mendelian genetics,
REVIEWS OF BOOKS

any more than they could have deduced the
facts and principles of neo-Mendelian genetics
from those of the molecular structure of DNA
and RNA.

As a result, Muller is the only contributor
who has anything important to say about
eugenics. While acknowledging fully the scientific importance of recent discoveries in molecular genetics, “‘genetic engineering” etc., he
stresses the present impossibility of applying
them to the genetic improvement of any higher
organism, and reiterates his view (which appears
to me to be completely unassailable) that negative
eugenics is merely tinkering, and that positive
eugenics could perfectly well be begun on the
basis of our present knowledge of genetics and
selection, through what he calls voluntary
germinal choice—artificial insemination with the
sperm of a donor chosen by the couple concerned
for his qualities—whether of strength, intelligence, physical good looks, or moral qualities.
With the establishment of “‘sperm banks” of
deep-frozen sperm (and doubtless in the not too
distant future of ova banks too) such eutelegenesis, as Brewer has called it, could reverse the
apparent dysgenic trend of to-day and gradually
but steadily raise the genetic potentialities of the
population.

This is the way that evolution has made a
man out of a fish and a fish out of a protozoa,
but multiple voluntary germinal choice could
enormously speed up the process, while ensuring
variety in the results.

To sum up, I would say that anyone who
wants to keep abreast of the exciting and indeed
revolutionary discoveries of recent molecular and
cellular biology should read Parts I and II, but
that anyone who wants to keep abreast of
eugenic possibilities should read Part ITI.

JULIAN HUXLEY

Dobzhansky, Theodosius. Heredity and the
Nature of Man. London, 1965. Allen and Unwin.
Pp. x+179. Price 25s.

THIS 1S A book which arose from the Holiday
Science Lectures, sponsored by the American
Association for the Advancement of Science.
The purpose of the lectures, the author tells us,
is “to broaden the scientific horizons of the

audience and to communicate to them some of
the excitement and inspiration of the scientific
endeavour’’. Judged within this context, the book
undoubtedly succeeds in that the material is
interestingly presented, up-to-date and accurate,
and aims to convey to the non-specialist reader
not only a synopsis of recent discovery, but a
discussion of its implications for the future of
mankind.

One of the major difficulties of presenting
genetics to a mixed audience is the varied amount
of basic knowledge they will have, and it is
inevitable that in such a book the better informed
readers will find themselves skipping some of
the descriptive material of the earlier chapters,
but Dobzhansky’s compromise in this situation
has been a good one, for three reasons: because
the material is throughout treated in its relationship to man; because the author has (not without
some trepidation, one feels) been bold enough
to omit a great deal of elementary instruction
on Mendelian genetics; and because so much
of this part of the book is written as an exciting
history from Leeuwenhoek’s discovery of
spermatozoa to the chemical structure of genes
and chromosomes. Dobzhansky’s knowledge
of this history—not only of the chief highroads
but also of some of the by-ways—is very
impressive.

From this we come to Race, and to questions
of human diversity, to genetic load and radiation
hazard, each chapter discussing biological,
political and moral implications as well as
scientific knowledge, and finally a chapter on
man’s future in relation to cultural and biological
evolution and the control of environment.

Dobzhansky presents anew the arguments for
chance or design in evolution and shows how
the factors of chance in genetic recombination
are counteracted by the constant operation of
the anti-chance agency of natural selection.

None of this is new and the seeker for advanced
knowledge must remember that the book was
not written for him. Neither is it an elementary
textbook for beginners, but it is an interesting
and worthwhile discussion of questions which
are always worth re-examination, and it will be
of interest to many members of the Eugenics
Society.

ROBERT PLATT

29
