* Eugenics is the science which deals with all influences that improve the inborn qualities of a race; also
with those that develop them to the utmost advantage.’—SIR FRANCIS GALTON (1904)

The Eugenics Review

EDITORIAL OFFICES: THE EUGENICS SOCIETY * 69 ECCLESTON SQUARE * LONDON ° SWI ° VICTORIA 209!

Editor for the Society : Mrs. K. Hodson

 

NOTES OF THE
QUARTER

THE GALTON LECTURE 1966

THE SUBJECT OF the Galton lecture for 1966,
printed in this issue of the REVIEW, is the
relationship between stature and intelligence;
it is certainly one that would have greatly
interested Galton himself. With great thoroughness Dr. James Tanner establishes that the
association is a real one and discusses the
various theories that might account for it.

The association is apparent in school children,
but it is also to be seen in adults. Early physically
maturing children are bright, but this cannot
account for the association in adults, since early
maturerers do not end up tall. Size of family,
that is number of sibs, affects intelligence
(particularly verbal) test score in both children
and adults. Number of sibs also affects height in
children (in all but Social Class I and the
agricultural groups), but probably not height
in adults; number of sibs could, therefore,
account for an association in children, but would
not explain one in adults. Both intelligence and
height of children is associated with the social
class of the parents. There are indications
however that, within social classes, the brighter
children tend to be taller: boys who get to
University are taller than those in the same
social class who do not; the girls who marry
upwards in social class tend to be taller than
those who do not. Dr. Tanner notes that if the

ER—I

association is true within families (and withinfamily data are lacking at present) as well as
within the broader grouping of social class, it
could not be a social one and must be biological.
If biological, then is it a genetic association—
does a genotype that makes for high intelligence
also make for tallness? Or is it due to some
environmental effect, perhaps some inadequacy
of intra-uterine environment producing a permanent stunting of both body and mind? Probably
both hypotheses are true and there is much
interesting work to be done to elucidate this
point.

It is interesting to speculate whether the
association between intelligence and stature
holds between, as well as within, poplations.
Are the shorter ethnic groups duller than the
taller ?—probably not. It would also be interesting to know if the association is with the linear
dimension, stature, or with body size.

VARIATION IN PTC TASTING

IT HAS BEEN true for thirty years and more that
far more is known about geographical and racial
variations in the frequencies of the ABO genes
than is known about similar variations in any
other species, plant or animal. This, of course,
is because vast numbers of blood donors and
others are grouped for practical reasons, so
making available an enormous fund of readymade data. Some of the other blood group
systems have also made a big contribution, and
for the same reason. The contributions to
anthropology, in the widest sense, are very great.

It is now becoming clear that the number of

117
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

human polymorphisms having a simple genetic
basis is likely to become very large indeed in
the not remote future. All these polymorphisms
which show regional and other differences in
gene frequency—and most do—are potentially
as valuable as the ABO blood groups. The
difficulty is that routine testing of large numbers
for practical purposes is seldom needed. The
observer has to set out to make ad hoc surveys,
and, of course, the numbers needed for useful
results are nearly always very large. Yet it is
greatly to be hoped that such studies will be
increasingly undertaken. For this reason a
special welcome is due to Dr. Sunderland’s
paper, printed in this issue. He has produced
excellent evidence of geographical and probably
racial variation in relation to the frequency of
tasting of PTC in North-eastern England.
These variations complement and supplement
the previously known variations of ABO. It is to
be hoped that many more such studies will be
undertaken, both on PTC and on many another
human polymorphism.

ORAL CONTRACEPTION

DR. M. C. N. JACKSON writes: As_ readers
doubtless know, it was decided some two years
ago that the WHO should look into the problem
of the control of fertility, and a number of
expert committees have been convened which
have examined the scientific background. Their
findings and conclusions have already been
published in the Technical Report Series (nos.
280, 300, 303, 304, 305, 313, 326, 332) and much
valuable information will be found therein. The
Report on Clinical Aspects of Oral Gestogens*
is the first on the strictly practical side of the
matter.

Dr. R. T. Hill, on whose energy and great
insight—not only into the scientific and medical
aspects but also into the human side—the success
of the whole project depends, chooses his teams
with considerable care so that there is a nice
balance between those who think one way and
those who think another—what he calls his
‘“‘yes men” and his “no men’. This inevitably

* WHO. Clinical Aspects of Oral Gestogens. Technical
Report Series No. 326, Geneva, 1966. WHO. Pp. 24.
Price 3s. 6d. Obtainable from HMSO.

118

provokes considerable discussion during the
meetings and means that controversial aspects
are well and truly thrashed out.

Bearing this in mind the report on the oral
gestogens which, because of the nature of the
preparations under review includes both oestrogens and progestogens, can only be reassuring.
It is pointed out in the introduction that these
orally active steroids taken in a certain manner
provide the most effective means of controlling
fertility currently available and that their use
has increased enormously during the past five
or six years. It is estimated that in 1965 at least
5 million women were taking “the Pill’—and
now there must be many more.

The effect of these steroids on the body as a
whole and on the endocrine and generative
organs in particular is considered in the light of
available evidence. There was in fact very
considerable discussion on many points and a
certain amount of conflicting evidence emerged,
particularly from the animal experimental work ;
yet the final concensus of opinion was that there
is no material evidence that these preparations
are immediately harmful to the takers. The
evidence on long-term effects cannot be regarded
as complete but as far as it goes (ten years) it is
negative. Absolute contra-indications were considered in detail and very few seem to exist—
certain rare hereditary liver defects and recurrent
idiopathic jaundice of pregnancy being the only
conditions listed. A recent hepatitis or catarrhal
jaundice are only temporary contra-indications.
Varicose veins, veinous and arterial thromboembolic episodes in the past, on the available
evidence (mainly statistical), need not be regarded
as definite contra-indications. A tendency to put
on weight is a warning to beware of overeating;
when there is cardiovascular renal disease the
possibility of water retention and its adverse
effect must be borne in mind. It is also noted
that there are some women who feel vaguely
unwell while on orals, and are best taken off.

The effects on lactation are considered at some
length and it is concluded that high dose products
should certainly be avoided but that the whole
subject needs further investigation. The possible
influence of malnutrition or deficiency diseases
on the effects of long-term use of oral contraception also needs much further study and the
NOTES OF THE QUARTER

extreme importance of both these subjects for
the underdeveloped countries is stressed—as
is the need for more basic knowledge and more
field work in general.

WHO AND POPULATION CONTROL

THE RESOLUTION TO increase aid in family
planning training and programmes in developing
countries, which was adopted at the World
Health Assembly at Geneva recently, has not
been accepted by the World Health Organization.

In June of this year Great Britain put forward
a draft resolution which would have empowered
WHO to extend such services as “‘expert advice
on programme-planning and execution, training
of personnel, and programme evaluation” on
request from the countries desiring such help.
This proposal, which was supported by a number
of countries including the United States, India
and Pakistan, was defeated by a combination of
Communist and Roman Catholic states, who
were joined by some of the thinly populated
countries such as Canada and Australia, and
who voted for an earlier resolution which leaves
the existing mandate basically unchanged. This
states that WHO is to give “technical advice, upon
request, in the development of activities in
family planning, as part of an organized health
service, without impairing its normal preventive
and curative functions’.

-The Vatican’s special commission on birth
control and related population problems has
now completed its reports and the summaries
have been handed to the Pope, who has made it
clear that he reserves the final decision to himself; this decision may indeed have been
published by the time these words are read. On
it may depend the chances of a resolution, on
similar lines to that adopted by the Assembly,
meeting with a lesser weight of opposition if it
is put to the World Health Organization at
some later date.

THE SIMON POPULATION TRUST
THE SIMON POPULATION Trust, which was
founded in 1961 under the Will of Lord Simon
of Wythenshawe, has as its aims the promotion
of a better understanding of the problems of

world population and resources, and the encouragement of such research, education or
other actions in any part of the world as may
contribute to the adjustment of population to
resources.

In April 1966 the Trust put forward a proposal
for voluntary sterilization for family welfare.
This proposal took the form of a statement
published in the Lancet* under the names of
Dr. C. P. Blacker, Chairman of the Trust, and
of Dr. L. N. Jackson, Director of the sterilization
project. It was the subject of a leading article in
the same issue and was followed, two weeks
later, by a letter from Dr. Blacker in which he
stressed the legality of the operation—primary
vasectomy was unheard of until thirty years after
the Offences against the Person Act was passed
in 1861—provided that the valid consent of
both husband and wife had been obtained and
that the operation was carried out in good faith.

Dr. Blacker’s survey of voluntary sterilization
in this REVIEWT will be remembered, as will
the article by the legal correspondent of the
British Medical Journal which we reprinted.t
This quoted Lord Justice Devlin’s opinion that,
although the traditional view was that sterilization was forbidden by the law of criminal
assault, an assault should not be treated as
criminal if it was done either to avert danger to
life or grave danger to health; or with the
consent of the other party and for a purpose not
otherwise criminal. Now, five years later, the
Medical Defence Union’s booklet Consent to
Operation includes for the first time a form of
consent to voluntary sterilization.

The stated aim of the Sterilization Project for
Family Welfare is to make known how voluntary
sterilization can help to solve some family
problems and can facilitate, under simple safe
guards, the practice of family limitation in the

United Kingdom. It offers practical advice to
patients and doctors and seeks to encourage
research on how fertility may be restored after
sterilizing operations.

The Lancet article reports follow-up inquiries
on sterilized persons in the USA, Canada, India
and Japan but the project appears to be confined

* 1966, i, 971.
Tt 1961-62, 53, 145; 54, 9, 143.
} 1961, 53, 33.

119
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

to the United Kingdom at present. It may be
supposed that, in view of the Trust’s aims quoted
in the first paragraph of this Note, there is an
ultimate intention to support sterilization for
population control as well as for family welfare.

OBITUARY

Margaret Pyke, OBE

IT IS WITH great regret that we record the
death on 19th June 1966 of Mrs. Margaret Pyke.
Mrs. Pyke’s links with the Eugenics Society go
back to 1930 when she became secretary to the
National Birth Control Council and Dr. C. P.
Blacker, at that time General Secretary of this
Society, was a member of the NBCC Executive
Committee.

Mrs. Pyke was elected Honorary Life Fellow
of the Eugenics Society in March 1953 and was
elected to the Council in 1954; she served as a
Councillor until 1963 and was appointed VicePresident for her last three years of this term
of office. She was again elected to the Council in
1964 and served until her death; she was also a
member of the Executive Committee from 1959
to 1963. She served on the Marie Stopes Committee, which was appointed in 1959 by the
Eugenics Society’s Council to act on its behalf
in carrying out the terms of Dr. Stopes’s bequest
to the Society. In 1960 she became a member of
the Company—The Marie Stopes Memorial
Foundation Limited—which was formed by the
decision of this Committee and was appointed
a Board member and Convenor of the Clinic
Committee.

In December 1957 the Eugenics Society’s
Jubilee Dinner was held. Margaret Pyke, who
was to have responded to the toast of The
Eugenics Society, was unfortunately prevented
from being present but she had prepared her
speech which was read for her.* In October of
that year she had taken part in a debate, held
at a Members’ Meeting of the Society, ““That the
Population of the United Kingdom should be
Stabilized at Forty Million’.t Mrs. Pyke was
the Society’s Galton Lecturer for 1963; she
spoke on “Family Planning: An Assessment” f.

* The Eugenics Review, 1958-59, 50, 15-17.
+ Ibid., 1957-58, 49, 178-9.
t Ibid., 1953-54, 55, 71-9.

120

Those parts of the Lecture which deal with the
history of the Family Planning Association are
to a large extent a record of Margaret Pyke’s
professional life for, as we have seen, she started
work as secretary to the NBCC thirty-six years
ago and became Honorary Secretary of the
National Birth Control Association in 1937,
two years before its name was changed to the
Family Planning Association. During these
thirty-six years the number of clinics increased
from under twenty to more than 540. She was
elected Chairman of the Executive Committee
of the FPA in 1955, and was still in this office
when she died. Her interests naturally extended
to the International Planned Parenthood Federation where she succeeded Dr. C. P. Blacker as
Administrative Chairman in May 1960 and was
a member of the Governing Body and Chairman
of the Management and Planning Committee.
The extent of the debt which family planning
owes to Margaret Pyke will be set out more fully
in the journals linked with the movement; here
we can but record on behalf of the Council of
the Eugenics Society its deep sense of loss which
will be shared by many Fellows and Members of
the Society.

PROFESSOR A. S. PARKES writes: The death
of Margaret Pyke came as a sad blow to
her countless friends and admirers throughout the world. Death is inevitable and comes
to all sooner or later, but it is difficult
to realize that so vigorous and dynamic a
personality is no longer with us. The story of
her life’s work is indeed a remarkable one. An
outline is recorded above, but this gives little
idea of the outstanding personality and remarkable qualities of the woman who played so great
a part in the foundation and development of the
Family Planning Association and the International Planned Parenthood Federation, and
who was so valued a colleague in the councils of
the Eugenics Society. Her interests were many
and varied, but above all must be reckoned her
devotion to the idea of family planning as the
means of freeing woman from the burden of
unwanted pregnancies. During her various
periods of office with the FPA, family planning
emerged from the back streets into the full light
of public discussion and wide acceptance, and
NOTES OF THE QUARTER

it did so in the teeth of social, legal and religious
taboos, and in the face of crass ignorance.
It was due in no small measure to Margaret
Pyke’s devoted work with the FPA, which has
done so much for so many people, that even if
official support is still less than might be hoped
for, active opposition other than that based on
religious dogma has fallen away to little more
than a facade.

Margaret Pyke’s great achievements rest on
two characteristics—her skill in handling people,
committees and organizations and her extraordinary tenacity of purpose. I tried to summarize
these qualities in my introduction to her Galton
Lecture, and what I said then remained true
up to the end. I said “First, she has a way
with her. It is almost impossible to say ‘no’
when Mrs. Pyke asks one to do something. If
one does manage to say ‘no’ one feels little
short of a scoundrel later. Second, Mrs. Pyke
never gives up—I have often been amazed at her
resilience and stamina in the face of strain and
stress”. I have had personal experience of both
these qualities. Of the former I need say only
that on many occasions I have been a happy

victim of her persuasiveness. Of the latter I need
only recall that on her way out to the 1959
IPPF Congress in New Delhi she was overtaken
by a debilitating malady which kept her
confined to bed during most of the conference
but did not prevent her by sheer willpower from
attending the meetings of the Governing Body
which were held during the Conference and at
which she was instrumental in the setting up of the
Research Committee of the Federation.

I concluded my introduction to her Galton
Lecture with these words: “‘There is no one in
the world for whom I would more willingly

take the Chair than Margaret Pyke and no one

I could introduce to an audience with greater
pleasure’. I like to recall that I had this opportunity of paying tribute to her, face to face in
public, while she was alive.

Her death has caused an extraordinary sense
of loss among us. Things will never be quite the
same again, but at least we have the satisfaction of
knowing that during her long and tremendously
active life this very gallant woman, with a
few others like her, changed the course of
human history.

121
