THE PHYSIOLOGY OF FERTILITY IN MAN
AND MONKEY"

By S. ZUCKERMAN, M., D.Sc. MRCS.
(Bett Memorial Research Fellow)
From the Depariment of Human Anatomy, Oxford

subject of far greater moment to

politicians and vital statisticians
than to biologists. A reproductive machine
that on almost all sides was presumed to
work too well, whose infinite capacities for
multiplication could raise the spectre of the
complete exhaustion of the world’s supply
of food, appeared too obvious in its manner
of working to attract the strong interest of
scientists ; neither did it require their close
attention in order to discover means for preventing its free expression. Malthusian doctrine presented to the world the menace of
unbounded human fertility. Sterility, as
Enid Charles has written, became enthroned
as one of the cardinal virtues.t It is thus no
matter for surprise that the physiological
problems of man’s own fertility, unlike that
of his domestic animals, were something to be
ignored rather than investigated. The last
few years have seen the beginnings of a
complete change in point of view. Kuczynski's new methods of population analy is
have emphasized the fact that reproduction,
both in North-West Europe and in other
regions inhabited by Europeans, is proceeding at so dangerously slow a rate that,
unless a pronounced change in its trend
occurs, the populations concerned will soon
be greatly diminished in numbers, and profoundly altered in age-group constitutions.{
A similar trend has been diagnosed in countries as recently industrialised as Japan, and

| UMAN fertility has always been a

* A lecture delivered before the Eugenics Soctety on
January 21st, 1936.
{ Charles, E. 1934. The Twilight of Parenthood.
London. Watts.
¢ Charles, E. Jbid.
—— 1935. Roy. Econ. Soc., Mem
Kuczynuski, R. R. 1935. Ecnomicae : (N.S.), 128.

37

I am guilty of little or no exaggeration in
saying that, in general, human reproduction
and replacement are to-day taking place at
as slow a rate as is compatible with survival,
and that in certain regions of the globe even
this is not being achieved. The human reproductive machine no longer appears a dangerously perfect mechanism.

It is not my function in this lecture to
examine the modern trend in population
growth, nor to discuss the sociological factors,
economic and psychological, that have
brought it about. Neither is it my business
to discuss the biological problems concerned
with the deliberate limitation of fertility.
My task is to consider the physiological
events which are concerned in the full expression of human fecundity. The basic facts,
which will be treated more closely later, can
be simply stated. A normal adult woman has
about thirty years of reproductive life. At
most thirteen, and frequently fewer, times a
year she liberates at twenty-eight-day intervals what is almost always a single ovum.
Each ovum lives at most a day. Unless insemination occurs frequently, the chances of
an ovum meeting a viable sperm are remarkably few (for sperms have a correspondingly
short life). When pregnancy, and then lactation, supervene, further ovulation and further
conception are inhibited for some twelve
months.

Thus assuming a woman to be reproducing
at a theoretical maximum rate, and disregarding the possibility of multiple births, she
could produce some thirty offspring in her
lifetime. Whether or not any woman has
achieved such fruitfulness I do not know.
When viewed against the picture of fertility
in the rest of the animal world, such theoretically maximal fecundity would, however,
38 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

not be excessive. The replacement rates of
certain fish, even allowing for the incredible
mortality which prevents more than ten or
fewer in a million surviving to maturity, are
enormously higher. Indeed, as low a limit of
fertility as that of Man finds its counterpart
perhaps only among a few other mammals.

Even if a theoretical maximum output is
regarded as its measure of efficiency, the
human reproduction machine is thus clearly
inferior to that of almost all other living
things. The theoretical maximum output
in Man is however ridiculously in excess of
the actual reproduction rate. I am not, as I
have said, going to deal with the deliberate
measures, which, following on a fairly widespread acceptance of the relation between
insemination and conception, are taken by
Man in order to prevent reproduction.
There are, however, many limiting factors to
reproduction which operate without any
general awareness of their existence, and
which to a large extent are uncontrollable.
For example there are those limitations to
more frequent sexual behaviour, and to a
richer reproductive life which, as Hogben
has argued,* are an automatic outcome of
modern developments in social hygiene, and
in the technique of living generally. With
these limitations, also, we need not concern
ourselves in this lecture. On the other hand,
physiological and pathological processes
which militate against a richer fertility
need to be briefly considered before we
examine the phenomena of ovulation and
fertilization, the two events which in the last
analysis, impose the conditions whose satisfaction is essential to fertility. The wider
limiting factors can be divided into two
groups: first, the general physiological
factors (for example those which demarcate
the total period of a woman’s reproductive
life) that affect all women: second, those
special genetical and pathological factors
which contribute to the production of differential fertility.

* Hogben, L. 1931. Genetic Principles in Medicine
and Social Science. London. Williams and Norgate.

GENERAL PHYSIOLOGICAL LIMITING
FACTORS

Seasonal Variations 1n Birth-Rate

Most vertebrates are incapable of reproduction except during one period of the year,
different species having different breeding
seasons. Thus polar bears are born only
during the middle of winter, while all
Californian sea-lions see the world for the
first time between June 15th and July 15th.
If a female polar bear fails to conceive, or
does not mate, during the mating season
which precedes the general “ birthday ”’ of

‘its species, it cannot again become pregnant

until the succeeding mating period. This is
an obvious restriction to fertility, from which,
however, Man does not suffer. For him
birthdays are an event for the individual,
not for the species. All the members of our
zoological order, the Primates, are not the
same in this respect.* Thus most lemurs
have a restricted breeding season, and the
same may possibly be true of a few of the
South American monkeys. On the other
hand the available evidence for Old World
monkeys and apes clearly suggests that
these animals breed at all times. It also
shows that marked seasonal variation may
occur in their birth-rates. For example,
most Hamadryas baboons are born in
November, while April to June are the
favoured months for births among Rhesus
monkeys. This fact either implies that some
months of the year are unfavourable for
ovulation and spermatogenesis, or that the
particular physiological processes which act
as a spur to overt sexual behaviour slow
down at those times. Two such mechanisms
inhibiting reproduction could operate together. Whatever is the correct explanation,
there can be no doubt, since monkeys always
have the opportunity for mating, that
seasonal variations in their birth-rates are
physiologically determined.

Seasonal variations also occur in the
human birth-rates of certain countries.f
They show themselves better, I understand,

* See Zuckerman, S. 1932. Proc. Zool. Soe., London,
Pp. 1059.

+ See Marshall, F. H. A. 1922. The Physiology of
Reproduction. London. Longmans, Green and Co.
THE PHYSIOLOGY OF FERTILITY IN MAN AND MONKEY 39

in data relating to illegitimate than in data
regarding legitimate births. While most
observers ascribe all the variations that
occur to social traditions and economic
causes, some infer from such facts as the
greater frequency of conceptions in parts of
the Northern hemisphere during spring and
mid-summer, an innate tendency to greater
reproductive capacity at those times. The
love feasts and related festivals of certain
peoples are also regarded as evidence pointing to the same conclusion. Such data are
obviously very unsatisfactory for drawing
conclusions. At present, the strongest support for the view that Man’s reproductive
capacities may vary seasonally owing to
uncontrollable physiological factors would
seem to come from the fact that the reproductive capacities of monkeys do. This,
however, is poor support. The question is a
significant one, and if there are undiscovered
physiological factors which tend to reduce
human fertility at certain times of the year,
they should be sought for.

Puberty and Menopause

The most obvious limitations to human
fertility are set by puberty and the menopause, and my chief excuse for discussing
these topics to-day, is first, the not-remote
possibility that both will become controllable
events, and second, the growing recognition
that puberty and reproductive capacity are
not synonymous terms.

The physiological activity of the gonads is
dependent on the functioning of the anterior
lobe of the pituitary. If this organ is removed
from an experimental animal, the ovaries
or testes, and the accessory reproductive
organs (which in turn are dependent on the
testicular or ovarian secretions), all atrophy.
If some other animal’s pituitary is implanted
into one whose pituitary gland has been
Temoved, the reproductive organs again
become functional. If the same experiment
is done with immature animals—in particular females—the reproductive organs
immediately mature and become active.
Moreover they can be maintained in that
condition by adequate administration of the
activating substances of the pituitary.

Puberty and the menopause are generally
believed to be controlled by the anterior lobe
of the pituitary. During infancy and childhood, the gland does not elaborate its
gonadotropic secretions, for the reason,
according to some, that it is then actively
promoting growth. As the process of active
growth slows up, the gland begins to pour
its reproductive hormones into the circulation, and these immediately affect the ovaries
or testes, as the case may be, both by promoting the secretion of their essential hormones
(which in turn act on the accessory reproductive organs), and by stimulating the
maturation of sperms or ova. The number
of separate gonadotropic hormones produced
by the pituitary is still disputed. Some
workers hold that a single factor is responsible not only for the growth of the ovarian
follicles but also for their rupture (ovulation),
and for the conversion of the ruptured
follicles into corpora lutea, organs of internal
secretion whose hormonal products are
concerned in maternal processes. Other
investigators believe that more than one
gonadotropic factor exists.

Only the first phase of the full ovulation
cycle is experienced for a long period after
the process of reproductive maturation
(puberty) sets in both in Man and monkeys.
The anterior lobe of the pituitary presumably
undergoes waves of activity during which it
elaborates only a follicular-maturation hormone, or only enough of a general gonadotropic hormone, to cause development of the
ovarian follicles. The hormone produced by
the developing follicles causes growth of the
uterine mucosa, and when the wave of
pituitary activity comes to an end, the wave
of follicular growth it stimulated also ceases,
so that the uterus no longer comes under the
influence of the follicular hormone. As a
result, a retrogressive uterine phase sets in
and menstruation occurs. The first menstrual cycles after puberty probably always
follow this course, 7.¢., the first menstrual
cycles experienced by women are usually
unaccompanied by ovulation.* Hence it

* See Hartman, C. G. 1931. Science, 74, 226.
Mikulicz-Radecki, F. v., and Kausch, E.
Zentralbl. f. Gyn., Pp. 2290.

193540

was that the Trobriand Islanders studied by
Malinowski never conceived in their early
youth in spite of unrestricted sexual licence.*
Hence, too, births rarely occur before the
third year of effective marital relationship in
Indian ‘‘ child marriages.”

Monkeys and apes show a similar latent
period between the onset of puberty and
the attainment of effective reproductivity.
It seems likely that this latent period is a
physiological characteristic that applies
generally to all Old World Primates—allowing of course for the usual individual
exceptions. If the present growth of knowledge of pituitary mechanisms is maintained,
there can be little doubt that before long
the process of puberty will be amenable—if
such a thing is ever required—to deliberate
control.

As maturation proceeds, the waves of
pituitary gonadotropic activity become more
effective, and determine complete cycles of
follicular growth, including both ovulation
and corpus luteum formation. Conception
then becomes possible, and continues possible in almost every cycle until the
menopause. I use the word “almost” deliberately, for it has been thoroughly established on monkeys,t and the fact confirmed
clinically on women,{ that ovulation may

fail to occur during some menstrual cycles of

completely healthy individuals. The clinical
evidence is derived from chance observations
made during abdominal operations, and from
observations of curettings of the uterine
lining, which takes on characteristic and
unmistakable appearances in respect to the
occurrence or non-occurrence of ovulation.
The failure of ovulation is na doubt often due
to some aberration of pituitary function, the
cause of which is at present unknown.
Though it is said that some women can tell,
by the appreciation of mammary gland
changes, whether or not they have ovulated

* Malinowski, B. 1932. The Sexual Life of Savages.

London. Routledge.
gig G. W. 1927. J. Amer. Med. Assoc., 89,
1838.

} Allen, E., Pratt, J. P., Newell, Q. U., and Bland,
L. J. 1930. Contrib. Embryol., Carnegie Inst. Washington, 22, 45.

Novak, E. 1930. J. Amer. Med. Assoc., 94, 833.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

in any given cycle, there is no means of
prophesying about the possible occurrence
or non-occurrence of future ovulations. It is,
of course, conceivable that some women are
more prone to anovulatory cycles than are
others, and that they are consequently less
fertile.

The occurrence of anovulatory cycles
raises the interesting question of their
possible relation to the well-known fact,
which has been established statistically,
that fertility decreases progressively from
almost the beginning of the child-bearing
period. Figures which display this fact well
are those relating to births in Sweden in
1891, data which, according to Charles,* are
widely used as a standard of comparison by
authorities on population in this country.

Birth-rates per 1,000 wives in different age

groups
15-19 vee 518
20-24 451
25-29. 375
30-34 312
35-39 250
40-44 sce 142
45-49 _ 20

It has been suggested, so I understand,
that these data indicate that the reproductive capacity of normal healthy women, as
a result of specific and uncontrollable
physiological factors, decreases almost from
the moment of its establishment. The fact,
pointed out by Charles, that “‘ the fertility
of newly married women of a given age is
greater than that of women of the same age
who have been married longer’’ would,
however, seem to argue against this view,
except, of course, that it would still be
possible to maintain that such a decline
always begins only after the start of actual
reproduction. If physiological factors are
responsible for the progressive decrease in
fertility, they must operate either by decreasing the incidence of ovulation, or by
increasing the incidence of abortion. It is
also possible that spermatotoxins are produced in the body of the female, which act

* Charles, E.

1934. The Twilight of Parenthood.
London. Watts.
THE PHYSIOLOGY OF FERTILITY IN MAN AND MONKEY 41

adversely on sperms.* It is, however, even
more likely that both the practice of contraception and a decreased incidence of coitus
are also involved in the progressive decrease
in the relative frequency of births during the
child-bearing period. The problem raises an
important issue in the consideration of
fertility, and the difficulty of separating
deliberately contrived influences from those
that are physiologically determined (both of
which may be operating in producing the
effect of a diminishing fertility in Man),
makes it essential that the question be
examined on laboratory animals. Investigation of monkeys or apes would provide the
most useful information, since they are most
akin to us zoologically, but to my knowledge
they have not been studied from this point of
view. In some other animals that have been
investigated, for example micef, there does
appear to be an inverse relation between the
degree of parity and the number of young
born per litter.

All ovarian activity comes to an end after
the menopause sets in, usually between the
ages of 45 and 50. The menopause is probably
a more gradual and less abrupt event than
it is popularly supposed to be. During its
establishment ovulation first becomes irregular before ceasing altogether. It is to chance
and unexpected ovulations occurring after
the menopause is supposed to have taken
place that many late pregnancies are due.

It is not altogether certain that the postmenopausal cessation of ovarian activity is
due to a decline in the gonadotropic activity
of the pituitary. The urine of post-menopausal and castrated women contains large
quantities of that fraction of the gonadotropic hormone which promotes growth of
the ovarian follicles.{ It is conceivable that
the initial menopausal change lies in the
ovaries themselves, and is such as to raise
their threshold to the gonadotropic hormones
of the pituitary. In view of the desirability

* See Pommerenke, W. T. 1928. Physiol. Zool., 1,

97, Parkes, A.S. 1924. Brit. J. Exper. Biol., 2, 21.
See also Marshall, F. H. A. Loe. cit. p. 38.
} See Frank, R. T. 1935. in Glandular Physiology
and Therapy. ‘Chicago. Amer. Med. Assoc

of exercising some control over the menopause, not only from the clinical but also
from the point of view of prolonging reproductive life, it is obviously necessary that
the phenonemon should be more closely
studied in laboratory animals than it has
been.

The human male, as is well known, does
not suffer so abrupt a menopause as do
women. Some writers describe a corresponding but slower process in men, occurring as a
rule at some time during the sixties. Exceptions are nevertheless very frequent. Motile
and possibly fertile sperms have been
recovered from a man of 95.*

So far I have considered only general
physiological factors that limit fertility.
Before passing on to what can be termed
differential limiting factors, there is one
further normal physiological limiting factor
that I shall just mention—namely the
number of ova a woman liberates at a single
ovulation. Usually, of course, it is one, and
twins are born only once in about eightyseven births. The single ovulation of Man is
a characteristic inherited from, or perhaps
better expressed as belonging to, the whole
group of Old World Primates from which
Man springs. Twin births among African
and Asiatic monkeys and apes appear to be
at least as rare as they are in Man.t

DIFFERENTIAL LIMITING FACTORS

It has been estimated that ro per cent. of
martiages in which nocontraceptive measures
are taken prove sterile.{ Such sterility
depends on a variety of factors, whose consideration properly belongs to clinical discussions of sterility rather than to a lecture
such as this. A brief outline of the factors
concerned would not, however, be out of
place.

Genetical Factors

I would first remind you of the widely
accepted belief that some otherwise normal

* See Forsdike, S. F.
London. Lewis.

¢ See Yerkes, R. M. 1934. Science, 79, 430.

¢{ Meaker, S. R. 1934. Human Sterility.
Bailliare, Tindall, & Cox.

1928. Sterility in Women.

London.
42 | THE EUGENICS REVIEW

people may be poor breeders, and that a
low fertility may thus have a genetic basis.
Numerous corresponding instances of low
and high fertility are known in animal husbandry. The Leghorn fowl, for example,
lays many more eggs per year than do other
breeds of fowl. The Dorset Horn sheep is
outstandingly prolific. Hammond, again,
has isolated two definite strains of rabbits,
differing genetically, with widely different
fertility rates.* The immediate factors
affecting biological differential fertility are
varied, but may roughly be grouped as (a)
those which influence the number of ovulations, (b) those which affect the number of
sperms liberated, and (c) those which determine the extent to which fcetal atrophy
occurs.

It has at times been suggested that basic
genetic factors Jie behind the differential
fertility of different ethnic stocks—for
example behind the differences in crude
birth-rates of negroes and whites in the
United States, but it is doubtful if this is
the true explanation. As a general rule
differences in birth-rates can be explained
away by occupational differences and by
differences in social customs. Pearl’s figures
on the effects of contraception on the fertility
of whites and negroes show not only a
remarkable similarity in the innate natural
fertility of the two groups, but also that the
same kind of relationships between contraception and mean pregnancy rates exists in
comparable economic classes taken from
both. t

Pathological Factors

For obvious reasons a genetically-determined low breeding capacity would be
difficult to recognize in any given individual.
Fortunately, however, most patients under
treatment for sterility present some diagnosable pathological or congenital abnormality. As a general rule, several contributory causes, both male and female, determine
the sterility of any given marriage. Female
factors predisposing to sterility outnumber

* Hammond, J.
Pouliry Journal, 19.
t Pearl, R. 1934. Human Biology, 6, 355.

1934. Harper Adams Utility

corresponding male factors in the ratio of
two to one,* but there are estimates which
attach an even greater share of the blame to
the male. Sometimes his incapacity is due
to inefficient spermatogenesis, following on,
as is now believed, inefficient endocrine
functioning of the anterior lobe of the
pituitary. Sometimes it is due to some congenital defect which prevents the proper
introduction of the sperm. More usually,
however, male sterility is due to an inflammatory disease—for example, venereal
diseases and mumps—having produced
changes in the reproductive tract incompatible with fertility. Corresponding abnormalities lead to sterility in women, in whom
congenital abnormalities of the reproductive
tract are at least as common as in the male,
and in whom inflammatory diseases, new
growths, and other disorders of the reproductive tract—all conditions partly or
wholly incompatible with fertility—are
probably commoner. Thus sterility in women
is sometimes due to imperfect gametogenesis,
sometimes to difficulties of fertilization,
sometimes to an inability to carry through
with gestation—a not uncommon disability
which frequently passes unnoticed since
miscarriages, it is generally believed, occur
mostly in the earliest stages of pregnancy.

Dietary Factors

Before passing on to discuss the essential
physiology of conception, there is one last
point which requires mention—namely the
effect of dietary deficiencies on fertility.
Experimental work on laboratory animals—
in particular, rats—has shown that reproduction is impossible if animals are maintained
on inadequate diets.t Two factors which
have been found to be indispensable are
Vitamin A and Vitamin E. The physical
changes which occur in the animal, and in
the reproductive organs particularly, following deprivation of these two .accessory
dietary factors are very constant. Vitamin E
has been shown to be a specifically sex

* Meaker, S. R. Loe. cit. p. 41.
+ See Evans, H. M. 1932. J. Amer. Med. Assoc, 99,

469

 

1932. Amer. J. Phystol., 99, 477.
THE PHYSIOLOGY OF FERTILITY IN MAN AND MONKEY 43

vitamin, the main and almost only effects of
its absence being resorption of foetuses and
degeneration of testicular epithelium. The
specific change in the reproductive organs
following deprivation of Vitamin A is also
testicular degeneration. Vitamin E occurs
in such foods as fresh lettuces and cereals
and is probably never missing from any
human diet.

Man is notoriously capable of reproduction
even in states of considerable inanition, for
example that which accompanies either
advanced cancer or tuberculosis. Nevertheless Meaker, a leading expert in the treatment
of sterility, believes that many instances of
human infertility can be cured by making

corrections in the diets of the people concerned.

THE PHYSIOLOGY OF FERTILIZATION

Such then are the physiological factors
which set general limits to fertility, and the
pathological conditions, largely uncontrollable, which tend to reduce human fecundity
still further within these limits. We can
now examine, against the background I
have roughly sketched, the mechanism of
fertilization itself. Recent research has
shown that the conditions for effective
fertilization are much more fixed and
specific than is generally supposed; they
must be properly understood if the most
fundamental limiting factors to fertility are
to be appreciated. Effective fertilization
demands the meeting of a viable sperm and
a viable ovum, and it is therefore necessary
to know the time of ovulation in the menstrual cycle, the length of life of the ovum,
and the length of life of the sperm, in order
to define the conditions necessary for
conception.

The Time of Ovulation

Ovulation is a spontaneous event which
occurs only once in each menstrual cycle.
This fact has been established by experimental work on isolated mature monkeys,
and it is not controverted by any sound
clinical data. The view is sometimes advanced that although spontaneous regular

ovulation may be the rule, the human female
sometimes ovulates at irregular times as a
result of the stimulus of coitus. A corresponding mechanism of ovulation is the
normal characteristic of ferrets and rabbits.
To my knowledge, the hypothesis as it refers
to human beings has never been supported
by any adequate data; on the other hand,
as both Hartman and Knaus have argued,*
it is incompatible with a large number of
fully reliable facts. Two further considerations make it an improbable hypothesis.
The first is the established conclusion, to
which I have already referred, that women,
like Old World monkeys, are far more prone
not to ovulate in any given menstrual cycle
than to ovulate too readily. The second is
that ovulation is an event which can occur
only at the end of a phase of follicular
maturation. All the acceptable histological
data, both from human beings and from subhuman Primates, indicate that follicles
normally ripen to the point of bursting only
during a brief part of the middle period of
the cycle. This fact clearly limits the
applicability of the hypothesis we are discussing. Even assuming that coitus could
stimulate a ripe follicle to burst, ovulation
brought about in this wav would occur
only during the period wh. ovulation
normally takes place independently of the
stimulus of coitus.

This period, as I have just indicated, is as
a rule confined to the middle of the cycle.
A great deal of evidence supports this conclusion. Some of it is derived from the study
of monkeys, and some has been obtained
from the study of clinical material and clinical
records. As several investigators have in
recent years summarized the evidence in
detail,} it is unnecessary here to do more than

* Hartman, C. G. 1932. in Sex and Internal Secretions. Edited by Edgar Allen. Baltimore. Williams
and Wilkins.

Knaus, H., 1934. Pertodic Fertility and Sterility in
Women. Vienna. Maudrich.

¢t See, for example, Hartman, C. G. 1932. In Sex
and Internal Secretions.

——— 1933. Amer. J. Obst. Gynec., 26, 600.

Knaus, H., Loc. cit.

Zuckerman, S. 1930. Proc. Zool. Soc., London,
p. 691.

Shaw, W. 1934. Brit. Med. J., i, 7.
44

refer to the variety of observations on which
the conclusion rests. Observations on
monkeys, which have essentially the same
kind of menstrual cycle as women, comprise :
(a) direct inspection of the ovaries at different
times of the cycle, (5) histological examination of ovaries removed at known times of
the cycle, or recovered from animals which
died on known menstrual dates, (c) rectal
palpation of the ovaries throughout the
cycle, (d) observation of the external sexualskin cycle (after preliminary establishment
of its direct relation to the ovarian cycle)
and (e) controlled matings. Observations on
women mainly comprise (a) investigations
of the endometrial changes that are correlated with the ovarian cycle. There are
also (6) naked-eye observations of ovaries
during operations performed at known
times of the cycle, (c) histological studies of
ovaries, (d@) a few data on the recovery of
ova from the uterine tubes, to which I shall
refer again later, and (e) some indirect but
very striking data provided by Knaus on the
uterine responses to pituitrin. Knaus first
ascertained that after ovulation the rabbit
uterus becomes refractory to pituitrin, and
by extirpation experiments he was able to
show that its failure to respond to this
stimulus is due to the presence of a corpus
luteum. Uterine contractility thus provides
an index of ovulation, and investigation of
the motility of the healthy human uterus
led to the conclusion that ‘“‘ in women with
normal reproductive physiology ovulation
always takes place on the fifteenth day
before the onset of the period.’’ A corresponding conclusion is also indicated by
investigations of the urinary excretion of
certain of the sex-hormones.*

There is no need for me to quote other,
less precise, observations on human beings
which also support the conclusion that
ovulation is a spontaneous event occurring
about the middle of the menstrual cycle.
I am also doubtful of the value of attempting
as yet to define the time of ovulation with
any great precision. Knaus’ definite conclusion has, however, already been quoted.

* Kurzrok, R., Kirkman, I. J., and Creelman, M.
1934. Amer. J. Obst. Gynec., p. 319.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Ogino supports him in defining the time of
ovulation with reference to a succeeding
menstruation (twelve to sixteen days before),* and both emphasize the view that
the interval between ovulation and the onset
of the next menstrual period is more or less
fixed, however irregular the whole menstrual
cycle may be in total length. Consequently
it is possible to define even for irregular
cycles the period in which ovulation occurs.
Some purpose may be served by quoting
Knaus in full on this point. “ The ovulation
date of an irregular cycle is that period of
time which falls between the two ovulation
days of the shortest and the longest cycles
respectively, the cycles being recorded for
at least twelve months.’ Ogino’s definition
is not widely different, and both Knaus and
Ogino declare that it is possible to make
predictions as to conception on the basis of
their estimates of ovulation. Their claim has
been both disputedt and supported,{ but on
the whole it must be admitted that surprisingly little has been done either to refute
or substantiate a conclusion which is clearly
of the utmost social importance.

The stand taken by both Knaus and
Ogino is that women can conceive only
during a brief period in the middle of the
cycle, the period being limited by the short
lives of the ovum and sperm, a question
which I shall shortly discuss. Armed with
case-histories, both Knaus and Ogino claim
that sexual behaviour can be regulated
according to their conclusions. The criticisms of their opinion are based on both
clinical and scientific grounds. It is not
uncommon, for example, to criticize the
theory by opposing to it instances in which
conception is believed to have resulted from
isolated coitus occurring outside the so-called

‘safe period.’ Siegel’s famous war-time
studies§ and Dickinson’s much-quoted conclusions] are weapons that have been often

* Ogino, K. 1930. Zentralbl. f. Gyn., 54, 464. 1932.
Ibid., 56, 721.

¢ See, for example, Fetscher, R. 1933. Deuts. med.
Wschr., 59, 812.

{ See, for example, Latz, L. J. 1935. J. Amer.
Med. Assoc. 105, 1,241.

§ Siegel, P. W. 1915. Deuts. med. Wschr., 41, 1,251.

1916. Munch. med. Wschr., 6, 748.
7 Dickinson, R.L. 1927. Amer. J. Obst. Gynec., 14, 718.

 
THE PHYSIOLOGY OF FERTILITY IN MAN AND MONKEY 45

used for this purpose, and it would perhaps
be as well if the views of the last named
author were quoted here. “‘ There is general
agreement,’’ writes Dickinson, “on five
matters: (1) Conception can occur at any
part of the month. (2) There is very marked
difference between favourable and unfavourable periods. (3) The week or ten days
following menstruation is the time of
greatest likelihood of conception. (4) The
week preceding menstruation presents the
least likely chance of conception, averaging
about 7 per cent. or in various lists 3, 6, 9,
Qg, 3, Io per cent. (5) Conception during
menstruation is comparatively frequent,
about 13 per cent.”

While I do not wish to be as sweeping as
Hartman in brushing aside as valueless the
testimony of women regarding the times and
frequency of coitus, I must confess to the
conviction that information obtained after
the event, as in the case of Dickinson’s
study, can hardly be as reliable as that
secured from individuals whose attention is
focussed on Knaus’ and Ogino’s views on
conception, and whose behaviour is planned
one way or the other in relation to them.
With this expression of personal opinion I
must couple the hope that before long, enough
properly collected clinical data will be
available to give a definite answer to the
question at issue.

There are only two criticisms of the views
of Knaus and Ogino which to my knowledge have emanated from laboratory workers. The first, by Evans and Swezy,*
attempts by indirect methods to prove that
ovulation in Man can occur at any time of
the cycle, but it is a criticism that does not
survive close examination.t The second is a
physiologically important criticism made by
Hartman.{ Both Knaus and Ogino regard
the post-ovulation or luteal phase of the
menstrual cycle as being far more stable in
length than the pre-ovulation or follicular
phase, to whose variations they ascribe the

* Evans, H. M., and Swezy, O.
Physiol., 96, 628.

¢ See Zuckerman, S. 1932. Brit. Med. J., ii, 1,093.

} Hartman, C. G. 1933. Amey. J. Obst. Gynec., 26,
600. aaa

1931. Amer, J.

major irregularities of the total cycle.
Hartman contests this point. His data are
derived from rectal palpation of the ovaries
of Rhesus monkeys, and show that the luteal
phase in this species of Old-World Primate is
much more variable in length than the
follicular phase. Hartman is of the opinion
that his data should be regarded as more
reliable, from the point of view of inferring
the human condition, than the clinical data
gathered by both Ogino and Knaus. There
are however other data, derived from the
study of baboons, which do not support his
view, but fall into line with the conclusions
of those who have studied the human cycle.

The female Hamadryas baboon is an
animal whose ovarian phases can be followed
by observing the cycle of swelling of the skin
and subcutaneous tissues of the genital
region. At the beginning of menstruation,
which marks the beginning of a cycle, this
so-called ‘‘ sexual skin ”’ is inactive. About
the second or third day it begins to swell,
until a considerable tense protuberance is
formed, which shortly after the mid-point of
the cycle suddenly collapses, and is quickly
resorbed. The sexual skin then remains
quiescent until the onset of the next period
of menstrual bleeding. It was found that
the subsidence of swelling coincides with
ovulation,* and thus an easy method was
available for determining its occurrence.
Using the phases of the sexual skin as a
basis for estimation, the mean length of the
luteal phase in forty-eight cycles of Papio
hamadryas, the sacred baboon, proved to be
15°I, P.E. 0-24 days, the o for the luteal
phase distribution being 2:47; the mean of
the follicular phase was 17:1, P.E. 0-35,
days, the o for the distribution, 3-49.f
I have recently had the opportunity of
repeating these observations on four Hamadryas baboons kept under laboratory conditions, The data for twenty-five cycles}
again show that the luteal phase in this

* Zuckerman, S. 1930. Proc. Zool. Soc., London,

p. 691.

¢ Zuckerman, S., and Parkes, A. S. 1932. Ibid.,
Pp. 139.

{ A single irregular cycle in which the changes in the

sexual skin did not follow a normal course has been
left out of the calculations.
46 i THE EUGENICS REVIEW

species of Primate is less variable than the
follicular phase, as Knaus and Ogino believe
it to be in the case of Man. The actual
figures are: luteal phase mean, 14, P.E.
0-256, days, o for distribution, 1-9: follicular phase mean, 19°84, P.E. 0-66, days, o
for distribution, 4-9. In the circumstances
it seems questionable whether Hartman is
justified in the inference he draws.

Survival of the Ovum

If the hypothesis that the human female
is fertile only during a fixed and limited part
of each cycle is sound, it is perfectly plain
that the ovum can have but a very short
life. And it is equally obvious that even
were the time of ovulation not fixed, which
is contrary to the bulk of present evidence,
women would still be infertile during the
greater part of each cycle if the mammalian
ovum were short-lived, The evidence, though
not abundant, is entirely in favour of this
latter proposition.

It is true that this evidence is derived
mainly from observations on animals, but
there is one important set of data which was
obtained from study of clinical material.*
Some clinicians, who were desirous of
securing shed human ova for investigation,
examined the ovaries and tubes of some
ninety gynecological patients who were
operated on at known times of the cycle.
Only five definitely recognizable ova were
collected, two coming from the same patient.
These two ova, and a third, were collected
on the fifteenth day of the cycle, the third
ovum being in a degenerated condition.
The fourth ovum, collected on the fourteenth
day, was quite degenerated, as was probably
the fifth, collected on the sixteenth day.
Three other doubtful ova were also collected,
one on the fifteenth and two on the sixteenth
day of the cycle, which, if ova, were in an
advanced phase of degeneration. When it is
remembered that some ninety patients were
examined, and only these few ova obtained,
it is perfectly plain that we are here provided
with strong evidence that ovulation in
women usually occurs about the middle of

* Allen, E., and co-workers. Loc. ctt., p. 40.

the cycle, and that the shed ovum has an
extremely short life, perhaps only of some
hours.

This conclusion is amply supported by the
only laboratory experiment on the subject
which I need quote here.* The rabbit is an
animal that ovulates, not spontaneously,
but approximately ten hours after coitus.
Rabbits were made to ovulate by being
mated with vasectomized males, and then
by subsequent introduction of sperms, the
life of the shed ova was studied. The
experiment clearly showed that conception
is impossible if insemination occurs more
than six hours after the rupture of the
follicles. The result of this investigation
agrees well with the conclusions of several
others on widely different mammals.

It is generally believed that a liberated
ovum takes about three days to pass from
the ovary, down the tube and into the
uterus. Consequently, since the life of the
ovum appears to be so short, fertilization,
when it occurs, must take place either at the
mouth of the tube or in its most distal part.
If viable sperms were always present in that
region, fertilization would follow every
ovulation, and it is therefore necessary to
enquire about the speed with which sperms
ascend the female reproductive tract, about
the number of sperms that are necessary
to ensure the fertilization of any single ovum,
and about the length of time sperms remain
viable.

Physiology of the Sperm

Experimentalists have found no difficulty
in answering the question about the speed
with which sperms ascend the female reproductive tract, the simple expedient of examining the uterus and tubes of recently mated
rats, rabbits, and other mammals, having
provided a definite answer.t In rats, sperms
reach the ovaries within sixty seconds of
mating. In dogs and rabbits their passage
through the reproductive tract may not be
so rapid, but it is certainly a matter of

* Hammond, J. 1925. Reproduction in 1 the Rabbit.
Edinburgh. Oliver & Boyd.

¢ See Hartman, C. G.
Secretions.

1932. In Sex and Internal
THE PHYSIOLOGY OF FERTILITY IN MAN AND MONKEY 47

minutes, or at most an hour or two. There
are no data on this question for either Man
or monkeys, and in the absence of contrary
knowledge, one must assume that the transport of sperms takes relatively as short a
time in them—provided that the process
of insemination follows a perfectly normal
course.

The second question, the number of sperms
required to ensure the fertilization of a single
ovum, has received a fairly exact answer
both from clinical and from experimental
work. A single normal ejaculate in Man
varies between 3 and 6 c.c.s, and each cubic
centimetre contains between 75,000,000 and
200,000,000 spermatozoa. These incredibly
high figures achieve some significance when
one learns that the Meaker Clinic for Sterility, the most famed clinic for the treatment
of sterility in the world, knows of no instance
of human pregnancy occurring where the
sperm count was below 60,000,000.* This
finding receives corroboration from experiments on the fertilizing powers of different
dilutions of semen on female rabbits previously mated with vasectomized males.f
Full concentrations of semen give full
fertility, lower concentrations give smaller
litters, until a dilution is reached, in which the
number of sperms is still high (100,000 per
3 ¢.c.s), which is completely ineffective from
the point of view of conception.

Although it takes but a single sperm to
fertilize a single ovum, it is not difficult to
understand why so many sperms have to be
ejaculated in order to secure fertilization.
In their passage from the vagina to the
upper part of the uterine tubes, the sperms
may become lost in innumerable glandular
crypts and folds of mucous membrane. It
is even likely that.many sperms are lost in
the peritoneal cavity. Consideration of the
amazing disproportion in the ratio of
liberated human sperms to liberated ova
leads to an interesting conclusion, which,
unfortunately, has to be highly speculative
for want of data.

It would seem, if Man is regarded as the
highest product of organic evolution, that

'* Meaker, S. R. Loc. ctt., p. 41.
¢ Walton, A. 1927. Proc. Roy. Soc., B., ror, 303.

there has been an increasing waste of male
germ cells as the evolutionary pattern has
unfolded itself. The ratio of sperms to ova
among fish in general cannot be nearly as
disproportionate as it is in Man. In many
viviparous species, for example, Xiphophorus
hellent Regan, mature females, previously
mated and then isolated, may give birth to
as many as seven litters of up to 100 young
each over a period of a year, fertilization in
each case having been effected by sperms
stored from the previous insemination.*
Furthermore, insemination in many fish
occurs during a definite breeding season,
when the chances of fertilization are high.
The young of frogs, again, are so numerous
that it is difficult to imagine so enormous a
disparity in the relation of male and female
gametocytes as occurs in Man; moreover
fertilization is to some extent ensured, as
it is in the case of fish, by the occurrence
of breeding seasons. The same is true of
reptiles, even though the number of young
they produce is not as great. Birds, too,
show the same general characteristics ; in
some, successive ova may be fertilized over
a relatively long period by sperms deposited
at a previous insemination. In the domestic
hen this period is as long as twenty days,
and in the domestic turkey a single insemination serves for a whole laying season.t
Compared with most, if not all, his fellow
mammals, Man again shows himself outstanding in regard to the waste of gametocytes. Most mammals can give birth to
large litters after a single insemination, and
even those that produce only a single young,
like those that are more fruitful, differ from
Man in usually breeding only during restricted mating seasons, and at oestrous
periods when sperms are certain to meet
viable ova. And finally one sees that Man
even differs from the majority of his fellow
Old World Primates, which although they
mate and may breed at all times of the year,
nevertheless are so controlled physiologically
(for example, by means of a sexual skin)

* Van Oordt, G. J. 1928. Tijdschr. Ned. Dierk. Ver.,
Helder, 3rd Ser., z, 1.

{ Crew, F. A. E., 1926. Proc. Roy. Soc., Edin., 46,
230.
48 | THE EUGENICS REVIEW

that mating during each menstrual cycle is
most frequent when the chances of conception are highest.* It is difficult to avoid
regarding breeding seasons and periods of
oestrus teleologically as adaptations which
limit the waste of gametocytes in the animal
kingdom. Nor is it difficult to realize that
compared with most other living things, the
behaviour of the human species is peculiarly
badly directed physiologically with regard to
optimum times of conception. In the circumstances frequency of coitus can be
regarded as a necessary means of achieving
fertilization. Although their sexual behaviour is still to some extent under oestrous
control, even subhuman Primates mate at
all times of the menstrual cycle.
Conception often, in the writings of
novelists, results from an isolated sexual act,
but in real life this is probably exceptional.
Meaker, to whose clinical experience I have
already had occasion to refer, has written
very clearly on this point. ‘ Undoubtedly
there are human matings in which a single
act of coitus, or at most coitus repeated at
intervals throughout one menstrual month,
would infallibly produce conception, but
they are exceptions. Most couples who
succeed in reproducing do so in spite of
certain imperfections in the conceptive
mechanism . . . most people are relatively
and not absolutely fertile.”’{ It is not surprising that many writers believe that a
general decreased incidence of coitus may be
partly responsible for declining birth-rates.

* Zuckerman, S. 1930. Loc. cit., p. 4

Zuckerman, S. 1932. The Social Liie of Monkeys
and Apes. London. Kegan Paul.

Ball, J., and Hartman, C. G.
Gynec., 29, 117.

t The opinion has been expressed by Yerkes, R. M.,
and Yerkes, A. W. (in A Handbook of Social Psychology,
edited by ‘Carl Murchison, 1935, Worcester, Mass.,
Clark Univ. Press) that sexual behaviour among chimpanzees is less engrossing and frequent than I found it
to be among baboons. Their opinion hardly applies to
some observations that have been recorded in the
literature. For example, Schultz, A. H., and Snyder,
F. F., in a recent publication (Bull. Johns Hopkins
Hosp., 1935, 4, 193) tell of a pair of these apes, under
investigation in their laboratory, that copulated “‘ fairly
regularly three and more times daily for approximately
six months ’’—and for several weeks after the beginning
of pregnancy.

t Meaker, S. R. Loc. cit., p. 41.

1935. Amer. J. Obst.

Survival of the Sperm

My emphasis of the necessity for insemination to occur close to or at the time of ovulation is based on the view that the human
sperm, like the ovum, is very short-lived.
The period of viability of the sperm is
clearly of the greatest importance. If
sperms could live in the female reproductive
tract for three weeks, as some earlier writers
claimed, there would be just reason for
regarding women as dangerously fertile.
Those sperms which had reached the distal
end of the tubes would be always ready to
fertilize any shed ova, while those that had
not, would presumably continue wandering
round the female tract until they had. But
all the acceptable data about mammalian
sperms is completely against this view, and
while it is perhaps impossible to define the
period that the human sperm can live in the
female body with any accuracy, it is safe to
say that it cannot be longer than two or three
days at the most.

I do not propose to discuss more than part
of the evidence on which this conclusion
rests.* Before, however, considering this
evidence, it is interesting to note that there
are animal species in which sperms are
undoubtedly long-lived. Bees are wellknown examples. Some viviparous fishes
and certain birds, to which I have already
referred, are others. The only two mammals
whose sperms, some claim, live for a long
period in the body of the female are bats and
badgers. Both these animals are said to
mate in the autumn, and it is stated that the
sperms remain dormant in the reproductive
tract of the female until the succeeding
spring, when ovulation occurs. This view of
the process of fertilization in these two
species is, however, not established.

Modern views on the viability of mammalian sperms in general, and of human
sperms in particular, derive both from
observations on the behaviour of sperms
recovered from the female genital tract
after coitus, and from observations on the
behaviour of sperms collected directly from

* Tor further information see Knaus, H. Loe. cit.,
p. 43. Hartman, C.G. In Sex and Internal Secretions.
THE PHYSIOLOGY OF FERTILITY IN MAN AND MONKEY 49

the male and kept im witvo. Hammond and
Asdell found that sperms cannot live in the
genital tract of rabbits longer than thirty-two
hours.* Huehner’s studiest show that human
sperms, like those of Rhesus monkeys,}{ do
not as a rule live more than two hours in
the unfavourable secretions of the vagina,
and, moreover, only a few feebly motile
sperms could be collected from the uterus
seven days after coitus. The motility of a
sperm does not, however, imply a power to
fertilize. Conclusive studies on guinea-pigs,
on rabbits and on men, have proved that
sperms may be fully motile and yet completely infertile§ Human sperms have
remained motile for six days at room temperature when kept in their natural medium,
and as many as twenty-one days when kept
at room temperature in buffered solutions.]
Numerous experiments, which are ably
summarized by Knaus,|| have, however,
shown that at body temperature sperms
rapidly lose their fertility, and the general
conclusion is that the sperms of all mammals
whose testes are enclosed in an external
scrotum become infertile within forty-eight
hours after they are exposed to the normal
temperature of the female reproductive
tract.

The Need for Work on Primates

I can briefly summarize the statements I
have made about the time of ovulation,
about the period of survival of the ovum, and
about the period of survival of the sperm, by
saying that the available information we
have about all three problems satisfies the
conditions demanded by the hypothesis that
women are fertile only during a fixed and
brief part of each menstrual cycle. It is
necessary, however, to emphasize the fact
that much of the experimental data we have
on the physiology of the sperm and of the
ovum is derived from studies of non-primate

* Hammond, J., and Asdell, S. A.
Exper. Biol., 4, 155.

¢ Huehner, M. 1913. Sterility in the Male and Female,
and Its Treatment. New York. Rebman.

t Hartman, C. G., in Sex and Internal Secretions.

§ See Hartman, C. G. bid.

q Meaker, S. R. Loc. cit., p. 41.

{| Knaus, H. Loe. ctt., p. 43.

1926. Brit. J.

D

mammals. Indeed, apart from reports on the
motility of sperms recovered from the human
female reproductive tract, the success which
Ogino and Knaus claim for the practical
application of their view on the “ safe
period ’”’ is the only evidence we have that
the periods of viability of the human sperm
and ovum are approximately the same as
those of the laboratory mammals that have
been studied.

Few can be so optimistic as to expect that
human beings will regulate their sexual and
reproductive lives on the basis of an hypothesis which, however convincing its foundations may be to some, is nevertheless a matter
that is still disputed. It is obvious that
irrefutable data about human beings will
accumulate only when some reliable and
easy method is devised for determining the
time of ovulation in the human female, and
it is to be hoped that the electrometer
recently devised by Burr and Lane* will,
as they suggest, provide the necessary means
for doing this. Until this has been done it is
clearly desirable that the survival of the
sperm and ovum should be studied, 7 vivo,
in some other Old World Primates. Such a
study has already been begun, with Hamadryas baboons as subjects.t This animal,
as I have already stated, provides in the
fluctuations of its sexual skin, an index of
the ovarian phases, and by mating females
at varying times before and after the subsidence of swelling, an event which is
correlated with ovulation, information should
be obtained both about the viability of the
gametocytes, and about the existence or
non-existence of restricted periods of fertility.
The few results so far obtained suggest that
the Hamadryas baboon does not readily
conceive from a single insemination, even
when this is made within as few as twentyfour hours either before or after the estimated
time of ovulation.

* Burr, H.S., and Lane, C. T. 1935. Yale J. Biol. &
Med., 8, 31.

+ Iam greatly indebted to the Council of the Eugenics
Society for the opportunity of pursuing this investigation, and to Professor W. E. Le Gros Clark, F.R.S.
for his kindness and generosity in allowing the study
to be made in the Department of Human Anatomy,
Oxford.
50 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Conclusion

In concluding this lecture it is almost
unnecessary to say that a sound knowledge
of the conditions of human conception would
be of value in planning sexual behaviour,
not only from the point of view of limiting
births, but also from the point of view of
their encouragement. Were such issues as
we have been discussing thoroughly established, the times of both normal and artificial insemination could be far better controlled than they can be at present, and it is
not unlikely that the incidence of sterility,
a problem with which gynecologists in their
practice frequently wrestle in vain, would
be materially reduced. There is one last
remark that I should like to make. The facts
that I have brought before you about the

specificity of the conditions that determine

conception, may have combined with the

knowledge we all have about the dangerously
slow rate of human replacement, to make a
depressing picture of a hopelessly inefficient
human reproductive machine. If they have,
I think we can reassure ourselves. It need
not be feared that the human potentialities
for reproduction are decreasing, for although
the conditions for conception may be very
specific, there is no evidence that they have
become disorganized in the majority of
people, or that any diminution has occurred
in the inherent fertility of Mankind. Even
if present reproduction and replacement
rates presage the extinction of the human
species, we can therefore expect that when
the factors responsible for their trends are
thoroughly understood and brought within
the realm of control, the human reproductive
machine will be fully capable of supplying
the living material of a progressive and
assured civilization.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVIII, No. 1.
