GALTON AND MID-CENTURY EUGENICS
: By FREDERICK OSBORN

Science Since Galton

INCE the turn of the century there have
S been extraordinary developments in

_ two fields of science which were close
to Francis Galton’s heart. In _ genetics,
Mendel’s work was rediscovered, and a great
science established, in what has undoubtedly
been one of the triumphs of the human mind.
In the social sciences, in which no figure of
Galton’s stature has appeared since his time,
and to which he contributed the principle of
correlation, and the application of Zuetelet’s

curve of normal distribution, the advances
have been substantial but less spectacular.

It was on the advancement of these
sciences that Galton based his hopes for an
effective eugenics. The best tribute we can
pay him, on this, the 134th anniversary of
his birth, is to consider what would have
been his views on the development of
eugenics in the light of our new scientific
knowledge.

Galton, who died in 1911, would have been
fascinated with the last half century’s progress in the science of genetics which had
become:a subject of controversy during the
last few years of his life. He would have
given his powerful backing to the further
advancement of human genetics. He would
have been present at the First International
Congress of Human Genetics to be held in
Copenhagen this summer. He would have
urged exhaustive studies on the identification of carriers of harmful recessive genes.
He would have supported heredity clinics.

Galton would have been disappointed in
the little progress that has been made since
his time in the study of the genetic factors
which affect the development of personality

a nr

* The Galton Lecture delivered in London on
February 15th, 1956

15

and intelligence. He would have been surprised that we to-day know so little more
than he did about the relative contributions
of heredity and environment in the development of the subtle differences in the characteristics which distinguish men and women
of unusual ability. I think he would have
urged that we should not wait till scientific
knowledge was complete, but should look for
acceptable eugenic policies to put into effect
during our own lifetimes.

I am sure Galton would have been pleased
with the methodologies of modern psycho-.
logv, in which he was one of the great
pioneers. The use of the blood groups in
anthropology would have stirred his imagination. The application of the new measures for the selection and training of
personnel now so widely used by governments and in industry would have seemed
to him to realize some of the high hopes he
expressed in the studies which he carried on
throughout his own lifetime. The new
methods for gathering objective data on
individual and group attitudes and motivations, and their statistical analysis, would
have provided him with tools for working on
some of the possible applications of science
to human affairs and to human beings. I
think he would have been appalled to find
that the major investments of brains and
money were being spent in the physical
sciences to the neglect of the sciences having
to do with man. He would have been one
of the first among us to recognize that the
social sciences require work with large numbers over a long period of: time to achieve
results in any way comparable to the results
achieved in physics and chemistry. He
would have been disheartened that pure research, that is, research without any immediate practical aim, was being carried out on

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, April 1956. 48, 1.
16 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

an enormous scale by governments and
industry in the fields of medicine and of all
the physical sciences, while the social
scientist was limited, with few exceptions,
to minor projects having some immediate
practical purpose.

We can put forward with some confidence
that these would have been some of Galton’s
reactions if he were suddenly to appear
among us to-day. But we have not answered
the major question: How would he have
applied to-day’s new knowledge and new
circumstances to the major problems of
eugenics which held first place in all his
thought ? It would be assuming the powers
of his genius for anyone of us to say what he
would have proposed. But we can be sure
that he would have reoriented his thinking
wherever the findings of science required it.

Indications of the New Sciences

We must start, I think, with a premise
that would have been new to Galton. The
studies made since his time do not indicate
major differences in genetic potential for
intelligence and the development of personality between any of the large socio-economic
groups or between the different races of man.
These groups may differ in their average of

genetic capacity, but if they do the differ
ences are too subtle for us to distinguish by
any scientific methods at present available.
Even if the average should be found to be
higher in one group than in another, the
overlapping must be very great. Genetic
capacities are certainly distributed among
the individuals in such groups in a normal
curve of distribution, as Galton was the first
to point out. A process of selection based
on socio-economic or racial groups, which
failed to take into account individual variations within groups, would be impractical
because it would not supply enough births
for replacement, and unsound because it
would miss too many able stocks. We need
the greatest possible number of births among
genetically superior individuals, whether
they are among the able individuals who are
the majority in one group or among the able
individuals who are the minority in another

group. Since eugenics is not concerned with
reducing the birth rate as a whole, a sound
process of purely genetic selection would
have to reach into every socio-economic and
every racial group to seek out the genetically
valuable individuals and attempt to increase
their rate of births, concurrently with the
attempt to reduce births among the less
valuable. The practical and scientific aspects of this matter are, I think, so well
established as to leave us no reasonable
alternative. I believe Galton would have
agreed that not group, but individual differences must be the basis of eugenics.

In Galton’s time death differentials still
played an important part in selection. But
to-day in European countries 95 per cent of
the children born alive survive to reach the
age of reproduction. The deaths of the five
per cent who do not survive are undoubtedly
highly selective against physical abnormalities and weaknesses, but they are certainly
not selective for the higher qualities with
which we are particularly concerned. Today the processes of selection affecting man’s
higher qualities operate not through deaths,
but through differentials in the number of
children born to people of different genetic
types.

Under these conditions fanciful utopias
have been proposed, in which there would
be an arbitrary selection, by government or
other authority, of those who should have
children, based on some agreed on measures
of quality. There are many reasons why
such proposals are repugnant to thoughtful
people. Western ideals would not permit of
such an abrogation of individual responsibility ; no man or group of men can be
trusted to decide who should and who
should not have children; even if our
scientific knowledge were far greater than it
is or is likely to be, there are questions of
values here which no man is fitted to determine.

Galton never envisaged any system of
arbitrary controls, except for the more
serious mental and physical genetic handicaps, which should be treated like a form of
communicable disease. But he did propose
that we should attempt to assign eugenic
GALTON AND MID-CENTURY EUGENICS 17

value to particular people, and single them
out for rewards for having children. The
values he proposed related to health, intelligence and fine qualities of personality. They
are generally accepted. No one could object
tothem. Yet somehow the idea of designating certain people as desirable progenitors of
the next generation, and rewarding them for
having children, has never found acceptance.
It has not been neglected. Others have
worked on it since Galton’s time, and it has
been quite constantly before the public in
one way or another. But it seems to arouse
more indignation than sympathy, and more
ridicule than serious consideration. I believe that Galton would have recognized by
now that public opinion was pretty well
fixed in this matter.

This opposition does not seem reasonable
to the eugenist. He recognizes more than
others that the conditions of modern life may
bring about a genetic degeneration of the
race; he feels perhaps more deeply than
others the need for genetic improvement and
‘the possibility of accomplishing it. But the
public in general is less willing to accept the
idea that ariy individuals are genetically
superior. In the United States they say
that there is no mother who does not sometimes think that her son might become
President. It is a fine and universal human
trait for a mother to have such aspirations.
Indeed she has considerable support from
science which has pointed out the heterogeniety of the human race and the infinite
complexity of human inheritance. The
genetic odds may favour one mother far

more than another, but in races, horse or |

man, it isn’t always the odds on favourite
which wins.

My own feeling is that if eugenics is to
make any progress in the foreseeable future,
we will not only have to drop the idea of
assigning genetic superiorities to social or
racial groups, but we will even have to stop
trying to designate individuals as superior
or inferior. To many eugenists this would
seem a radical step, almost the abandonment
of eugenics. But a little consideration will
show that there are means of selection which
do not require that we humiliate one half of

the individuals who comprise the human race
by telling them that they are not as fit as
the other half to procreate the next generation.

Practical Eugenics Programme

In the latter part of his life Galton urged
the study of ‘ forces under social control ”’
which would influence the distribution of
births. He himself analyzed the effect on
survival of differences in age at marriage ;
he pointed out the effect of the celibacy required of scholars by the colleges. To
Galton these were examples of social forces
which brought about a voluntary and quite
unconscious though adverse form of selection.

Other studies of forces which affect selection have been made more recently. They
were at first concerned with the effect of
birth control and its differential use among
socio-economic groups. All these studies
reached the same conclusion : namely, that
differences in the birth rates of different
socio-economic groups were directly related
to the practice and effectiveness of contraception. Both in England and in the United
States contraception was first. introduced
among the wealthier and better educated
classes, and resulted in widening class differentials. As the use of contraception spread
downward through the entire population,
the differentials have tended to narrow.
Contraception, a “force under social control,” greatly influences group differentials
in rates of birth.

Differences in size of family as between
individual couples appeared to vary in the
past inversely with income. But in the
early nineteen-thirties Eden in Sweden began
publishing studies indicating that above a
certain income level, (presumably those
practicing birth control), the size of individual families varied directly and not inversely with income. Further studies appeared to confirm this finding. The largest
study of this sort was the “ Study of the
Social and Psychological Factors Affecting
Fertility ’’ carried out in Indianapolis and
reported in the Milbank Fund Quarterly.
18 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Because of the size of the sample in this
study, it was possible to make an analysis
of births among several hundred couples all
of whom could be recorded as practicing
family planning effectively. In this family
planning group, the rate of births was much
below the rate required for replacement, but
the number of children per couple was
directly related to income. Those couples
with the lowest incomes had the fewest
children, and size of family increased with
each increment of a thousand dollars per
year of income, the couples with the most
children being those with the highest incomes. I believe we can now assume that
the ideal of planning family size, coupled
with effective means of preventing conception, constitutes ‘‘ a force under social control’’ which permits individual couples to
respond to the varying pressures of the environment with a considerable variation in
size of family ; and that among such couples
economic pressure tends to reduce the
number of children.

We still have much to learn, but it seems
fairly certain, subject to confirmation by

further studies, that when family planning:

has spread to all elements of the population,
and means of effective contraception are
readily available to all, couples will tend to
have children in some proportion to their
ability to give them proper care. The present evidence permits us to speak only of
their economic care. But there seems to me
every reason to believe that other aspects
of ability to care for children are also involved. Given equal economic security, it
can be assumed that parents who have the
vitality, the patience, the character, the
human sympathy, the affection and the
intelligence to give their children the kind
of care most valuable for their development
will, under favourable conditions of the environment, be found to desire and to have
more children than parents who do not have
as much of these qualities.

Such an assumption is subject to two important conditions : means must be found
to make early marriage and children economically possible to ambitious young people,
and the influences of the early environment

must be such as to provide the proper psychological conditioning for parenthood. By
this I mean that the parents of the future
should be exposed from earliest childhood
to influences which will tend to increase the
desire for children, and will increase this
desire most among individuals with the
ability to give their children the kind of
affectional and intelligent care we have indi+
cated. These psychological influences would
have to be selective ; that is, they would have
to have more effect on potentially good
parents than on potentially poor parents.
But it does not seem impossible to find influences which are selective. In the case of
intelligence, the more intelligent people are,
the more susceptible they are to influences
which arouse their intelligence. It does not
seem unreasonable to believe that psychological influences can be found which will have
the same selective effect on traits of personality, and will tend to increase qualities of
affection, sense of responsibility, and interest
in others, in proportion to the potential of
each individual for developing these traits.
We are assuming that we can find “ forces
under social control ’’ which when incorporated into the environment, would have
a selective effect on size of family.

Perhaps the greatest handicap to the
effectiveness of a selective environment of
this sort would be the tendency of people
everywhere to conform to the current fashion,
which seems to apply to size of family as
well as to size of bustle, design of clothes, or
other matters of taste. The Indianapolis
study which was made during the depression,
found almost no families of more than three
children among. these moderate income,
urban, educated people practicing contraception. To-day with a higher birth rate,
there is a greater variation in size of family
and a substantial proportion of families of
four or five children. To maintain an
effective selection of births it would be important to develop a public opinion which
would not expect couples to have a particular number of children, but which would
find it entirely natural for some couples to
have large families and others small families
or no children at all, depending solely on
GALTON AND MID-CENTURY EUGENICS 19

their own choice or taste in the matter.

Fortunately a process of selection, to be
effective, does not have to be exact. It is
enough if the general trend is in the right
direction. That was certainly the case with
natural selection, and we should be content
if it is the case with the kind of man-made
selection now being considered.

The most immediate and notable effect of
this kind of selection would be environmental ; a rapid increase in the proportion
of children brought up in homes which
would give them the best affectional care.
This would be the most effective argument
for getting such a programme accepted.
Everyone is anxious to improve the home
environment in which children are brought
up, and of course the easiest way to do so
is to have the children born in the homes
which provide the best environment. These
proposals should therefore, when properly
understood, have the enthusiastic support of
the public, which everywhere wants to see
children brought up in better home environments. There is here no interference with
individual choice as to size of family. There
is no question of assumed superiority or inferiority ; indeed the eugenic question need
not be raised, and it would probably be
better not to raise it. The results of this
environmental selection would be apparent
in the first generation brought up in the
better environments, and should be cumulative thereafter.

We have at present no scientific studies to
tell us whether this environmental improvement would result in a corresponding genetic
improvement, or if not, whether it could be
modified in such a way as to bring about a
genetic improvement. But there are good
a priort grounds for believing it would raise
the genetic average.

Since at present we lack knowledge of the
genetic components underlying intelligence
and personality and of the methods by which
these components are transmitted, a certain
number of geneticists will object that sucha
selection is not in any way related to
eugenics. But by their own admission they
have no evidence to prove this negative.
It is a negative which logically does not make

much sense. [I think that most of us would
be content if we felt that the individual
couples throughout the nation who provided
their children with the most intelligently
planned, the most affectional, and the most
responsible care, were having the largest
families. It is hard to see how such a trend
could be dysgenic. Until the science of
human genetics is very much advanced it is
the only kind of broad, overall selection we
can work for. If we can succeed in giving
direction to the social forces which will
effect this kind of environmental selection,
we will be better equipped to direct them to
a specifically genetic selection as soon as the
necessary genetic information is available.

Advantages of the Broad Programme
of Selection

‘There are a number of practical advantages in this proposed method of selection.
First of all is the fact that with the advent
of family planning, there seems already to
be a trend in this direction. We would be
working with the tide instead of against it.
Equally important is that such a process of
selection would make for great diversity, and
thus avoid one of the most justified criticisms directed at eugenics. Finally, a process of selection based on early success in
responding to the environment would be
democratic ; lack of parental support would
be no bar to early marriage among scholars,
artists, and others headed towards the professions. Those who had to fight their way
up would have an equal chance at raising a
family. It should therefore enlist the solid
support of public opinion, to an extent not
possible with any proposal for a_ solely
eugenic selection.

The proposal we have been discussing
develops out of common sense and would be
put forward on the ground that more children would grow up in the best home environments, with no public argument made for
eugenics. I think that Galton, if he were
here with us to-day, and had reviewed the
history of the eugenic movement since his
death, would endorse such a proposal. He
20 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

was an eminently practical man. He believed we could take a lesson out of the
evolutionary processes of the past. The
present proposal, except that it is necessarily
based on births rather than on deaths, provides, in the manner of natural selection,
for the survival of those who are best
adapted to the requirements of modern
civilization. I doubt that Galton would
have viewed it with the scepticism that is
expressed by some geneticists to-day.

This programme meets the requirement
that a process of selection should sort out
individuals throughout the whole population. It makes a beginning, and it has the
advantage that as our scientific knowledge
increases and public opinion is increasingly
informed, it can be more and more directed
to a genetic as well as an environmental
selection. Already enough is known of
medical genetics to make it almost obligatory
that we should set up heredity clinics in
connection with medical schools and marriage counselling services. Galton would, I
believe, have adopted the view now generally held, that heredity counselling should
not go beyond advising on the degree of risk
of defective heredity, leaving it to the
parents themselves to decide whether or not
it is to their interest and that of society to
run this risk. He would have hoped that
by educating the public through such services, individual parents, backed by public
opinion, would increasingly hesitate to run
the risk of bringing defective children into
the world. The public education resulting
from the use of heredity clinics should
develop a eugenic awareness which would
make the public more understanding of
eugenic measures, and individual couples
more anxious to play a eugenic part.

Galton clearly saw that eugenic policies
would fail unless geared to “ existing conditions of law and sentiment.”

I doubt whether, at the present time, he
would have gone beyond these specific proposals. I think they would have seemed to
him sufficient for a start on which to build
a eugenic form of society. I have no doubt
that he would have put the whole force of
his position behind these proposals.

Research

Even such a limited programme of eugenics needs the support of continuing research. A larger proportion of able young
men should be encouraged to enter the field
of medical genetics and be trained in both
genetics and medicine. Medical and genetic
research would both be advanced by setting
up genetic registers such as those already
established in a number of Scandinavian
countries. More medical schools should
teach and conduct genetic research.

The study of human genetics is at a
critical point from which it may make rapid
advances if it receives proper support. Professional societies of human geneticists have
been established in a number of countries,
and for the first time there are scientific
journals devoted exclusively to this field.
The first International Conference of Human
Genetics is being held this summer at Copenhagen. There have been great advances
since the war. But the ablest of the younger
men seldom go into human genetics, nor indeed into the various fields of the social
sciences. They are still going into the
physical sciences, and until this condition is
changed our knowledge of human beings is
not going to advance as it should.

Genetics and social science meet in the
study of the relative parts played by heredity
and by environment in the development of
individual differences. No field of knowledge is more important to eugenics. A
scientific knowledge of how individual differences develop would be a great stimulant to
education, to job selection, and to almost
every phase of human activity. It seems
amazing that so little serious work is being
done on this subject. In this field the
studies of twins in which Galton was so great
a pioneer should be pushed with renewed
vigour. A longitudinal study of identical
and fraternal twins, comparing them with
each other, with their brothers and sisters,
with foster children, and with unrelated
pairs, and carried out over a long period of
time, would, I think, change public attitudes
in a great variety of ways, and give us an
entirely new base for the development of
eugenic policies.
GALTON AND MID-CENTURY EUGENICS 21

Only a few studies have reported on size
of family in relation to the measured personal qualities of the parents. But there is
now under way in the United States a major
study, successor to the Indianapolis study,
which among other things will attempt to
determine relationships between size of
family and the personal qualities of the
parents. The outline of this study is reported in the Eugenics Quarterly for December, 1955. In using measures of personal
qualities, this study will not attempt to
separate genetic differences from differences
in intelligence and personality caused by the
environment. Here we must, for the present, rely on the rather general indications
given us by studies on the relationships in
intelligence and personality between parents
and own children versus parents and foster
children, and particularly on the twin
studies. All of these indicate a correlation
between developed qualities and the genetic
base.

Finally, further practical advances in
eugenics require intensive study of all forces
“subject to social control’? which may
affect size of family. Such studies are wholly
in the field of the social sciences. They are
most immediately useful in countries where
information is needed as to the best means
of reducing a too rapid rate of births. But
these studies do not now provide information
on how to make the birth rate selective. It
should not be too difficult to include in such
studies an investigation of the differential
effects of various environmental factors on
different types of couples. This information
would be valuable for many purposes, and
particularly to indicate trends of significance, and for developing eugenic principles.
It seems clear that the advance of programmes which would make for selection
based on personal qualities of intelligence
and character must go hand in hand with
advances in studies on social and psychological motivation.

Conclusion

It is eighty-six years since Galton published his Hereditary Genius ; eighty-six
years since he gave us the hope that the

in the next generation.

average of human intelligence and character
could be raised to the level of the upper five
or ten per cent to-day ; since he envisaged
the eugenic movement as something that
would sweep the world and make man at
last the master of his own destiny on earth.
It has not happened. The eugenic movement is nothing but a few small handfuls of
men in various countries ; here in England,
in the United States, in India, in France.
They are not influencing public opinion.
The very word eugenics is in disrepute in
some quarters. Yet I still believe in Galton’s dream. Probably most of you do.
We must ask ourselves, what have we done
wrong ?

I think we have failed to take into account
a trait which is almost universal and is very
deep in human nature. People simply are
not willing to accept the idea that the
genetic base on which their character is
formed is inferior and should not be repeated
We have asked
whole groups of people to accept this idea
and we have asked individuals to accept it.
They have constantly refused, and we have
all but killed the eugenic movement.

People will accept the idea of a specific
hereditary defect. They will go to a heredity clinic and ask what is the risk of our
having a defective child. They balance that
risk against the chance of their having a
sound child, and they usually come up with
a pretty sound decision. But they won't
accept the idea that they are in general
second rate. We must rely on other motivation.

Given the right circumstances, people will
have children in proportion to their ability
to care for them. If they feel financially
secure, if they enjoy accepting responsibility,
if they have warm affectional responses, if
they are physically strong and competent,
they are likely to have large families, provided they have a reasonable psychological
conditioning to this end. If they are unable to feed the children they have, if they
are afraid of responsibility, if their affectional responses are weak, people don’t want
many children. If they have effective
means of family planning, they won’t have
22 Ste : THE EUGENICS REVIEW

many. Our studies have shown this to be
true all over the world. On such a base it is
surely possible to build a system of voluntary unconscious selection. But the reasons
advanced must be generally acceptable
reasons. Let’s stop telling anyone that they
have a generally inferior genetic quality, for
they will never agree. Let’s base our proposals on the desirability of having children

born in homes where they will get affectionate and responsible care, and perhaps our
proposals will be accepted.

It seems to me that if it is to progress as
it should, eugenics must follow new policies
and state its case anew, and that from this
rebirth we may, even in our own lifetime,
see it moving at last towards the high goals
which Galton set for it.

GENUS

the Review of the
ITALIAN COMMITTEE FOR THE STUDY OF POPULATION PROBLEMS

and of the
ITALIAN SOCIETY OF GENETICS AND EUGENICS
edited under the auspices of the National Research Council

Editor: CORRADO GINI

Summary of Volume XI, December 31 1955
C. GINI

Problémes démographiques en Europe: I Introduction; II. Les migrations

intérieures; III. Les migrations internationales; IV. Le vieillissement des populations.

C. GInI
classificazione delle razze umane?
C. C. ZIMMERMAN

Possono e devono i caratteri psichici e culturali essere tenuti presenti nella

American roots in an Italian village: Part I, The migrants from S. Giovanni

Incarico; Part II, The Ciociaria Culture; Part I1I, Data from Ceccano.

C. GIN1

G. GIUROVICH
secondo la professione paterna.

A. SOFIA

A. OKASAKI

Méthodes et résultats de l'étude des populations primitives.
L’origine sociale e il rendimento differenziale degli studenti romani classificati

Sulla variabilita e la correlazione delle ossa delle mani e dei piedi nei due sessi.
Politique eugénésique au Japon et résultats obtenus.

Reviews of Italian, English, American, French, German, Danish, Portuguese, Swedish, Russian,
Greek, Egyptian, Indian, South American, South African and Australian books.

GENUS

accepts scientific articles, papers, notes and communications written in Italian, English, F vench, German
and Spanish in the field of the different sciences related to population problems (Demography, Sociology,
Economics, General Biology, Genetics, Eugenics, Anthropology, Social Hygiene, Psychology, Geography)

Orders should be addressed to: Segreteria del Comitato Italiano per lo Studio dei Problemi della
Popolazione, Via delle Terme di Diocleziano, n° 10-—-Roma (III-8°) (Italy).

 
