Opinion

HE EUGENICS SOCIETY’S first survey
of opinion was fully discussed in the July
1962 (54, 57-9) issue of the REvIEW, the
questionnaire itself having been reproduced in
the October 1961 number (53, 180-1). Briefly,
this survey was addressed to 1,000 people whose
names appear in Who’s Who, 406 of whom
returned completed questionnaires.

The Council of the Eugenics Society later
decided to extend this inquiry and send the same
questionnaire to educationalists: on a stratified
plan, 3,992 names were taken from the membership list of the Association for Science Education
and 1,349 from that of the Classical Association.
Twenty-four questionnaires were not received by
the scientists, leaving 3,968 effective names, of
which 1,089 (27 per cent) replied. There were
forty-two non-recipients among the classicists—
this larger proportion is largely accounted for
by the Classical Association’s membership list
being under revision at the time. An effective list
of 1,307 names yielded 302 completed questionnaires (24 per cent).

These percentages represent a low level of
response for surveys of this type, especially when
compared with the Who’s Who survey, where in
addition to the 41 per cent who returned completed questionnaires a further 10 per cent were
sufficiently interested to write and return uncompleted forms. There was no such response
in the Educationalist survey. It would appear,
therefore, that interest in the subject needs
arousing, even among educated people, but that
(not unexpectedly) the range of thought and
sense of duty of those whose names appear in
Who’s Who are greater than average.

Broadly correct definitions of EUGENICS
were given by 89 per cent of scientists and 92 per
cent of classicists. This is a very similar figure to
that found in the Who’s Who sample, although
the scientists and classicists tended to be more
specific in their answers, quoting dictionary
definitions or referring to the Greek derivation.
Three out of four in each of the three groups
indicated that eugenics is concerned with the

Surveys

limitation of problem families and with providing facilities for voluntary sterilization; 9 per
cent more scientists than classicists opted for
“encouraging the birth of more children to
families whose early born children show
particular promise”’.

CREATION OR NATURAL SELECTION:
86 per cent of the scientists and 95 per cent of the
classicists gave natural selection as their preference; neither group approached the remarkable
Who’s Who figure for a belief in “creation”.
There was, however, a significant group, particularly among classicists (15 per cent) who stated
spontaneously that “natural selection and
creation are not mutually exclusive”.

HEREDITY AND ENVIRONMENT:
Among scientists, seven out of ten considered
that heredity has more effect upon intelligence
than environment does. The comparative proportion among classicists is only slightly lower
(65 per cent). About one in five of both groups
considered both heredity and environment were
equally important, though it is interesting to
note that as many as one in ten of classicists felt
that they did not know.

As in the previous survey, both groups tended
to name the other influence as having the
principal effect on social behaviour—74 per
per cent of scientists and 65 per cent of classicists
said that environment was more important than
heredity. The classicists here showed more
certainty. One in four of the remaining respondents considered that both environment and
heredity were of equal importance.

In the Who’s Who survey 80 per cent supported the idea that research on human heredity
should be carried out. Among classicists and
scientists support was even higher—84 and 88
per cent respectively. Only 1 per cent in each
group was against it. Knowledge that the
questionnaire was put out by the Eugenics
Society may have had some influence here. The
main reason given for encouraging research is
the general one that all knowledge is useful and
that all research is justifiable on this ground, but

211
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

17 per cent of scientists and 10 per cent of
classicists specifically mentioned the problems of
inherited disease and defects.

WORLD POPULATION CONTROL: Nearly
everyone (93 per cent) agreed that the population
of the world was increasing fast, but as compared with the 44 per cent of the previous survey,
only 38 per cent of classicists and 33 per cent of
scientists thought it was too large in relation to
the natural resources of the world. This perhaps
is because scientists are more aware of the
present misuse and maldistribution of world
resources—11 per cent of them volunteered this
statement. Of the classicists, 20 per cent were
unable to give an opinion on this question. It
seems extraordinary that about one person in
ten should think that the population of the
world is too small in relation to its resources.
Nine out of ten people, however, still considered
that we should try and control the increase in
population and not rely on increasing world
resources. To this end, the encouragement of the
use of birth control was advocated by 80 per
cent of the classicists and 85 per cent of the
scientists (the same proportion as was shown in
the Who’s Who survey).

Reactions to specific suggestions about possible methods of controlling the population were
again very similar to those shown in the previous
survey. Only three methods showed differences
of more than 5 per cent. Of scientists and
_classicists, 56 per cent recommended seeking to
deter certain people from having children as
compared with 63 per cent from Who’s Who:
fewer classicists than either other group were in
favour of providing greater opportunities for
voluntary sterilization, but on the other hand
more were in favour of legalizing abortion. Only
one-third of the educationalists were specifically
against such a measure.

Throughout both surveys the three groups
completing the questionnaire showed remarkable unanimity on many questions. The scientists
are slightly, but only slightly, more in favour of
eugenic policies and views than the classicists
who, when they lag behind appear to do so from

212

lack of knowledge on technical points rather
than from definitely opposed views. Both groups
are more in sympathy with eugenic thought than
the Who’s Who sample, but the differences are
marginal.

Reverting to the varying degrees of response
elicited from these three groups of people, a
comparison raises some interesting conjectures:
the first, Who’s Who, questionnaire was sent out
under the name of Social Surveys (Gallup Poll)
Limited, the second inquiry under that of the
Eugenics Society with a covering letter from the
General Secretary; the replies were addressed to
the Society and only the final analysis was made
by Gallup Poll.

Apparently there are people who willingly
reply to an anonymous inquiry but do not care
to let their names become known to a committed
organization—perhaps they fear further involvement in the form of eugenic propaganda or
invitations to membership. On the other hand,
in the Who’s Who survey 43 per cent of the
replies came from people who were aged sixty
five or over. No information on age was available

in the later survey, but it seems likely that a much
smaller proportion were beyond retiring age
and that the replies came on the whole from a
younger section of the community; there is also
the point that many older people have more
leisure to devote to the task of filling in a
questionnaire.

Another point to be remembered, one which
also applied to the Who’s Who survey, is that
those who take the trouble to fill in and return
the forms are likely to be people who are already
interested in the subjects involved and enjoy an
opportunity of airing their views. Thus the
samples which have been analysed may be
overweighted on this side.

To sum up, the surveys have shown a general
similarity of opinion among those of a random
selection of three groups of educated people who
elected to respond to the Society’s questionnaire.
These findings will be of valuable general
information to the Council in guiding the actions
and policies of the Eugenics Society during the
coming months and years.
