VOLUNTARY STERILIZATION
A SYMPOSIUM*

Dr. C. P. Blacker’s Contribution

R. BLACKER said that his contri
bution to the symposium was to

give an historical retrospect. Much
could be said. But time admitted of little
more than an abstract of a complicated
story.

It was only between the years 1928-39
that there existed in this country an active
interest in the possibilities of eugenic
sterilization. The climax of the period was
the year 1934 at the beginning of which
the Brock report was published.

The practice of eugenic sterilization could
be regarded as having begun fifty-four
years ago, when in 1897, the first operation,
a salpingectomy, was performed in the U.S.A.
Two years later (1899) the first vasectomy
was performed by Dr. Harry Sharp of
Indiana.

In the years before the first war, many
women were doubtless sterilized for therapeutic and prophylactic reasons which are
strongly applicable to women but scarcely
applicable at all to men. The possibilities
of eugenic sterilization were occasionally
mentioned, notably by MHavelock Ellis.
After 1918, reports of the practice reached
this country from the U.S.A. There was,
moreover, in the twenties, much discussion
of rejuvenation: the name of Voronoff
was much heard. Vasectomy was proclaimed
by some to be a method of rejuvenation,
and the operation was performed on ageing
men with this end, though how extensively
it would now be difficult to say.

In early 1926, an advisory committee was
organised in the U.S.A. by Mr. E.H. Gosney
of California: this committee was later
incorporated as the Human Betterment Foundation. This Foundation was largely concerned with investigating and publicizing
work on eugenic sterilization. Between

” * The three papers that form this symposium were
read at a members’ meeting of the Eugenics Society on
November zoth, 1951.

1927 and 1930, twenty-six papers were
sponsored of which one, The Effecis of
Vasectomy on the Sexual Life, by Mr.
Paul Popenoe, was widely noticed in this
country.

Though the Mental Deficiency (Wood)
Committee (1929) was not concerned with
the subject, its findings and recommendations suggested how sterilization might be
employed. Discussions at this time were
largely centred on mental defectives. The
Wood Committee’s investigators found, in
six sample inquiries, nearly twice as many
mental defectives as had been found in a
comparable investigation (that of the Royal
Commission for the Care and Control of
the Feeble-minded) twenty years before.
The ratio per thousand of 8-56 (Wood Committee) compared with that of 4-6 (Royal
Commission). How far the ascertained
increase reflected a real. increase was debatable ; the Wood Committee concluded that
it was ‘‘ hard to believe that there had not
been some increase.’’ The same Committee
estimated that there were 300,000 mental
defectives in England and Wales, and they
recommended that institutional provision
should be made for a third of this number—
a big expansion on the provision which
existed then or has existed since. They
further recommended what they called a
“new conception’ of the institution. Its
aim should be to stabilize and train as many
inmates as possible for life in the general
community ; it should resemble, in its
social function, a flowing lake rather than
a stagnant pool. Here was an obvious
field for sterilization. Everyone agreed that
mental defectives should not have children.
Indeed, in its annual reports, the Board
of Control had recommended with this end
the legal prohibition of marriage of mental
defectives.

The stimuli provided by the publications
of the Human Betterment Foundation and
by the report of the Wood Committee
prompted the Eugenics Society to take the

180
VOLUNTARY STERILIZATION

matter up. In various pamphlets and other
publications it put forward a case which
subsequent events proved to be moderate
and justifiable. But in so doing it was
attacked on both flanks. On the one hand
we were criticized by those actively concerned
with the welfare of mental defectives who
saw their objectives (improved conditions
for defectives) endangered ; on the other by
those who saw in widely-applied measures
of sterilization a means both for reducing
numbers of mental defectives (who were
thought to be increasing at an alarming
rate) and for effecting drastic economies
(in expenditure on institutions and colonies)
for the ratepayer. By the latter group our
proposals were condemned as timid and overcautious. Two Parliamentary Bills were
drafted, one relating to mental defectives
alone, the other to mental defectives and
““mental convalescents ” as defined in the
draft Bill. During the years 1929-34 the
Society was active in putting its case, and
much support was forthcoming. Resolutions
favouring the Society’s proposals were, for
example, passed by the National Association
for the Feebleminded, the National Union of
Societies for Equal Citizenship, the National
Council for Mental Hygiene, the Women’s
Co-operative Guilds and the Conservative
Women’s Reform Association.

But the persons and bodies directly
responsible for the care and control of mental
defectives were reluctant to commit themselves : most were understandably conscious
of how the innovation could be abused so as
to defeat the main objectives they were
pursuing, namely an improvement of the
conditions under which defectives had to
live. In discussions, much breath was wasted
in saying that sterilization was ‘‘not a
panacea ’’—which no responsible person
had ever declared it to be. During this
period, invaluable help was given to the
Society by Dr. R. Langdon Down, to whom
we shall always be in debt.

There grew up a demand for an authoritative and impartial survey. The Council of
the British Medical Association made a
preliminary move by appointing in November 1930 a committee which did not reach
c

181

agreement. In February 1932, a deputation
consisting of representatives of the County
Councils Association, the Association of
Municipal Corporations and the Mental
Hospitals Association—all important bodies
—submitted to the then Minister of Health
(Sir Hilton Young: now Lord Kennet) a
request that the matter be impartially
investigated. The Minister complied by
appointing the Brock Committee.

As remarked before, the Committee produced its report in January 1934, and it is on
the recommendations of this Committee,
which endorsed and indeed (in two respects)
went beyond what the Society had advocated, that the case for sterilization now
rests.

The report had a large and, on the whole, a
sympathetic Press, and numerous organisations which had previously been in doubt
came down in favour of its recommendations. There was formed a Joint Committee
on Voluntary Sterilization (Lord Horder,
Chairman) which was largely subsidised by
the Eugenics Society which also accommodated it in its house. A most impressive
list of supporting resolutions was collected
of which a conspicuous feature was the
favourable—indeed enthusiastic—attitude of
organizations connected with the blind. No
less than thirty-two of these passed supporting resolutions.

Efforts were made in Parliament. In these,
Major A. G. Church, Wing-Commander
A. W. H. James and Mr. Hugh Molson took
prominent parts.

But an adverse wind was beginning to
blow. The beginning of 1934, when the Brock
report was published, was also the occasion
of an event which increasingly told against
us. The Nazis promulgated a sterilization
law with compulsory clauses. There is no
time to discuss the German enactment.
Suffice it that the course of international
events generated suspicions of any measure
which had even distant affinities with Nazi
practices. The argument was increasingly
heard that the cautious and moderate
recommendations of the Brock Committee
were the “ thin end of a wedge ”’ of which
the thick end would be a compulsory system
182

operated by Eugenic Courts, the instruments of a dictatorship.

The Government of the day felt that the
measure had ceased to be a purely medical
question : it had acquired dangerous political
overtones.

Subsequent experience has demonstrated
what we all knew, that sterilization was open
to abuse ; but it has also shown, as will be
heard from a later speaker, that it can be so
safeguarded as to be a valuable instrument
of preventive medicine. Other countries
such as Denmark and Sweden, no less
democratic than ourselves, have sterilization
laws which work well. Indeed they are supported by a large volume of medical and
lay opinion.

The subject has, as the Chairman said,
been in the doldrums since 1939. The time
has now come when it should be revived.

Mrs. Moya Woodside’s Contribution

To my mind, people in this country take
a rather insular outlook towards the possibilities of eugenic sterilization. Ignoring
or unaware of successful experience in
Scandinavia, Switzerland and the United
States, they are apt to think of it as a dangerous sort of experiment which easily
lends itself to misuse. From a strictly
genetical point of view they may feel it has
very limited value, as even if all certified
persons were sterilized the much larger
group of “ carriers”’ in. the normal population is untouched. Or—despite the word
voluntary—they may believe that sterilization is something “ done ”’ to people, perhaps
against their will, and which has damaging
psychological results. The whole topic is
greatly befogged by speculation and emotion.

When I went out to North Carolina, now
nearly four years ago, I was most curious
to know how a sterilization law worked in
everyday practice. And I was curious about
how men and women felt who had actually
had the operation. In the course of my study,
it became apparent that many of the theoretical dangers and difficulties associated with
sterilization were, in practice, negligible or
non-existent. But there were difficulties of a
social and economic nature, which, in the

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

particular circumstances of North Carolina,
proved an effective brake on the best
intentions of the law.

Let me sketch in very briefly the background of eugenic sterilization in the United
States. It is no new experience there, since
the earliest law was enacted over forty years
ago, in the state of Indiana. Shortly after,
in 1909 and 1911, California and Iowa passed
similar laws and other states soon did the
same. Today, in 1951, twenty-seven states
have sterilization laws in active use. The
total of officially reported sterilizations to
January ist of this year was 52,233 : 21,250
of these were male, 30,983 were female:
26,858, or rather more than half, were
undertaken on grounds of mental deficiency.
The remainder were on grounds of mental
disease.

Now all this happens, and has been happening for forty-three years, without fuss
or fanaticism in a country where individual
liberty is respected as much as here. I
would like to stress that the character of
these various state laws is entirely democratic, and their administration is in the
hands of informed and responsible people.
The Eugenics Board in North Carolina, for
instance, consists of the Attorney General,
two institutional psychiatrists, a senior
administrative social worker and a senior
public health doctor. I attended several
meetings of the Board when sterilization
petitions were being considered, and I was
impressed by the almost microscopic way
in which every detail of a petition was
scrutinized so that no medical or legal
requirement was unfulfilled. In fact, the
outside criticism most often made by doctors
and social workers about the functioning of
the Eugenics Board was in terms of “ red
tape ’’ and ultra-cautiousness.

North Carolina is roughly the size of
England, excluding Wales. It has a population of 34 million people, nearly a third of
them Negro. The predominant religion is
Protestant fundamentalist, and Catholics
are in a very small minority. North Carolina
has had its present law for nineteen years,
and during that period, 2,696 sterilizations
have been done. As in the other twenty-six
VOLUNTARY STERILIZATION

interested states, the law refers onl} to
cases of mental disease, feeble-mindedness
and epilepsy. Nowhere is there statutory
provision for sterilization on grounds of
transmissible physical defect, such as deafmutism or hemophilia: a mental condition
must exist as well. Sterilization of normal
individuals for medical reasons is not
covered by law, and is left to the surgeons’
discretion.

There is nothing wholesale about the
application of the law: in fact, petitions are
only presented for a very small proportion
of those eligible. Operations are not considered for permanently-institutionalized
persons (which eliminates the large group of
chronic psychotic and low-grade defective).
Nor, in the case of women, are they necessary
once the menopause is past. There is selection, tou, within the diagnostic categories—
at one of the North Carolina mental hospitals
the medical superintendent tried to recommend all cases of recovered puerperal
psychosis. At another mental hospital the
preference went to high-grade defectives
with epilepsy. The correctional and mental
deficiency institutions tend to select cases
where, in addition to feeble-mindedness, there
is a record of anti-social sexual behaviour.
No patient or inmate anywhere is recommended for sterilization unless they themselves understand what it means and give
their own consent. Nor would any surgeon
operate on an unwilling patient, even though
their sterilization had been specifically
authorized by the Eugenics Board.

To illustrate the type of patient selected,
here are two cases from Eugenics Board
records :

A married woman, age twenty-four, diagnosed
as severely epileptic, who is the mother of five
children ranging in age from six years to four
months. She has been in Court several times for
sexual misdemeanour, and has also been guilty
of maltreatment and abandonment of her
children.

A single girl, age seventeen, mentally deficient,
who was committed to a training school for
being an inhabitant of a disorderly house. Her
mother is dead, her father is an alcoholic. Her
father was suspected of incest. Two brothers
have prison records for stealing. On an intelligence test she received an I.Q. of 58.

183

I hadrather imagined that medical superintendents, when considering eugenic sterilization, would draw up family trees of their
patients and weigh the pro and con of
Mendelian inheritance. But not. at all—
their decision was based on the immediate
welfare of the patient and the social surroundings to which he or she would return.
They spoke of protection (this was a word I
often heard used about the operation).
Sterilization protected a woman’s physical
and mental health, and protected indirectly
her family. Feeble-minded girls were protected from undesirable pregnancy, and the
community protected from the burden of
supporting their handicapped children. This
to me was a new way of looking at negative
eugenics; but it seems one that Galton
would have approved.

There were two main practical difficulties
about getting sterilizations put through.
First, the complications of petition procedure, which requires a medical examination, psychological tests, consents from
next-of-kin or guardian, a social history,
naming of surgeon who will operate, and
provisional arrangements for hospitalization.
All this calls for time, care and_ skilled
social case-work, since it may take several
interviews with relatives before they will
give their consent. This is particularly so
when dealing with patients from the Social
Problem Group, since their relatives are
likely to be of low intelligence themselves
(and, in North Carolina, often illiterate and
very superstitious).

The second difficulty was a shortage of
hospital beds, of qualified surgeons and of
public funds to meet the cost. However
serious the laws’ intention, operations
cannot be performed if there is no accommodation available and no money to pay the
surgeons’ fees. Remember, there is no
compulsory health insurance coverage in
America, and medical services in the poorer
Southern states are shockingly inadequate.
Whether or not recommended persons got
sterilized often depended on where they
lived. If it was in a rural area without
hospital service (in 1948 thirty-six of North
Carolina’s 100 counties had no hospital
184

beds whatever) the administrative difficulties of getting a patient admitted to a
hospital in another area, for an operation
not regarded as urgent, were almost insuperable. Again, if the local hospital were
Catholic-controlled (as was the case in one
or two counties) no co-operation was forthcoming. If it had no beds for Negro patients,
then Negroes went unsterilized. If the local
surgeon were uninterested or hostile, sterilizations did not get done.

But my most unexpected discovery in
North Carolina was the extent and popularity
of sterilization outside the eugenics law.
Known as therapeutic sterilization, these
operations were performed on _ physical
grounds such as heart or kidney disease, and
social factors of poverty and high fertility
were taken into account. When possible,
the operation was done immediately following a woman’s confinement, so that one stay
in hospital sufficed. The surgeon obtained
informal written consent from the patient
and her husband before she was admitted.
No stigma was attached to the procedure :
those who’d been “fixed” or had their
“tubes tied’’ (to quote the vernacular! ) were
rather objects of envy among _ prolific
friends and neighbours.

I interviewed forty-eight married women
of normal mentality who had had this sort
of operation. There were both white and
Negro in the group; some were well-off,
but most were in poor circumstances. A
few had University education ; a few were
near-illiterate. The average number of
pregnancies was five. With three exceptions,
all had nothing but good to report. General
health had improved, anxiety and worry
diminished, interest in sex had revived, and
marriages were happier. Husbands also
approved. As one Negro mother who had
had fourteen pregnancies said: “‘It’s the most
wonderful thing that ever happened. I
wished they had given it to me six years
ago.”’ The enthusiastic testimony of these
women left no doubt in my mind that sterilization in appropriate cases could only
benefit mental and physical health.

One last point. Sterilization in North

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Carolina is regarded as a medical and social
welfare measure, and is carried out in that
spirit. If we here could create a similar
unemotional climate of opinion, the practice
of voluntary sterilization would be greatly
forwarded in this country.

A Synopsis of Mr. Cecil Binney’s

Contribution

Mr. Cecil Binney, M.A., barrister-at-law,
dealt with the legal position regarding
sterilization. He remarked that he had
given considerable attention to this subject
since the occasion many years ago when the
Eugenics Society, before he became a member,
kindly employed him to produce a pamphlet
on, the subject. He had then found the
utmost difficulty in coming to any conclusion
about the law and further consideration
made the problem no easier. There could be
no doubt that a sterilizing operation if done
for therapeutic reasons was as lawful as
other surgical operations. It was equally
certain that it was unlawful to perform
such operations except for therapeutic reasons on persons incapable of giving their
consent or unwilling to do so. The question
which concerned the Society was as to the
legality of the operation if performed with
the patient’s consent on eugenic grounds,
though this might involve the larger question
whether the operation was illegal when
performed for less worthy motives. The
legal position had been slightly clarified since
the question was first mooted in that it was
now plain that the consent of the patient
was not necessarily in itself a defence to a
charge of unlawful wounding, while it was
obvious that any sterilizing operation must
come under the definition of wounding.
The question still remained open in what
circumstances wounding might be held to be
unlawful because it was done with a commendable motive. The question whether a
prosecution was likely to be brought against
a doctor performing a sterilizing operation
was quite a different one from the question
whether it was against the law, and one on
which he could not express any opinion.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLIII, No. 4
