EUGENIC LEGISLATION IN DENMARK
By H. O. WILDENSKOV, oo.

(Medical Superintendent of the Keller Institution for Mental Defectives, Brejning, Denmark)

WISH to present a short report on the
Danish laws dealing with mental defectives. These laws must be regarded as

being distinctly eugenic in their effect, in so
far as segregation and sterilization are complementary.

The scheme of State care of mental defectives in Denmark is an extremely progressive
one, and is closely associated with the name
of Professor C. Kellers, the founder of the
present system. It is to his initiative that we
owe the Keller Institutions for Mental Defectives, with the branches on the isle of Live
for men and on the island of Sprogé for
women. From the beginning the “ open
door ”’ policy of these institutions has helped
to build up public confidence in the State
scheme, and this confidence provides a basis
for further extension of State control.
Denmark now has institutional accommodation for one in every 740 inhabitants. If
German and English institutions were on the
same scale, there would be room for 88,000
persons in the former and 53,000 in the latter.*
Altogether, family relief included, about
two per thousand of the Danish population
are covered by schemes of State assistance.

For the regulation of these great improvements in the State schemes, new laws have
been necessary, and those about which I am
privileged to report were passed in the course
of the last year by the Minister of Social
Affairs.

RESPONSIBILITY OF THE STATE

In the Public Assistance Act of May rst,
1933, the State undertakes complete responsibility for all expenses connected with the
State care of mental defectives, including
such items as clothing and conveyance to the
institution, and even for dental treatment,

* The number of mentally defective persons who were
accommodated in institutions under the Mental Deficiency Acts on January Ist, 1933, was 31,646.

medical treatment, funeral, etc. In order to
ensure that a patient does not have to wait
too long before being admitted into an institution, the State is considered liable for any
expenses incurred one month after a proper
application form has been submitted. If the
institution has no vacancy, it is nevertheless
obliged to find temporary accommodation
for the mental defective. The Ministry is
responsible for seeing that there are sufficient
places in institutions, and this has necessitated building a large new branch which is
to be finished in one year. Finally, the law
compels all doctors and headmasters to
report if they find, in the course of their
work, a case of mental deficiency in need of
attention, and similar regulations apply to
State schools.

If all these provisions are to have the
necessary effect, an extensive decentralisation will have to take place, in which every
Commune must take part. This is being done
by a social committee established in each
Commune, whose duty it is to carry out
these provisions within its borders. The
decision that the State should pay the whole
expenses for mental defectives has had the
effect of making individual Communes eager
to register their defectives, fearing that
otherwise they would have to pay the cost
of their care.

But since, under this Act, the State undertakes complete financial responsibility, it
thereby acquires an authoritative status in
relation to the care of defective individuals
and to the prevention of their reproduction.
The relevant provisions are enacted in a law
of May 16th of this year. According to this
law :

Public care of mental defectives can
only be undertaken by recognized institutions. An application for admission can be
made either by the parents or their representatives or by the person responsible for

281

Cc
282

the mental defective, e.g. a Juvenile Care
Committee (Jugend flegeausschuss) or the
social committee. The institution itself can
also initiate the procedure.

The application for assistance is directed
to the institution which, having verified the
statements, proceeds to provide the necessary aid as early as possible. An appeal
against the decision of the institution can be
made to the Social Ministry, whose decision
is final. If necessary it is the duty of the
police to assist in implementing the decision.
Application for dismissal can be brought
forward either by the mental defective or by
the persons entitled to make the initial application. Dismissal, however, can only take
place with the consent of the institution
concerned. An appeal against refusal to
dismiss can be made to the Social Ministry,
whose decision is final.

PROVISION FOR STERILIZATION

It is the duty of an institution to propose
immediate sterilization of a mental defective
if the interests of society require it—for
instance, on the ground that the person concerned is obviously unable to give his children
a proper training or to earn a living for them ;
or when sterilization would benefit the
patient by enabling him to avoid institutional
life or live under freer conditions, providing
there were no fear of his having children who
would be a burden to society. The mental

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

defective need not himself give his consent
for sterilization, but a guardian must give
his opinion in the case mentioned above. No
age limit is laid down.

The proposal to sterilize is sent to a committee consisting of a judge, a social worker,
and a medical specialist. If this committee
agrees to the proposal, the institution becomes responsible for the sterilization. If it
does not agree, the operation cannot take
place, and a new proposal can only be
brought up after one year has elapsed. The
expenses of the operation are borne by public
funds.

Sterilization is defined as vasectomy or
salpingectomy. Sterilization not in accordance with the above procedure is a legal
offence.

From the above, it is evident that sterilization is not conditional on the existence of a
hereditary defect. Therefore, the law relies
on social values to supply reasons for sterilization—for instance, if incapacity of the mental
defective to educate and feed his children
makes sterilization desirable, or if sterilization is beneficial to the mental defective by
enabling him to have greater freedom.

These laws exercise a eugenic effect, since
they apply extensively the principle of social
care, and thereby obviate or reduce the
dangers of transmitting hereditary defects.
In addition, they seek to decrease the burden
of State expenditure by providing for
sterilization in suitable cases.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVI, No. 4
