CORRESPONDENCE

MR. HERBERT BREWER writes: The admission
by Madeleine Simms that much ill health
results from unnecessary abortion, invites
contrast with other widely publicized assertions
on behalf of her organization that abortion
induced by doctors is safe and harmless, no more
to be feared than having your tonsils out. The
harmful sequelae of abortion are especially
serious for the younger women. As Asherman
has pointed out (Proc. Ist World Congress on
Fertility and Sterility). development of the hypoplastic organs of the young female, which completed pregnancy tends to normalize, is prone
to undergo permanent arrest as the result of
abortion, to the great detriment of health and
maternal efficiency. In this connection, what
carries more weight than the ipse dixit of
Madeleine Simms is the testimony of Dr. E.
Sjovall, a leading Swedish gynaecologist with
extensive experience of abortion, who stated, “an
abortion will always be a dangerous and unbiological method, for the sharp severance of
all the processes in the body of a pregnant woman
will often result in long lasting ill health” (Rep.
4th Int. Conf. Planned Parenthood, 1953, p. 85).

It is both absurd and unfair to represent me
as a defender of unwanted parenthood. For over

thirty years I have been advocating voluntary
sterilization as the most effective means of combating that evil. My judgement in this has
recently been vindicated by the testimony of
Dr. Chandrasekhar, one of the world’s foremost
demographers.

On the basis of extensive Indian experience,
he has declared that voluntary sterilization by
vasectomy is by far the best answer to the
problem of fertility control. “This,” he affirmed,
“‘was true although the methods tried included
the birth control pill and the much-publicized
intra uterine coil... . The advantage of voluntary
sterilization is that it solves the problem, once
for all, for those couples who have had from
two to four children and do not want any more
for health, economic, or other reasons” (New
York Times, 4th April 1965). If we followed the
Indian example in providing readily available
facilities for vasectomy for similar cases here,
that could go far to obviate a large number of
illegal abortions, which, it is generally agreed,
mainly concern married women. Unlike induced
abortion, and at a small fraction of its cost,
voluntary sterilization by vasectomy provides a
harmless, certain and foolproof solution, without
destroying life or impairing health.
