REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS. 7!

history of the subject proves that such a result has never in the past
followed. So far as the children of dissolved marriages are concerned, he claims that the State need have no apprehension, as the
number who would be left to the public charge would be no greater
than now follows in case of death of parents or illegitimacy.
R. NEWTON CRANE.

Loeb, Jacques. The Mechanistic Conception of Life. University of

Chicago Press; 1912; (London, Cambridge University Press); 6s.

net; pp. 227.
UNDER this title Dr. Loeb has gathered into one volume ten essays and
lectures, all of which have appeared in various publications within the
last twenty years. They cover a wide range of subjects, and for the most
part summarise recent work in these subjects. The connecting link
between them is found in the fact that they all endeavour to explain
biological processes on chemical and physical grounds.

Three essays deal with the mechanism of fertilisation and consequently with that of heredity, and are thus of particular interest to
eugenists. For heredity forms the basis of eugenics, and all those interested in the latter science must wish to follow the latest work on heredity.
These essays may be recommended as giving a clear and concise account
of the remarkable experiments with regard to artificial parthenogenesis
which have attracted the attention of biologists within the last few years,
and in which Dr. Loeb himself has taken a leading part.

A. M. CARR-SAUNDERS.
Hubbard A. J. The Fate of Empires. London. Longmans, Green
and Co.; price 6s. 6d.; pp. 220.

RECENTLY quite a number of books have appeared that aim at setting
out the principles which govern the course of history. It has been the
fashion lately to lay stress upon the importance of heredity and to
attempt to account for the decay of civilisations by the disappearance of
the better strains. Though we may be certain that heredity has something to do with the matter, most of these attempts appear to be somewhat immature in the present state of our knowledge. Mr. Hubbard’s
book, however, emphasises quite different factors. He has been much
influenced by Mr. Benjamin Kidd, and the argument follows the lines
familiar to those who have read “ Social Evolution.”

The argument, put briefly, is that at certain periods in history
reason leads individuals to seek their own comfort by abolishing competition; in other words, Socialism makes its appearance. Reason
again teaches men that it is not in their own interest to make provision
for future generations; hence comes the fall in the birth-rate. Both
these phenomena are much in evidence at the present day, and “ the
turning point in past civilisations has been marked, again and again,
by the appearance of Socialism coincidently with a failure of the birthrate.” Thus civilisation is once more on the decline. What is the
cure? How can civilisation be made stable? According to Mr. Hubbard there can be no enduring civilisation that rests on reason alone
or on instinct alone, or “any religion that serves their purposes.” In
China, nowever, we find an enduring civilisation that rests upon “ the
prepotence of the suprarational method over that of pure reason.” That,
of course, was Mr. Kidd’s main argument.

The weakness of arguments of this kind are their extreme vagueness.
What is Socialism? It might be fairly argued that it resembles far
more closely certain institutions which are prominent in the early stages
of human history rather than anything we can discover during the decline
of Roman and other civilisations. Then, again, it might be argued that
the hope of civilisation rests more upon reason than upon anything else.
What is required is a much fuller knowledge of many things—especially
certain biological problems—before we can hope to attack with success
72 EUGENICS REVIEW.

such a vast question as that of the cyclical rise and fall of civilisations.
Nevertheless, such books as that under review are full of suggestion
to those who take an interest in the wider problems that the contemplation of the historical record raises. A. M. CARR-SAUNDERS.

Chatterton-Hill, GrorGEs, Ph.D. (Privatdocent of Sociology at the University of Geneva). The Philosophy of Nietasche: An Exposition
and an Apprectation. London. John Ouseley, Ltd.; 1912; price
7s. 6d. net; pp. 292.

IN this able volume Dr. Chatterton-Hill has given us a sympathetic
yet discriminating appreciation of that potent, but erratic, genius,
Friedrich Nietzsche. He regards Nietzsche as one of the great forces of
modern Europe, and as a force working, on the whole, for good. He
believes that Nietzsche’s message—be strong, believe in life, cultivate an
ideal of strength and beauty, despise the soft virtues, recognise that only
through suffering can anything great be created, reject the mediocre conceptions of democracy and Socialism, beware of the materialism of
science and ideals of mere comfort and equality, look for the coming of
the Over-man, the leader, creator, autocrat—is a message which the
modern world needs. rie recognises the violence of Nietzsche’s language,
his exaggeration, his furious onslaught on most of the ideals—scientific,
philosophic, sociological and religious—which our civilisation most highly
cherishes. He discounts his perverted view of the origin and spirit of
Christianity. But he does full justice to Nietzsche’s originality and power,
the grandeur of his philosophic thought, his intrepidity, his insight, his
poetic charm, and his prophetic enthusiasm. It is not possible in the
course of a brief review to do justice to Nietzsche’s scheme of thought,
which has affinities with the general doctrine of eugenics, although it
may be that Eugenists may find him a dangerous ally. Nietzsche is the
sworn foe of democracy, of equality, of the religion of love, pity, and
sympathy, of asceticism, of pessimism. His ideal is one of exuberant life,
of beauty, power, and strength. His hero is the strong man who can
command and coerce, who is not afraid either to suffer or to inflict
suffering. The weak, the timid, the incompetent are to be crushed out
of existence or coerced for their own good. Sympathy is a mistake—it
weakens him who gives and does not help him who receives. Morality
is only to be approved if it can be shown to be more useful to life than
immorality. The justification of humanity is the production of the
superior race—the Over-man. ‘This is the new wherefore? The categories of life are zsthetic, artistic—not moral. Science is materialistic,
religion is a worship of the slave virtues, and so on and so on.

All this gives one furiously to think, as the French say. Much might
be said on the other side. Nietzsche is not good meat for immature
minds, but there are some to whom he may be a useful tonic or at least
good red pepper. J. A. LInDSay.

Key, Eten. Love and Ethics. London. G. P. Putnam’s Sons; 1912;
price 1s. net; pp. 61.
THE authoress here replies to. some of the criticisms that have been
showered on her former book, “ Love and Marriage,” protesting that,
in pointing the way to the probable development of marriage in the
future, she was only pleading for a recognition of the development of
the social organism, and, therefore, forecasting what would be one
of the necessary developments of one of the most important of social
customs. Ellen Key is both an Idealist and a Eugenist, and from these
standpoints she considers the existing marriage laws and customs of
society, weighs them in the balance, and finds them wanting. The ideal
of love and marriage she sets before us is perhaps far beyond the
capacity of the average even to appreciate, much less to attain, but
the future development of sex relations will be along the lines she
