THE EUGENICS REVIEW

to beg the question for the choice of institutions
in the world of reality” (p. 235). But when he
adds that “many features of the real world
which are particularly relevant to the choice of
the best institutional mixture have been assumed
away throughout this volume’, one is inclined to
suggest that “many” should be amended to “all’’.
A Pareto-optimum is simply a Pareto-optimum,
and can be described in terms of a highly simplified competitive economy of omniscient individuals, or of an economy organized by an
omniscient central authority, or of various
mixtures of the two. The significant problems of
economic policy and of the choice of appropriate
institutions are not problems of how to calculate
or compute “optima”? from complete data,
known and predictable with certainty, as
represented in textbook and blackboard diagrams. They are problems of how best to
provide against ignorance and uncertainty, how
to cope with ‘“‘externalities’’, which are not
exceptions, or curiosa, but the very stuff of a
modern economy in which motor-cars and more
spacious housing are the main desiderata.
Professor Meade is, of course, perfectly well
aware of these points, but hardly seems to give
them due weight in his conception of the
relationship between his highly abstract analysis
and policy conclusions.

It might be dangerous if undergraduate
students get the distorted impression of the
nature of policy problems that, given the
necessary value judgements, wise and realistic
decisions are, or can be, reached by calculations
or computations from complete data known with
certainty; and that they should therefore devote a
large part of their time and energy to the
cultivation of purely analytical, logical or
geometrical analysis. The belief in the supreme
importance of precise and subtle, but highly
abstract, analysis rather resembles that of the
senior Guards officer’s belief that the best
training for the battlefield was for the soldier to
spend much of his time performing meticulously
precise drill-movements on the barrack-square;
or the belief of the classics masters that devoting
much of one’s time to Latin and Greek composition was the best training in clear thinking
and expression (admittedly not nearly as bad an
idea as some of those which have superseded it).

104

But this line of criticism may not merely seem
rather carping, it is also premature. One will not
be able adequately to judge the emphasis of
Professor Meade’s work until further instalments
are unfolded. One should certainly look forward
to these confident that, as with the present
volume, one will be treated to a masterly and
instructive example of detached, lucid and
precise analysis.

T. W. HUTCHISON

CONTRACEPTION

Mears, Eleanor. Handbook on Oral Contraception. London, 1965. Churchill. Pp. xv+107.
Price 20s.

DESCRIBING ORAL CONTRACEPTIVES, Dr.
Mears writes “it is probably true to say that no
other group of drugs in general use has been
subjected to so much careful investigation on a
world-wide basis”. This handbook is a remarkably compact and efficiently constructed summary
of all the work which has gone into studying
oral contraceptives up to the beginning of 1965.
In a mere 100 pages it covers the clinical usage of
“the pill’ and sets it in its correct biological
context, and includes, in addition, chapters on
very recent advances, such as sequential therapy.

The book has arisen out of the work of the
Oral Advisory Group of the IPPF Medical
Committee. To a large extent it gets the best of
two different worlds. On the one hand, it
benefits from a single authorship which leads to
continuity and avoids the excessive length (and
price) of volumes that attempt to cover a large
field by calling on several authors. On the other
hand, it has the advantages of a symposium in
that many distinguished authorities on oral
contraception have been closely associated and
partly responsible for large sections of the book.

In summarizing the scientific aspects of the
subject all the most significant work on both man
and animals is adequately covered. All the
controversial issues that have arisen around oral
contraception are faced squarely and honestly:
possible effects on the pituitary, on blood
clotting mechanisms and on liver function, and
any long-term risk of carcinogenesis are closely
discussed. Perhaps one of the most useful
REVIEWS OF BOOKS

aspects of this handbook will be as an answer to
those biologists and doctors who are over
cautious in the large-scale use of oral contraceptives. At the same time Dr. Mears does not
overstate her case and is careful to underline
those areas where doubts remain. It is interesting
that in certain physiological fields knowledge of
the action of “‘the pill’’ has outstripped our basic
knowledge of the normal.

Under the clinical usage of oral contraceptives
the Handbook surveys their use, effectiveness,
possible side effects and their action on lactation
and the menopause. The least satisfactory part
of the book is a chapter of practical advice to
doctors which is clumsily set out as a series of
questions and answers.

Not all reviews of the Handbook have been as
eulogistic as the above. It has been described as
“‘hastily put together’? and over enthusiastic in
its advocacy of oral contraception, that socalled “‘violent incursion into the endocrine
physiology of the woman’’. For my part, I find
it a most valuable book on an exceedingly
important topic.

MALCOLM POTTS

SCIENCE AND RELIGION

Thorpe, W. H. Science, Man and Morals.
London, 1965. Methuen. Pp. 155. Price 25s.

THIS BOOK IS the outcome of a course of
endowed lectures delivered by Dr. Thorpe at
Balliol College in 1963. When it is known that
the purpose of the lectures is to discuss the
relation of science to Christianity with particular
reference to the “sympathetic explanation of
differences . . .” the general trend will be
apparent. Indeed, it would not be unfair—if
perhaps a little unkind—to say that it is an
heroic endeavour to get Paley’s watch going
again after its century-long retirement. But the
emphasis is shifted from the design of the actual
parts of the watch to the materials from which the
parts were fashioned—the shape and purpose of
the parts having been inherent in the materials
from Creation. Such a bald statement as this,
however, does less than justice to the full and
learned argument and Dr. Thorpe is clearly as
highly qualified in philosophical as he is in
scientific matters; moreover he is a_ noted

ER—H

authority on animal behaviour and many
original and fascinating examples are given,
accompanied by enlightened interpretations and
inferences.

Eugenics receives measured approval, more
particularly “when it comes to be based, as we
hope it will, on foundations of knowledge
incomparably greater than at present” (p. 123).
Several possible future techniques—such as AID
with preserved semen, or perfecting a method by
which, to implant “‘nuclei of somatic cells into
enucleated eggs, and then force them to develop
parthogenetically” (p. 123) are mentioned. But
some will demur at the author’s disagreement
with the example quoted (p. 123) of the laboratory rat becoming decadent in the absence of
natural selection; Dr. Thorpe argues that such
absence does not produce decadence because the
rat becomes admirably adapted to the protected
environment of the laboratory. But surely this is
to confuse the “decadence” within an environment where natural selection is operating and
““decadence’’ outside such a society. Carried to
the human parallel we have the words of the late
Sir Charles Darwin, while President of The
Eugenics Society: “The most efficient way for a
man to survive in Britain is to be almost halfwitted, completely irresponsible and spending a
lot of time in prison, where his health is far
better looked after than outside; on coming out
with restored health he is ready to beget many
further children quite promiscuously, and these
‘problem children’ are then beautifully cared
for ... until such time as they have grown old
enough to carry on the good work”’,* which well
describes an admirable adaptation to Welfare
State conditions yet still deserves the appellation
“decadent”’.

Differing interpretations by individual physicists of the physical (author’s italics) universe
receives attention and mention is made of the
fact that as more and more physical considerations are taken into account, fewer features of
the universe remain accidental (p. 134). But such
thoughts could only be written in the absence of
a valid definition of an accident itself. To a
Determinist the mention of the word “‘accident”’
can only bring a wan smile.

* The Next Million Years, p. 94.
105
