HOMOGAMY IN FERTILITY

An American Study of the Mating of Like with Like

By RAYMOND R. WILLOUGHBY, Ph.D.

additional light on the problem of the
correlation of intelligence and fecundity
by adding to the usual measures of the
latter more remote degrees of relationship,
propounded to a group of college and noncollege people the question ‘‘ How many
grandchildren (born alive) has your father’s
mother had? Your father’s father? Your
mother’s mother? Your mother’s father ?’’
While the results were approximately
satisfactory for the purpose intended, it
became evident that the value of the data
could be greatly enhanced at the cost of
little extra effort by requesting the subject
to draw a pedigree chart showing the exact
relationships of his grandparents and their
children and grandchildren, with dates of
death or present ages. It may be pointed
out in passing that, if carefully gathered, a
body of data in this form offers extensive
possibilities for the demographic analysis
of any population able to comprehend the
directions, and that for such a population a
considerable sampling may be gathered with
comparatively little effort. |The method
accordingly merits, in my judgment, much
more extended use than it has yet received
on the part of eugenists and students of
population. The possible question whether
it can be still further generalized by including, say, the great-grandparental generation and its descendants, must, however, be
answered in the negative, at least for
America; since the number of intelligent
persons of the average age of twenty who
have no information on their own first
cousins is astonishing at first glance, and
those who must consult their parents before
recording the number of the latters’ siblings
are not rare.

|= 1928 the writer, wishing to throw

A SIGNIFICANT CORRELATION

In the first inquiry conducted by the
improved method, in which the Clark
University class of 1934 acted as subjects,
systematic examination of the data was
made in an endeavour to determine its possibilities. Among the findings appeared a
correlation between the number of the
father’s siblings and the number of the
mother’s siblings amounting to .36. It can
hardly escape notice that this is an item of
some moment; for fertility is fairly well
established as a character determined in considerable degree by hereditary factors, and
homogamy in this character has its usual
significance in favouring the differentiation
of strains, plus the particular one that in
this instance the strains so differentiated
will survive in direct proportion to the
degree of the trait. Accordingly, rather
intensive efforts have been made to learn
whether the phenomenon is_ reasonably
constant, upon what it depends, and
whether it is essentially a contemporary
phenomenon; the results, not as unequivocal as might be wished, but nevertheless
highly suggestive, are reported in the
present paper.

We may consider first the information
yielded by the original (1928) material.
These data are of somewhat limited serviceability in the present problem on account of
the form of the question asked (see above).
The average number of grandchildren of
the maternal grandparents (the same as
that of either maternal grandparent except
for plural fertile matings) correlated with
the average number of children of the
paternal grandparents yields a coefficient
of .494+.036; this, however, is spuriously
large, since the subject and his siblings are

223
224

included in both distributions. To estimate
the size of this spurious contributing factor,
the Clark University data mentioned above,
which were collected by the pedigree-chart
method, were examined ; a correlation similar in every respect to that noted above was
calculated, and yielded a coefficient of
.496+.055. The latter correlation was then
recalculated, omitting the subject and his
siblings from both distributions ; the resulting coefficient was .280. It appears to be a
legitimate inference that in both populations
the spurious factor amounts to about .21 (in
terms of raw correlation) and that the degree
of assortive mating in fertility is approximately measured by a coefficient of .28.

It should be observed, however, that this
effect is the aggregate of two generations ;
extreme fertilities in either the parental or
the grandparental generation could be compensated by extremes in the reverse direction in the other, and a coefficient of —.20
between the generations on the paternal side
(approximately zero on the maternal) indicates that they are occasionally so compensated; the true measure of homogamy in
fertility is therefore probably somewhat
larger than that obtained.

The distributions encountered in correlating these variables, it should be mentioned parenthetically, are, of course, not
normal, but J-shaped; the regression lines
are, however, sensibly rectilinear, and the
use of the product-moment coefficient is
therefore appropriate.

Examination of the sub-populations yields
the following results :

T N

Faculty 525 45
Graduates 471 46
*Seniors (’28) 127 12
*Juniors .642 23
*Sophomores 553 31
*Freshmen .390 29
Non-college .422 23

* These are the terms in customary usage in
America to designate respectively the fourth, third,
second, and first year students in the standard
undergraduate university or college course of four
years.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

The largest of these differences (seniorsjuniors) is only 1.67 times its standard
error; it is therefore concluded (1) that the
1928 data indicate the existence of a degree
of homogamy in fertility represented by a
coefficient of .28; and (2) that if any secular
trends in the tendency indicated exist, they
cannot be discovered from these data by
reason of (a) the small secular range (not
more than a single generation between
faculty and freshmen), and (b) the small
size of the sub-populations.

Passing to the freshman data of 1930,
upon which the original observation was
made and which were the first collected by
the pedigree-chart method, we may consider
three measures of homogamy : (1) The number of siblings of each parent (or that number plus the parent himself—the two values
being indistinguishable in correlations) ;
(2) the number of individuals in the subject’s generation on paternal and maternal
sides respectively ; and (3) the average fertility of those of the paternal and maternal
siblings who reproduced at all (so defined
in order to allow both for individuals unable
to marry and for the fact that the number
of individuals in the subject’s generation is
partly determined by the number in the
parental generation). It is possible that
there are other suitable measures.

The marital correlation in the trait (1)
above is .34+.07, which becomes .356 upon
the exclusion of one extreme case (22 children, from three wives) ; that in variable (2)
is .496+.055, which becomes .280 when the
subject and his siblings are excluded from
both distributions; the correlation in variable (3) is .61+.05 when the fertility of the
parents is included in both distributions, or
.23 when this common component is
excluded.

INTELLIGENCE VERSUS OCCUPATION

When the data are divided into halves on
the basis of (1) intelligence of subject (Thurstone Psychological Examination), and (2)
occupational level of father (a subjective,
but probably fairly reliable division by the
writer), the following curious situation is
disclosed : In the lower intelligence group
  
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 

i homogamy in fertility is measured by a
Fificient of .509+ .085, while in the higher
elligence group it is .0o78+.117; and in
# lower occupational group (skilled and
skilled labour, etc.) the coefficient is
3+ .111, while in the higher (professional
Mi business) it becomes .429+.108. There
Ean insignificant correlation (biserial r=
ho +.106) between subject’s intelligence and
fernal occupational level; the homogamy
Rrelation of .356 for the entire group is
Minished infinitesimally (about .004) by
 partialling out of subject’s intelligence.
mhese latter findings make it possible to
Meulate somewhat upon the causation of
& phenomenon under examination, which
hink may be regarded as established for
is freshman group also. The curious
wersal of direction as between intelligence
mj occupational groups appears to be a
Bsequence of the low correlation between
liigence and paternal occupational level
and in this group; that is, the two variles are independent of each other, and
mement in one category of either implies
Ming with respect to the accompanying
woory of the other. This is a fortunate
Stimstance, since each variable is free to
me its own contribution independently,
& the respective contributions can be dismed free from each other’s influence.

h low occupational level and high intelliice we must presumably see restrictive
Bors, in the sense that individuals
sessing these attributes are prevented
in doing something they otherwise might
le done ; the effect of such restrictive fac& might be to reduce range and therefore
tenuate correlations. But inspection of
standard deviations does not confirm this
Hosition (product of the two standard
Hations=4.70 for the lower intelligence
ip; 4.65 for the higher; 5.44 for the
er occupational group; 3.78 for the
Her). The alternative appears to be that
‘tendency to which the restriction has
m applied is a true tendency to homoi - that is, in the lower intelligence and
fer occupational groups there is a tenBy to seek a mate from a family approxiing the size of one’s own, which tendency

" r
. ey

HOMOGAMY IN

FERTILITY 225

is modified with higher intelligence and
lower occupational level.

The whole matter being somewhat
difficult and hypothetical at best, the experiment should be tried of reversing this supposition. It is possible that the ‘“‘ normal ”’
tendency is to avoid selective mating in fertility, that this tendency is seen in the
higher intelligence and lower occupational
groups, and that the modification comes
with a decline in intelligence and a rise in
occupational status. Choice between the two
hypotheses is exceedingly difficult and
tentative; it seems perhaps more conservative to suppose that the unmodified condition is that of random mating, and that the
homogamy phenomenon is the one to be
explained; further, it has been remarked
upon that marked consciousness of kind and
resulting stratification of society are often
associated both with inferior social (and presumably intellectual) elements of the population and with somewhat uncultured but
occupationally ‘ successful’ groups. ‘This
disposition of the problem does not, of
course, disclose the mechanisms involved ;
it does, however, provisionally ally it with
other somewhat recognized social processes.
Further, whatever the mechanisms, the consequences are presumably of somewhat
extensive social significance.

In summary of the Clark University data,
there appears to be indicated a degree of
homogamy in fertility represented by a coefficient of about .3, its exact size varying
somewhat with the remoteness in relationship to the mating pair of the individuals
whose fertility is used to estimate it. Subpopulation analysis on intelligence and occupational bases yields results which are provisionally interpreted as indicating that the
homogamy arises from the accentuated consciousness of kind sometimes associated
with low intelligence and high occupational
status.

A HIGHER SOCIAL GROUP

Pedigree charts numbering 113 have been
collected from the students in an elementary
psychology course at Smith College, through
226

the courtesy of Dr. Hanna Faterson; the
girls are mostly sophomores and juniors,
that is, about 20 years old. The social background of these girls is markedly different
from that of the Clark boys; the former
come from homes economically far more
stable than the latter, who are predominantly sons of local and near-by artisans,
small business men, and a scattering of
professional men. Contrary to expecta
tion, however, the parent-sibling distributions are not curtailed; the product
of the standard deviations is 6.9, as

against 4.7 for the Clark group. The
homogamy correlation for the entire group
(omitting cases complicated by half-siblings)
is .363+.062, identical with that for the
parents of the boys.

The group was divided into a higher and
a lower intelligence group (the Smith College Intelligence Examination is the source
of the intelligence data) ; for the former the
homogamy coefficient is .496+.077, for
the latter .314+.098. The group does
not divide readily into higher and lower
occupational groups, since no men in
‘lower’ occupations can afford to send
their daughters to Smith College; it
does so, however, on the basis of business (the selling of materials) versus professions (the selling of services requiring
learning and skill). For the business group
the homogamy coefficient is .523-+.070, and
for the professional group .278+.117. The
correlation between intelligence and occupation could not be computed satisfactorily,
since the latter is categorical and the
former arranged in centile ranks; but the
mean intelligence centile of the business
group (which is also the more variable) is
50.90, while that of the professional group
is 56.35, so that the correlation is evidently
of appreciable magnitude. The critical
ratios (d/ca) are in none of these instances
statistically reliable, but some weight should
be given to the inter-relationships of the
values found.

The Smith College data confirm remarkably the existence of a homogamy coefhcient of about .35. The results of the subpopulation analysis are not, however, so

THE EUGENICS REVIEW.

  
  
   
   
  
   
   
    
   
  
   
  
    
  
   
  

clear. The consciousness of kind ment
in connection with the Clark results 4
perhaps be predicated of the business gf
as against the professional group; but ¥
indeed difficult to understand why the §
of the homogamy should reside in the iq
intelligence group at Clark and the hig
intelligence group at Smith. Since theré4
relatively few sources of error in this reg
we may assume that the cause for the dij
ence is to be sought in the differences
tween the groups; the most obvious dif
ences are in economic status and orig
The Clark parents are economically mf
less stable, and more of them spring ff
European and Jewish backgrounds; in
way these factors appear to ‘niluence’
degree of homogamy, in co-operation z
intelligence, in different ways.

Dr. Mason N. Crook has very kindly
lected pedigree charts from a total of
Dartmouth College students enrolled {
psychology courses. ‘These boys resem
the Clark group in sex and the Smith greg
in economic background. ‘The product4
the standard deviations of the distributig§
of parent-siblings is intermediate (about 53
between the corresponding figures for Clag
and Smith. The homogamy correlation {
— .132+.064. ‘This group has also beg
divided on the basis of intelligence and aga
into business versus professional. ‘The ce
relation for the higher intelligence group 9
— .204+.090, and that for the lower — .0224
.098. The professional group yields a eq
efficient of —.159+.160, and the busines
group one of —.049+.112; attention shoulg
be called to a greatly reduced range, with '
standard deviation of only 1.4, in the dis a
bution of siblings of fathers of the profes
sional group. The median intelligence cent
tile for the business group is 40, that fof
the professional group 55. Except for the
negative sign, the whole constellation of
facts here is very reminiscent of the Smith
group.

Dr. Harley N. Gould, of the Departmen
of Biology of Newcomb College, Tulane Uni
versity, New Orleans, has recently publishe¢
an article on the sizes of families of the
HOMOGAMY IN FERTILITY

young women students of his institution.*
At my request he has calculated from his data
the coefficient of correlation between number
of father’s siblings and number of mother’s
siblings, i.e., our homogamy coefficient in
fertility. This value turns out to be .113+
.043—evidently a real and positive value,
but much smaller in size than most of those
for the northern groups. The product of his
standard deviations is 6.9, identical with that
for the Smith group.

IN EARLIER TIMES

- We have now canvassed the modern
evidence bearing upon the problem of the
.existence of homogamy in fertility as de‘fined, and may pass to a consideration of
-evidence drawn from older populations.
‘Ideally these should be college populations,
‘to ensure strict comparability; it has not,
‘ however, been practicable to secure any such.
:The first population to be considered is that
‘of the marriages noted in the History of Gortham, Maine, by Hugh D. McLellan. This
kcommunity is a typical colonial Yankee
Eyillage, racially almost pure English, agri-eultural in economics, and considerably ini bred through the mechanisms of cousin martriage, marriage of members of one fraterEnity to those of another, and marriage of
Fone individual to two siblings. This intbreeding is a source of error of unknown
proportions, as is also the fact that the
‘upwards of 500 marriages considered are
necessarily only those in which both spouses
pwere born in the community. The range of
Fdates is from 1743 to 1887, with a median
Fin the decade 1810-20.

i The homogamy correlation differs
curiously in various parts of the range;
fthe data are arranged alphabetically by surfname, yet the correlation for the first 100
tases is .26, while that for the entire series
including half-sibling cases, but not countAng the half-siblings) is .15. Excluding
fhalf-sibling cases reduces this to .14+.03.

  
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
  
 
    
   

= Parental generation : average number born, 5.37;
Mgurvived to age 21 4.73. Student generation : averMive number born, 3.16.—Journal of Heredity, 1930,

Resi, pp. 489-494.

227

The most obvious source of such a correlation is in a mutual correlation of both
series with date; it is well known that birth
rate is a function of time in certain civilizations, and it may be that a tendency to
marry into families of the same size as one’s
own is a consequence of the fact that there
are no others. ‘The number of the wife’s
siblings was therefore plotted against the
date of marriage (which to be sure is not
the date at which the phenomena under consideration were determined, but may be considered to be rather uniformly a constant
time later); the resulting distribution is
curvilinear, with a gradual rise during the
period of active colonization to a point of
approximate stability in the late eighteenth
century ; this is maintained to about 1820,
when a slight drop sets in, to be considerably accelerated about 1850. The series was
accordingly divided into four sub-series at
1790, 1820, and 1850: the following are the
corresponding coefficients :

T N
1743-1790 wes .09 66
1790-1820 wee I2 159
1820-1850 wee 12 157
1850-1887 wee .05 52

For the 1820-50 period, the correlation
between number of wife’s siblings and date
of marriage is —.13; for the period 17901820 it is .03. Partialling out the date in
the 1820-50 period reduces the homogamy
correlation from .12 to .10. Further reductions can be effected by using only one
sister per family (and only one brother
where duplication can be recognized—it
should be recalled that the reductions would
presumably be greater if this could occur
throughout); on this basis the 1790-1820
correlation becomes .06+.065 and that for
1820-50 .08 + .06.

On the basis of the Gorham results it may
be concluded that the true homogamy in this
group was negligible ; on the other hand, it
should be observed that the coefficients remain stubbornly positive, from which it may
perhaps be inferred that the potentiality for
homogamy has been present in the population for a long time.
228

FERTILITY IN A RELIGIOUS SECT

Another population was sought which
might serve as a check on the Gorham
results; it was found in the records of a
Schwenkfelder Society, a German religious
sect with a history much like that of the
New England Puritans. Records are available extending from 1736 to 1922, and
covering about 663 marriages. These data
are subject to the same sources of error
noted in the Gorham material, viz. that only
those marriages in which both spouses were
born in the society can be used, that there
is considerable inbreeding in the sense previously mentioned, and that the conditions
of search make it impossible to detect multi
plications of the same fraternity on the side_

of one of the spouses (here the wife, in Gorham the husband). The raw correlation between the numbers of husband’s and of
wife’s siblings is .10. This is raised to
.12+.03 by the exclusion of cases complicated by half-siblings, and probably decreased about as much (judged by results on
sub-populations and other populations) by
the use of only one case from each family
(so far as the records permit, which in
practice means the use of only one husband from each fraternity); if practicable,
the use of only one husband and only
one wife from each fraternity might
result in a still further slight decrease. The
fact of this decrease appears to mean that
it is slightly more probable that a man will
marry the sister of his brother’s wife than a
member of another family. The regression
lines (as in the Gorham material) appear to
be satisfactorily rectilinear.

To eliminate the possibility of spurious
correlation through the correlation of both
variables with time, the number of the
wife’s siblings was again plotted against
the date of marriage, with about the same
results as in the Gorham group. Up to
1790 (72 cases) there was approximate
stability at 5.5 children per family; from
1790 to 1820 there was a rise to about 9;
from 1820 to 1850 there was approximate
stability at the decreased value of 7; beyond
1890 there was a steady drop to about 4 at
the end of the period of record. —The homo
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

gamy correlations based on these peg
and their sub-divisions are : ;

 

 
 
  
  
 
   
   
  
   
   
  
  
 
   
   
   
  
   
  
  
  
  
   
  
 
 

T N
1730-1790 wee .04 72
1790-1820 . .30 66
1820-1850 .. —-.06 108 ¥
1850-1880 wee o8 «115
1880-1910 vee 03 52 3
1910-1922 bee II 42 3

4

Partialling out date of marriage 4
the two largest of these correlations ga
.18 for the period 1790-1820 and §
for the period 1910-22. (Correlations j
tween date and wife’s siblings are 4
for the earlier period and .28 for the nj
recent, and are not significantly diffeff
for husband’s and wife’s siblings.) For 4
former period, using only one husband ft
each fraternity gives the raw correlatf
.21 and the partial .14. he latter valug
the smallest to which it has been possiblq
reduce this coefficient, and appears to req
sent a real phenomenon. For the sa
period, the correlation for the group j
cases) whose occupations are known, and
presumably ‘‘higher’’ on the average3
.32, and that for those of unknown occy
tion (38 cases) is .28. This is the sqj
phenomenon previously noted in the modé
college groups. 4
It is clear that over the greater part of §
period considered there was no real hog
gamy in fertility among the Schweg
felders ; the most striking exception is df
cult to explain, but may be due to a beg
ning tendency, after social stratification &
set in, but before effective communicath
was established, to marry within clasg
which had begun to show characteristic ,
tilities. It is conjectured that the tendery
to positive correlation from i1gro to 1g
may be the same as observed in o
modern populations, since this is the dg
range from which the college parg
marriages were drawn. 4

THE CONCLUSIONS SUMMARIZED

This concludes the presentation of tf
evidence gathered ; it remains to derive {J
generalizations that seem to be indicated
   
   
   
 
   
  
   
  
   
  
   
 
  
   
  
  
   
 
   
  

We have examined five modern and two
Ristorical populations, separated by an averfaze lapse of about a century. The historical
opulations, widely different in location and
wultural background, but similar in isolation
mand economics, agree in showing nearly comgplete absence of homogamy in fertility,
Mithough the traces that are shown are in nine
put of ten instances positive; only one of
mhese is of a size comparable with that of the
Mnodern populations. Of the modern popuations, all of which are drawn from the
glass sending children to colleges, three are
i a size represented by a coefficient of .3
» somewhat greater ; these are groups send5 ng children to north-eastern colleges, and
Mio sex factor in the children appears to be
fof any determining power. A fourth, drawn
: fom a southern population (the children
sing female), shows a much reduced, but
evidently real correlation (.11). A fifth,
rom a population sending male children to
s famous and expensive north-eastern colfege, yields a negative coefficient (-. 13).
ewe may conclude that homogamy in ferlity was, as recently as the days immeBatiy preceding the War, a tendency of
widespread but not universal application ;
pnd that although potentialities in that

HOMOGAMY IN

FERTILITY 229
direction have existed in the population for
the entire duration of the nation, the conditions necessary for their expression have
arisen only in the present century.

The tendency in question appears from
the present data to be always associated with
superior economic status, if it be permissible to include in that term the business
group (probably with a higher income) as
opposed to the professional group. The
data on intelligence are conflicting, but in
the two groups with male children the
greater tendency towards positive homogamy resides in the lower intelligence group
(as measured by the intelligence of the children), and in the one with female children in
the higher intelligence group. From these
findings the hypothesis is proposed that
homogamy is dependent upon mating within
social classes which have approximately
characteristic fertilities, and that the stratification is greater among less intelligent and
more financially successful groups. But
whatever the cause, the consequences of such
a phenomenon, where it has become established, must be of considerable significance
in promoting the differentiation of classes
based upon fertility and the survival of
those with the higher fertilities.

§——_—_— OO ——E—E——— ey”

MEETING OF THE EUGENICS SOCIETY

PROFESSOR C. G. SELIGMAN, E.R.S.,

will ive an Address on

Race and Temperament

at 5.30 p.m. (Tea at 5 o'clock), on November 25th, at the Rooms of
the Linnean Society, Burlington House, Piccadilly.

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIII, No. 3.
