SIR F. MACFARLANE BURNET
O.M., F.R.S., F.R.C.P., M.D., Ph.D., D.Sc.

2000 A.D.—A Biologist’s Thoughts
on the Next Forty Years’

[om YEARS AGO I spoke at a public
meeting in Hobart held as one of the functions of A.N.Z.A.A.S., with Sir John
Morris in the chair.

My choice of topic to-day is influenced in part
by the memory of the discussion at that meeting
and in part by my feeling that in the next forty
years major changes in the human situation
must occur. You will remember from your history books how the year 1000 was looked forward to by Christendom as the end of the world.
Perhaps A.D. 2000 is developing something of the
same apocalyptic flavour. This year, 1959, I was
asked to address freshmen at the University of
Melbourne during Orientation Week and realized with something of a shock that in the year
2000 their average age would be just what mine
is now; and that their generation was the one
which would carry the responsibility for major
decisions at the turn of the new millennium.
To-day’s freshmen at the university are to be
educated so that they are best fitted to guide our
destinies in A.D. 2000. It underlines one of the
greatest problems of education to-day to consider how little we can guess even as to what
will be the sort of responsibilities that our current undergraduates will have to shoulder in their
years of full maturity.

I am going to be rash enough to make some
suggestions about the problems that will confront them in 2000 and to look at some of the
implications for action in the meantime that
those suggestions will call for. Before I start,
however, I think I should insert a word or two

ee

* A shortened form of the Sir John Morris Memorial
Lecture, 1959. Delivered in Hobart under the auspices of
The Adult Education Board of Tasmania. The Lecture
was originally published by the Melbourne University
Press (London agents, Cambridge University Press).
ce 2s. 6d.

of personal explanation. When I am called upon
to talk on a subject other than those on which I
am professionally competent, I invariably find
myself trying to twist my topic into the same sort
of form that I would use in dealing with some
theme in experimental biology or medicine.
This has its difficulties. It may be mildly amusing
to be told that orders of precedence are visible
amongst any group of barnyard fowls, that there
are breeds of mice as aggressive as a Communist
union, and others as meek as middle-class
taxpayers, or that human population problems
are not basically very different from those of
rabbits. But if we press the biological resemblances too earnestly, most people will consider
the picture that emerges as unnatural, academic
and rather naive.

Nevertheless I feel sure that if I am to say
anything worth saying I must be true to my basic
credo as a biologist that man is a mammal
evolved from lower mammals and subject to the
same imperatives as any other living form. I am
driven, as it were, to look at politics as a form
of applied biology and to do so from the same
external attitude as one uses in considering
viruses or bacteria. I know perfectly well that,
like everyone else, I cannot get outside of my
human limitations and that there are almost
as many pitfalls in looking at human problems
simply from the biological angle as to look at
them without any consideration of that angle.

There are, perhaps, fortunately, strict limitations on what we can see of the future. To-day
one must preface any forecast of even short
term possibilities with the assumption that
civilization will not be destroyed by the outbreak
of a major war fought with nuclear weapons.
If we eliminate this possibility of utter catastrophe we can, I think, make some useful

25

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, April 1961, 53, 1.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

calculations about conditions in the year 2000.
My thoughts will be based only on the logical
development of two facets of the present human
situation, population growth and the demand for
a higher standard of living. In doing this I am
following a precedent of Sir Charles Darwin
when he wrote about the next million years. It
is obviously and completely futile to attempt to
forecast the future of any individual, of any city
or of any specific human activity, but short of the
ultimate catastrophe, it is legitimate to follow
the implications of universal human qualities.

Population Growth

I am going to concentrate on the matter of
human population because in any biological
consideration of our human problem it is the
central theme. It always has been—back to the
first man and before that to the very beginnings
of life. It is a basic characteristic of life that every
living form will multiply to the limit allowed by
its environment. Sometimes the conditions are so
simple that food is the only limit—and we have
swarms of locusts or plagues of mice. But in
general we find that any environment we like to
choose that is not subject to gross change
from outside, there will be a characteristic
distribution of the various animals, plants and
micro-organisms that inhabit it. In one way or
another almost every type of animal will have
some influence on every other type. If carnivorous animals increase too rapidly they will destroy
too many of the plant eaters that they prey on.
In all sorts of more subtle ways these interactions
between species result in the development of an
uneasy equilibrium at which each species persists
at a characteristic level of numbers. Birth rates
and death rates will, in general, adjust themselves
to maintain the standard population—this, of
course, is only one way of saying that in all
natural situations there is a tendency for a Jow
density of population to favour survival and
reproduction and for a rise above the optimal
to increase death rates from disease and the
attack of beasts of prey. There is an inbuilt selfrighting tendency therefore to maintain standard
population levels in any stable environment.
Human life has developed so many complications and has dodged so many of the normal
biological limitations that analogies with lower

26

animals are liable to be strained and meaningless.
But there is something about the evolution of
living beings that must never be forgotten
because we ourselves have evolved as part of that
process. Evolution has depended on theinterplay
of two characteristics of living matter, the first
that life has found a general method forreproducing all its essential attributes, which is basically
the same whether a virus generates a new brood
of virus in the cell it invades, or a cell duplicates
its chromosomes and divides into two cells or a
baby is born. And the second that whenever
this process of reproduction or replication takes
place, thereis always the possibility of error,
the duplicate may not be an exact copy of the
original, and any error will be perpetuated in
turn when further duplication takes place. The
process of evolution is based on those inheritable
changes that we call mutations and in the last
analysis mutation means only that at some point
the process of duplication has made an error.
Mutation, like all mistakes, is a random accidental process and hardly ever will it benefit a
plant or animal to undergo mutation. All but a
few rare mutations are harmful but from the
point of view of evolution as long as mutation
is a reasonably rare occurrence, harmful
mutations do not matter. Those individuals that
carry them will perish while the very rare
beneficial mutation will find an opportunity
to flourish and, subject to minor qualifications
that I need not go into, will eventually become
the standard form of the species. The fact that
all higher organisms derive their inheritance
from two parents and that a mutation may as a
result not be expressed for many generations,
complicates the logic but does not modify the
essential conclusion.

I know of nothing to invalidate Darwin’s
central doctrine that progress and even the simple
maintenance of biological efficiency is only
possible to a species when a large proportion
of the individuals born are eliminated by the
selective winnowing of the environment before
they find opportunity to reproduce. As every
animal breeder knows, the only way to maintain
a stock in its desired configuration is to cull
ruthlessly and to select for breeding at each
generation those individuals conforming most
closely to his ideal.
2000 A.D.—A BIOLOGIST’S THOUGHTS ON THE NEXT FORTY YEARS

The human species was subject to almost the
same processes of selective survival till about a
hundred years ago but even from the earliest
days of prehistory man has always used his
intelligence and accumulated knowledge and
tradition to favour his survival as an individual.
To-day’s human population of the world is the
product of evolution and selective survival but
the process has been a far more complex one
than anything amongst the lower animals, and
sometimes there has been survival value in
qualities which would have been positively
harmful in the simpler stages of our evolution.

But I want to concentrate rather closely on
population. We don’t know much in detail about
the growth of world population before a few
hundred years ago but we can be reasonably
confident that overall there was a slow steady
growth throughout history with forward moves
and checks depending mainly on the variable
impact of famine and disease. It seems likely
that population doubled about every three
centuries. This means that on the average birth
and death rates balanced to give a stable population—a population with quite a different age
structure from a modern one. Nowadays in
Australia we have a birth rate of around 20 per
1,000 per annum and a death rate just below 10.
In the Middle Ages the birth rate and death rate
probably both oscillated irregularly around
40 per 1,000. This translated into human terms
means that the average family produced about
five children born alive with probably several
other pregnancies terminated by miscarriage
or stillbirth, and that more than half the children
died, mostly from infectious disease, before
they were adult. Until quite recently this held
also for most of the backward areas of the world.
Let us remember, too, that this is the “‘natural”
state of affairs for every species of animal in
the wild.

Premature death in childhood has always been
regarded by human beings as an intolerable
burden—and everywhere in the world the
achievement of medical science in preventing
death in childhood is regarded as the most
worthy of all human achievements. Those of us
who have had something to do with the prevention of infectious disease take a special pride
in that success. Only a hundred years ago

the infantile mortality in London was 300 per
1,000. The best figures now are 20 per 1,000
live births. Those 280 lives saved can be
accounted for in all sorts of ways—education of
women in mothercraft, public sanitation,
pasteurization of milk, vaccination, modern
surgery, antibiotic drugs, decent housing. Everything we cherish in a rising standard of living
helps to reduce child mortality—but we must
also remember that modern medical science
can do a tremendous amount to save life in
infancy and childhood without significantly
raising general living standards.

   

GRIN 6 werent

Ca oe

50

40 $0

20 100

20 $0
400 1935 1940 19946 950 ss ©

FIGURE 1

THE INFLUENCE OF ERADICATION OF MALARIA FROM
MAURITIUS IN THE PERIOD 1946-8 ON THE RATES
FOR BIRTHS, DEATHS AND INFANT MORTALITY, AND
ON THE GROWTH OF POPULATION.
Population figures in thousands.
Birth and death rates per 1,000 per annum.
Infant mortality: Deaths per 1,000 live-born infants in
first year of life.

Figure 1 shows a graph of what happened in
Mauritius when malaria was eliminated around
1946-48. Before World War II there had been a
slow rise of population with high birth and
death rates. With the disappearance of malaria
—and with DDT and modern techniques, it
is quite easy to remove malaria from a rather
small subtropical island—there was a spectacular divergence of birth and death rates and the
population started to climb and has gone on
climbing. Mauritius is now a relatively healthy
country but malnutrition and iron deficiency
anaemia in children is apparently becoming
increasingly important.

On a bigger scale, the world is rather like
Mauritius. It will not be as easy to eliminate
malaria from continental areas like India or

27
ER—E
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

tropical Africa as it was from Mauritius but
the World Health Organization is already
proclaiming as a practicable objective its
eradication from the world. I have no doubt that
it will be done before 2000. There are other
causes of unnecessary death from infectious
disease in underdeveloped regions but for these,
too, methods of prevention are known. In brief,
every country can look forward to the day when
life expectation at birth is sixty to seventy years.

As a biologist, I must say here that the position we find ourselves in—that we can expect that
every child born, with only rare and unlucky
exceptions, will survive to maturity and reproduce—is something which has never happened
before in the whole-history of life. And it needs
very little thought to realize that it is something
which cannot go on indefinitely. Man is a mammal and his body,. his reproductive pattern and
his instincts were evolved along with the rest of
life. This evolution of our bodily form and of our
patterns of behaviour was dependent on the fact
that over tens of thousands of generations there
was a high enough mortality in the face of a
strenuous environment to allow selection of the
fittest to occur and to maintain a more or less
stable population in full genetic integrity.
If we eliminate selective survival we cannot hope
to maintain our physical inheritance intact—
genetic deterioration will be inevitable.

Preventive medicine has been remarkably
successful in almost eliminating death from
infectious disease and malnutrition from advanced countries. Yet in a sense that very success
has created two major biological difficulties,
overpopulation and genetic deterioration, that
are going to tax all our powers to deal with in
the future.

Overpopulation

Let us look first at the problem of overpopulation. For most Jarge mammals the general rule
is one young per annum which is sufficient to
replace the population that is constantly being
depleted by accident, disease and the attacks
of predators. Primitive man undoubtedly had a
hard life with many deaths in childhood and
early adult life. To replenish and increase his
numbers required a pattern of instincts and reproductive behaviour which ensured that women

28

bore virtually the maximum number of children
that was physiologically possible. This could
mean about twelve to fifteen completed
pregnancies during the reproductive period. In
fact it would usually be fewer as a result of
malnutrition, fever, and gynaecological injury
or infection. With a very heavy infantile mortality nothing less than the physiological maximum
allowed continuing survival of a human group..
Even when with the coming of civilization some
of the dangers, famine and wild beasts, for:
instance, were reduced or eliminated, the increased toll of infectious disease associated with
crowding, demanded that the birth rate remained
high. So we have developed in the course of
human evolution, both physical and cultural,
the necessary patterns of sexual behaviour, high
fertility and strong instinctive love of children
to ensure a high natural birth rate. |

The complex adjustments that go witha high
and rising standard of living, have removed the
biological need for the large families of earlier
centuries. Under to-day’s conditions of hygiene,
an unsophisticated people will have a birth rate
around fifty and a death rate that may be as low
as 7 to 8 per 1,000. Such a country will show a
doubling of population every twenty years.
Birth rates, in fact, are mostly far below fifty
for the reason that most people in most countries
have found one way or another of reducing
the. number of unwanted births.

Even so the rate of growth of world population
is fast enough to be terrifying. In 1940 it was
2,246 million, in 1950, 2,495, in 1960. it will be
2,950, and if the rate of the 50s is maintained,
we shall have a world population of 6,700
million in A.D.2000 and 13,000 million in 2033—
and that is within the lifetime of our small children to-day. I should add that, short of major
war or some fantastically unlikely plague, nothing that can now be done seems likely to make
the a.p. 2000 figure much smaller than 6,700
million.. But we can be sure that from then
onward there will be a swing of all the major
policy-making organizations into an attempt to
check the process in one way or another.

World Resources

There is one obvious question. Why shouldn't
the world go on with a human population
2000 A.D.—A BIOLOGIST’S THOUGHTS ON THE NEXT FORTY YEARS

doubling every thirty odd years? Hasn’t the
progress of science and technology done far
more than keep in pace with population growth
since the beginning of this century? And what
about atomic energy? The simplest answer is to
look at the second factor that I have mentioned,
the desire for a higher standard of living. It is a
fair statement that most people in the world who
know of the existence of America hope to enjoy
a living standard equivalent to that of the United
States. To a rough approximation the United
States consumes approximately one-third ‘of the
world’s production of fossil fuels and of its
other irreplaceable mineral resources, including
uranium. America has: 180 million people,
about one-sixteenth of the present world
population and one-fortieth of what it will be in
2000. In other words, to give the world as a whole
a 1959 American standard of living in 2000 would
require about thirteen times the present annual
production of oil, coal, steel, copper and the rest.
It is known that the easily accessible and high
grade sources of tin, lead and zinc are already
running low and not even iron and. copper ores
could stand such a drain for many years. I know
that many competent American scientists believe
that by a combination of the use of atomic
energy, the development of methods for exploiting low grade ores and making full use of scrap
metal, use of the “inexhaustible”? metals aluminium and magnesium to the full, and increasing use of synthetic processes, the maintenance
of a world population of 10,000 million at a high
level of comfort could be assured. Similarly,
if every food-raising region of the earth was
cultivated with the efficiency of a farm in lowa
or our own Wimmera, food for that number
could be managed. But no form of sophistry
can imagine that the irreplaceable resources of a
small planet can continue to supply a population
increasing in geometrical progression, 6,500
million in 2000, 52,000 million in 2100, 420,000
million in 2200. What I want to stress is that
this is what must happen if the current human
situation persists. Clearly it cannot go on and we
have virtually only two ways to bring the situation into line with reality. Either we can wait for
population reduction by the catastrophe of
famine, nuclear war, and the overthrow of
civilization, or we can make a wholehearted

attempt to control the position before it is too
late, by spreading a sane: understanding of the
position and by supporting a steady extension
of research and action to find the most humanly
acceptable forms of birth control.

There is so much research needed into matters
relevant to birth control, that one can fairly
say that it is the most humanly important of all
the problems that science and scientists can be
called upon to solve.

- Merely to state it is to indicate how difficult
it will be to obtain the concentration of effort
onto the problems of human eepeREnEiOn and
survival that is needed.

At this point I feel I must make a short digression to emphasize my conviction of the importance of bringing all the help science can offer;
to the solution of such major human problems
and to voice some doubts about the: present
structure of scientific activity. Are we really
making the best use of our scientists?

Perhaps it is both ungrateful and unwise for
me, as a research man, to voice such a question
and I doubt whether it is possible to do more
than attempt a few general remarks and note a
few paradoxes. At one level we tend to assuiie
that research is an attempt to find ways of doing
something that the community desires, of curing
the common cold perhaps, or providing an
inexhaustible source of energy for. industry.
Most of the money provided for science by the
community is ‘provided on this basis. Weapons
research is still the greatest user of research
funds and medical research is largely financed
by funds raised to conquer specific diseases;
cancer, heart disease, rheumatic disease, poliomyelitis, and so on. Those who administer
research funds are, however, well aware that
the indirect approach is often more fruitful than
the direct. A great deal of space research, of
physical research on high energy particles, and of
geophysical research, is supported by defence
funds, just as much of the best biological research
to-day can legitimately be supported by any sort
of medical research fund.

Facilities for Research

Something must be said about the factors
which determine men’s choice of a subject for
research and the facilities that they can com
29
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

mand for its pursuit. Where research is the parttime activity of a- university teacher, there is
fortunately virtually no limitation to his choice
of topic. For full-time research workers, particularly for those whose work needs expensive
equipment and a team of associates, there are
much more severe limitations. Except under
exceptionally favourable conditions, elaborate
research of this type will be possible only when
it has a rather direct bearing on some practical
matter which governments and the community
generally feel is important enough to justify
the financial support that is involved. I do not
think that there is any serious resentment by
scientists at this considerable limitation to their
potential range of activity. Irrespective of the
topic or its bearing on human affairs, scientific
work with adequate facilities and a real problem
will always be fascinating. It is probably just
as gratifying to create a hydrogen bomb as a
new antibiotic or a new theory of immunity.
If for any reason the general direction of applied
research should be radically changed in the
future, I have no doubt that we would find large
numbers of people trained in the scientific
approach willing to move into the new fields.
And as I shall mention later, one of the most
important needs of technical and scientific
education to-day is that we should strive to
produce graduates with a training that will fit
them to handle the new problems and techniques
which will emerge during their years of active
professional work.

Population and Conservation

I have talked about the menace of overpopulation as the most obvious of the major
problems of the future, the most urgently
necessary one for us to tackle immediately.
There are several others almost as important
and I believe there is one way in which we can
recognize them.

We have passed the day when poets or philosophers could “grasp this sorry scheme of things
entire...and mould it nearer to their heart’s
desire’. Utopias are out of date. But can I
suggest that we use as a touchstone of the good
and the necessary action this question: What is
necessary to ensure that future human beings on
this planet shall continue to have health, intelli
30

gence and happiness not inferior to those we
enjoy here and now?

A little thought will make it clear that many
of our present activities are incompatible with
such a criterion and that some of the most
important ways of achieving such an objective
are almost completely neglected. I believe that
four things chiefly are needed.

Population control is the first necessity but an
absolutely necessary corollary is conservation
of the world’s resources, both the irreplaceable
minerals and fossil fuels and the recurring ones
dependent on the fertility of land and ocean.
Once population control has been established for
the world as it is now virtually established in
Sweden and England, we can begin to think
about the equally difficult and important,
but rather less urgent task, of maintaining the
genetic integrity of a population without the aid
of natural selection. I believe that it is immediately self-evident that all these are necessary if
the world is to be tolerable to human beings
like ourselves in a hundred years’ time. It is
perhaps even more evident that until the possibility of war is eliminated, nothing effective can
be done. The elimination of war may be impossible but if there is any way in which science
or the scientific method can assist social, political
and ethical efforts in that direction, it must be
given the highest priority. I believe that to understand and prevent war we need to study with all
the resources of science the models of conflict
that nature presents us amongst mammals
and birds in the wild or under domestication.
The social scientists must, of course, make the
major contribution and one can hope that their
steady but unspectacular process of understanding and resolving conflict in industry will
eventually influence the technique of statesmanship and make possible the enforcement and
maintenance of peace. If we could divert the
urgency, the money and the human ability that
we now use on defence research into these fields,
we might even have ‘‘One World” by the year
2000.

Need for Wider Research

This brings me to my final point. I believe that
throughout the world there is now a larger
population of men and women of trained
2000 A.D.—A BIOLOGIST’S THOUGHTS ON THE NEXT FORTY YEARS

intelligence than ever before in history. Their
minds are being used for those activities which,
on the whole, conform most closely to the felt
short term need of their communities. If an
increasing proportion of such first rate minds
could move from defence research and from the
humanly insignificant fields which contain so
much of academic research, to work with a more
direct bearing on the realities that I have been
discussing, we might hope for much. There are
just as many good brains waiting to be called
on to help in the world situation between now
and 2000 as there were to do the planning, the
operational research and the infinite number of
scientific chores called for by our countries in
World War II.

There is an old idea of H. G. Wells that
seems to me to be worth restating. He called
for a continuing assessment of the future in
all those aspects that could or should influence,
present policy at both national and world levels.
Such assessments, particularly long term ones,
can never be scientific in the full sense but they
would be subject continuously to modification
and refinement and could be expected to become
increasingly more accurate and far reaching.
Much of this is being done already by individuals
or interested groups; mineral and oil reserves
have been mapped out, the potential water
supplies for an increasing population, even the
number of thoracic surgeons who will be needed
to deal with our mounting incidence of lung
cancer. There are figures available for these and
many other aspects of the future. What is lacking
is any way to make the information and its
implications available to those who should be
aware of it. If we are going to provide a tolerable
future for our children and grandchildren, we
must somehow learn to believe that it is realistic
and necessary to look further ahead than the
year or two that is all that interests the politician
or business man to-day.

In the universities, I believe we shall have to
think more and more seriously about the need
to shift the emphasis of research towards more
direct social usefulness. I see a lot of research
in the medical sciences and I worry sometimes
about the small proportion that is likely to have
any reasonably direct impact on human wellbeing. An immense amount of intelligence, skill

and enthusiasm has been channelled, forinstance,
into cancer research and in the long run this
work will influence not only the treatment of
cancer but also our understanding of some of the
most subtle aspects of biology. Its indirect results
for human well-being may well be much more
important than any effects it will have on the
mortality from cancer.

In a broader field, are we making the best use
of our best brains in medicine by concentrating
them within the three fields of practice, teaching
and laboratory research, with a relative neglect
of some of the most important social aspects
of medicine. We could well use many more of our
best medical graduates in the three fields of:

1. Postgraduate training of doctors;

2. A continuing assessment of the actual
results of medical treatment;

3. Sane and authoritative health education
for the public.

Turning from specifically medical science to the
sciences as a whole, I feel that we academics
must attempt to convey something of our vision
of science to a wider audience and equally
to widen our own vision of science to cover all
disciplined application of intelligence to the
preservation of human health and _ integrity
for all time to come.

I am sorry that I shall not live to see A.D. 2000.
I do not think 2000 will be as happy as 1959
but what I do know is that then and for the
rest of human history, there will be an overriding need to find and apply all the resources
of human intelligence to the progressively
increasing difficulties of the human situation.

The Importance of Education

One of the late Sir John Morris’s major
interests was university education and I am sure
that he would be at one with me in finishing on
this note of the importance of education.
Everything that we can do to extend secondary
and tertiary education in the next forty years
will be needed. It will be very difficult to find
sufficient good teachers to do that as well as it
should be done. But perhaps it does not matter
so much how they are taught as long as we can
ensure that all who can benefit will have the
opportunity for some general training of intel
31
THE. EUGENICS. REVIEW

lectual skills. The world of science and technology moves so fast that life for those of us in it
is a never-ending postgraduate course. What
we need our universities and institutes of technology to do is to provide the best possible background for that continuous postgraduate training. If in the process we can keep people thinking
and alert about the biological and social
implications of the changing human situation,

32

we are going to be just so much more successful
in providing that background. .

_If we can do this, and keep on doing it till
A.D. 2000 and beyond, we shall have some hope
of achieving what I suggested earlier was the best
objective towards which we can aim—that
future generations of human beings shall continue to have health, intelligence and happiness
not inferior to. those we now enjoy..
