EUGENICS EDUCATION CONFERENCE. 47

THE METHOD OF INTRODUCING THE EUGENIC IDEAL
INTO SCHOOLS.

By Proressor J. ARTHUR THOMSON
(Professor of Natural History, Aberdeen University).

THE aim of eugenics is the improvement of the racial qualities
of future generations, and there is no nobler endeavour open to
us. ‘‘ Eugenics is the study of the agencies under social control
that may improve or impair the racial qualities of future generations either physically or mentally.’’ This quotation of Sir
Francis Galton’s familiar definition is sufficient answer to the
ignorant or malicious suggestion that eugenics is altogether
redolent of the stable and the barn-yard. It might, indeed,
smack of worse, but as a matter of fact it takes to do with
character and intelligence as much as with physique. Its chief
thought is of racial quality, the hereditary ‘‘ nature,’’ but it is
well aware that this cannot be expressed without the appropriate
“* nurture.”’

The extraordinarily difficult problem for discussion this
afternoon is, how the eugenic ideal may be introduced into
school education. So little has hitherto been attempted in this
direction that it is doubtful whether we can wisely advance
beyond giving hints for experiment and looking about for some
general educational principles that have been shown to be sound
in other cases, and that have some bearing on the present problem. It is to be hoped that some wisdom may result from the
manifoldness of counsel which a conference of this kind should
secure; it will be a great gain if we are able to discover any way
of shortening the period of ‘‘ trial and error.”’

I.

What is it then that we want? Not to coerce youth into the
acceptance of a dogma, but to stir the imagination into heroworship. Not to force something in from the outside, but to
develop what is normally there already—a feeling of kinship,
an awareness that we stand and fall together, a pride of race.
Not to cloud the horizon with responsibilities prematurely anticipated, but to educate the conscience by the discharge of duties
48 EUGENICS REVIEW.

which, though real and not fictitious, are yet appropriate to
youth.

To talk about teaching a scholar racial responsibility is
to betray a detachment from realities. What we want to discover is the appropriate sunshine and rain and fresh air for
certain buds which lie ready to be awakened to growth. We
want to find what physiologists call the liberating stimuli, and
there are three whose efficacy is sure. First of all, there is—

(a) The artistic stimulus, through poem and _ picture,
through song and story, through the history of our
race and the lives of its heroes. As one of our wisest educationists has said: ‘‘ The power that may be exercised in the
formation of character by the presentment of ideal types is as
yet very imperfectly utilised.’”’ It is ours with a thought-out
strategy—of working towards a eugenic conscience—to learn
the tactics of artistic appeal. For the young mind, each in its
own secret and unconscious recapitulation, is hereditarily open
to the thrill of the undying voices of the past. It may seem
a strange route to the Eugenic ideal, but is it not the surest that
we know?

‘Let statue, picture, park, and hall,
Ballad, flag, and festival,
The past restore, the day adorn,
And make to-morrow a new morn.
So shall the drudge in dusty frock
Spy behind the city clock
Retinues of airy kings,
Skirts of angels, starry wings,
His fathers shining in bright fables,
His children fed at heavenly tables.
*Tis the privilege of Art
Thus to play its cheerful part.”

(6) The second stimulus is in action. Whatever you do,
Stanley Hall says somewhere, don’t lecture. One does hot
require to read ‘‘ Stalky and Co.’’ to be sure of the futility of
eugenic ‘‘ jaws.’’ For, as far as character is concerned, it is
by living that we learn. And just as the play of animals is now
recognised to be of vital importance as a rehearsal for the serious
business of life, so there is much to be said for the proposition
EUGENICS EDUCATION CONFERENCE. 49

that the most effective citizens are often those who learned early
what it is to play the game. For that means the maximum selfexpression tempered by loyalty, the greatest individual effort
and yet subordination to the good of the whole, and besides.
that, the discipline of looking forward. The characteristics
that may develop, and do develop into racial responsibility are
in-the-making in playing the game. Another line of doing by
which youth may learn is suggested by such activities as
scouting, especially when this is developed on broad lines, with
a good deal of exploring thrown in, and with real enduring of
hardness. During the last bad railway strike, when there was
distress in many parts of the country, the scouts of an academy
near a mining district were employed to find out about sufferers
in outlying cottages and to distribute provisions. It is difficult
to conceive of anything more educative, as a change from the
imperative and invaluable discipline of the schoolroom, than
this active participation in the communal life. Are there not
many indications that our education requires to become more
occupational and less bookish, more motor and less sedentary,
more communal and less conventual? In any case, it will
have to be admitted that one of the reasons why painstaking
education is often disappointing is that the responsibilities are
mainly fictitious, not real. The apprentice in a carpenter’s.
shop knows what real responsibility is when he makes a wheelbarrow that won’t wheel, or spoils a good tool, but the schoolboy ‘‘ slacker ’’ often gains no such valuable lesson. That he
may be punished does not make him feel the responsibility any
less fictitious. Our point is that a discipline in real responsibilities in youth is the natural condition of the desired development
of the eugenic conscience.

(c) The third stimulus comes through the ordinary avenue
of knowledge. But here again it is the indirect method that
pays. Let a diagrammatic illustration suffice. It is very easy
nowadays to get an observation bee-hive—even if you have to
send to the Nicholson Institute at Stornoway to get the best one.
A formicarium is also readily procurable. Now, it may be safely
said that it is quite impossible for any normal pupil whatsoever—except a few who are born philosophers—not to be inter50 EUGENICS REVIEW.

ested in the social life of the bees and the ants, especially if the
teacher has added to an accurate knowledge of the facts just a
dash of, say, Maeterlinck’s art. But if this be true in regard
to the study of insects, can we believe that the study of the
human hive will prove less fascinating if we give it a fair chance?
In spite of all our remarkable improvements, is it not too true
still that we waste so much time over the Wars of the Roses
that we seldom get near the beginning of the interpretation of
the society in which we live? While there is truth in the
epigram that activity is the only road to knowledge, it requires
the supplement that accurate knowledge is the only sound basis
for action in cases where you can’t trust your instincts. It is
useless nowadays to expect a feeling of responsibility for future
generations from pathetically unreflective ‘‘Johnnies’’ and
tragically mis-educated ‘‘ Jennies,’’ who do not understand, who
have never had a chance of understanding, what racial evolution
means.

Racial evolution in school! Surely! For the idea that the
present is the child of the past and the parent of the future is
one of those true and deep ideas which are also clear. It can
be made real in a dozen ways, most convincingly from zoology
and botany, from the bird show and the flower show for
instance. But everywhere museums are springing up—following
the Oxford Museum model—which are interpenetrated with the
evolution idea, which show everything, from a word to a buttonhole, as the long result of time.

It is to the naturalist’s mind difficult to think of anything
more useful in the education of the cititzen than a well thoughtout, vividly interesting yet not too easy, practical as well as
didactic course of instruction, which should lead to a firm grasp
of the general ideas of racial evolution and individual development, of the characteristic Darwinian idea of the web of life or
the inter-relatedness of things at first sight far apart, and of the
characteristic Pasteurian idea of the biological control of life.
These ideas form a natural preparation for the eugenic ideal.

IT.

Leaving the problem of the eugenic ideal, let us consider

the question of definite eugenic instruction, including sexEUGENICS EDUCATION CONFERENCE. 51

instruction in schools. This is another extremely difficult
question, another problem whose solution must be found by
experiment. An attempt to state some of the pro’s and con’s
may be useful.

There is no doubt that many phenomena of modern life,
especially in cities, are not eugenic, but kakogenic. Now, it is
the opinion of many investigators who have paid special attention to the problems centred in sex, that instruction, or more
definite instruction, would lessen ‘‘ immorality,’’ sexual vice,
adolescence troubles, indecency, and pruriency. Ignoring the
subject is said to be in part to blame for bad first impressions,
discoloured views, morbid brooding, obsessions of fear, and
some forms of sexual vice. All this handicaps eugenic
progress.

For young children the best instruction is theoretically that
given by the parents, especially by the mother. When this is
given, it is well, especially if care is taken to avoid anticipating
interest and to abstain from offering explanations which will
be afterwards found to be untrue. We may tell a child to wait
for an answer, but we must not give the child an untrue answer.
Prof. Stanley Hall emphasizes the advantage of getting the
right presentation first, pre-occupying the mind with a dignified
wholesome view.

But we have to face the actual facts. Few parents give any
sex-instruction at all. Few can do it well. Few, for instance,
are able to utilise the indirect, impersonal, biological approach.
Most parents are too shy. Moreover, the personal aspect of the
case rises obtrusively in the boy’s mind when his father speaks
to him. In large sections of the community the boys and girls
leave the home in early adolescence. The family is not the
social unit it once was. And while we do not wish to acquiesce
in this as a necessity, we have to admit it as a present fact.
Furthermore, those children who most need guidance, because
of inborn predisposition to go wrong, are the least likely to get
help from their parents. It all comes to this, that in many cases,
if not in most, information regarding the most important function in life is picked up haphazard, often in an inaccurate and
discoloured form, often from sexually precocious or petverted
52 EUGENICS REVIEW.

acquaintances. Is it not quite clear that instruction by parents
requires to be supplemented ?

It will probably be admitted by all that every college should
have its voluntary course of instruction in bodily and mental
hygiene, in the art of life, in genetics and eugenics, and that
every college should have its wisely chosen confidential
physician who would save the nation untold wastage, who would
earn in the year the salary of his lifetime. In many cases, however, advice at college age comes late, not too late perhaps, but
unfortunately late. Can nothing be done earlier?

Instruction in regard to the facts of sex has been tried in a
considerable number of schools in America, Germany, Hungary,
Switzerland, and Finland, and in a very few cases in Britain.
It remains, however, in an experimental stage.

The instruction given deals with (1) the elementary physiology of sex and reproduction—how life is continued; (2) the
significance and dangers of adolescence; (3) hygienic aids to
self-control and clean-mindedness, the ideal of physical fitness,
and the racial significance of sex.

The instruction is sometimes given quite by itself, to which
most educationists object, and sometimes linked on to naturestudy and biology, human physiology, domestic science, homemaking studies, hygiene, economics, and social problems.

The instruction is given by the headmaster or headmistress, or by the class teacher, or by the teacher of biology,
physiology, etc., or by the school physician, or by means of
books and pamphlets. But there is great diversity of opinion
in regard to the best method.

But we must not hurry on too quickly. There is a previous
question, whether there should be in school any school-instruction whatsoever bearing on sex and reproduction. Many wise
people think that there should be none, and for the following
reasons :—

(a) It is pointed out that sex, which is the physical basis
of one of the noblest and most personal expressions of the human
spirit, is a very delicate matter. It is like religion. If you
speak about it unwisely, you may do much more harm than
good. To which it may be answered that if saying nothing were
EUGENICS EDUCATION CONFERENCE. 53

working well, we should all wish to leave well alone. But it is
not working well. Moreover, in proportion as we cease to
educate on the cheap, we shall get teachers more able to undertake difficult tasks.

(b) It has been said that it is a terrible responsibility to break
brutally on an adolescent’s reserve of mind. But this is a
question-begging objection. There is no occasion for psychic
violence. There is no brutality in some good sound biology.
There are many methods of indirect approach—some of the
subtlest of which are beginning to be opened up by the suggestions of Freud. There is nothing brutal in Prof. Huxley’s
suggestion that there should be a carefully prepared chapter on
the physiology of sex and reproduction inserted even in the
school text books of physiology, which continue to be published
on the grotesque assumption that man has no reproductive
system.

. (c) Doubt is also expressed whether the education authorities would be justified, even if willing, in attempting intrusion
into what ought tobe a parental responsibility. | But the parents
usually do nothing in the way of discharging this particular
responsibility, and to get them to raise a revolution because the
school was trying to do what they ought to do might be
as wholesome as it would be hypocritical. A wiser answer
is probably that the mode of sex-instruction chosen should be
one that is not too far ahead of contemporary public sentiment.

It is easy to argue oneself into a laissez-faire policy until
one comes back again face to face with the facts—of unwholesome ways of looking at things, of morbid curiosity, of bad
habits, of filthy-mindedness, of thoughtless immorality, of
disease, of habitual vice. These are ever dragging evolution
in the mud, and the eugenic ideal of positive advance cannot
hope to find wide realisation unless we try also to lessen the
kakogenic handicaps. |

It must be noted that unless we supply some wholesome
instruction, the mind of the youth tends to be discoloured by
unwholesome information gathered surreptitiously.
| It must be noted that in every large school there is a small
percentage of abnormal pupils, who infect others with their own
unfortunate perversions.
54 EUGENICS REVIEW.

If nothing ‘‘ straight ’’ is ever said by anyone, it is difficult
to deny the justice of the sufferer’s reproach—which is not confined to Brieux’s plays—‘‘ But you never told me anything
about that.’’

It should be noted, too, that the sex-instincts in man are
general rather than sharply-defined. That is to say, we have, in
regard to sex-functions, very little instinctive knowledge of what
various phenomena mean, or of what is normal, or of what is
to be carefully avoided. A boy or a girl may slide into bad
habits without being well aware of what is happening.

These are a few of the considerations which lead some
who have given careful attention to the subject to think that
there should be some sex-instruction in schools. And in
working towards something practicable, it may be of service to
point out that the instruction will need to be varied with refer-.
ence to different sections of the community, and with reference
to the differences between girls and boys.

Taking the first point, one does not, of course, imagine that
the dangers and difficulties involved in sex are restricted to
particular sections of the community. They are universal—we
are all tarred with the same brush—but they alter with altered
circumstances—from the one-roomed house to the unnatural
segregation of the public school. The counsels given by the
wise headmaster or the wise school physician would be very
different in different cases. It must be remembered, too, that
habits are formed in the concrete, by habitually doing or not
doing something, and that if the outside school conditions have
tended to the establishment of a vicious habit of word, or
thought, or deed, there is not much hopefulness in the school
discipline saying don’t. Which leads one to make the obvious.
remark that the problems of sexual vice and the like cannot
be dealt with, either theoretically or practically, by themselves.
They are wrapped up with problems of housing, occupation,
wages, interests, use of leisure hours, education, civics, and what
not. Everyone knows the importance of the economic and
occupational factor in keeping up the traffic in immorality.

What seems the practicable line of advance is to recognise
a graduated series of educational methods, leaving it to the
EUGENICS EDUCATION CONFERENCE. 55

discretion of the teacher to decide how far along the series it
may be profitable to go.

(a) Much may be done in the nurture of adolescence by
developing external pre-occupations and interests and real responsibilities; by opening paths of legitimate excitement (in
work and play for both boys and girls, in art and wholesome
adventure, in dramatic and musical exercise) ; and by disciplines
in enduring hardness (e.g., in scouting, boys’ brigades, in girls’
guildries, in climbing and swimming and exploring).

(b) The highest value is to be attached to all forms of
education (religious, ethical, and imaginative) which fill the
mind with noble examples, which exalt the conception of human
love by associating it with the chivalrous, the poetic, and the
romantic, and which sets a premium on self-control, courtesy,
mutual respect, and healthy-mindedness.

(c) While respecting the natural instinct of reserve in
regard to sex questions, something might be done to suggest that
the mystery is observed because sex is sacred, not because it is
inherently shameful or unclean. From history and literature
it is surely possible to suggest that control and chastity make
marriages happy and nations strong, while the corruptio optims
pessima is already hell.

(d) Much may be done through Nature Study (for younger
pupils) and Biological Studies (for senior pupils) to remove the
facts of sex and reproduction from a purely human and personal setting, to exhibit them as natural phenomena at many
different grades of evolution, to put an end to pruriency, and
to make the big facts about the continuance of life familiar in
the botanical and zoological fields—leaving it to ordinary intelligence to see the human applications.

(e) Beyond that it may be possible to go—in the way of
more definite sex instruction in the senior classes in schools—for
boys in particular. It is probable that the instruction will be
most successful when it is linked on to, and arises naturally out of
studies in natural history, biology, physiology, domestic science,
hygiene, social problems, and the like.

It seems quite plain that girls require much gentler sexeducation than boys, and the difficulty cannot be ignored that,
56 EUGENICS REVIEW.

as things are at present, a large proportion of the girls will not
marry. It may be distinctly dangerous to bring to the focus
of consciousness instincts which often remain normally at a subconscious level.

It seems also quite plain that when sex-instruction is given
—whether by the headmaster, the science teacher, the school
physician, or by lending booklets—caution must be exercised not
to anticipate interest, not to excite, not to deal with the pathological, not to frighten, not to pretend that men and women are
angels, and not to say too much!

iil.

Too much prominence in this contribution to the discussion
may have been given to the problem of sex-instruction, but
that has been done deliberately in the conviction that the lack
of sex-instruction is one of the great barriers to eugenic
progress.

To return for a moment to the main theme of introducing
the eugenic ideal in school education, three definite suggestions
have been made. We may summon to our aid the witchery of
art; we may begin an apprenticeship in services which make
towards racial improvement; and we may appeal to the intelligence by making evolution, variation, heredity, selection, the
web of life, the biological control of life—real conceptions, and
leaving them like seeds to grow in the mind.

But is there not something more needed to win any great
measure of success? Is it not significant that Sir Francis
Galton, who so clearly recognised that eugenics must pass from
science into practice, was also so strongly convinced that great
progress would not come until the eugenic ideal came to have
a religious value in many minds. When it begins to sway us
through and through—this vision of a nation healthy alike in
mind and body; when we come to care more about that than
about anything else, then we shall make short work with our
difficulties and our timidities, our objections and our sloth. We
shall know eugenics to be ‘‘a virile creed, full of hopefulness,
and appealing to many of the noblest feelings of our nature.”’
And, having made sure of sound eugenic precepts, we shall
hearken to what was said to the ancient people of high eugenic
practice and ideal—‘‘ and thou shalt teach them diligently unto
thy children, and shalt talk of them when thou sittest in thine
house, and when thou walkest by the way, and when thou liest
down, and when thou risest up, and thou shalt find them for a
EUGENICS EDUCATION CONFERENCE. 57

sign upon thine hand, and they shall be as frontlets between
thine eyes; and thou shalt write them upon the posts of thy
house and upon thy gates.”’

DISCUSSION.

Rev. Crecit Grant wished to assert that there was one practicable
reform for which cumulative evidence of such strength was already
available, that it was the immediate duty of the Eugenics Education
Society to take adequate measures to investigate that evidence. He
could himself pile up such evidence from very numerous sources,
including an appeal to the strong statements made in the morning sitting
by Mr. Badley, after many years’ experience, and he could appeal to
the known opinions of several of the most eminent of the members of
the Eugenics Society. But instead, he would rest his case boldly on
his own experience. It was an experience of fifteen years of bringing
up together boys and girls, of ages ranging from 2 to 20. ‘Those years
of close observation and investigation left him as certain that the
mixture of sexes and ages was a prophylactic against carnal temptation,
as he was certain that vaccination was a prophylactic against smallpox.
He would say that co-education, of almost any kind, under conscientious
management, would diminish by one-half the number of those who
failed to go through life pure. That bringing up together, under
proper conditions, boys and girls would stamp out unchastity, save in
rare cases of abnormality. He would submit three considerations no
less relevant to this conference: (1) that such co-education made for
better marriages and better choice, as it was based upon better and
deeper knowledge. (2) That the co-education of boys and girls resulted
in a more equable development on all sides, and there was more certainty of discovering in what direction lay their special inheritance and
strength, and how that might best be employed in the service of
humanity. (3) That in a co-educative school, direct hygienic teaching
could be given with perfect security. Of course, it should be
given wisely, but it could be imparted with tact, and, after
some experience, with perfect security. Finally, he submitted that
co-education was confronted at the present by a danger which was
grave and wholly undeserved, and into which he had not now time to
enter. The sole hope of co-education having a fair trial in our day
and generation seemed to rest with the active and undelayed help
afforded by the Eugenics Education Society. He felt the full responsisibility of what he was saying, but was not just a personal statement of
that kind, deliberately made, standing by itself, sufficient to justify,
nay even to compel such a society to take immediate steps to investigate
this matter? That was his challenge. If he were in order in doing so,
he would move that a committee be formed for that purpose. He would
take the earliest opportunity of doing so, for he was convinced that
co-education was, after religion, the most powerful agency under
social control in the direction of improving the racial qualities in the
future, physically, mentally, and morally.

CoLONEL DE BurcH (Boy Scouts) said that the organisation which
he represented was heart and soul with the aims of the Eugenic Educa