LUCIEN

MARCH

AN APPRECIATION

finely moulded head and aristocratic

features, but of singularly modest
bearing—a figure which in any crowd expressed the retiring disposition of the man,
seeming to slip unnoticed from place to place
—this was the exterior of Lucien March, when
he held the high position of Director of the
Statistique Générale de la France ; and was
far more than the highest registration official,
in that he had made for himself an international name and was as great and creative
a personality in the world of demographic
studies as his contemporary, Sir Bernard
Mallet, then the chief registrar in our own
country.

It is of Monsieur March’s part in the
development of International Eugenics alone
that I am entitled to write. In his passing
we have lost one ofthe earliest of our leaders.
Already in the first International Congress,
London 1912, he appeared as an exponent
of the sociological studies which form such a
vital part of our science, when he read a
paper on “‘ the fertility of marriages according to profession and social class.’’ This fact
alone is an indication of his independence as
a thinker, for biological aspects of sociology
have at no time been a popular study in his
country. His influence has, however, established a method of census-taking which has
made the bulletin of the “‘ Statistique Générale
de la France” still one of the most important
sources for such data in Europe.

The reality of his attachment to eugenic
work was further proved by his contributing
a paper to the Congress in New York in 1921,
this time on ‘‘ the consequences of war and
the birth rate in France.”’ It was in New
York that, under the name of International
Commission of Eugenics, the Federation
really took birth, and Monsieur March contributed in large measure to the building up of
a sound constitution for the organisation. In
1926, shortly after his retirement from the
Statistique Générale, the Federation met in

A SPARE man of middle height with

Paris, where as the leading French eugenist
he acted as a courteous and most gracious
host and a series of receptions to
which were invited some of the most prominent men in France, thus setting a standard
for the meetings of the Assembly which was
not easy to emulate in su ing years.

At that meeting he gave many hours of the
most careful and conscientious work to the
task of setting out the constitution of the
Federation in English and French, so that
the two versions should be exactly comparable; this labour contributed very greatly
to harmonious working ever since. That
meeting was the last attended by Monsieur
March. He left the Federation in order to
devote himself to research tasks, selfimposed. His counsels were sorely missed, as
well as his gracious and friendly personality,
which showed its greatness in making no
distinction whatever between the great and
the humble who came in contact with him.

At the time of the World Population Conference at Geneva (1927), Monsieur March
was Professor of the Institute of Statistics
in the University of Paris. Those intimately
concerned with that conference will remember that it was made the occasion of a vigorous anti-birth-control p da in which
a number of Parisians took a prominent part.
This had no effect whatever on the quiet
determination of Lucien March, who assisted
with advice in preparation of the programme
and came personally to Geneva to read his
paper on “the differential increase in the
population in France and in the world.” He
appears on the extreme left of the frontispiece to the published proceedings.

France has the reputation of showing little
concern for questions of Human Biology and
has an antagonistic outlook on eugenics, yet
she has given to the world some of the earliest,
most profound and truly scientific studies
existing. Amongst these the works of Lucien
March find their place.

C. B. S. Hopson.

261

D
