INTERNATIONAL

FEDERATION OF

EUGENIC ORGANIZATIONS
Report of the 1936 Conference
By C. B. S$. HODSON, E.Ls.

(): recent years the I.F.E.O. has only
met every two years, but as compensation the plan is followed of
holding a Conference at the same time. This
year the Dutch Federation of Eugenics acted
as host. Arrangements were made with a
hotel at Schweningen (which may be
described as the Dutch Brighton) both to
provide meeting rooms and to put up those
attending. This is the second time that this
plan has been followed and it is generally
voted as desirable. At these meetings work
is pretty concentrated. The saving of time
on journeys to a meeting room is all to the
good ; further, meal times and odd minutes
are doubly valuable when those who want to
meet each other are all on the spot and can
use every odd minute profitably.

This meeting was memorable as being the
second only when the Federation was
accorded the honour of a public reception.
On Wednesday, July 15th, before work
began, the Minister of Education and Deputies of the Town Council of the Hague
received the I.F.E.O. in the beautiful New
Museum. Dr. Waardenburg (President of the
Dutch Federation) gave an interesting lecture
on the origin of eugenics, of which a summary will be printed in the Report. This was
followed by refreshments ; and then guides
showed the treasures of the museum, which
is most beautiful in its modern arrangement.

There was only one other period for entertainment. On the Sunday afternoon an
improvised outing was arranged to the Franz
Hals Museum in Haarlem. In a bad week
this was fortunately a sunny afternoon, so
that the little old city was looking its best.
Professor Rodenwaldt, familiar with AngloSaxon weaknesses, halted the return journey,
in the market place for tea, and with the

217

energetic Dutch organizer, Dr. Sanders, by
imperative telephone brought the organist
of the Cathedral Church a quarter of an hour
before his time, to play a fugue on what is
one of the most beautiful of old organs. So
the fortunate visitors listened to one of the
famous Dutch carillons as they sat in the
old Square for tea and then had a taste of
beautiful music in the sun-flooded Cathedral.

The Conferences for the most part
centred round the work of Research Committees, and a brief account will be given in
order of day to day sequence. The first day
was devoted to reports from different
countries, which were summarized by Dr.
Bijlmer in the morning. In the afternoon
short papers were given on methods and
social impact of sterilization practice in those
six States which have laws for eugenic
sterilization. Naturally much interest
focused at this meeting on the eugenic
plans of the new Germany. It was a great
opportunity. The President of the Federation has been a chief adviser to the Government, and he did great honour to the meeting
in bringing (in addition to most of the
German members) Dr. Ruttke, who controls
Popular Health Instruction, and Dr. Astel,
who directs eugenic work for Thuringia,
generally acknowledged as the model province. Both of these read papers and
answered questions. This was a revelation
to those unfamiliar with the Reich policy.
It became clear that positive eugenics in
actual practice looms larger than the muchtalked-of sterilization. More than this,
public assistance has been wholly reorganized
on biological principles; ‘“‘ want” is no
longer an excuse for indiscriminate reproduction ; the stock of the family as regards
health and capacity determines whether
218

assistance is based on the hope of a growing
family, or on the needs of the individual
who, himself a burden, is likely to generate
fresh burdens according to laws of probability. Questioners sought to establish regimentation as a controlling factor, only to be told
that in effect individual tastes and popular
feeling were given wide scope under the
present experiments.

It may be well to bring out here some
points which will not appear in a printed
report, throwing light on the strangely
varying attitudes of different countries. As
example: it emerged that castration of sex
offenders is being widely demanded in
Holland, while sterilization is still regarded
with distaste and suspicion. Denmark,
originally most cautious to avoid compulsion
in sterilization, has now made this as well
as other regulations for the feeble-minded,
compulsory for that category. At the same
time administrators in Denmark take the
utmost care to use their powers with reserve
until public confidence has been built up.
Marriage laws are easily promulgated in
Scandinavia ; in Germany (supposed land
of drastic legislation) advisory marriage
bureaux are paving the way with careful and
paternal help towards legislation, which
may be withheld for some time yet.

Feeble-mindedness was the subject of
the next day’s work. Two years before, at
Ziirich, grading and methods of assessment
had been discussed. Now the points at issue
were the search for diagnosis of different
types with the added endeavour to find
indications by types of genetic transmission
of different forms, where these do not
appear recognizable by outward stigmata.
Dr. Torsten Sjoegren gave further data on
the group he described in the Annals of
Eugenics. Dr. Lionel Penrose gave a paper
on his recent work, and Dr. Brugger presented a statistical analysis of the cases
coming under his observation in Basel. This
will not be given in full in the Report as it
will shortly appear elsewhere.*

Genetics of mental disorders was surveyed
by Dr. Luxemburger, who also gave an

*In Zeitschift fiir die gesammie N eurologie.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

account of his recent investigations in
prognosis. Prognosis in epilepsy was taken
by Dr. Konrad, mainly based on twin
studies.

Other psychological work was relegated to
Monday ; and Sunday, which should have
been a free day, gave opportunity for discussions which had been crowded out earlier.
One important paper acted as a bridge
between abnormal and normal psychology,
namely, a paper by Dr. Stimpfi, who is
reviewing criminal twins. His findings look
at present as if they would lie halfway
between the conclusions of Lange and recent
Dutch workers.

It must be confessed that pressure of
work disorganized this meeting. Vigorous
discussion and a clamour for papers not
originally planned, brought the programme
into sad confusion and only enthusiasm
and the fact that practically everyone was
housed on the same spot, made it possible
to carry all this work over without a breakup of the party.

The Standardization Committee for mental
measurement dominated the psychology day.
Dr. Kinder described co-operative work in
new tests applied on aments in New York,
on Indians and on Mayas. Dr. W. Stephenson did good work for the Committee in
throwing open the plan of the British group,
now under way, to any in Europe who might
care to co-operate. He also gave a paper on
the plan he has evolved for the use of current
tests in discriminating ‘‘ types,”’ the essence
of the work being that many tests are applied
to one person. The statistical method which
he adopts brings out personality and intelligence type. It is likely that when the
technique becomes familiar, this method will
prove most fruitful in comparative studies,
cultural and racial.

Later he demonstrated the use of visual
discrimination tests, using those adapted by
Dr. John Raven from the Fortes’s tests.
Those present cordially responded to the
suggestion that they should experiment with
the use of these tests. One of the objects of
the present group-work is to standardize
tests by comparing results of different
INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION OF EUGENIC ORGANIZATIONS

workers where possible‘on material that has
already been subjected to other well-known
methods. Although, at the end of the Conference, the number was small, this was
undoubtedly a very useful meeting. Dr.
Stephenson is circulating a report in his
periodical bulletin.

If one point can be picked out as of special
interest it would be the paper and demonstrations of Dr. Hanhart of Ziirich. His paper
on mutations in man described the work he
has done in tracing to their source some
stocks with congenital defects in Switzerland. His work is in some ways comparable
to the studies of Torsten Sjoegren in Sweden.
In both countries the parish registers have
been kept for so long with care that family
relationships can be worked out in all classes,
often well into the seventeenth century.
The published report will unfortunately give
an inadequate idea of the magnitude and
interest of this work which can only emerge
when the pedigree charts are seen, and these,
unfortunately, would be too expensive to
reproduce here.

Dr. Hanhart’s paper was given on the day
allotted to mutations and selection. Professor Sirks opened with a theoretical survey
of mutations in general. Professor Gates
followed with a paper, richly illustrated, on
mutations in the evening primrose. Hanhart’s first demonstration only served to
whet our appetites, and until he took down
his charts and went away he was employed
every free minute with groups of specialists
going over various points.

Later the question of selection dominated
the programme. In this section Dr. Robinson
of the American Eugenics Research Association gave an interesting and depressing study
of the effective fertility of graduates in the
American Universities of highest standing.
Dr. Brugger contributed an equally depressing series of figures from the other end of
the scale. A comprehensive study from
Basle of families in which oligophrenics occur,

219

shows this as the most fertile part of the
community.

It may be of interest to eugenists in
general to hear something of the business
transacted in Assembly sessions. Next year
should be a record in eugenic history.
International gatherings are being organized :
(a) by the French eugenists to coincide with
the International Population Congress in
Paris; (b) by German eugenists with the
support of the Reich in Berlin as a convenient halting place on the way to (c) Moscow,
where the occasion of the International
Congress of Genetics will also, it is hoped,
be utilized as an occasion for prosecuting
further organization of eugenic movements
(this latter opportunity is still somewhat
vague). The I.F.E.O. resolved to do its part
in encouraging support for all these.

It was decided that the Presidential term
of the Federation should be four years. It
was a self-denying ordinance, for it entailed
the resignation of Professor Ernst Ruedin
under whose statesmanlike guidance the
group has made considerable progress—
indeed never has the federation previously
been so vigorous and so much alive, doubtless in response to a world awakening.
Professor Ruedin was immediately elected
Honorary Vice-President together with Dr.
Alfred Ploetz; he with Major Darwin and
Dr. Mjéden (also elected honorary vicepresident) is a doyen of our science in
Europe and was the first to make an international move.

That the presidency is now recognized as
no sinecure was evidenced by the difficulty
in securing a successor to Ruedin. There were
five nominees who all brought eloquent
reasons for refusing the task. Hence the
acceptance by Dr. Torsten Sjoegren of the
post was acclaimed with sincere gratitude.
His name is already so well known from his
writings that we confidently expect the
friendly support of eugenists in all countries
for our work.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVIII, No. 3.
