FERTILITY AND CHILD MORTALITY IN
COUSIN MARRIAGES*

A Study in a Moslem Community in East Africa

By R. E. 8. TANNER

Introduction

HIS study was undertaken to discover
| if there were any significant variations
in the fertility and child mortality of
cousin and non-cousin marriages in the
Madanga chiefdom of Pangani district Tanganyika, which might indicate reasons for
the high infertility distinguishing a wide
area surrounding the sample locality. It was
also undertaken to test the statements made
by a number of European officials to these
people that their preference for cousin
marriages was a prime cause of their
infertility.

The data were obtained from married men
resident within two miles of the chiefdom
headquarters, each of whom gave details of
their various marriages in reply to direct
questioning. Details were obtained of 503
marriages of which 190 were cousin marriages.

All the informants were Moslem men for
whom local custom allowed marriages with
the daughters of their paternal uncles and
aunts as well as with the daughters of
maternal aunts. It was forbidden to marry
the daughter of a maternal uncle.

‘Cousin marriages were preferred in this
community because of the lower rate of
bride-wealth demanded between relatives
and because their patrilineal system of
inheritance ensured that property was retained within the family by such a marriage
between patrilineal relatives since both man
and wife belonged to the same lineage. Such

* Owing to lack of space we are unable to print the
Tables on which Mr. Tanner’s paper is based. These
have, however, been filed in the Society’s Library and
are available for further study on application to the
Librarian.

The section headed Fertility is covered by Tables
1-3; Infertility by Table 4; Child Mortality by Tables
5-7
marriages were also distinguished by easy
divorce without rancour in sharp distinction
to the prevalent and lengthy bickerings.
which marked the progress and dissolution
of so many non-cousin marriages. First
marriages of women were a source of
considerable prestige and expenditure.

Details were only recorded of live births
during the marriages as information on
miscarriages and still births was found to be
unreliable. The information was confined to
the fertility of 271 men during the periods:
of their marriages either terminated or still
continuing at the time of questioning. This
total represented approximately go per cent
of the married men in the sample area
comprising the adjacent villages of Barabarani and Jaira.

At the time of the enquiry this area was
being treated as a control for various
investigations by the Malaria Division,
Tanganyika Medical Department and had
received no wholesale prophylaxis, although
individuals may have received treatment
for malaria at the local dispensary.

Fertility .
The sample showed 119 cousin marriages
(or 60-6 per cent of the total of 190 marriages)
and 125 non-cousin marriages (or 57:6 per
cent of the total of 313 marriages) to be
fertile. Although in cousin marriages the
average number of children per fertile
marriage was 3°37 and in non-cousin
marriages was 2°79, the gross child mortality
showed little variation (32:1 per cent and.
31-1 per cent). Also a higher proportion of
cousin marriages (23 to 15) produced more
than six children (182 to 111) possibly as a
consequence of their greater stability (eighty
197

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, January 1958. 49, 4.
198

three continuing as against forty-nine only
in non-cousin marriages).

More women in cousin marriages (89 per
cent) were married under twenty years of
age than in non-cousin marriages (74-4 per
cent). But a lower proportion of children
were born to them in the first ten years’
marriage (52-9 per cent as against 64-8 per
cent). Long-term marriages of over eleven
years showed a higher live birth rate for
cousin marriages (3°66, 4:73 and 6-79 per
woman) than in non-cousin marriages (3-12,
4:2 and 5-66 per woman).

In both cousin and non-cousin marriages
more girls (54:2 per cent and 52-4 per cent)
than boys (45-8 per cent and 47-6 per cent)
were born. There were only nineteen
polygynous marriages (of which four were
marriages with three wives) and _ these
showed a higher proportion of infertile
unions than in monogamous marriages
(43°7 per cent to 39-4 per cent and 73-1 per
cent to 42-4 per cent). Although in both
categories the fertile women had a higher
average of children (4:3 to 3:37 and 3:0 to
2-79) the sample was too small for any
definite conclusions, especially as four of
the women recorded were multipara of high
fertility with a total of 35 births between
them.

Infertility

Although cousin marriages were more
stable (45 per cent continuing as against
32:9 per cent in non-cousin marriages) a far
higher proportion of the women married
before they were twenty years old, were
infertile in the marriages recorded (49-3 per
cent as against 21-8 per cent).

In both categories an infertile marriage
was unlikely to last over ten years but a
higher proportion (36-2 per cent) of infertile
non-cousin marriages were contracted when
the woman was over 30 years of age.
Similarly a higher proportion of infertile
marriages were terminated (55 per cent to
47°I per cent and 67-1 per cent to 60-8 per
cent). From sociological evidence available
infertility was infrequently given as the
grounds for a divorce. The high proportion
of infertile women was characteristic of the

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

area (39:4 per cent and 42-4 per cent) anda
cause for continuous comment. There was a
universal desire for children but no widespread magical search for the causes of their
infertility.

Child Mortality

In the first year of life the infant mortality
was highest (47-8 per cent and 62:5 per cent)
amongst boys in both categories but in the
children of cousin marriages the mortality
for both sexes between two and ten years
was considerably higher (47-7 per cent and
48-6 per cent) than in non-cousin marriages
(32°8 per cent and 30-9 per cent).

The overall mortality was highest for girls
(38 per cent) in cousin marriages and for boys
(35°9 per cent) in non-cousin marriages and
after surviving to eleven years children were
almost certain to survive their parents.

In relating mortality to the size of the
family from each marriage, the majority of
all deaths in cousin marriages occurred in
families of six and more children (58-1 per
cent) whereas in non-cousin the mortality
although showing a high figure (38-6 per cent)
for large families, was more evenly distributed although a majority of deaths occurred
in families of three or less children.

In cousin marriages fifty-four of the
fertile women (45:4 per cent) experienced
child mortality averaging 2:38 deaths per
marriage but in non-cousin marriages a
higher proportion of the fertile women (51-2
per cent) were involved although the average
mortality (1-87) was a little lower.

Women who married cousins before they
were twenty years of age showed a higher
child mortality (1-05 children per marriage)
than in non-cousin marriages (0-84 children
per marriage) although in non-cousin
marriages a higher proportion (1-35 to 0°45
children per marriage) was found for those
women who married between twenty-one
and thirty years of age.

In cousin marriages up to fifteen years’
duration there was a lower mortality per
woman (0°32, 0:46 and 1-06) than in noncousin marriages (0-46, 0-71 and 1-07) but
beyond that the average rose (I-53 and 3-09 as
against 0-9 and 2-46 in non-cousin marriages).
FERTILITY AND CHILD MORTALITY IN COUSIN MARRIAGES

Conclusion

The figures showed no consistent differences between cousin and non-cousin fertility
and’ child mortality rates which could
suggest that genetic or endemic disease
factors might be involved.

Cousin marriages showed a slightly higher
percentage of fertile women and a much
greater fertility per woman as a whole
except for marriages lasting between six and
ten years.

In both categories infant mortality was
highest among boys in the first year of life
but after that the proportion between them
varied with age at marriage of the woman
and the length of the marriage.

199

Infertility in cousin marriages was conSpicuously high for women who married

before twenty years of age.

It is considered that the explanation of
these figures will be found in individual
ill-health and in social factors relating
amongst others to marital stability and
family care.

Acknowledgments

My grateful acknowledgments for advice
and criticism are given to Dr. D. Clyde of the
Tanganyika Medical Department and to
Messrs. Goldthorpe and Southall of the East
African Institute of Social Research.

GENUS

the Review of the
ITALIAN COMMITTEE FOR THE STUDY OF POPULATION PROBLEMS
and of the
ITALIAN SOCIETY OF GENETICS AND EUGENICS
edited under the auspices of the National Research Council
Editor: Corrapo GINI

Summary of Volume XII, December 1956.
C. GINI
Cc

Un’ inchiesta sugli emigranti italo-americani.

. CANALI DE Rossi Appunti sociologici su tre centri di emigrazione (S. Giovanni Incarico,

Ceccano, Ricigliano).
A. NADDEO
A. NADDEO
. A. ANDERSON
Educational Census of 1897.
. PEDRONI
. E. TAVENER
. GINI
. GINI
sociologi italani?
. D’AGATA Intelligenza e prolificita.

Ulteriori studi sulla fecondita e fecondabilita delle primipare.
Su una nuova funzione rappresentativa dello sviluppo demografico.
A Footnote to the Social History

Modern Russia; The Literacy and

Sviluppo e situazione attuale dell’istruzione pubblica dell’ Unione Sovietica.
New Light on the Adventure and Beagle Expedition, 1826-36.

Facolta extra-sensoriali e subcosciente.

E la Sociologia estranea alla cultura italiana oppure chi lo dice ignora i

Review of Italian, English, American, French, German, Dutch, Belgian, Chinese, South-American

GENUS

books.

accepts scientific articles, papers, notes and communications written in Italian, English, French, German
and Spanish in the field of the different sciences related to population problems (Demography, Sociology,
Economics, General Biology, Genetics, Eugenics, Anthropology, Social Hygiene, Psychology, Geography)

Orders should be addressed to:

Segreteria del Comitato Italiano per lo Studio dei Problemi della

Popolazione, Via delle Terme di Diocleziano, n° 10—Roma (III-8’) (Italy).

 
