MENTAL DEFICIENCY ON MERSEYSIDE’

Its Connection with the Social Problem Group

By D. CARADOG JONES

(From the University of Liverpool School of Social Sciences and Administration)

. F all the social and biological questions which urgently await solution,
one of the most important is how to

identify those persons who outwardly are
normal but who inwardly carry defective
genes. Until such identification is possible
the prevention of undesirable parenthood by
sterilization or any similar method, even
though it were legalized, would only be
effective over a small part of the field.

A considerable step forward was taken
towards the solution of this problem by the
careful investigations which were carried
out by Dr. E. O. Lewis for the Committee
set up by the Board of Education and the
Board of Control to inquire into the incidence of mental deficiency. His conclusions
can be briefly summarized as follows:

i. Mental defect can be conveniently
separated into three grades which shade into
one another and become indistinguishable
at the boundaries; idiocy, imbecility, and
feeblemindedness. The more serious grades,
idiocy and imbecility, are sporadic; they are
liable to appear in any class of the community and at any time without apparent
cause.

ii. Feeblemindedness, on the other hand,
is less the sport of chance; it is not evenly
spread throughout any area but lies thick in

- certain patches; there are ‘ pockets ’ of the
feebleminded, as Dr. Lewis expressed it.

iii. Moreover this higher-grade defect is
not evenly spread throughout the population, but is relatively conspicuous in certain
classes. ‘These classes constitute what has
been termed the ‘ Social Problem Group,’
because it is from this group that criminals,
paupers, unemployables, and all types of
that kind who are likely sooner or later

 

* The substance of this paper was delivered as an
address at the Annual Conference of Mental Health
Workers in Liverpool in April of this year. ,

to become a social burden, are largely
recruited.

These are facts which were probably well
known to all who have been working for
any length of time among the mentally
deficient, but to Dr. Lewis belongs the
credit of formulating them and emphasizing
their importance. ‘To those who are concerned to stop the flow of mental defect at
the source their immediate value is selfevident. If a part, and possibly a large
part, of mental defect is localized in certain
patches and, more particularly, in certain
social classes, it becomes considerably easier
to identify the carriers of the defective
genes. The area in which we must search
for them is to that extent limited and we
are saved the labour of traversing much
ground where they are less frequently found.

The purpose of this paper is to describe
an investigation which has some bearing
upon these same questions. The Social
Science Department of the University of
Liverpool during the last three years has
been making a survey of social conditions
on Merseyside, similar in character to the
Booth Survey of London, which is being
repeated after an interval of some forty
years.. The desire is to present a picture
of the social conditions under which the
great mass of people are living.

Now it occurred to me when we began
our survey that many of our so-called social
problems arise because certain classes in
the community start life handicapped in one
way or another, and never catch up with
their fellows in the race. Some are born
blind or deaf, epileptic, mentally deficient,
physically deformed. Others—it may be
due to their initial endowment or their early
environment—are persistently addicted to

97
98

drink, crime, immorality. Others again are
chronic sufferers from ill-health or unemployment, or they are constantly coming to
the Public Assistance Authority or some
charitable agency for relief. In all these
cases there is some lack of physical, mental,
or moral balance, or some failure of social
and economic adjustment which makes them
a burden upon the community. I thought
that if, in the early stages of our survey,
the various official and voluntary agencies
which are concerned with the welfare of
these sub-normal types could supply us
with certain information on parallel lines
about all their current cases, or a random
sample of them, we might in course of time
accumulate data of some interest. I therefore designed a card of printed questions
which, if adequately answered, would, I
hoped, throw additional light on matters
such as those which engaged the attention
of Dr. Lewis in regard to mental defect.
In this way independent confirmation—or,
as the case might be, contradiction—of
some of his conclusions might be obtained.
Moreover, his exceedingly important conception of a Social Problem Group would
be approached from a number of different
angles, in that it would be broken up into
its constituent elements, each of which
would be discussed independently, yet in
relation to the rest.

Clearly, to accomplish all that we had in
mind would have meant co-operation on an
ideal scale between a large number of
different bodies—which could scarcely be
expected. But I should like to register here
our deep appreciation of the interest shown
in our inquiries by the various agencies
we approached and of the generous manner
in which they placed their records at our
disposal. Without such aid from the West
Lancashire Association for Mental Welfare and the Special Schools Department of
the Local Education Authority, the inquiry
into mental deficiency in this area would
have been impossible.

One rather serious difficulty we had to
face at the outset. Any information coming
to the knowledge of a society concerning a
particular family that applies for assistance

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

must be treated as confidential; otherwise
the friendly relations which are so desirable
between the body that is helping and the
family that is helped are difficult to maintain. Even the fact that a particular family
or individual has applied for help should
not be made public if it can be avoided. We
got over the difficulty in this way. In
Liverpool we are fortunate in the possession
of a general Registration Office, controlled
by the Council of Voluntary Aid, which was
set up to prevent the overlapping of
assistance granted by different agencies in
the district. Each agency that was to cooperate in our inquiry was given a code
letter, and every family concerning which
that agency reported to us was given a
number. Arrangements were then made for
the letter and number to be sent to the
Registration Officer, along with the name
and address of the family concerned, but no
other information of any kind. At the same
time the particulars we required about the
family were sent to us along with the cade
letter and number but no name and address.
To us, therefore, each family remained
quite impersonal, a mere number; but with
the help of the data in the possession of the
Registration Officer, who was able to locate
each case but knew nothing else about it,
we can throw some light on the important
question of the spread of different types of
defect throughout the district.

Another difficulty must be mentioned.
For the information we required we were
dependent upon the case-paper records kept
by each association or authority concerning
the cases they assisted. In general we
could not, and we did not, expect any direct
inquiries to be made about their cases on our
behalf. Sometimes, therefore, the information we sought was not available because it
was of no immediate interest to the agency
concerned to collect it in the prosecution of
their work. At other times, though it
might be of interest, it was not essential to
them and consequently, if not readily accessible, no effort had been made to obtain or
confirm it. It follows that the particulars
inserted on our cards are not always as
complete as we should have liked them to be.
MENTAL DEFICIENCY ON MERSEYSIDE

On this point I should like to make a plea
in passing, and what I say has reference to
all areas, not to Merseyside in particular.
Many of the agencies that look after the
interests of the blind, the deaf, the mentally
deficient, and other sub-normal types are
understaffed. They are consequently so
busy in running their machinery efficiently
that they cannot spare the time to stop to
inquire into the value of the work they are
doing and whither it all leads. The
majority of them, though they may have
the interest, simply have not the leisure for
research into the root causes of the defects
with which they deal: they are compelled
to live from hand to mouth in an attempt to
cope with each fresh crop of cases as they
arise. The result is that we do not get the
full advantage of the valuable experience
they acquire in the process. Since they
alone are in the position to obtain the sort
of data which can unravel the mysteries
relating to the transmission of mental
defect from one generation to the next, my
plea is that they should try to discover what
precise data are likely to throw most light
on these questions, and then see to it that
the data are accurately and fully recorded
in their case papers.

I am not suggesting something which will
add enormously to their work—I ask only
that an effort should be made to record
certain facts which can quite readily be
acquired in the ordinary routine visits to
the homes of those who are assisted. The
facts thus accumulated should in due course
be of real value to students of these subjects
and they might indeed help towards a solution of some of the difficult problems of
human heredity.

THE PEOPLE INVESTIGATED

The remainder of this article will be confined to a brief account of some of the
material collected concerning one type only
of defect, namely mental defect. It relates
to 1,755 persons notified as mentally defcient under the appropriate Mental Deficiency or Education Acts and resident in
Liverpool, Bootle, and two or three neigh
99

bouring urban districts. All of them were
(or had been) attending special schools for
mental defectives or were under the supervision of the local Mental Welfare Association. We did not set out to discover cases
that were confined in institutions. The
particulars about each case are recorded on
a card, so that we have an equal number
of cards giving for each mentally deficient |
person the sex, age, occupation (if any),
and husband’s or father’s occupation, class
of home, age of wife or mother, and the
number of children, or brothers and sisters,
alive and dead. Also, on the back of the
card is recorded any history of near relatives known to be mentally deficient, blind,
deaf, or sub-normal in some other respect.

In addition to this material that was collected directly, we obtained indirectly particulars concerning a small number of cases,
said to be mentally deficient, in the course
of another investigation which might be
described as a kind of household census.
Every thirtieth house in every street
throughout Merseyside—which this time
embraced Birkenhead and Wallasey, as well
as Liverpool, Bootle, and certain urban
districts on both sides of the river—was
visited if it was believed to contain a working-class family. The criterion was the
occupation or the probable income of
the head of the household. The visitor
endeavoured to get particulars as to the size
and constitution of each family, the occupations of those earning, their economic position, housing conditions, and soon. Fairly
detailed information has been obtained in
this way concerning nearly 7,000 families,
representing a large random sample of the
normal population. In making their rounds
the investigators found thirty-seven persons
alleged to be mentally deficient and it is
therefore possible to compare in certain
respects the families in which these subnormals appeared with the normal families
that were sampled.

I need hardly say that the number of
mentally deficient persons discovered by this
second method will give an under-estimate of
the proportion of such persons in the
sampled population because, in the first
IO0O

place, the investigators did not set out to
discover them—they only came across them
incidentally; and because, in the second
place, relatives would tend to hide, rather
than to disclose, their existence. Also,
defectives in institutions as well as those
under fourteen would only be recorded by
chance, since the investigators were in
general only seeking to account for potential earners in the household who were over
fourteen but were not earning. Though the
number may seem to be small, however, I
do not think the estimate is altogether unreasonable. ‘The figure for Liverpool alone
is equivalent to 1.44 per 1,000 of the
sampled population, which may be compared, though the comparison is not a strict
one, with a proportion of 1.76 notified
mental defectives per 1,000 of the general
population discovered in our direct investigation when we included all defectives of
the classes already defined.

THE VARIATIONS IN PROPORTIONS

‘Those who have studied with any care the
Report of the Mental Deficiency Committee
may be puzzled as to why the proportions
just quoted should differ rather widely from
the proportion for the country as a whole,
as estimated by that Committee. There are
at least three reasons for the deficiency :
(1) certain classes of defectives, as already
explained, are omitted from the Liverpool
figures ; (2) the incidence of defect is known
to be appreciably lower in urban than in
rural areas; and, most important of all, (3)
the number of defectives officially notified
is considerably below the number ascertainable as defective. It was the latter figure
which Dr. Lewis set out to discover in his
investigations for the Committee, whereas
we were concerned with the former.

Confirmatory evidence of the last-mentioned deficiency can be obtained from the
Report of the Board of Control for 1930.
The number of mentally defective patients
under care on January Ist, 1931, is there
given as 55,064. This number includes all
in approved institutions of various kinds,
those under guardianship, and those under

THE EUGENICS REVIEW.

statutory supervision. In addition, there
were 21,990 defectives under voluntary
supervision, 9,471 ‘‘ subject to be dealt
with ’’ but in respect of whom no action had
been taken, and 3,819 known to the Local
Authorities but not as yet ‘‘ subject to be
dealt with.’? Finally, from Dr. Newman’s
Report on the Health of the School Child
we learn that there were, in 1930, 32,130
educable mentally defective children. When
all these numbers are put together they total
122,474, or 3 per 1,000 of the population, as
against Dr. Lewis’ estimate of about
320,000 certifiable defectives, or 8 per 1,000
of the population. Much as we already do
for mental defectives the gap between these
two figures is some measure of how far short
we still fall in our machinery for their
notification and care.

The analysis of this material has been a
laborious task and is not yet complete. The
greater part of it has been undertaken,
under direction, by Miss Phyllis M. Perrott,
a member of our research staff. Her care
and diligence throughout have been beyond
praise. The patient amassing of the
material, upon which we have built, from
widely divergent sources has been the work
of Miss J. E. McCrindell, to whom I should
like to make warm acknowledgment. Her
keen and never-failing interest in the investigation combined with her long experience
as a social worker have been extremely
valuable.

THE RELATIONSHIP TO SEX

It may be of interest if I mention one or
two results that emerge from our work so
far as it has gone. First, consider the
relation of mental defect to sex. Although
we cannot claim to have caught up in the
net of our inquiries every mentally deficient
person in the district, I do not think our
methods have been such as to give either
sex a better chance of inclusion than the
other. The household census returns gave
a proportion of 57 males to 43 females
mentally deficient. The direct inquiry gave
a proportion of 55 males to 45 females. The
Liverpool figures alone for mentally defiMENTAL DEFICIENCY ON MERSEYSIDE

‘cient children in special schools between the
ages of 5 and 16, which were likely to be
more complete, gave exactly the same proportion. ‘These results are in agreement
with those of the Government Mental
Deficiency Committee. I calculate from
their figures that the proportion of males
to females was 55 to 45 among children
under 16, and 52 to 48 for all ages combined.

The proportions are of course affected by
the numbers of normal persons of each sex
living in the area of inquiry, but it is well
known that in the general population
females are in excess of males. For
instance, at the last census in the area of
our inquiry the proportion of males to
females was 47 to 53. In our Liverpool
sampled population we have not yet
analyzed the figures under fourteen, but for
those above that age the proportion of males
to females was 48 to 52. We are driven to
the conclusion that males are more prone to
mental defect than females. Some words
which I wrote elsewhere on this point are
relevant here :

The complacent male sometimes claims
that most of the world’s geniuses, whether
in science or art, have been of his own sex.
If these figures are to be accepted as representative the female may with justice retort
that at least her sex produces relatively
fewer of the mentally deficient class. In
other words the male would appear to be

-the more variable of the two, downwards as
well as upwards from the normal.

THE RELATIONSHIP TO AGE

Let us next consider how mental defect
is related to age, confining ourselves to
persons over sixteen years of age, since the
definition of mental defect varies when we
pass from children of school age to adults.
‘Fhe Mental Deficiency Committee found
that, while in the general population in the
area of their investigation 54 per cent. were
under forty as compared with 46 per cent.
of forty and over, among the mental defectives the proportion over forty fell to 33 per
cent. In the mental defective group studied

Ior

on Merseyside, only 2 per cent. were over
forty and less than 20 per cent. were over
twenty-five, whereas in the general population over sixteen sampled in Liverpool, 76
per cent. were over twenty-five.

Whichever figures we take, it is clear that
the mentally deficient disappear from sight
or die young as compared with the normal
population. The figures for Merseyside are
more extreme in this sense than those of
Dr. Lewis. As already stated, we have not
included in our survey the mentally defcient who are in institutions. Also, we
should be more likely than he to miss the
older defectives ; for he counted all he could
discover, whether they were notified or not,
whereas we only included those who were
definitely under supervision. In this area,
as in most others, the machinery for searching out feeble-minded persons of mature
years is non-existent: they only come to
light in general when by some open act they
prove their lack of social adaptation. It
follows that comparatively few of them are
under supervision. It would be a great gain
if close and friendly touch could be maintained with all those who have in their
earlier years attended special schools for the
mentally defective.

Mind and body are closely related and
other defects or some constitutional weakness are not infrequently associated with
feebleness of mind. ‘This partly accounts
for a high death rate in early years among
the mentally deficient. Were it not, indeed,
for the attention and care that is now given
to them by doctors, nurses, and trained
workers, many of them would not live as
long as they do.

THE DEFECTIVE-PRODUCING CLASS

From what class do the mentally deficient
spring? Dr. Lewis, as we have seen, found
about the same frequency of low-grade
mental defectives—idiots and imbeciles—in
all classes of the community, but the feebleminded were far more prevalent in what he
called the ‘ Social Problem’ class than in
any other. What do the Merseyside figures
show ?
102

In the household census that was taken
of Liverpool and Bootle, particulars were
obtained concerning a random sample of
over 4,000 families from the general working-class population. All the families containing adult males were then classified
according to the grade of occupation of the
head of the household, with the following
result : 39 per cent. were engaged in unskilled occupations, 26 per cent. in semiskilled, and the remainder in skilled and in
non-manual occupations. Nearly 1,200
families each containing one young mentally
deficient person between the ages of five and
twenty-two were similarly classified according to the father’s occupation. Of these 57
per cent. were unskilled and only 23 per
cent. were in skilled or non-manual occupations.

The small random sample of families
found to contain mentally deficient persons
in the household census was also analyzed,
with the following result :

In 63 per cent. of them the head of the
family was unskilled and in only 7 per cent.
was he recorded as skilled.

In one-quarter of these families the head
was unemployed, as compared with only one
in ten of families in general at the same
period of time.

Over 40 per cent. were below a defined
poverty line, as compared with 16 per cent.
of all the families sampled in the same area.

Eighteen per cent. were living in overcrowded conditions, as compared with 11 per
cent. of all the homes sampled.

“LARGELY FROM THE SUB-NORMAL ”

The last-mentioned group of families is
admittedly small, and I should not put much
trust in the figures based upon them, taken
by themselves, but they all point in the
same direction. They lend support to the
conclusion that the feeble-minded are
largely drawn from a class of the population
that is in other respects sub-normal. ‘The
households in which they appear are frequently below the average, whether we
judge them by the occupation of the head,

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

his employability, the economic status of
the family, or the home conditions.

FERTILITY OF THE FAMILIES

From the standpoint of eugenics there is
another vitally important question upon
which our figures have a direct bearing—
that is, the contribution which these families
make to future generations, We endeavoured to find, when possible, the number
of brothers and sisters, alive and dead, of all
young mental defectives between the ages
of five and twenty-two. Those that were
living at home were usually recorded in the
case papers, but information would not
always be available concerning those living
away from home or dead. ‘The estimate we
get of the size of family may therefore
be regarded as a conservative one. Particulars of the same kind were obtained for:
the random sample of families investigated
in our household census.

For families in general the number of
children born per family was 3.92; for
families containing one or more young
mental defectives the number of children
born per family was 7.16, almost double the
previous figure.

As we have already seen, there is a tendency for those who are mentally deficient
to die young, and it is highly probable that
they come from a stock that is constitutionally, as well as mentally, below the average.
Evidence of this is found in the number of
children recorded as dead per family in the
M.D. group of families, which is 2.47 as
compared with 0.95 in the group of workingclass families sampled from the general
population. The net contribution of families
in general to future generations is thus 2.97
children per family, while that of the
mentally deficient group of families is 4.69.

We carried the analysis of our figures a
stage further by dividing our main group
of about 1,700 families containing mental
defectives between the ages of five and sixtyfive into three groups: those containing
more than one person classed as mentally
deficient, comprising abot a quarter of the
total; those containing, in addition to the
MENTAL DEFICIENCY ON MERSEYSIDE

mentally deficient individual, one or more
others classed as mentally retarded, comprising with the first group a third of the
total; those containing no other person
recorded as deficient or retarded.

FERTILITY PARALLEL WITH DEFECT

When the Liverpool families containing
children in special schools for the mentally
deficient were graded on this basis according
to the occupation of the father, it was discovered that the group of families containing more than one defective recorded the
highest proportion of fathers in the lowest
occupational grade. ‘The same families also
recorded the largest mean number of
children per family, both living and dead,
namely 5.0 and 2.7 respectively, as compared with 4.6 and 2.4 in the group of
families containing a single recorded
defective.

In view of these figures it may seem that
we have a clear case for segregation or
sterilization. But whom shall we segregate
or sterilize?—The parents of the defective
child? But if we wait until a defective
infant is born before we take action against
the parents, the deed is done and we are
too late. Moreover, while mentally defective persons are found with more than
average frequency in families which are
below the normal in occupational grade,
economic status, and general home conditions, the great majority of such families
contain no individual who would be certifiable as mentally deficient. And, as we shall
now show, these families are reproducing
their kind in numbers larger than families
which are normal. Our figures suggest,
indeed—lI do not claim that they conclusively
prove—that there is a definite gradation in
fertility : it is highest in families containing
more than one defective; it is very high in
families with a single defective; it is still
distinctly high in families which contain no
mentally deficient person but which are
sub-normal in some other respect.

The following table provides evidence in
support of the last statement :

103
SIZE OF FAMILY IN CERTAIN SOCIAL
GROUPS
Number of
Size of children born
Group of families. sample. per family.
Random sample of working
class bee vee «» 4,379 302
Male head unskilled . 1,452 4.31
Male head unemployed 360 = 4.35
In receipt of Public Assistance wee wee 216 4.54
Below the poverty line 75I 4.71
Overcrowded 397. 6.06

It is possible also to compare the number
of living children per family in the 1,115
families containing at least one mentally
defective member with the corresponding
figure in 86 families where the defect is
blindness, in 186 families where the defect
is deafness, and in 52 families where the
defect is epilepsy, the defective individual
in each case being between the ages of five
and twenty-two. Here we cannot compare
the number born, because the number of
children dead was frequently not recorded
and was sometimes unreliable.

The mean number of living children per
family in the mentally defective group was
4.69; in the blind group it was 4.88; in the
deaf group it was 4.59; in the epileptic group
it was 4.50. All these results are considerably in excess of the mean number of children alive per family in the general working-class population which, as we saw, was
2.97.

There is one point here which might quite
easily be overlooked and to which I think
attention should perhaps be drawn. Since
all the families with a defective child must
have had at least one child, it might with
some degree of fairness be argued that such
families should only be compared with normal families which have also had at least one
child: in other words we should exclude
from our normal group all families for which
no living or dead children were recorded. If
that be done, the mean number of living
children in the normal group is increased
by only about one-third of a child per
family, so that it is still definitely less than
the mean number of living children in the
defective groups.
104

THE EUGENIC PROBLEM

We have ventured to class the different
types of families we have been considering
as all in a sense sub-normal, and it seems
clear from the figures quoted that such
families are in general bringing more children into the world than normal families.
Now, just as in mental defect there are
different grades—and possibly different
species—so mental defect itself may be
regarded, in its social reactions, as only one
of a genus of defects and disabilities. If,
then, we are to limit the production of
children in the mentally defective group, is
there any reason why we should stop there,
and if not, where should we draw the line?

In answer to this question it has to be

admitted that we cannot be strictly logical.

We shall be driven to adopt different
methods for different classes by the force
of public opinion, if for no other reason.
Sterilization might come to be accepted as
suitable for certain types: for others the
desired result might be best achieved by a
scaling down of social benefits. I will
briefly indicate the sort of case which I
think would be likely to fall under these
two heads, starting with the second.

It is possible that some of the groups we
have been discussing may have larger
families than the normal because they are
naturally and constitutionally more fertile.
On that point we have no very definite
evidence. But it is certainly the case that
such families have not the same inducement
as normal families to limit the number of
their children. The complaint is continually heard that, at the intelligent end of the
scale, where more children would be a
decided advantage to the State, we have the
well-attested fact of family limitation; at
the opposite end, where they become a drag
on the rest of the community, the effect of
our social services is such as actually to
encourage the production of large families.
A member of the Survey staff was recently
informed on good authority that, in a
certain area of Liverpool, which I shall not
name, where families have long been suffering from hopeless unemployment, young
people from the age of eighteen years

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

onwards are almost pushed out of the home
by their parents, like small birds from their
nests ; it is not done unkindly : they see the
advantage of getting married and setting up
for themselves, though it may be only in a
single room, because the Public Assistance
granted to a young man and his family is
on a more generous scale than the allowance
which they would receive if they were
unmarried and living as dependants upon
their parents.

It would be unfair to assume that this
alleged practice is universally prevalent,
even if it be true of one small patch of
Liverpool; I have thought it worth mentioning only because it is indicative of a
tendency. Most of us, in these days, believe
in the principle underlying the social services, and we realize the benefits which they
have brought to the working classes; but I
think the time has come when we must
exercise more refined methods in selecting
the families which are to enjoy these benefits. No humane person would wish to see
anybody destitute, but we cannot afford to
give—and indeed we do not at present give
—without reasonable inquiry into the means
and qualifications of applicants for assistance. In particular, those who have any
regard to the future of the race will agree
that we should try to avoid giving in such
a way as to put a premium on the production of a pauper class. One can see that
there are many difficulties in the way of
attaining this result. How precisely they
should be overcome is a matter upon which
we should look for some guidance to those
who have had long experience in the administration of relief.

THE REMEDIES SUGGESTED

Turning now to the proposed alternative
method of family limitation which, as a
supplement to segregation, has received
some measure of influential support, we
have allowed that it would be neither
entirely just nor entirely effective to adopt
compulsory sterilization for mentally defective persons alone. With suitable safeguards, however, it is felt that there would
MENTAL DEFICIENCY ON MERSEYSIDE

not be the same injustice—and there should
be definite social advantage—if the voluntary sterilization of the mentally defective
and certain other classes could be legalized.
Our first aim should be to prevent, so far
as possible, the birth of children who are
likely to be the victims of some serious hereditary disease or defect of mind or body
transmitted by either parent.

With that in view, it is suggested that
any individual who has been certified by
one or more qualified medical practitioners
as suffering from such a disease or defect
should be advised to undergo sterilization.
The necessary safeguards proposed are that
the operation should only be authorized by
a properly qualified board—which, in the
case of mental defectives, might be the
Board of Control—and that it should only
be performed with the consent of the person
concerned or, if he should be under age or
defective, the consent of his parent, guardian, or spouse. Although such consent
would be essential, there is no reason why
moral pressure should not be used to obtain
it. For instance, a mentally defective or
an insane person in an institution might be
perfectly harmless and therefore fit to live
with relatives, except for the one danger
that he or she might be capable of producing
a child suffering from a like defect. It
would not be unreasonable, from the point
of view of society, to grant perfect freedom
to such an individual on condition that he
or she were willing first to be sterilized.

The same procedure has been proposed
for the recidivist type of criminal who is
constantly in and out of prison, for the
adult male who has been found guilty of a

105

sexual offence against a child under fourteen, and for the mentally retarded young
woman who periodically enters a maternity
home to be delivered of an illegitimate baby.
The justification for it in these cases would
not be on racial grounds but because such
persons could not be regarded as suitable
parents. It might be impossible to prove
that the offspring of any of these particular
types would of necessity be defective or
diseased, but it is almost certain that their
home conditions would be most unsatisfactory and that in one way or another the
children would themselves be likely to
become a burden upon others.

All may not be prepared to go to the
lengths which I have indicated, but probably few will dispute the desirability of
putting a limit to the burdens which the
recidivist and the sexually irresponsible are
permitted gratuitously to impose upon the
State. When that limit is reached such
persons should only be given their freedom
on condition that they are not able to abuse
it in a manner injurious to the race, and
those who cannot accept sterilization as a
suitable method of preventing such abuse
should do all in their power to promote the
discovery of a better alternative.

It is generally acknowledged that to bring
a genius into the world is to confer a lasting
benefit upon mankind. As our knowledge
of genetics grows, one hopes the day will
also come when to produce a child who is
mentally deficient, who is afflicted with some
grave disease or deformity, or who is
branded at birth with the stigma of pauperism, will be considered and treated as a
crime against both the child and society.

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIV, No. 2.
