INTERNATIONAL BIOLOGICAL
REGISTRATION.

By Jon ALFRED MJOEN AND Jon Bo.

THE NORWEGIAN SYSTEM FOR IDENTIFICATION AND
PROTECTION OF THE INDIVIDUAL.

This system for identification, known as the Norwegian Identity
Book, has been worked out at the Winderen Laboratorium, Kristi‘ania, by Dr. Jon Alfred Mjoen and Jon Bé. The system was laid
before the International Emigration Congress in Rome, 15th May to
6th June, this year, by the Norwegian delegate, Fjelstad. The Congress resolved that the proposition should be printed in extenso in
Italian, English and French. The Identity Book has created intense
interest according to the official reports and it was resolved that a
special conference should be held to discuss the Norwegian Identity
Book.

It is a characteristic of our time that the best are sacrificed and
the vicious protected. During the years of war the brave, the selfsacrificing, the devoted even unto death were mown down, while the
cowards seldom came farther than the rear of the firing-line. Nay,
in all the belligerent lands, there were actually regulations which
prevented criminals from being sent to death. It is equally characteristic of the organisation of our modern society that the law-abiding
are restricted in the exercise of their right of self-determination,
because there exists a growing minority of law-breakers. In the
human ant-hill there are none to exterminate the parasites. On the
contrary, these parasites flourish and strut around as they have never
done before and make their way with well-filled valises through all
entrance gates from the Riviera to Gjedser-Warnemunde, from
Ukraine to Castle Garden. They manage to cross frontiers and pass
through one land to another without standing in a queue on
Alexander-platz, whilst the unpracticed, respectable citizens of another country must run from consulate to consulate, from one police
station to another, to be cross-examined, suspected, nay, even
thrown into prison, until wearied out and discouraged, he gives up all
further attempts to get across the border. The drunkards make
it necessary to fashion regulations which fall heavily upon the temperate, the international criminal necessitates a system of passports,
of control, and finally of punishment, which becomes more and more
intolerable for the industrious members of society. The fault lies
mainly in the fact that in the passport office, or in the sick insurance,
at the ballot box, or in the court of justice, no sincere effort has
hitherto been made to identify a human individual or to connect the
individual with his own past. The basic principle for the modern
treatment of the individual at all the cross-roads of life is this :
“‘ Because there are to be found individuals with a vicious past, we
184 EUGENICS REVIEW.

must also deal with you as if you were equally vicious.’’ The claim
that every human being has a right to make, namely, the claim to be
held responsible for his own acts, for his own motives and for his own
way of life, is rendered difficult by the fact that we have hitherto had
no means of identifying the individual. We have lacked a system
which could promptly and in a practical manner establish the fact
that “I am I, and nobody else.”? It is not very reassuring to see
the powerlessness which is displayed by the so-called authorities of
the State, even in the leading civilised lands, when it is a question
of ascertaining the material composing the population and its movements, or when law and order need to be maintained and social evils
combated. Milliards of money are granted annually for education,
public health and the prison system, with the result that hospitals,
lunatic asylums and prisons must be built larger and larger. And the
prisons are filled, although most of the criminals still remain at
liberty.

Our national and international conditions afford in reality to the
criminal the fullest opportunities of constantly extending his fields
of operation. Even in those cases where anti-social activities do not
display criminal] methodicalness and foresight, we see that these antisocial race-elements inflict great damage on the community. For
they infect society biologically and morally. The biologically inferior
—the mentally deficient—fill the ranks of the chronic drunkards,
castaway sand loafers, and may spread venereal disease. With the
increasing movements of the populations which are now taking place
these race-elements are being dispersed more than ever over new
fields of operation.

In our human age it is becoming—and rightly so—constantly
more and more difficult for society to rid itself of the inferior individuals by brutal] methods. Formerly recourse was had to capital
punishment. The method was radical and killed all evil growths at
the root. But in our modern society, with its increasing feelings of
mercy, the difficulties augment themselves with every new generation.
The upright and industrious individual is often placed under control
as if he or she belonged to the class of drunkards, prostitutes or
criminals. Especially if they remove themselves some distance from
their native place. The demand for a new solution of these problems
is making itself more and more clearly heard.

A system which can perhaps afford some help and which at any
rate can solve some of the difficulties we have mentioned above, will
be described in detail in what follows :—

BroLocicaL REGISTRATION OF THE POPULATION IN CONNECTION WITH
THE IpENTITY Book.

The first time the individual comes into contact with
the public authorities is when he is baptised, or in England,
registered, and the last time when he is borne to the grave.
Between these two points there may lie many stages at
which the individual makes claims upon the community he lives in,
or vice versa. In these cases, and in many other relations, it would
INTERNATIONAL BIOLOGICAL REGISTRATION. 185

be of mutual advantage to have all particulars about an individual’s
course of life collected in a few words and entered in one book. The
information must be provided with the signatures of the authorities
and accompanied by identity marks, for instance, special index,
print of hand-surface and finger-prints. Any investigations of or
decisions that may have to be made can then be carried out easily,
promptly, accurately and justly at any time, in any place, and in any
situation in which the individual may be placed.

We therefore suggest that a law should be passed establishing
biological registration of the people with an Identity Book. This
book shall be handed to the child on the completion of his 15th year,
and shall accompany the individual throughout his whole life. The:
Identity Book contains in a few lines all the most important data
concerning the life of a human being from the cradle to the grave.
It lies in the interest of the possessor to have it ready to hand whenever he requires it. It contains no reproach even against the most.
degraded individual, except in so far as the passport section will lack
the recommendation to foreign authorities which the modern passport
contains. On the other hand, the Identity Book from the mere fact
one can promptly and certainly establish who the bearer is will be an
immediate and irrefutable accuser of those who once again come into
conflict with the law. It will in this respect act quite automatically
through the reciprocity existing between the police records of criminals, and the name, number and biological characteristics entered in
the Identity Book. The Identity Book will therefore serve as a sure
means of discovering criminals, while at the same time it will act as a.
reliable protection in cases where suspicion falls upon innocent citizens.

With the introduction of the Identity Book the searching of an
emigrant ship could proceed with ease and certainty. It will be possible in quite a short time to “filter,” so to speak, an emigrant ship
on its arrival in port, even if the numbers of passengers should amount
to several thousands.

The disadvantages of the present system lie in the great number
of papers required, as well as in the elaborate and time-consuming
method of procedure for the procuring, cancelling and procuring again
of these papers. (Every individual must at the present time drag
around with him from fifteen to twenty different sorts of credentials).
The result of this is that, for instance, a large number of those who
are entitled to vote do not exercise their right of voting, chiefly
through fear of the troublesome formalities connected therewith. In
some States police are employed for the purpose of making out the
list of voters. A large number of officials go from house to house, and
on payment of a certain sum per person, write down the names of
all the members of the household who have or are entitled to the right
to vote in the current year. The matter ought at any rate to be so
arranged that this enumeration should at the same time be of utility
for other branches of administration. An enumeration must be made
of all the citizens in the State, and this list can afterwards be supplemented by returns regarding births. deaths and removals to and
from a place.
186 | EUGENICS REVIEW.

In other lands (for example, in Prussia) the district officials in
making out the lists, must have recourse to the voluntary assistance
of the house-owners or of private persons. (It must, however, be
remembered that the voluntary work of private persons also costs
time and money, even if the State has no direct outlay). If such an
expensive system as is at present employed in several European
countries is actually to be set in motion, then these labours must also
be made to serve other purposes also besides merely the exercise of
the franchise. The Identity Book will have the advantage that it can
be used as a franchise book for voting at parliamentary, local and
church elections. The election authorities by examining the age and
place of domicile of the person concerned can then at any moment
decide whether he is entitled to vote or not.

In all relations between employers, and especially as regards the
engagement of domestic servants, there prevail at the present time
exceedingly difficult and uncertain conditions under which the innocent suffers most. At the present time complaint is heard that
thievish women, women who have been convicted of crimes, who are
of immoral character or who are suffering from venereal diseases, find
their way into respectable homes, where the damage they cause would
perhaps be less great if the master or mistress of the house were
aware of the history of the person they are taking in. The Identity
Book would here afford greater security. It would also be a decisive factor in the case of those seeking pauper relief.

The poor law authorities would in a moment be able to ascertain
with certainty the parish to which the applicant for relief belonged,
which is of great importance in enabling a claim for refund to be
made in the proper quarter.

The disadvantages of the present passport system are so generally
recognised all over the world that we hardly need to produce further
proofs to show that its abolition would be felt as a great relief. The
present passport system may briefly be characterised as a vexatious
persecution directed against all respectable, hardworking and reliable
people. It is a stalking horse for the crimina! elements that are so
numerous in our days, and especially for the many parasites on
society, who avail themselves of these defective systems in order to
be free and unrestrained, to seek new fields of operation after having
eaten the old ones bare.

If the sick-insurance club should continue its activity as an independent paying-office, it would for many districts be an
advantage to combine the sick-insurance office with the office for the
registration of the people. (This ought to be arranged according to
local circumstances). Such an arrangement would have the advantage that the insurance office would at all times possess a clear view
of and control over the number of members. The work of the police
in sending out the present separate removal certificates, as well as
the obligation of the individual to preserve same, will be done away
with.

Under existing legislation there is carried out an enumeration
of all who are liable to pay taxes in town or parish, or, more
INTERNATIONAL BIOLOGICAL REGISTRATION. 187

correctly speaking, in every local government district. The Identity
Book will not, of course, be able to help the authorities to find the
tax-payers. But the system in its entirety will work in such a way
that it will be to the interests of the tax-payers to register themselves
in order not to be out of the advantages which society on the whole
offers to them.

Several of the advantages mentioned above apply also to banking, the customs system and the combating of smuggling, the import
and export trades, to the army and navy, to the mercantile marine,
and above all, to the combating of the activities of spies. These latter
are based upon false passports, and after the introduction of the
Identity Book false passports will be an impossibility. Mobilisation
will be simplified. The Identity Book will replace the seaman’s certificate book and it will serve as an assistance in the mercantile marine
and in the navy in the helping of distressed sailors in foreign ports,
as well as in finding missing sailors. When this book has become
obligatory (by international law) all vessels lying in a port can easily
and rapidly be searched both for those who have lost touch with
their relatives at home, and for those who are being sought for on
account of inheritance, deaths or desertion. The communications
which at present have to be sent to east and west with declarations
of domicile in order to ascertain where the individual comes from (his
native district being liable for refund of expenses) are both timeconsuming and sometimes unreliable.

SIMPLIFICATION OF ADMINISTRATION.

The claims that are being made upon State and district are increasing from year to year in an alarming degree. The claims must
be met, and in order to get the budget to balance heavier and heavier
taxes are being laid upon the citizens. The burdens that rest especially upon certain middle classes are becoming more and more intolerable. It is seldom that we see new proposals of reforms brought
forward for the consideration of the authorities without these
demands involving constantly fresh sacrifices of money precisely from
the hardest working members of our community.

The reform that is here proposed stands in contrast to other
reforms in so far as its carrying out will result in a not inconsiderable
saving of expenditure in the different branches of administration in
State and local districts. For many years there has been talk of a
simplification of administration without its having been possible to
succeed to carry out any great saving or reduction. The simplification lies mainly in the fact that the obligatory biological registration
will render superfluous a great deal of costly work in the various
administrative offices, and many branches, cards or certificates, that
are now requisite and which every member of the community is
obliged to have and keep up to date, he will only have to keep in
this one book, which will be his ‘‘ conditio sine qua non.’’ The effect
of this is that it will limit the field of operation for all work-shirking
and criminal elements. The positive effect is that it will secure for
the industrious elements in the community better facilities than
188 EUGENICS REVIEW.

hitherto for obtaining work and help in case of illness, and for all
kinds of social assistance from the cradle to the grave. Furthermore,
it will relieve the administration of a huge amount of work which has
hitherto demanded of state and district considerable economic sacrifices with comparatively ineffective results.

SUMMING UP.

The Identity-book renders it possible in the course of a few
minutes to determine with absolute certainty whether a person is.
what he asserts himself to be, no matter in what part of the world he
may happen to be.

The Imdentity-book can be so arranged that it replaces the following documents :—Birth, baptismal, vaccination, school, confirma-.
tion, graduation, matriculation, and marriage certificates, police
papers, tax receipt, passport, military pass, seaman’s book, life insurance policy, personal certificate and other personal papers. When
used in the right way it will facilitate the control for the State and,
what is still more important, the control will to a great extent be
placed in the hands of the public itself.

The Identity-book will solve one of the most difficult problems.
of control by emigration and immigration,

The Identity-book means a facilitation of the book-keeping and
control in private and public institutions ; also universities and
schools and in the business world.

The Identity-book is an incorruptible judge and accuser against
habitual criminals and recidivists. It will be an obstacle for them at:
every stage of their shady operations.

The Identity-book, if lost by the holder, is, in contrast to the
present passports, valueless to the finder.

The Identity-book will be an invaluable protection and means of
defence for all citizens who have been slandered, rendered suspect,
or through the actions of others deprived of their ‘honour as citizens.
After the introduction of the Identity-book such mistakes as, for instance, wrongful arrests and the consequent mental suffering inflicted
on innocent and defenceless persons, will be rendered difficult, if not
impossible.

The Identity-book will, on the death of the holder, be returned
to the biological registration office. The material t thereby collected
will serve for the guidance of genealogists, race-biologists and race:
hygienists, of doctors and statisticians, of jurists and criminalists,
and of all the laboratories and institutions which are working for the
promotion of a population policy and for the welfare of the people.

Through such an organisation and arrangement of material in
biological laboratories it will be possible to secure the first foundation
for a scientific and practical judgment of the physical and mental
character of the nation and the race.

The Identity-book will, without violent measures, serve to educate people up to a higher conception of the duties of citizenship and
to a feeling of social solidarity.
