Genesis and Reclamation of the poor White
in South Africa.*
By Proressor J. E. Duerprn, M.Se., Ph.D.

Rhodes University College, Grahamstown. |

The interest at present manifested in the problem of the poor
white of South Africa, and the seeming inadequacy of any solution
would appear to call for its relegation to the fundamental principles of
genetics. Indeed, had the question been one concerned with the
improvement of domestic stock it would have been submitted to the
geneticist forthwith; but as a problem in human welfare, it has been
relegated to politicians and philanthropists. Yet the teachings of
genetics apply with equal force to human beings and domestic animals,
and success in either calls for the application of like principles.

In his experimental breeding work with animals the geneticist
is impressed with the permanency of the fundamental characteristics
of a race,and at the same time with their modifiability in the individual
as a result of environmental influences. He is well versed in Galton’s
phrase: ‘‘Nature and Nurture,’’ and is accustomed to contrasting hereditary and acquired characteristics. As a working basis he proceeds
on the assumption that acquired modifications are non-transmissable,
and that each generation starts where its predecessors began, not where
they left off; the germ plasm is deemed to remain continuous and unalterable, and individual attainments are for the generation only.
Racial variation he finds in plenty, and selection of the desirable and
rejection of the undesirable enable him to advance the average of the
good qualities he desires. Failing the sporadic changes in the germ
plasm which give mutations, progress can, however, be achieved only
by means of environmental influences, and the effects are but
individual, not racial.

Original Stock from which Poor Whites are Derived.

In approaching the poor white problem the geneticist first enquires
as to the nature of the original material from which the class has come.
From this he can gather to what degree the degenerate condition of today is evidence of an originally retrogressive nature, or to what extent
it has been impressed by force of circumstances. If primarily degenerate in nature his science can offer no encouragement ; the individual is
constitutionally incapable of fitting into the complexities of modern

*An Address delivered before the Grahamstown Social Welfare League.
GENESIS AND RECLAMATION OF THE POOR WHITE. 271

life, and can exist only on support from others or under some simpler
state of society not yet evolved. If, however, the degeneracy be
the result of circumstances to which he has been subject there is the
highest hope for his recovery ; the blood is good, but the chances have
been against it and call for amelioration.

Historically, there is no uncertainty in estimating the sociological
value of the original stock from which the class of indigent white has
evolved. It is derivative of the two most virile nations of Europe, the
industrious, adventurous, sea-faring Dutch and British, with a slight
admixture of French. The Dutch followed in the wake of van Riebeck,
mostly from 1652 to 1806, and were largely soldiers, sailors, artizans,
farmers and servants with a leavening of the administrative, commercial, and professional classes. In any numbers, the British arrived
from 1795, when they first took over Cape Town, and were much of the
same types, the purely settler class predominating in the last century,
notably the three to four thousand 1820 settlers in the Eastern Province.
The French refugees arrived mostly in 1688, but their national identity
became largely merged in the Dutch element. On the whole the immigrants may be held to have been no better and no worse eugenically
than the corresponding classes of their time in Holland and Britain,
the descendants of whom make up the two nations to-day, while the
sturdy qualities of independence and adventure were probably in the
ascendancy. Writing in dispatches of the men who took part in the
Great Trek of 1886—37 the Governor, Sir Benjamin D’Urban, describes
them as ‘‘brave, patient, industrious, orderly and religious people;
the cultivators, defenders, and tax contributors of the country.’’

Production of the Poor White Class.

If, then, it be accepted that the ancestors of the poor white class were
neither better nor worse than the corresponding classes in Europe, we
have to account for their present state of degeneracy, in which they have
become for the most part incapable of providing for themselves more
than a bare subsistence. Opinions may differ as to the relative value
of the various influences, but a close study of all the circumstances is
highly convincing that they can be summed up as inherent in the
peculiar conditions of South Africa to which the trekkers subjected
themselves. The general trend was towards isolation, of removal
from centres of activity and progress to distant parts where each could
lead an untrammeled existence, free from every form of social, politieal, and economic restraint, where land could be had for a mere
nothing. The free, simple, hunting, pastoral life and the lure of the
land made a strong appeal; the country was thinly peopled, and ample
room was available for increase of family and stock, or for further
migration if necessary. The presence of the native was a disturbing
factor, and at the same time inhibited any healthy stimulus for manual
work; while the hard natural conditions prevailing in undeveloped
South Africa, with the accompaniment of drought and flood, discouraged agriculture and all forms of enterprise, and led to partial
exhaustion of the land by stock. The conditions to which the settlers
were subject are well expressed by the South African puet, Mr. F. C.
Slater :—
272 EUGENICS REVIEW.

*‘Many evils come to try

Their fortitude: their cattle die,
Sometimes all their streams run dry
When, ’neath the sun’s unflinching sting,
Earth is as a tortured thing,

That quivers in its parchéd pain

And begs with blistered lips for rain!
Sometimes, when their fields are green,
Russet clouds on high are seen—
Hissing clouds that fall like rain

Over valley, field and plain—

Hissing clouds that pass in haste

And leave behind a desert waste.’’

With the gradual filling-up of the country and the absence of new
areas to which to migrate, the farmer had to restrain his wanderings,
his family growing larger and the resources of his land less. Except in
the most favoured spots he gradually found himself becoming poorer,
and less capable of providing a decent existence. Absence of education
and of stimulating contact with his fellow man and with the outer
world engendered narrowness of outlook, and lack of sympathy and
plasticity for progressive measures. It was manifest that the trekker
had struck out on wrong lines, and could not retrace ; he stagnated, and
his virile nature succumbed.

As regards the proportion of the population now involved, rural
and urban, we cannot do better than quote the estimate of Prof. W.M.
Macmillan in his Lectures on the Agrarian Problem: ‘‘We might state
the case thus, that nearly one-twentieth of the white population of the
Union are in permanent absolute poverty, many of them perhaps
demoralised beyond redemption; in addition, we have to reconstruct
society so as to prevent perhaps considerably more than another
twentieth from being dragged by adverse, but remediable conditions,
down to the level of those submerged .’’

The results are such as would be expected, and have but little
relationship to national characteristics; they would in all likelihood
have been the same with the people of any nation, subjected to the
same environment. The descendants of the Dutch comprise by far
the majority since they were the first settlers, and have the longest been
subject to the deteriorating influence of the remote country, the back
veld. It is their adventurous and freedom-loving nature which has
been their undoing. ‘‘Our poor rustics to-day are the depositories of
the traditions of the Great Trek, and the children of the pioneers of
civilization in this wide land;’’ but South Africa owes much to them
for their pioneering efforts in the opening-up of the country.

The production of an indigent class of land-owing farmers, descended from virile stock, is probably unique in social evolution, and
has an intense interest for the eugenist and sociologist. It is to be
ascribed to the depressing influences of isolation, consequent upon the
sparsely populated character of South Africa, the harsh pastoral and
agricultural condition of the country occupied, and the presence of the
inferior Bantu race. Elsewhere the indigent population is constituted
GENESIS AND RECLAMATION OF THE POOR WHITE. 273

largely of the inefficients and incapables by nature ; the present class is
‘specific to South Africa in its origin. It is for the most part a result of
historical and geographical factors, acting on an otherwise desirable
strain.

New Agricultural and Industrial Era.

In the meantime, and more especially during the past twenty
‘years, a new agricultural and industrial era has dawned upon South
Africa. The extension of railways, the manifold activities in research,
‘teaching and propaganda of a vigorous and well-directed Department
of Agriculture, the development of schemes of water storage and
irrigation, successes against animal diseases innumerable, the intro‘duction of high-grade stock of all kinds, the advent of the ostrich and
lucerne and fencing, the encouragement of fruit and grain production
and better methods of disposal and export of products, all these have
placed pastoral and agricultural effort on an assured basis, more progressive and intensive. Mining, metallurgical and manufacturing
industries have made their advances, and wielded an influence in the
‘country ‘s rise. |

But the stimulating influences from these have failed to reach the
isolated trekker on his distant farm or, reaching him, have found him
‘cold and unresponsive. The incubus of years of depressing isolation,
‘subversive to nature, cannot lightly be thrown aside. Meanwhile the
land has made its appeal to a newer and intensely vigorous type, with
‘capital and intellect meet for development, infused with the new ideals
in agriculture and awake to its possibilities; the townsman of all
‘classes, merchant, official and professional, has responded to the call of
the country and its life of freedom, while the farmer already prosperous
has expanded more and more. The glamour of the land prevails in
South Africa. The inevitable has happened. The trek farmer has
relinquished his feeble hold on his land, and has either become a
dependant upon the newcomer or drifted helplessly into the towns,
searcely more capable of making a Jivelihood there than in the country.
Within recent years one has witnessed whole districts in which the
pioneering farmers, pathetic in their hopelessness, have been replaced
by the modern progressive; the country has advanced in material
prosperity, but the individual has succumbed. The original trek
farmer was before his time, elected a wrong course, and cannot now
retrace his steps; he failed to fore-see the result of isolation in a new
undeveloped country, great with possibilities, but special in their
nature, only to be won by strenuous, intelligent effort directed by
science. The new occupier takes up where the old leaves off, but has
knowledge of the requirements meet for success.

Recovery.

Recovery of the poor white class is not without its hopefulness,
though having atwo-fold bearing. For adults the geneticist has nothing
to offer. They are the inheritors of the two or three hundred years of
environmental influences, unfitting for modern South Africa. The
effects have been cumulative from generation to generation, and have
moulded the individual from the day of his birth. Transferred to
QT 4 b 3 EUGENICS REVIEW.

ameliorating surroundings, his efforts to shake off the incubus of habit
are for the most part futile. In general, he is incapable of making a
decent livelihood either under or away from his old surroundings,
incapable of adaptation to the more strenuous and complex conditions.
now normal to South Africa. He but accentuates the ordinary poverty
and distress of town life. His day of opportunity has gone by; he
remains a genuine subject for philanthropic effort, designed to help to.
ameliorate the condition of the incapable and the unfortunate in life’s.
struggle ; his position calls for the exercise of all the virtues of altruism,
but he is no longer a helpful factor in his country’s welfare.

On the other side, the possibilities of the new generation inspire
one with the highest hope. The immigrant stock has been shown to be:
virile, the quality of the blood has not changed, the deteriorating
influences affect only the individual, the new life starts with all the
original potentialities of its class, and can be moulded to the possibilities of its ancestral forbears. But from the beginning the coming
generation must be freed from the depressing environment which
enfolds its immediate forbears, ere it is moulded in the same depressing
manner; it must be placed under influences such as will fashion it in
harmony with the social needs of to-day. There is no escape for these
genetic requirements. Allow the new generation to grow up under the
old parental surroundings, and it repeats the parental incapacity ;
subject it to favourable conditions and it responds, fitted for the complex needs of its class. No creature does its best which does not start
well from the beginning.

The principle of the early segregation of the new generation under
improved conditions is not here “advocated for the first time. but its.
enforcement from the realm of genetics accords it the support of
scientific authority. The application of the principle, however,
presents great difficulties which cannot now be entered upon; some
little has already been done. Manifestly, in the present state of the
public conscience, much propaganda will be necessary ere intelligent
sentiment in support of the need is awakened on a national scale.
National problems receive their enforcement at particular periods in a
country’s history, and in these days of awakened national aspiration,
re-arrangement of social ideals, and political stability the time may be
deemed opportune. An effort to arouse public sentiment on behalf of
the submerged part of the nation should appeal with peculiar force to.
the University youth of South Africa, appreciative of the blessings he
himself received from the State in fitting him for a position of
enlarged social worth. Infused with the spirit of true South African:
nationalism, he should in turn be prepared to strive for a chance in life:
for his humble brother. It is fundamentally a problem of education,,
but with unusual features. It is suggested that University Associations.
be formed to investigate the problem in all its bearings, and to constitute nuclei from which should radiate influences destined to arouse
an intelligent and sympathetic public opinion, that fore-runner of
legislative accomplishment. No nobler or more inspiring call could
come to the educated youth of South Africa, infused with true nationalism as part of a humanitarian universalism, than to devote himself to.
the social reclamation of those in economic bondage, impressed by a
GENESIS AND RECLAMATION OF THE POOR WHITE. 275

formative period in his country’s history. In reflecting on the good
work done by Mr. Geo. H. Hofmeyr, Secretary for Higher Education,
in the encouragement and co-ordination of the efforts in Child Welfare
and Industrial Education it is permissible to hope that the Universities themselves may follow the lead in the regeneration of submerged
South Africa; no other part of the community is able to bring to bear
upon the problem such independent and enlarged sympathetic minds,
trained in the conditions necessary for the right development of others.
Studies such as those emanating from the investigations of Prof. W.M.
Macmillan may well be taken as inspiring models.

In the assurance of tangible results, a movement of the nature here
outlined is wholly different from that of philanthropy as generally
exercised, and makes a different appeal. The one is wholly remedial
whereas the other is mainly palliative. Philanthropic effort usually
concerns itself with the naturally deficient, the incapable, and its
measures aim at making his lot more bearable; but it is without
permanent eugenic value. Indeed, unless wisely administered, it may
encourage degeneracy, by affording the means for bringing into being
others of like character, and thus continue the bad stock. Social
sentiment has not yet reached the stage where it will permit of measures
for the gradual elimination of the undesirables. The reclamation here
advocated is concerned with the birth-right of individuals having a real
potential value to South Africa.

The new agricultural and industrial development of South Africa
carries with it the call for this regenerated class. Everywhere is the
growing demand for efficient whites. Immigration is good, and is
immediate in its returns, but the recovery of one’s own carries high
obligations, even though slow in realisation. Farmers demand
efficient whites for their intensive agriculture and high pastoral
attainments ; industrialism calls for a higher level of production, only
possible from efficients.
