EUGENICS: CAN IT SOLVE THE
PROBLEM OF DECAY OF
CIVILIZATIONS ?*

By R. A. Fisuer, Sc.D.,
(Fellow of Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge. Hon. Sec., E.E.S.)

The deeay and fall of ancient civilizations, equally of those which
extend beyond the limits of written history, as of, within historic times,
the Graeco-Roman and the Islamic, offers to the sociologist a quite
special problem; one, the importance of which to mankind of the present
time and of the future is porportional to the magnitude of the events
which it embraces.

One must understand the term civilization, not merely as applicable to societies of which we see reason to approve and admire the
institutions, but as designating the aggregate of all the social adaptations appropriate to the permanent evistence of a dense population.
In general form these adaptations have a universal character. In all
societies which we can call civilized, the personal understandings,
which a man can form with a small circle of immediate acquaintances
are supplemented by a vastly more numerous system of conventional
understandings, which establishes his customary relations, his rights
and his obligations, with regard to the entire society of which he is a
member. He is thus free to devote himself to productive labour even
of a highly specialized character, with confidence that the production
of necessities for his primary needs, the protection of his possessions
from robbery, and even the satisfaction of his moral and intellectual
requirements, will be undertaken by the labours of others, who make
of such tasks their special occupations. The specialization of occupations, involving the customary acceptance of a conventional monetary
medium, the maintenance of public order, and the national organization of military preparations, are thus the universal characteristics
of the civilized in contradistinction to the uncivilized societies of
mankind, and it is a matter of experience, which no one thinks of
denying, that such an organization does in fact enable a given area to
support a much larger population, and that at a higher level of material
and intellectual well-being, than the uncivilized peoples who could
alternatively find there their subsistence.

Such a civilized society, once organized and established, how is
it possible to imagine that it should fail in competition with its uncivilized neighbours? The latter occupy their territory more sparsely,
they lack moreover the organized central government which could

 

* This paper was presented in French at the Conference of the International
Federation of Eugenic Organisations in Paris on Saturday, July 3rd, 1926, in the
Rooms of the League of Red Cross Societies, Avenue Velasquez.
PROBLEM OF DECAY OF CIVILIZATIONS. 129

mobilize to advantage their scanty numbers. On the contrary, our
experience of uncivilized populations shows them to be divided by
hereditary enmities and petty jealousies, which should make their
union, even upon a question of the simplest national interest, almost
an impossibility. Industrial organization gives to civilized peoples,
in antiquity as well as in our own times, the advantage of superior
weapons; while the habits of co-operative labour enable them to adopt
a more regular, coordinated, and effective system of military tactics.
Above all, the superior knowledge which a civilized people can, and
does indeed, continually accumulate, should enable them to act generally with superior information, with a surer knowledge of the consequences of their collective action, and with the capacity to profit by
experience, and to improve their methods if their first attempts should
prove to be unfortunate. Bearing in mind the unquestionable advantages of superior knowledge, of coordinated efforts and of industrial
skill, should we not confidently anticipate, if we were ignorant of the
actual history of our planet, that the history of civilization would
consist of an unbroken series of triumphs, and that once the germ of
an organized society had made its appearance in Babylonia, perhaps,
or in Egypt, it would be only a question of time for every country in
the world to be in turn absorbed and organized by the Babylonian, or
Egyptian, civilization.

The indications which we possess of the earlier civilizations, as
well as the plain narrative of the historic period, differs strangely from
the naif yet rational anticipations outlined above. We see, indeed,
a certain tenuous continuity of traditional civilization, but this continuity will not conceal, either from the ignorant or from the savant,
the brusque changes in the lands, the languages, and the religion
associated with the highest civilization at different epochs; nor the
fact that each such great change, as well as many others of less obvious
effect, has been accompanied by the violent irruption of some new people
of uncivilized origin. The experiment of becoming civilized has, in
fact, been performed repeatedly, by peoples of different racial origins,
perhaps always, indeed, with some aid from the traditional ideas of
peoples previously civilized, but developing their national and industrial organizations by their own progressive powers; and in all cases
without exception, if we set aside the incomplete experiment of our
own civilization, after a period of glory and domination accompanied
by notable contributions to the sciences and the arts, they have failed,
not only to maintain their national superiority, but even to establish
a permanent mediocrity among the nations of the globe, and in many
cases have left no other record of their existence than that which we
owe to the curiosity of archeologists.

To what ought we to ascribe this failure, again and again experienced by the highly civilized nations? And of what sort should be
an explanation which we should regard as adequate’? It is easy to
find among the peoples of antiquity institutions disagreeable enough
to our modern feelings, it is easy to criticise their educational ideas,
or the forms of government which they have successively adopted;
above all it is easy to find fault with their ignorance of economic law
130 EUGENICS REVIEW.

and to ascribe to their mistakes in this domain the same civil and political misfortunes, which we anticipate equally from the parallel errors
of our political opponents. Such arguments are not only inconclusive
from our ignorance of the laws of causation upon which they rely,
they are also demonstrably insufficient to meet the requirements of our
special problem. For, in the first place, our knowledge of the earlier
stages of the history of great peoples shows us customs no less repulsive,
manners no less licentious, a neglect of education at least equally
pronounced and ignorance of economic law as absolute as any which
can be ascribed to their civilized successors. In the second place,
moreover, in a period of national decay it would be unreasonable to
expect that any aspect of national life, political, religious, intellectual, or economic, should remain in a healthy and flourishing condition, or that the misfortunes of the times will escape the complaints
of observant contemporaries. That the condition of agriculture, for
example, was unsatisfactory in the later Roman empire, though a
legitimate inference from the state of that society, fails to constitute in
any true sense an explanation of its progressive decay. Peoples
in the prime of their powers appear to find no difficulty in making good
use of very inferior natural resources, and adapt their national organization with complete success to much more violent changes than those
which can be adduced to explain the misfortunes of the later stages
of their civilization.

A physician observing a number of patients to sicken and die in
similar though not identical conditions, and with similar though not
identical symptoms, would surely make an initial error if he did not
seek for a single common cause of the disorder. The complexity of
the symptoms, and of the disturbances of the various organs of the
body, should not lead him to assume that the original cause, or the
appropriate remedial measures, must be equally complex. Is this
not because the physician assumes that the workings of the body,
though immensely complex, are self-regulatory and capable of a
normal corrective response to all ordinary disturbances; while only
a small number of disturbances of an exceptional kind meet with no
effective response and cause severe illness? Have we not equally
a right to assume a self-regulatory power in human societies? If not,
we should be led to think that such societies should break down under
the influence of any of the innumerable accidents to which they are
exposed. Human societies of various kinds have adapted themselves
to every climate, from the Arctic to the forests and deserts of the
Tropics. They share the territories of the most savage or the most
poisonous animals, and often long withstand without disruption the
assaults of most implacable human enemies. Social progress has
not been arrested by the introduction of new weapons, of alcohol, or
of opium, or even of infanticide; yet these introductions might each
of them seem to threaten the existence of the race. That civilized
men, possessed of more effective appliances, with access to more
knowledge, and organised for the most detailed co-operation , should
prove themselves incapable of effective response to any disturbance
of their social organizations, surely demands some very special explanation. ,
PROBLEM OF DECAY OF CIVILIZATIONS. 131

If we turn to our own civilization in the hope of isolating a single
cause which is capable, continually and persistently of injuring the
racial qualities of future generations, we are at once confronted with
the phenomenon of the differential birthrate. The earlier investigations on this subject gave no adequate idea of either the widespread
character or of the intensity of this phenomenon. The method of
correlations had revealed that among the boroughs of London a high
fertility was positively correlated with all the indications of a lower
social status. This was true of the census of 1851 to an extent which
might possibly be explained by the higher age at marriage of the
superior classes. In the figures for 1901 the association had_ become greatly strengthened, indicating a rapid increase in the differentiation between the different classes in respect of fertility. For
England and Scotland generally, the most complete information
upon which we have to rely is that provided by the census of 1911, since
unfortunately the necessary questions were not repeated in 1921. For
Scotland, Dr. Dunlop has published the average number of children
in marriages of at least 15 years duration at the time of the census, and
for which the age of the bride had been from 25 to 29. In spite of
this partial standardisation of the age at marriage, which will doubtless have tended to decrease somewhat the differences observed, the
professional occupations, officers of the army and navy, doctors,
lawyers, ministers of religion and clerks all show a fertility among
the lowest, while the most fertile groups are supplied by the poorest
classes of labourers. It should be noted firstly that with marriage of
at least 15 years duration in 1911, we are here concerned with births
largely of the last decade of the ninteenth century, and secondly that
the differences show themselves clearly between different grades of
the same occupation. Thus plasterer’s labourers have more children
than plasterers, bricklayer’s labourers more children than bricklayers,
and the farm labourers more children than the farm foremen.

For England at the same census the results published by Dr.
Stevenson show a steep and regular gradation of fertility from the
professional occupations to the lowest grades of labourers, although
it should be noted that in this classification three large and approximately homogeneous groups, the textile workers, the coal-miners and
the agricultural labourers, were set aside from the rest of the population for separate consideration.

It is now sufficiently recognised that the inverse relationship
between fertility and social status, though strongly marked in the
United Kingdom, is by no means confined to that country, but is, on
the contrary, a phenomenon more or less definitely established in every
civilized country; and there are interesting indications, not yet, I
believe, established by any widespread investigations, that even in
the villages of India the peasants with the smallest holdings provide
the largest quota of children.

In this peculiar tendency of civilized societies to concentrate in
the lowest classes the task of producing the citizens of future genera tions, our modern civilization appears to be merely following the
course traversed by the Graeco-Roman civilization. We know, it is
132 EUGENICS REVIEW.

true, practically nothing of the rate of reproduction of the lower
orders of society under the Roman Empire, but there can be no doubt
that the failure of reproduction among the aristocratic, and among the
self-respecting families was extremely pronounced. In my opinion
the same conclusion should be drawn as to the wealthier classes of the
Islamic nations, at least during the centuries which contain the highest development of their civilization; and, as we shall see, there is
reason to suppose that a cause exists capable, unless counter-acted, of
producing such a phenomenon in any society in which social position
is largely determined by wealth; and this condition brings within the
scope of the principle the most ancient civilizations of which we have
any information.

The first indication of a rational explanation of the differences in
fertility that show themselves between different classes was found by
Galton in studying the extinction of English peerages. Galton
observed that in many cases the extinction of the peerage followed
upon the marriage of the peer, or his heir, to an heiress, and was led to
consider whether the failure of male heirs, which is necessary to the
production of an heiress, was not due in part to congenital causes, which
showed themselves subsequently in the extinction of the peerage to
which she was united. He collected therefore, from the records of
the English peerage, a large number of cases of marriages with heiresses, and compared them with an equal number of marriages with
women who were not heiresses. His table showed a considerable
difference between the fertilities of the two groups, thus confirming
the hypothesis which he had formed. Subsequent examinations of
marriages in the English peerage have shown that the average number
of children born to the peeresses increases steadily with an increase
in the size of the families of which they were members. Galton
attached much importance to his discovery, and pointed to a further
confirmation of the principle in the fact that the extinctions are more
frequent in the higher ranks of the peerage than in the lower ranks.

In commenting on this work of Galton, de Candolle made the
important observations that the same causes were at work, and that
the same principle must be applied in explanation of the lowered
fertility of the well-to-do classes generally. I am not altogether
sure whether de Candolle had seized absolutely the subtlety of Galton’s
argument; for it is not merely that heiresses find it easier to marry,
and therefore marry on the average more frequently than do other
girls, but that they tend to make on the average marriages more
advantageous socially, and therefore to ally themselves to men, who
by their abilities have established their social position. In any
case, there can be no question of the value of de Candolle’s observation, for, as is now well understood, the phenomenon of infertility
among the upper classes is by no means confined to titled families.

In a brief but important note to the ‘‘Eugenics Review,’’ J. A. Cobb
has pointed out (1913) that the same principle must act from the top
to the bottom of the social system, and that the action of social selection in all classes must be to unite with infertility all such forms of
ability as tend to promote social elevation. Cobb did not consider
PROBLEM OF DECAY OF CIVILIZATIONS. 133

the application of this principle to the mental and moral qualities
which favour the voluntary limitation of children, and was therefore
led to attach the less importance to the action of this principle as an
explanation of the differential birthrate in our own times. Nevertheless he argued that since its action was continuous and universal
throughout the great mass of the population, it might, in its ultimate
historical consequences, be of more importance than the voluntary
action of parents. He made also the interesting suggestion that the
social selection of persons whose reproductive apparatus or instincts
were imperfectly developed, might lead to such outbreaks of perverse
Vices as are occasionally observed to occur in the higher ranks of
societies.

In the light of modern knowledge as to the inheritance of the
mental and moral qualities in man, there can be no reason to exclude
{from consideration those qualities of temperament which favour, or
are opposed to, the voluntary limitation of births, any more than those
equally temperamental characters which favour the postponement,
or the precipitation, of marriage; and, it is an important argument
in favour of the view that we have to do here with a selection acting
directly upon the fertility itself; that the elements into which fertility
may be analyzed, the marriage-rate, the age of marriage and the
fertility of married persons of a given age; all appear to have a social
graduation in the same sense.

If we admit, and it is difficult to find grounds for denying any
step of the argument, that a social selection of this kind characterized
also the civilizations of the ancient world, we must suppose that at the
beginning of an indigenous civilization, whether this event occurred
once only or several times in ancient history, the population stratified
itself into various occupations of different importance roughly in
accordance with the innate abilities of the different families; that,
with the development of aggregates larger than the individual family
the primitive military advantage of belonging to a numerous kindred
became outweighed by the economic burden of supporting an increasing
family upon a limited domain. At first, we must suppose that the
families of superior classes were not less fertile, or possibly were more
so, than the families of inferior rank; but as soon as social position
came to be influenced to an important extent by the possession of
wealth, members of small families began to enjoy a social advantage as
compared to more prolific strains. There would thus grow up a
tendency, affecting all such innate qualities as could, in the social
surroundings, exert an influence upon fertility, for the lower classes to be
innately more fertile than their social superiors. For a long time,
perhaps, this difference of innate fertility would be more than counterbalanced by the economic advantages belonging to social position, for
it is characteristic of man as of other animals to reproduce himself more
rapidly, the more favourable is the environment; and, especially, the
delegation of such parental cares as the work of the household, and even
the nursing of children, would strongly favour a higher fertility in the
upper classes. Nevertheless, the social selection which we have
described, acting persistently and upon the great masses of the popula134 EUGENICS REVIEW.

tion, must sooner or later, reverse the differential birthrate, and cause
the lower classes to become effectively the more fertile. From this
point the innate qualities of the race, in all classes of society, cannot but
deteriorate ; for in no state of society, however unjust its institutions,
can we imagine that it will not. be the more able, the more industrious,
and the more beautiful, who find their way into the upper classes.
Finally, we may anticipate that progress in the arts, in the sciences, and
in social organisation will continue subsequently to the epoch when
racial deterioration has set in; that these improvements of social
organisation will include the more and more thorough utilization of
such innate ability as is available, with a corresponding increasingly
rapid exhaustion of the innate qualities of the classes from which it is
drawn.

An important stage in the evolution of social . rganization, which
is observable in several, if not in all, of the civilizations of which we
have knowledge, appears to be intimately related to the process of
social selection, which we have described. Societies of a primitive
character are composed of relatively permanent classes, in which the
social status of the individual is determined primarily by birth, and
only to a minor degree by the wealth which he may possess, or which he
can accumulate. At a certain stage of development political movements are found to arise, aimed at the attenuation of the privileges of
birth, and tending to a reorganization of the social strata on a
basis, principally or entirely, of wealth. The movement called
Liberalism in our own civilization is evidently of this kind, and in the
reorganization of our own societies has already attained, in this respect,
practically its full effect. In the Islamic civilization the revolution by
which the Abbasside dynasty in 750 A.D. supplanted the Omeyyads,
has many similar features. It asserted the claims of the subject
peoples, and of the unorthodox sects of Islamism, and, in its success, it
established a constitutional monarchy, of which the first Vizir was a
self-made banker with no pretensions to family. Movements of this
kind may, conceivably, represent a normal reaction of the human mind
under civilized conditions; whether this be so or not, it is easy to see
that such movements will be powerfully reinforced by any inequality
of the birthrate which promotes an influx of persons of humble origin
into influential positions. Indeed it may be argued, on historical
erounds, that aristocracies do not yield up their aristocratic privileges
until they are permeated by the sentiments of families, who, by reason
of wealth and intermarriage, have mingled inextricably in their race.
The dissolution of class barriers enables a society to draw upon ability
whencesoever it may arise; it becomes a necessity for societies in which
ability is becoming more and more rare. Nevertheless in a plutocratic
society it completes the vicious circle, by maintaining that stream of
infertile promotions by which the fertility of the upper classes is continually forced down.

In a full sociological enquiry into the effects of social selection
upon the innate qualities which favour fertility, it would be necessary
to consider, in a detail which is here impossible, its action in barbarous
societies, on the one hand, and in decadent civilizations on the other.
If, however, we concentrate our attention upon the problem of mainPROBLEM OF DECAY OF CIVILIZATIONS. 135.

taining in full vigour a civilization, which is still in a flourishing cond1tion, it is only necessary to observe that the menace to that civilization, which is here discussed, arises solely from the social advantage
which our economic system gives to families of low fertility.

We owe it to the genius of the French people to have shown, with
quite other objects in view, how the social disadvantage of the fertile
families may be diminished, abolished, or even reversed, within the
limits of our economic and industrial svstem. The discussion of the
eugenic effects of systems of family allowances has hitherto been
mainly concerned with the direct effects to be anticipated in promoting
the fertility of those classes who are actually in receipt of such allowances. If Iam right in supposing that the effective fertility of a social
class, in a particular moral and economic environment, depends.
largely on those innate qualities which govern our temperamental
responses, then this direct effect may be of much less importance than
one has been inclined to imagine. Such direct effects will only be of
eugenic value when the allowances are paid to classes having natural
abilities above the average of the nation to which they belong; but, if I
am right in believing that the fertility of the upper classes is only
maintained at its low level by the selective promotion of the least
fertile members of lower classes, then the payment of family allowances
to any one class will have an indirect effect, which, acting slowly, but
cumulatively, will tend, gradually, to raise the fertility of all classes
superior to it. Moreover, turning to the lower classes of society, if their
high fertility is, to any extent, maintained by the accession of members of the most fertile families of superior classes, then family allowances given to any class will, to this extent, tend to lower the fertility
of all classes inferior to it. It is to this indirect effect of family allowances that the attention of Eugenists should, in my opinion, be principally directed.

In order to nullify, or better to reverse, the action of social selection upon the innate causes of fertility, it would be necessary that the
allowances should cover the full net cost of the children in every class,
or, to put the matter more exactly, that a member of a large family
should find himself in a position of similar social and economic advantage, to an only child of parents in the same station This presupposes.
that the allowances shall increase, at least proportionately to the earnings of the father; and this presents no economic difficulty throughout
the salaried occupations. The economic difficulties of applying the
method to capitalists and to professional men working for profit appear
more formidable, though they admit of, at least, a theoretical solution, through some form of mutual insurance.

A serious objection, which deserves a most careful consideration, to.
the total abolition of the economic advantage of small families—a total
abolition which it would be desirable, on eugenic grounds, to maintain
permanently with a view to reversing the differential birthrate—is that
in such a state of society there would be no economic check to the
growth of population. Overpopulation cannot, indeed, be regarded
as an immediate danger, in view of the actual frequency of births in
England or in France, and it would doubtless be long before symptoms,
136 EUGENICS REVIEW.

alarming in this respect, could be induced to show themselves.
Nevertheless, we should recognise that we are preparing here a problem,
which it will fall to our successors to solve, and there is little doubt
that a eugenically desirable solution would entail the prohibition of
more than a rigid maximum of births in classes in which the real wages
showed a tendency to fall below a fixed mimimum.

Such a restriction will only be repulsive to our ideas of liberty so
long as we continue to foster the outworn fiction that the economic
burden of an excessive population is in fact born only by those who are
responsible for its increase. Experience of the action of an economically stable system of family allowances in throwing upon a whole
industry the burden of an undesirable increase in numbers, should do
much to impress upon all classes the justice of such restrictions, against
the time when the necessity for them should arise. In the meanwhile,
there can be no doubt that individual restriction, based upon eugenic
diagnosis, might in many cases be applied with economic benefits.

It may be that the scientific theory which I have put forward will
prove, in the light of late investigations, to be incomplete, or indeed
incorrect ; in any case in view of the importance of the subject it is to be
hoped that such investigations will be undertaken, and the theory
examined rigorously in every point. For the present I see no reason
to doubt that the fate of entire civilizations may be sealed by so small a
thing as the economic advantage of the less fertile stock, and that by
resolutely attacking the economic problem which confronted her at the
moment of her devastation, and of her victory, France has made a
contribution to human thought, which, in its ultimate consequences,
will dwarf the great events which gave it birth; a discovery upon which
may be founded, after the failure and ruin of many glorious achievements of the nations of antiquity, the human ideal of a truly imperishable civilization.
