REVIEWS OF BOOKS

on the neurological disorders which he may encounter in his practice. Actual clinical
descriptions have been kept to a minimum and have been included only for certain rare
diseases or where there is clinical or genetic heterogeneity within a particular disorder.
The information given is accurate and well organized. The text covers not only those
conditions which are strictly neurological but also includes sections dealing with the
muscular dystrophies and the amino-acidurias. There is little discussion of experimental
work, most of the text being concerned with familial aggregation in specific disorders. This
is perhaps inevitable because we are still at the stage of “‘pedigree genetics” in many of
these disorders, the underlying biochemical defects being quite unknown.

From a practical point of view one of the most important functions of a book such
as this would seem to be to help the clinician when faced with a problem in genetic
counselling. The author has marshalled a great deal of information on the genetics of each
particular disease, but in order to give genetic counselling the reader would occasionally
require a little more help than is given in the text. This is so for example in the case of the
neurogenic atrophies, the congenital muscular dystrophies and in “‘idiopathic” epilepsy.
Certainly in the section on genetic counselling in epilepsy the reference cited would be of
very little help in this regard. In certain sections the information might best have been
summarized in tabular form, as for example in the case of the Mucopolysaccharidoses, and
sometimes an occasional illustration might have helped make the text clearer. However,
these are minor criticisms. The book as a whole is a most valuable contribution and will
probably be an important reference work on the genetics of neurological disorders for
some time to come. We can look forward with eagerness to subsequent monographs in
this series. ALAN E. H. EMERY

Dawe, Clyde J. Editor. The Chromosome: Structural and Functional Aspects. In Vitro,
Vol. 1. Publication of the Tissue Culture Association Inc. Annual Symposium. June 1-4,
1965. New York, 1966. Williams and Wilkins. (Edinburgh, Livingstone.) Pp. xiii+ 107.
Price 68s.

THIS VOLUME CONTAINS eight original papers presented at a symposium, sponsored by
the Tissue Culture Association Inc., held in Miami in June 1965. It is concerned with various
structural and functional aspects of the chromosome. The main points outlined in these
papers are admirably summarized in an informative preface.

Topics dealt with include: chromosomal polymorphism and speciation; the use of
photometric procedures (mainly estimates of DNA content) in the identification of particular
chromosome pairs; measurement of chromosomal dimensions using automated techniques;
single-stranded and multi-stranded concepts of chromosomal structures; evidence relating
to a possible specificity of effect of certain viruses and chemical agents in inducing chromosomal abnormality; relationship of RNA-synthesising sites to localization of chromosomal
anomalies; synthesis and turnover of nuclear proteins in relation to phases of the mitotic
cycle; and, lastly, mechanisms responsible for repression and derepression of interphase
chromatin and relationship to the heterochromatin-euchromatin concept.

Subject matter is, in general, dealt with critically and with authority, although in
some cases by no means exhaustively. Arguments are well presented, easy to follow and
usually well illustrated. It is unfortunate that in four of the eight papers presented the
conclusions reached are not definitive and the reader is left with a sense of frustration.
Nevertheless, in all papers the questions raised and the methods employed to examine
these questions deserve serious consideration by the student of biology. Text and Tables
are well laid out and Figures well reproduced. There is a useful index.

An outstanding feature of this volume, at least to this reviewer, is a comprehensive
dissertation on ‘‘Mechanisms of Repression and De-repression within Interphase

119
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Chromatin” by John H. Frenster. Much of the fascinating work outlined by Dr. Frenster
is still not widely known. The summary to his paper deserves to be quoted in full:

Although each diploid cell within an individual probably contains a full and
identical complement of all the DNA species characterizing that individual, not all
of these DNA species are transcribed to RNA within any one cell or tissue. Stable
epigenetic mechanisms select specific portions of the DNA genome for transcription.
Such selective mechanisms are seen to employ a nonspecific generalized repression
of all DNA within a cell by means of complex formations with polycationic histone
repressors. Nuclear polyanionic de-repressors antagonize the interaction between
DNA and histones, and effect a partial displacement of repressor histones from
localized portions of the DNA genome. Such histone displacement allows these DNA
segments to undergo an intermittent separation of the strands of the DNA double
helix. A species of nuclear RNA appears to function as a highly selective agent in
de-repression by hybridizing with a single DNA strand, freeing the complementary
DNA strand for continuous specific messenger RNA synthesis. Cc. E. BLANK

Srb, Adrian M., Owen, Ray D., and Edgar, Robert S. General Genetics. San Francisco,
1965. W. H. Freeman. (London, Bailey Bros. and Swinfen.) Pp. x +557. Price 50s.

THE ORIGINAL AUTHORS are joined by Dr. Robert Edgar in presenting this second edition
of their book, first published in 1952. The task of pruning the original text and incorporating
new material without appreciably lengthening the book must have been formidable for,
during the intervening years, this science has advanced with the impetus of a tidal wave.
It is to the authors’ credit that they have retained much that is ‘‘classical’’ while still
producing an up-to-date account of the subject. Their new opening chapter, acknowledging
Mendel’s work should particularly please critics of the first edition who, like Dr. Gordon
Haskell in his review for THE EUGENICS REVIEW (44, 229), regretted the lack of historical
approach. That there is still no mention of such British pioneers as Galton (except briefly
in one of the set problems) and Bateson may bea source of regret for some. In the newer
sections, also, it is sometimes not clear where a particular idea originated. For example,
in the discussion on the coding theory of the gene in Chapter 10 one looks in vain for a
straightforward answer to the question, “‘who first put forward the brilliant suggestion that
this was a triplet code?” Again, when referring to the hypothesis of X-inactivation in
“Genetics and Man”, Chapter 15, no mention is made of Mary Lyon. At such times one
senses something of Dr. Haskell’s irritation with the earlier edition, although elaborate
historical treatment would obviously have been impracticable.

The first four chapters deal with the principles underlying reproduction. With the
thoroughness of good teachers, the authors include representative life-cycles, for instance
of corn, neurospora, bacteriophage, because ‘‘Geneticists must be familiar with the details
of the life cycles and reproductive processes of organisms with which they work”. New
work on the chemical basis of heredity comes in the middle section and here there might
perhaps have been a better order of presentation. For example, after reading about DNA
and chromosome replication, one would have liked to have stayed at the molecular level
to consider genes and their mode of action: it seems a pity to break the train of thought by
switching to linkage and chromosome mapping. Chapters on mutation and gene structure
highlight the significant contribution of Drosophila and bacterial studies. It was useful to
give the differing concept of the gene according to the organism studied, e.g. ‘classical
gene”, “‘phage gene’’, “‘neurospora gene’’, in illustrating the divisibility of the functional
unit. Turning to gene function, it is shown how basic problems underlying control of
metabolism in man, exemplified in the stepwise breakdown of phenylalanine, can be solved

120
