MATERNITY AND CHILD WELFARE WORK
AND THE POPULATION PROBLEM"
By C. P. BLACKER, Mc, MD., ERCP.

(General Secretary of the Eugenics Society)

I. FAMILY WELFARE SERVICE AS PART OF
POPULATION POLICY

N the course of the last three years the

attitude of the general public towards

the population problem has undergone a
noteworthy transformation. Up till 1936
the belief was prevalent that there were no
limits to the power of growth of the population of this country, and that our economic
and social evils were mostly attributable to
over-population. The remedy was to be
found in reducing fertility by spreading a
knowledge of birth control.

The writings of such authorities as CarrSaunders, Kuczynski, Glass, Charles and the
chairman of the National Association of
Maternity and Child Welfare Centres and for
the Prevention of Infant Mortality, Dr.
McCleary, have popularized an opposite
view. They have shown that while it was
true that the annual number of births still
exceeded that of deaths, fertility has nevertheless fallen to such low levels that, in the
absence of massive immigration or of a very
drastic change in people’s reproductive
habits, a decline in our population is soon
inevitable. Opinion as to what is desirable
now ranges between wide extremes. At one
end of the scale are those who would like to
see our present population (about 40 millions
in England and Wales) substantially increased; at the other end are those who
believe that this country would be better
off if our numbers were reduced to those of
Elizabethan England, at which timé they
probably stood at about 7 millions. When
our population actually begins to decline, as

* The first part of this paper is the substance of an
address given on March 27th, 1939, at a meeting of
the executive committee and the council of the National
Association of Maternity and Child Welfare Centres
and for the Prevention of Infant Mortality. For kind
permission to publish it we are indebted to the Editor
of the National Association’s Journal, Mother and Child.

gt

it is likely to do in the next four or five years,
public opinion will become more uniform and
there will be a clamour for counter-measures
designed to raise fertility.

There has already been a demand for a
Royal Commission to investigate the matter
and suggest remedies. For certain understandable reasons this demand has not yet
been met; but it can be taken as almost
certain that, in the next few years, such a
Royal Commission will be appointed. In the
meanwhile the matter is receiving consideration by two unofficial committees, a Population Investigation Committee, which is
concerned with the diagnosis of the causes
of the fall of the birth-rate, and a Population
Policies Committee (jointly set up by the
Eugenics Society and PEP), which has the
task of devising appropriate policies for
raising fertility. The two committees are in
the closest touch with one another.

What are the measures which might be
taken to this end ? Many—perhaps the most
important—are economic in character. Some
have been adopted in certain European
countries. Among such measures are family
allowances, marriage loans, differential taxation giving substantial rebates for children,
educational reforms designed to lower costs,
and various housing schemes such as would
establish facilities for families containing
children. But there is another measure which
might be of special interest to the National
Association.

There exists, I understand, under the
“umbrella” of the National Council for
Maternity and Child Welfare, a number of
important organizations dealing with various
aspects of the family. The intention of all
these bodies is, I take it, primarily humanitarian. The need for promoting the health
and welfare of mothers and children exists
92 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

whatever the demographic position ; these
requirements claim our attention whatever
the population may be doing—whether its
numbers are going up or remaining stationary. When, however, there are prospects, as
at present, of an actual decline in our
numbers, a new social background, distinct
from and additional to the humanitarian, is
disclosed. Against this background the
family comes to have a new significance and
importance.

The need becomes apparent for an organization which we might call a “ National
Council for Family Welfare,’ wherein would
be co-ordinated the activities of all the
associations which are now working independently for the various interests of the
family. Indeed, such a central organization
might assume some new functions which are
not yet covered by existing associations.
The following might be among the activities
of our proposed ‘ National Council for
Family Welfare.”

Sterility

We know approximately how many childless marriages there are. But we do not know
how many of these marriages are childless
because of contraceptive measures deliberately taken by the parents or because of an
involuntary sterility of one or both parents.
Is involuntary sterility increasing? What
part (if any) is it taking in the decline in
fertility ? These are questions which call for
an answer. In the meantime it has been
recognized that the diagnosis of the cause of
sterility and its treatment are complicated
procedures in which two people are involved
—the woman and her husband. Though the
subject is now being actively discussed in the
columns of the medical press, it has probably
been more systematically investigated in the
United States than in this country. There
is room for an organized service for the
diagnosis and treatment of sterility, with
branches all over the country.

Marriage Guidance

There appears to be a demand among
engaged and young married couples for
guidance on the physiological and psycho
logical problems of marriage. Indeed, there
has recently been formed a Marriage Guidance
Council, which tries to meet this need by
organized lectures and individual advice.
The subject is a difficult one by reason of the
multiplicity of human types and of the
uniqueness of each marital relationship. It
is, however, possible that, underlying this
complexity, there exists a common denominator of ignorance and a common need for
guidance which springs from the uniformity
of the elementary instinctual equipment of
humanity.

Eugenic Advice

To an increasing degree the public are
being made aware of the existence of hereditary abnormalities which are transmissible
to later generations. There is a consequent
demand for guidance on genetic problems
which has the closest bearing on the welfare
of the family. There is as yet little uniformity
of opinion as to how these problems should
be approached by the doctor, and simple
Mendelian principles are commonly regarded
as having a wider application than is in fact
the case. If, moreover, the medical profession could be educated in this matter, and
an adequate service established throughout
the country for dealing with problems of
human genetics, a satisfactory machinery
would be created for implementing the
recommendations of a recent Departmental
Committee on Sterilization, if these were
translated into law.

Birth Control

This subject arouses controversy; all,
however, agree that there are numerous
reasons of health which justify the doctor
in advising against pregnancy. It is at
present the common practice of birth-control
clinics to advise a combination of chemical
and mechanical methods which necessitates
a speculum examination of the cervix. In
this way are discovered numerous minor
gynecological disorders—erosions, early
stages of prolapse, discharges—which are
amenable to treatment, but which are not
sufficiently serious to bring the woman to
hospital. A useful opportunity is missed by
MATERNITY AND CHILD WELFARE WORK 93

these clinics of doing good if these conditions
are not dealt with. The recognition of this
fact has induced the more enterprising of the
birth-control clinics to establish gynecological sessions, at which the opportunities
for early diagnosis given by the routine
speculum examination are put to their best
use. There is no reason, moreover, why, at
these clinics, advice should not be given as
to the use of the so-called ‘‘ safe period ”’
which is permissible to all those persons for
whom the use of “‘ appliance methods ”’ is
forbidden on moral grounds. While it would
probably be going too far to say that conception was impossible during the premenstrual week, it is certainly true that the
chances of conception are then substantially
lower than in the preceding week. In any
case, advice on the regulation of pregnancy
is clearly called for on certain grounds of
health, and is in the interests of the mother.

Pregnancy Diagnosis

It is well recognized that, apart from
pregnancy, there are many causes of
amenorrhcea. Women approaching the
menopause frequently find that the expected
onset of the periods is delayed.

For many such women the prospect of
another child is highly unwelcome. The
mistaken belief can easily arise that a
pregnancy has occurred, and in many cases
the woman tries to procure an abortion.
Well-advertised abortifacients are bought
and consumed, or the services of an abortionist may be enlisted.

Much mental stress and ill-health resulting
from these practices might be avoided if a
regional system of pregnancy-diagnosis services could be established. By the Friedman
or Zondek-Ascheim tests, pregnancy can be
diagnosed much earlier than by clinical
examination, and the expenses of these
tests could be greatly reduced if arrangements for their performance were comprehensively organized. If the public could be
educated as to the very high degree of
reliability of these tests, and could be
induced to avail themselves fully of such
pregnancy-diagnosis services, the sales of

abortifacients and the practices of abortionists might be substantially curtailed.

Other Activities

In the National Council for Maternity and
Child Welfare there are already co-ordinated
other activities which are in the interests of
the family, such as the movements for
créches, day nurseries, nursery schools, child
guidance and mothercraft training. The
importance of diet to healthy maternity
might be further stressed by an organization
concerned with family welfare.

If all these functions were effectively
centralized in an organization concerned
with the social no less than the individual
aspects of the family, special qualifications
would be called for in the medical staff of the
centres. The diagnosis and treatment of
sterility, the giving of eugenic advice and
marriage guidance call for special knowledge ; and there would be an obvious need
for a more than average proficiency in
gynecology, pediatrics and obstetrics. It
might be desirable to create a_ special
Diploma in Family Welfare comparable to
the other diplomas taken in post-graduate
courses.

2. ROLE OF EUGENICS IN FAMILY WELFARE
SERVICE

I have urged that the provision of an
integrated Family Welfare Service should
form part of an organized population policy.
What part could be played in such a service
by eugenics? It seems to me that it could
perform an advisory and educational function.

1. Advisory Functions of a Eugenic Department

In the measure that a eugenic conscience
spreads throughout the community, there
will be an increasing demand for guidance on
personal problems of a genetic character.
Such a demand would be stimulated if a premarital medical examination were made
compulsory or if sterilization and/or abortion
with medical safeguards were legalized. The
presence of hereditary abnormalities in
candidates for marriage (especially if the
94 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

partners are cousins) or among their relatives may raise the query ‘‘ Ought I to get
married? ’”’ Or the question may take the
form: ‘ If we get married, ought we to have
children ? ”’

There should be established adequate
facilities on a regional basis for dealing with
these problems. According to my proposal,
this would mean that medical officers of a
department of Family Welfare should be
trained in how to deal with eugenic problems.
There should be placed at their disposal a
simple Manual of Instructions which they
could give to patients (or “ applicants ’’),
explaining what information about their
pedigrees the patients should obtain in
order to provide the material for a prognosis, and also explaining how the results
should be set out. The medical officers
should, furthermore, be acquainted with the
principles of eugenic prognosis: that is to
say, that they should have some idea as to
how much importance should be attached
to simple Mendelian ratios in the interpretation of human pedigrees, to the desirable
qualities shown by the applicants’ families
as a whole and to those of the couple concerned. These questions are now recelving
consideration from the Sterilization Committee of the Royal College of Physicians
and its final report may well contain some
useful recommendations of which full use
should be made.

2. Educational Functions of a Eugenic
Department and the Social Services
A eugenic service could exert an influence
on the whole Family Welfare Movement.
The nature of this influence is well expressed
by the Statement of the Aims and Methods
of the American Eugenics Society :

“‘ The conditions of society as a whole
may greatly affect the freedom of decision
of parents as to the size of their family.
Eugenists therefore believe that the good
social order must provide such conditions
and motivations that parents of sound
heredity will of their own volition have
more children than at present whereas
parents of inferior heredity will have
fewer.

“. . . Good heredity is indicated by
the personal qualities of the individual and
of his home far more than by the class of
society in which he is found. Desirable
qualities are evidenced by the character
of the home environment which parents
provide for their children, by the personal
interests and attainments of the parents,
by their services to the community and by
their capacity for living happily. These
criteria provide an approximate measure
of an individual’s hereditary endowment
when, and only when, they are used in
comparing individuals who have enjoyed
essentially the same environmental opportunities. For the present, while biologists
and psychologists are discovering more
exact methods of measurement, such
criteria constitute a practical means of
comparing the eugenic value of different
individuals. They form a much needed
supplement to the imperfect biological
methods thus far available. They have the
added advantage that changes in the distribution of births, if made in accordance
with these criteria, would make for larger
families in the homes which provide the
best environment for the nurture of children in every class of society and in every
racial and regional group.”

The existence of a eugenic department of a
Family Welfare Service would serve to propagate this point of view. It has a special
bearing on the members of the so-called
“Social Problem Group.” The group is
admittedly ill-defined; but social workers
nevertheless concur that it exists and that a
typical social problem family is_ easily
recognizable. The sifting of undesirable
parents must develop through the work of
various social agencies, which come into
contact with individuals; these are in a
position to discover persons with hereditary ©
defects and to assist (or persuade) them to
avoid parenthood. But a eugenics department could exert a favourable influence on
the social services, not only in the direction
of helping to limit parenthood in appropriate
ways but also in that of promoting parenthood. It could lend its support to the
MATERNITY AND CHILD WELFARE WORK 95

various movements which will probably be
set on foot to further this end—such as
graded family allowance schemes, housing
and educational reforms, etc. It would also
be in a position to encourage research into
the causes of differential fertility. It might,

for instance, assist the Population Investigation Committee in the use of its questionnaire. Through the agency of social
workers it might also encourage parenthood in families where home conditions
are good.

BARRA ASASSRSSSSRSSSSSSSSSORSRSSSSSROROR0SoSoSSSSSSoouaoq

VOL. XXXI, No. 2

The Causes of War

QRETHRSRHRSSRSESSSSSSSSSagsags

ASSah

SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW

JOURNAL OF THE INSTITUTE OF SOCIOLOGY
Editorial Board :
A. M. CARR-SAUNDERS, ALEXANDER FARQUHARSON and MORRIS GINSBERG

CONTENTS

The Correlation between Fertility and Intelligence within Social Classes

An Anthropologist’s View of Mass-Observation
Enrolments at German Universities since 1933
Psycho-Analysis and the Study of Politics

Annual Subscription £1 1s. 0d., post free. 5s. 3d. per copy, post free.

The Le Play House Press,
35 GORDON SQUARE, LONDON, W.C.1

HASTA ASSASSSRSSSSSERSSRSRSSRASSSRRSSSSRSRSSSSSaegy

APRIL 1939

Morris Ginsberg

Pearl Moshinsky
Raymond Firth
Charlotte Luetkens
T. Maling

SABSAAAAASSSRSSSSSSSSSSSSSNSSSRaH

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXXI, No. 2.
