MODERN MARRIAGE AND
MONOGAMY.

By Syspr. NEvVILLE-ROLFE.

° Because in Great Britain bigamy is a penal offence it may be
argued we have monogamy. Although in the technical sense no man
or woman is allowed more than one legally recognised partner in
marriage, no thinking person would maintain for a moment that strict
monogamy in the biological sense exists. Many recognise in the ideal
of monogamy the goal towards which education, habit and social
custom should aim; others maintain that man is naturally promiscuous
and monogamy is at variance with evolutionary development.

Is there any truth in this contention? We are pressed now with
the necessity of understanding the laws of Nature that we may, when
possible, use them for attaining our own ends. There is a widespread
desire to foster a better, healthier, happier, abler race to people the
earth, and a recognition that the present population are the stock from
which the better race must spring. As we are not expecting a new
creation, it is our duty to look into conditions with a view to stimulating those tendencies which will bring our desired goal nearer and suppressing those social customs that will prevent its attainment.

What is the evidence in support of man’s ‘‘natural promiscuity ?”’

Let us look first to the animal world and see whether monogamy is
simply an artificial excrescence or an evolutionary development. If
the latter, we shall expect no evidence of its existence among our
arboreal cousins or among savage races.

Yet, according to Brehm and other authorities, most birds even,
pair for life, except the Gallinaceans; and Mouzkouski, from his
observations of the apes in Sumatra, tells us they usually live in
families consisting of father, mother and one or two young. The fact
that the family remains as a unit until the younger offspring are
sufficiently grown to lead an independent existence, shows that monogamy over the child-rearing period exists, among some at least of the
anthropoid apes. |

In the primitive human races we find every kind of marriage
custom existing, including strict monogamy, polygyny and polyandry. There seem to be several factors that influence the form of
marriage and family among the primitive races and tribes. The underlying principle is, of course, the need of providing protection for the
mother and child, and the family unit of father, mother and child has
existed since primeval times. As far as we can tell from the early
history of man, he did not at first live in herds, but eked out a precarious existence as a hunter. Even to this day the primitive hunting
races are those practising monogamy, (a) because one wife and her
offspring is as much as one man can protect and maintain in food, (b)
because those races that have been bred in monogamy are probably of
the type suited by biological selection to the practice,
MODERN MARRIAGE AND MONOGAMY. 89

The first trace of polygamy is found in the dwellers in the fertile
plains where tribes congregated together and lived a less nomadic
existence. —

We have at the present time, in different parts of the world, man
in practically every phase and stage of development, so can see for ourselves from the records of the anthropologists, exactly what is happening.

We do not find promiscuity reigning in all the savage tribes, but
every possible variation of marriage custom. In Thibet they have
polyandry. Usually the eldest brother acquires a wife and shares her
with his younger brothers. Many of the men, with no opportunity for
promiscuity, remain unmarried for life. Polyandry is attributed, in
the first place, to the barrenness of the land, and, in the second place,
to the discrepancy between the sexes.

According to Prejevalski, among the Mongols, the women are far
less numerous than the men, and Yanorski says that among the Turcomans there are 100 boys born to 76 girls.

In a Census of the North West Provinces of India in 1866, the proportions were found to be 100 men to 86 women, and in the Punjab 100
to 81.8 women. Mr. Dunlop, another authority, says: ‘‘It is remarkable that wherever the practice of polyandry exists, there is a striking
disproportion among the sexes of the children as well as the adults. In
a village I have found upwards of 400 boys where there were only 120
girls.’’ The reason for this is still in doubt. It used to be maintained
that privation and mal-nutrition of the mother tended to result in a
preponderance of boys being born, but Punnett and others hold that the
hypothesis has not been proved. It may be that there is an inherent
tendency in certain races, a mutation, that leads to the discrepancy
between the sexes, which gave rise in the first place to the custom of
polyandry. There seems hardly any evidence of polyandry existing
among a prosperous agricultural people. At the present time it is
practised mainly in Central Asia, though we have traces of the custom
in Scandinavian and Icelandic history, in that nothing unsuitable is
seen in the wife being shared with equals. When warriors had sworn
brotherhood in arms, the relationship was often ratified by the wife of
the senior being lent to his newly acquired brother as a ratification and
a sign of full recognition of the bond.

Polygyny, the marriage of several wives by one man, is the present custom in various parts of the world. Wherever there is a stable
agricultural or pastoral population where one man by his labour can
provide more food that is needed for one woman, and under conditions
where female and child labour can increase production, there, if no
other educational or civilising factors come into play, polygamy, or
monogamy with concubinage, would probably be found.

Polygamy is rare among hunters, except in isolated instances
among the Australian and Bushman tribes, and among a few of the
more prosperous North American Indians. In Africa 86% of the
higher agricultural tribes are polygamous, but outside Africa the proportion ranges from 71% to 57% among the primitive pastoral peoples.

Primitive polygamy where marriage is usually a form of wife
purchase (one wife equalling three cows, or so many sacks of maize),
90 EUGENICS REVIEW.

often gives evidence of being in origin a monogamous custom, where
the first wife is ‘principal wife,’ and the others are in a different social
class, the same marriage ceremonies may be carried out in each case,
and each subsequent wife may be duly purchased and the man will
assume responsibility for her future for life, but it is approximating
the marriage with concubinage, and shows traces in recognising the one
principal wife of the earlier days when monogamy was the custom of
the tribe. |

Leaving primitive people for the moment, we will turn to history.
True polygyny—the permanent and legal marriage of more than one
wife is supposed to be the custom among Moslem peoples. It is allowed
by law and religion, but obtains in practice far less than is generally
supposed.

According to the Imperial Gazetteer of India, there are among the
Hindus and Buddhists 1008 and 1v07 wives respectively to every 1000
husbands. _

Among the Mohammedans of India there are only 1021 wives to
every 1000 husbands, so that even if no man had more than two wives,
all but 21 would be monogamous. The Muntazalite doctors taught
that the Koran advocated monogamy, and laid emphasis on the fact
that the clause in the Koran which allowed four contemporaneous
marriages was immediately followed by the admonition: ‘‘And if ye
fear that ye cannot be equitable, then (marry) onlyone.’’ They argue
that as it is not humanly possible for a man to be absolutely impartial
in his treatment of four wives that monogamy must be considered the
law.

In actual practice at the present time, a few of the wealthy Moslems
in India, Turkey and elsewhere have several wives, but the majority,
owing to poverty, content themselves with one, while a certain number
of the better to do, because they are more educated and choose educated women as wives, limit themselves to one legal wife, though in the
latter cases concubinage is by no means rare.

In Turkey polygamy has recently been made illegal.

None of the Hindu laws restrict the number of wives allowed,
though the teachings and interpretation given favour monogamy.
According to Westermark, ‘‘Apastaruba says, ‘If a householder has a
wife who is able and willing to perform her share of the religious
duties, and who bears sons, he shall not take a second’ .’’

It has been held by some that the Jews, as portrayed in the Old
Testament, held monogamy as their ideal, but the evidence is, to say
the least of it, conflicting. Deuteronomy certainly presumes that a
man will have two wives, and the law of Exodus takes it for granted
that female slaves will be the concubines of their owner or his sons.

Solomon, we are told, had ‘seven hundred wives and three hundred concubines,’ and Rehoboam is said to have had eighteen wives
and sixty concubines.

As property became more important in the social organism,
though economic conditions may be such as would support polygamy,
monogamy with concubinage seems to have been the usual development.

« - Tt has been held that Christianity initiated the ideal of monogamy,
MODERN MARRIAGE AND MONOGAMY. 91

but there seems but little historical evidence of this. Not only do we
find strict monogamy where no knowledge of Christian teaching exists,
but we find polygamy practised long after the Christian faith has been
adopted. In fact it is stated on good authority (Westermark) that an
express prohibition of it was not pronounced until the convening of
the Rabbinical Synod at Worms in the beginning of the 11th century.
This prohibition was originally made for the Jews living in Germany:
and Northern France, but was adopted by all the European countries.
The Jewish marriage code still retained provisions originating from
the time polygamy was legally in existence.

It was only in 1249 that the Prussians formally promised thenceforth not to take two or three wives but to content themselves with one.

Although in Europe and America monogamy, strictly interpreted
as one legal wife, is either the law or the practice, it is only among
the-poor and the more ethically developed individuals in any race or
country that biological monogamy without prostitution or promis:
‘cuity obtains.

What part has monogamy played in racial and social development ?

Monogamy was, as we have seen, the naturai relationship for the
anthropoid ape and for primitive man, i.e., it is the natural biological
law uncomplicated by the artificial conditions provided by civilisation.

When man had to seek his own food unaided by mechaniaal contrivances, he had to select a fit mate and remain her protector if the
race was to continue. At the present time, amoug many primitive
peoples, strict monogamy is also the rule, e.g., the hunting tribes of
the South American Indians, the aborigines of the Malay Peninsula,
the Andaman Islanders, the Veddahs of Ceylon, the Negritos of the
Phillippine Islands and even some of the Central African Pygmies.

In many of these tribes the code is far stricter than in any ‘civilised’
country, in some cases adultery being punished by immediate death
for both parties.

It is among many of these peoples, too, that the test for fitness for
marriage is most insisted upon: It is well known that the Indian
warrior had to prove his fitness to found a family and protect a wife by
bringing back so many scalps.

In some of the African tribes a rhinoceros has to be killed by a
bachelor as a proof of eligibility for marriage, and among the Andaman
islanders we have a good example of the equal responsibility of the
sexes.

The question for the civilised countries to ask themselves is this:
**Can they afford to risk racial decay and degeneracy by tolerating an
‘unnatural’ promiscuity ?’’ This is racially infinitely worse than polygamy. Under the polygamous system the primitive races did limit
relationships to the family group. China adopts the concubinage
system—except in the trading centres where the West has corrupted
Eastern customs—but the position of the women is that of cattle, and
the infant mortality is almost unbelievable. In Europe and America
women have acquired their intellectual independence and are fast
acquiring economic and political independence, so it is useless to talk
of reverting to legal concubinage. We see from anthropological and
92 oo EUGENICS REVIEW.

biological. evidence that the normal channel through which we may
hope to attain better inherent quality in the human race is through
monogamy. The economic conditions that fostered polygamy no
longer obtain under present day industrial conditions, and if adequate maintenance and education for the rising generation are to be
secured, the family unit must have the social and economic stability
that only monogamy can give. :

Biology and ethics are at one in insisting on the ideal. The problem for us is how to realise the ideal, and at the same time give due
freedom to the individual. During the last century we have been
insisting on the rights of man; during recent years it has been recognised that woman is also included in the Genus Homo.

The Eastern flavour of early Christian teaching led to some confusion of thought among the European peoples. Though monogamy
was the law in Greece and Rome in pre-Christian times, moral laxity
was the custom then asnow. The Christians of the Middle Ages, with
their rebellion against the flesh and all things pertaining to the body,
banned all sex as evil, eulogized celibacy, and in that way rendered a
great, if unwitting, disservice to the race by attracting into convents
and monasteries, and condemning to celibacy many of the fittest and
ablest representatives of several generations. With the corruption of the
Church in the Middle Ages this tendency ceased to have such racially
injurious effects, as though celibacy was enjoined, parenthood was
tacitly permitted.

The whole bias of teaching, however, being in the hands of the
priesthood, the attitude towards the handing on of the sacred torch of
life from one generation to the next was one that represented the torch
as poison gas—an unavoidable evil and the root of all sin. We have
not yet shaken ourselves free of that attitude of defilement, and from
it spring many of our social troubles of to-day.

The young receive an ever stronger impression of their own liberty
of thought and action, but no direct teaching as to the biological facts
of life, of the duty they owe to the race, and the responsibilities of
carrying on the torch of life. This exaggerated importance of individual] liberty is the foundation on which is built ean ill-digested smattering of Freudian psycho-analysis, stimulated by leisure filled with
sexually suggestive novels, cinemas, plays and amusements; then we
wonder at the moral laxity of the present age!

The present generation is not to be condemned. It may be badly
taught and ignorant, but it has courage and is prepared to face facts.
One of the strongest factors in inciting women to seek political recognition was the unhealthy conditions of the sex relationship, and the
hideous position in which many women were placed.

Not so long ago women were set aside in every town—the slaves of
vice, outcasts of Society; well-to-do women were lulled to acquiesce
in the fiction that man is naturally polygamous, therefore unless his
polygamous tendencies are provided for, no married woman or respect able girl would be unmolested.

Against that contention women rebelled. They refused to purchase ‘security’ at the price of their sisters’ lives, and now they are
looking this bogey of polygamous man and monogamous woman in the
-MODERN MARRIAGE AND MONOGAMY.: 93

face. We know it is biological moonshine to have two halves. of one
race inherently different. We see now from Science how we have been
misled in the past, not from malice but from ignorance. We have men
and women of all types in the world. We have in our own hands the
power of selection. In Europe and America, for generations, there has
been no value in biological selection attached to continence, eccept in
the women. In the past there has been a selective value placed on
courage—on honesty—on physical fitness—on comeliness. Of recent
years inebriety has certainly had a negative value, and drunkards have
tended to be rejected as partners in marriage. All teaching has emphasized the social injury resulting from alcoholism, and, apart from
American legal enactments, the whole of Europe has become more sober
during the last hundred years.

If we want true monogamy, we must attach a selective value to
continence and provide social conditions under which it can be practised. So long as we shrug our shoulders at the young man ‘‘sowing
his wild oats,’’ so long as women assess each other’s social value on the
amount of physical attraction that can be exerted on the opposite sex,
so long shall we favour conditions of promiscuity and social degeneracy .

Many have grown up in the belief that monogamy was only adopted
as the result of the teaching of revealed religion. If the supernatural
origin of the commands is not acknowledged, it is considered that
liberty can be justly claimed to seek self expression and self realisation
along the lines that seem individually desirable. What has to be
realised both by men and women, but especially by women, is that
although there may have been no Eve to eat any apple, human beings
have the power of reasoning and are able thereby to see a little way
into the mysteries of Nature, and that knowledge and independence
carry with them great responsibilities. :

Those who did not know mental defect was hereditary, could not
be blamed for encouraging a feeble-minded girl to marry, but to do so
knowingly is to commit a crime against the future. In the same way
when no positive teaching is given to the young on the importance of
sex control, when the public tolerate suggestive plays, books and advertisements, they cannot blame the present generation for its lax
morality, but once it is understood that racial improvement is dependent on sex control, value will be given in selection for marriage to the
self-controlled, and the rising generation will be trained to sublimate
or transform their creative energies into socially desirable channels.

The question is often raised as to what place should divorce take
in a truly monogamous community. Is it not a question of equity
where the claims of the individual the child andthe State, should each be
given due consideration? From the biological, economic and social
standpoint the stability of the family is of primary importance. On
the other hand, the more developed a people, the higher the importance
attached to the ‘companionship’ aspect of marriage. From the racial
point of view the child is the primary consideration ; the third, but by
no means unimportant aspect is the family as an economic and social
unit of the State. It is necessary that the partners should be within
the range of possible accord. There are those fortunate people who
meet as affinities early and find no attraction elsewhere throughout life.
04 | EUGENICS REVIEW.

It is agreed that permanent happiness is not likely to be found where
no intellectual companionship and sympathy exist. Desire unredeemed is but transitory, while the ideal is love strengthened by
passion.

Early marriages are essential if social evils are to be reduced, and
undoubtedly they have very great advantages, but would inevitably
lead to more divergences of character developing in either partner
which, with the increased sense of individualism, especially among
women, would result in some cases in conditions where the continuance of the marriage would be undesirable from every point of view.
In the interests of all parties divorce—with the interests of the children adequately safeguarded—should be accessible. If real discord exists, if one or other partner is incapable of healthy parenthood
er has acquired social habits that must provide a bad educational
environment for a child, then the marriage cannot fulfil two of its three
essentials. It cannot provide companionship for the partners, it
cannot result in the rearing of fit citizens in the future. The marriage
may have proved in the first instance a useful ‘property contract,’ but
the State has no interest in maintaining a condition which encourages.
promiscuity, disease and illegitimacy and can no longer contribute
effectively to the stability, fertility or general well-being of the community. Ina truly monogamous State, divorce will be easily obtainable in those cases where the interests of the community and of posterity
require the dissolution of marriage. Those who look on marriage as
a religious sacrament will, of course, continue to live in accordance
to the teachings to which they adhere; and though divorce would be
accessible, it would be left to individual initiative to seek it.

One has but to look at the legislature of those countries where
women have acquired education, independence and political influence
to see how those tendencies are revealed. The Scandinavian countries
have since 1918 revised all their marriage, divorce and illegitimacy
laws. M. Castberg, the Norwegian Minister of Justice, in introducing
his Illegitimacy Bill, stated that the underlying principle was very
simple. That each child born into the world must have a father and
a mother, both were jointly responsible for its creation and both must
be equally responsible to the community for its education and maintenance. That the marriage ceremony had been omitted could not
exempt the man from the responsibilities of fatherhood. The law
has now been altered in accordance with this view.

The principle is also made legally effective in several of the
American States, and, to a slighter degree, in most of the British
Dominions.

The growing vitality of the eugenic conscience is clearly apparent
in the recent marriage laws. In Scandinavian countries marriage is
forbidden between persons suffering from transmissible disease and
insanity. Habitual drunkenness and crime are grounds for divorce.
Many of the American States prohibit marriage with the insane, epileptic, mentally defective and venereally diseased. Until these restriction are uniform throughout the States, however, their value will be
mainly educational. With time, the eugenic sense will be sufficiently
strong in all the democracies for effective insistence on the rights of
posterity.
MODERN MARRIAGE AND MONOGAMY. 95

Once the mass of the population realises the extent to which the
suffering and burden of disease and defect is preventible by checking
the breeding of inherently defective stock, public opinion will provide
the social customs, and the legal machinery necessary to secure that
the fit shall be accorded the privilege of parenthood, and the unfit,
while protected for their lifetime by the community, will be denied ‘the
right of handing on their defect to others. 
It has been argued that the eugenic ideal would negative monogamy: but why should it?

If the highest privilege accorded to us is that of fashioning posterity on such lines as will improve its inherent quality, we must attach
the greatest importance to selection in marriage. It is the gravest
decision any human being takes in life as it affects not only himself and
his partner, but the unnumbered ages of the future.

It has been argued, if so important, why not have preliminary
trial marriages to be sure that the decision. is a wise one, before ratifying it? Because trial marriage, if a real marriage, would result in
offspring : if entered into casually, would prevent that care in selection
in marriage that is essential both to racial development and, incidentally, to monogamy. No deliberately childless marriage
would be any test, as parenthood alters psychologically the relationship between partners in marriage, deepening and strengthening the
affections and sympathies in quite unforeseen ways. Far better is the
education of both sexes under conditions which give ample opportunities for healthy friendship, but which also give from earliest years
positive teaching on sex control, and actively instils the eugenic ideal
as an inherent part of the religion of the future.

As there has been no selective value attached to self-control, there
are at the present time a number of amoral abnormal people of both
sexes at large; the average needs of the human race cannot be judged
by the physiological abnormalities of such types, and public opinion
should be aroused to insist that their abnormalities should not be
passed on to afflict posterity.

If we want monogamy we must work actively to provide conditions
under which it is possible to develop it. Like everything else worth
having, it will require sacrifice and effort to attain.

On the one hand there is the Communist (Bolshevik) ideal of no
family, no selection in marriage, and total ignoring of the teachings of
science as to race improvement and deterioration, conditions that, if
realised, must lead to rapid racial degeneracy. In 1921 there were
in Russia 85% of the children in schools infected with venereal disease.
Family organisation and tradition was rapidly destroyed, no responsibility was incurred by parenthood as the State claimed Jurisdiction over all children from birth. The spirit of internationalism
carries with it permission for general race mixture, thereby losing all
the fruits of inherent development among the civilised races. Those
who care for the race of their forefathers and who wish to make use of
the discoveries of science, to prevent suffering and disease, and to
improve the inherent quality and capacity of the race must direct
their course in the opposite direction and tread what for some will be
the hard and narrow road.
96 EUGENICS REVIEW.

We must realise that the emancipation of women has made the
continuance of professional prostitution limited to a small class of
pariah women impossible as an acceptable social custom. If nothing
is done to limit the demand for facilities for promiscuity, it will mean
a low moral standard for both sexes. With a low moral standard goes
a high disease rate, and a low standard of home life and married
happiness. |

As Ellen Key says so well: *‘‘Another equally eloquent circumstance fully supported by statistical evidence is this: that prostitution
increases in direct proportion as the general social conditions and the
economical situation are unfavourable to marriage, and that it
decreases as marriage is facilitated. . . . Where moralsare loose,
the emotion of love has small importance. The control of sensuality
develops the deeper feelings of love.’’

Spinoza also defines the same idea that ‘‘the sexual love which has
its origin in what is external and accidental, may easily be turned into
hate, a kind of madness that is nourished on discord, but that love, on
the other hand is lasting which has its cause in freedom of soul and in the
will to bear and bring up children.’’

Virtue need not involve insipidity. ‘“The wise virgins’ deadly
sin against love is that they disdained to learn of the foolish ones the
secret of fascination; that they would know none of the thousand things
that would bind a man’s senses or lay hold of his soul; that they regarded the power to please as the power to betray. When all women
who can love are able to make goodness fascinating and completeness
of personality interesting, then Imogen will conquer Cleopatra. As
yet the charming ones are not always good, and the good not always
charming, and the majority neither ‘‘the one nor the other.’’

The men must take to heart the knowledge already possessed by
the Courts of Love of old that the reason that love and marriage were
so often incompatible was that woman cannot expect from her husband
the delicate conduct her lover must show, since the latter only receives
by favour what the husband takes as his right.’’

Marriage is going through a difficult period. Not only has it to
take the step in its evolution from wife purchase to equal partnership,
but the higher ideal of the standard of happiness required in marriage
due to the greater intellectuality and emotional development of the
individuals concerned, coupled with the growth of eugenic responsibility, and the modern tendency to question the utility of all social
customs, put monogamy on its trial. Though struggling to exist
amidst almost impossible conditions at the present time, it remains
the ideal.

Conditions are far worse in the Latin countries than in England,
though even here there is still the tacit acceptance of the different
standard of conduct for men and for women. Promiscuity before
marriage, often in certain sets continued after marriage, though deprecated publicly, is not actively censured by public opinion.

These conditions, fortunately, are steadily changing for the
better. We begin to perceive that woman must use her recently

* ‘Love and Marriage.’’ Ellen Key.
MODERN MARRIAGE AND MONOGAMY. 97

extended influence and men and women must together apply the teachings of science and education, social custom and law, to secure a biological monogamy in the future through which the individual will
experience the deepest, purest and highest emotional development,
and the race will free itself of the burden of inherited defect and
abnormal sensuality to go forward with the torch of life burning ever
more brightly.

_ “Family feeling, ancestor worship, pride of pure blood will regain,
in a new sense, their decisive power over emotions and actions.

‘*Thus will love’s freedom be limited—but not through idealistic
philosophy’s abstract conceptions of citizenship and duty, nor through
the hard and fast breeding rules of Spartan evolutionism.

‘*Freedom for love’s selection, under conditions favourable to the
race; limitation of the freedom not of love but of procreation, when the
conditions are unfavourable to the race—this is the line of life.

‘*The spirit of the age, working through the standards of literature
and public opinion, transforms with infallible certainty thoughts and
feelings in the direction in which the strongest lead them.

‘*It now rests with the young to be these strong ones.’’ (‘‘Love
and Marriage.’’ Ellen Key. P. 126.)
