7O EUGENICS REVIEW.

in an address to the Roman Senate, commanded a Christian wife who,
taking advantage of the Roman law, divorced her husband because of
his debaucheries so that she might not partake of his crimes by living
with him. St. Epiphanius allowed divorce, and said that if either party
married again the Church absolved them from all blame, tolerated their
weaknesses, and did not reject them either from the Church or eternal
life.

The theory of the indissolubility of marriage did not apparently find
favour in the Church until after the Fourth Century, and here in
England, after the Sixth Century, Theodore, Archbishop of Canterbury,
in a Penetential, declared marriages to be dissoluble on the grounds of
desertion, adultery, impotence, relationship and captivity.

Is there not ground for the assumption that the ecclesiastics, at a
time when their conduct caused the Church the greatest humiliation, were
more influenced by cupidity than religious zeal in enforcing the doctrine
that marriage was indissoluble? They assumed sole control over the
marital relations. They granted, for pecuniary consideration, permission
to marry, and when those whom they had joined together desired to
have their marriages dissolved, they found, also for a pecuniary consideration, specious excuses for separating and then remarrying the
parties, while still insisting that the sacred tie was indissoluble. Mr.
Lee, in the Cambridge Modern History, says “the most holy sacrament of
marriage, owing to remote consanguinity coming within the prohibited
degree, was made a subject of derision to the laity by the venality with
which marriages were made and unmade to fill the pouches of the
episcopal officials.” He might have instanced the case of Bothwell who,
when he wanted to divorce his wife in order that he might marry Mary,
got a decree on the ground that one of his ancestors had married into his
wife’s family a century before. As Cardinal Borgia, the Vice-Chancellor of Innocent III., wittily, if profanely, said, “ God desireth not the
death of a sinner, but rather that he should live and—pay.”

If Sir Lewis Dibdin, or some other lawyer equally well grounded in
Church history, might divest himself of all prejudices in favour of present
received theories, and with a mind trained to weigh evidence, should set
himself to write a history of English Church law and divorce, the result
of his labours would be glady welcomed. R. NEWTON CRANE.

Andrews, C. B. Life, Emotion, and Intellect. London and Leipsig.
T. Fisher Unwin; 1913; price 5s. net; pp. 95.

THE author makes use of the following passage as a kind of motto to his
book: “Life is real; intellect is artificial; emotion, although it is obliged
to express itself in intellectual formulz, is our nearest approach to the
essence of life.” His persuasion of the artificiality of the intellect appears
to lead him into statements with which Eugenists must quarrel. We
attempt, he says, to destroy love by Eugenic marriage certificates. If love
is blind then the believer in the Eugenic health certificate for marriage is
blinder still—and so on. Galton long ago gave a complete answer to
statements of this sort. Society has erected all kinds of barriers, economic and customary, within which the emotional activities of the individual
are confined, the Eugenist regarding many of these as purely artificial
wishes to substitute rather better ones, resting more on a biological than
on an economic and social basis. We join the author in deploring any
attempt to standardise humanity. Eugenics aims at the preservation
and preponderating survival of the best of a/Z classes. On the whole the
book is a not uninteresting essay on the emotions, with special reference to
the emotional reticence of Englishmen. C. S. Stock.

Delzous, Louis. La Famille Frangaise et son Evolution.  Libraire
Armaud Colin; price 3 fr. 50 c.; pp. 287.

THIS book is an interesting study, by a French lawyer, of the forces at

work in France during the nineteenth century which transformed the
