CORRESPONDENCE. 313

The answer reached by this second line of investigation is simple, but
of wide-ranging consequence. It says that the intelligence employed in
any mental performance must be analysed into two factors. The one is
different for every different kind of performance or test; it seems to be
identifiable with the neural structure in the brain specifically subserving
that particular performance. But besides this specific factor, there is also
a general one, always the same whatever the performance; this general
factor in ability seems to be represented physiologically by the free
energy of the whole cortex of the brain, or some still wider neural region.
This analysis of cerebral action into the two factors, neural structure and
neural energy, was clearly enunciated 12 years ago by no less an authority
than Dr. Mott.?

This result, gained wholly independently of the work of MM. Simon
and Binet, nevertheless fits it like a glove. An explanation is at once
supplied for the success of their extraordinary procedure in casting all
the old basal powers to the winds, and, instead, pooling together tests of
the most miscellaneous description. For if every performance depends
on two factors, the one always varying randomly, while the other is constantly the same, it is clear that in the average the random variations
will tend to neutralise one another, leaving the other, or constant factor,
alone dominant.

This constant factor, or general mental ability, or free energy of the
whole cerebral cortex, is, therefore, what the tests of MM. Simon and
Binet really measure. The specific abilities, on the other hand, are left
by them practically untouched.

Our explanation does not merely serve to gratify the natural human
craving for intelligibility. It readily inspires a great number of most
important practical consequences. Great as has been the value of the
Simon-Binet tests, even when worked in theoretical darkness, their
efficiency will be multiplied a thousand-fold when employed with a
full light upon their essential nature and mechanism.

C. SPEARMAN.

THE EUGENIC ASPECT OF THE EMPLOYMENT OF MARRIED WOMEN: A REPLY.

It is well to point out at the commencement that we are interested in
Marriage only as it forms the foundation of family life, and are not concerned with so-called neo-malthusian marriages. That the best energies
of married women should be devoted to the interests of home and family is
@ proposition about which there is not likely to be any difference of
opinion. It is otherwise when, as pointed out in the note in the EUGENICS
REVIEW for July, we are obliged to choose between a home-life whose
very possibility depends upon the extraneous economic labour of the
women and no home at all. Encouragement of homes which depend
upon the economic labour of both parties will no doubt cause a rise in
the marriage rate, but the price paid for this is the absentee mother, for
she is only enabled to become a mother because for the best part of her
time she is absentee. The creation of social custom on this matter would
seem to be more easy than on many another, for marriage supported by the
earnings of both parties offers many of those attractions which appeal to
the temporary and immediate convenience of mankind to the prejudice of
its permanent welfare. It is said, however, that otherwise these women
would remain single; we must therefore consider what we should be
losing by such a state of affairs. The note proceeds :—‘ Among wageearning women those who have proved their efficiency by earning their
living at skilled work are probably superior in energy and intellectual
capacity to the remainder, and, as the excess of women over men makes
it impossible for all women to marry, it is just those who should not be

1 Journal of Mental Science, 1902, October.
314 EUGENICS REVIEW.

prevented from so doing.” The view advanced here can only be held
by setting up precisely the same standard of fitness for women as for
men, indeed by claiming that the eugenic excellence of a woman can be
measured by her earning capacity, or by saying that in the arena of
economic conflict and under the conditions in which men strive with one
another, certain women who show up better than their sisters are in fact
better as women. Would these same women prove superior under what we
must regard as the true, though very different, standard of female fitness
provided by home-life? We believe that they would not, for the sufficient
reason that success in economic strife means excellence in qualities that
on the whole have slight bearing upon home-life. If we follow the
reasoning of the note, eugenists would do well to look for their wives
among the ranks of economically successful women, since it is assumed
that the level there is higher than elsewhere. This we hold to be an
entirely false assumption. We may now consider the sort of man such
a woman is likely to secure. It is clear that her professional success is
only of advantage in securing a man who is willing to share a more
pretentious home, in part supported by the woman, to a less pretentious
one wholly supported by himself, using support to mean economically
supported, and who is also willing to consent to the best part of the time
and energies of his wife being used outside the home.

The eugenist is not concerned so much with unreasonable restrictions
on marriage as with restrictions on eugenic marriage. To remove restrictions on one sort of marriage, for instance, that supported by the earnings
of both parties, only makes it harder for the normal marriage to take
place, for it raises the standard necessary and discourages what we regard
as the eugenic marriage, where the spheres of man and woman are quite
definite and where man is selected for one kind of excellence and woman
for another. Since the ¢o¢al number of children born is controlled by the
general economic condition of the country, discouragement of marriage in
any one class will only result in a larger number of children to those
marriages which do take place. Continual exposure to identical economic
conditions is bound, in the long run (and as eugenists we are wedded to
“long views”), to result in an approximation of type. The qualities for
wage-earning being sexually neuter it is likely that all the finer female
traits will be sacrificed to serve economic ends, for the emphasis of selection will be laid on those qualities which make woman economically
successful. Civilisation makes ever increasing demands for specialised
ability; it is therefore most wasteful not to make use of the one natural
instance of specialisation provided by sex. The economic consideration
in marriage is a bar to sexual selection, and it would be better to choose
a wife uninfluenced by any prospect of economic assistance. It is from
every point of view bad that women should marry late in life, an effect
which, on the whole, would be entailed by professional and general
economic efficiency. Both of these things would help to lower the eugenic
standard. We can, of course, invoke the argument that the best people
will always have sufficiently sound instincts to avoid such marriages, but
custom and contemporary standards have great weight, and, what is far
more serious, conditions would be so moulded as to make eugenic marriage increasingly difficult and they might reach such a stage that none
but the wealthiest men could afford to dispense with the earnings of their
wives. That this is not merely a pessimistic prophecy may be seen
clearly in those industrial communities where the wages of the wife have
long been indispensable to marriage. The growth of the factory system
has made an almost equal demand for the labour of men and women. The
employment of married women having been allowed to become customary,
the wages given by the employer, determined by the minimum requirements of a working man’s home, have shown a tendency to be divided
between two persons instead of being given to one. The assumption that
a man’s wages ought to be sufficient to support a wife and family having
CORRESPONDENCE. 315

failed, any man desirous of establishing normal family life must either
be able to earn nearly a double wage or be willing to live at a materially
lower standard than his fellows. Nothing less than a radical change in
the ideals of marriage has resulted from the employment of married
women in this case and that change is clearly one for the worse. We do
not disagree with the principle that a married woman, whose home is
about to be broken up through misfortune, should be allowed if she can
to restore its position by external economic effort, but such cases are and
will be exceptional and in no society are there lacking such occasional
facilities. Whilst in every way welcoming the widest possible education
and outlook for women, always bearing in mind the inherently different
standard of selection to be applied to the two sexes, we protest most
strongly against the suggestion, implicit in the note, that the standards of
selection for men and women should be allowed to approximate, as they
surely will, under any long continued practice of marriage based upon
the earnings of both parties.
R. A. FISHER.

C. S. STOcK.
