METHODS OF RESEARCH

By G. ARCHDALL REID, M.D., F.R.S.E.

It was originally intended that this paper should be read
before the Eugenics Education Society at the meeting on October
19th. I have been asked, however, to publish it in the present
issue of the Journal, so that there shall be only discussion on it
at the meeting. This arrangement has seemed to me excellent.
The paper is very controversial ; and it will be a great advantage
if people who disagree with it and wish to indicate their reasons
can come ready prepared.

Science is founded on verifiable facts. A verifiable fact is
one which may be perceived not only by the original observer
but also by those to whom it is communicated. Speaking
generally, facts are intellectually valuable to us largely in proportion as we are able to observe them for ourselves. They are
then particularly impressive.

Some facts may be directly observed, for example, the fact
that men have heads. Others are so obscured by the conditions
in which they occur that they cannot be observed directly, for
example, the fact that water is compounded of oxygen, or the
fact that there are more women than men in England. To
discover them we must perform experiments, or collect statistics,
or follow some such special procedure. Some sciences, for
example, systematic zoology, botany, and anatomy, are founded
almost solely on facts that have been directly observed ; others,
for example, physics and chemistry, on facts that have been
reached experimentally. It is axiomatic that the scientific value
of a fact depends, not on the mode in which it was collected,
not on whether it has been directly or indirectly observed, but
solely on the use that can be made of it. There is, however, a
current delusion that a fact indirectly observed is more valuable
than one discovered through direct observation, and that physics
242 A. Reid:

and chemistry, for example, owe their accuracy to experiment.
But the students of physics and chemistry have obtained
exceptional accuracy merely because they have been able to
measure precisely, and because they have been in the habit of
testing their thinking carefully. The circumstance that they
have been unable, as a rule, to observe directly has been a
burden, not an advantage. Mathematics, the most accurate of
sciences, owes nothing to experiment, and Astronomy, one of the
most accurate, very little.

Science consists in the systematic arrangement and classification, of facts. There are two ways in which facts may be
classified—by description and by interpretation. We describe
when we indicate co-existences and resemblances. Thus, when
we describe man as a mammalian vertebrate we indicate that he
resembles certain other animals in that he has a backbone with
which breasts co-exist. Proof of a descriptive statement is
usually easy. We have merely to demonstrate the facts—to
show, for example, the backbone and the mammae—and our end
is achieved. Speaking generally, there is in descriptive science
a maximum of facts and a minimum of thinking. At any rate,
to one who knows the facts, the thinking is usually simple.
Systematic zoology, botany, and anatomy are examples of
descriptive sciences.

On the other hand, we interpret when we arrange facts in
sequences, when we link together antecedents and consequents,
when we trace the relation of cause and effect, when we frame
suppositions, hypotheses, inferences, when we ‘explain ”’ and
‘*understand ”’; in brief, when, having ascertained what objects
are like and how they are related, we indicate the results which
follow from their qualities and relationships. Thus we interpret
when we say a bullet in the brain was the cause of a man’s
death. Obviously description, expressed or implied, must
precede or accompany interpretation ; for we cannot surmise the
past nor forecaste the future of objects, nor cenceive the effects
they may produce on one another unless we know something
about their properties. Every science, therefore, is descriptive
at first, but tends to become interpretative. If the facts on which
a science is built are few and simple, description is quickly
METHODS OF RESEARCH 243

finished and interpretation soon follows. If they are very
numerous and complex, description takes longer and interpretation follows more slowly. Thus mathematics which rests on
very few facts was interpretative almost from the beginning ; it
was ages before physics and astronomy in which the facts are
much more numerous, truly reached that stage ; biology in which
the facts are excessively numerous is only now reachingit. The
study of heredity and evolution are nothing other than attempts
to interpretate the facts of descriptive biology.

Proof that we have correctly interpreted is usually much
more difficult than the proof that we have correctly described ;
for, almost invariably, any collection of relevant facts admits of
two or more contradictory interpretations, between which
decision has to be made. The task of the thinker, therefore, is
more elaborate, and proof is correspondingly harder to reach.
There is a recognised method of procedure, which for a century
has been described and insisted on by every writer on the
method of science who has obtained enduring credit, which for
three centuries has guided all labourers in science whose work
has stood the test of time, and which, from time immemorial,
has been followed in the law courts and even in the everyday
thinking of the ordinary man. This method has four stages.
In the first, a stage of observation, facts are collected. In the
second, a stage of generalisation or induction, every relevant inference that can be conceived as possible is drawn from the facts
collected in the first stage. In the third, a stage of deduction,
crucial instances are thought out by means of which all the rival
hypotheses made in the second are put to the test. In the
fourth, a second stage of observation, those facts are collected to
which the mind was directed in the third stage. More briefly,
in the first stage relevant facts are collected; in the second we_
make hypotheses as to what these facts may mean; in the third
we try to think of other facts which shall enable us to decide
between these guesses; in the fourth we collect this second set
of facts and then finally decide. In other words, in the first
stage we prepare for, and in the second complete generalisation ;
in the third we prepare for, and in the fourth complete verification. There are thus two stages of observation, separated by
244 A. Reid:

two of thinking. With the exception of this fourfold process no :
means are known by which the whole of the facts bearing on any .
hypothesis can be brought into evidence.

If we do not begin with facts, then our thinking is all in the '
air. If we do not generalise from the facts, then we make no
scientific use of them. If we draw no deductions from our’
generalisations, then we make no attempt to verify the truth of
it. If our deductions do not direct our minds to more relevant
facts, or if, after being so directed, we neglect to observe the facts
thus indicated, then our deductions are mere guesses piled on the
initial guess, the generalisation. Inscience the only legitimate use
of deduction is to furnish signposts pointing to crucial instances
—that is, to additional, and in the circumstances, more decisive
facts.

Usually every thinker favours a particular hypothesis out of
the two or more which are conceived in the second stage. He
thinks it the most probable explanation of the facts, and, therefore, strives to show that it is right and all the others wrong.
Even if no other suppositions are conceivable, he has still to
decide between the alternatives that his chosen hypothesis is
true, and that it is not true. His hunt for crucial instances,
then, takes the form of making predictions by means of his
favoured hypothesis—predictions which furnish crucial instances
between it and its rivals. He declares to himself: “If my
explanation is true, then certain other things must be true. If
it is not true, then they also cannot be true.’’ Finally, he looks
to see if those other things are true. This power possessed by a
true hypothesis, and by no other, of enabling the thinker to
predict correctly under all relevant conditions is the best test of
its truth that we have. Indeed, it is the only test. As Whewell
wrote: ‘‘ When the hypothesis of itself, and without adjustment
for the purpose, gives us the rule and reason of a class of facts
not contemplated in its construction, we have a criterion of
reality which has never yet been produced in favour of falsehood.”

When we are endeavouring to prove a hypothesis, it is usually
essential that we shall appeal to ‘‘a class of facts not contemplated in its construction.’”’ If we merely bring forward more of
the same class of facts as those on which the hypothesis was
METHODS OF RESEARCH 245

based, we extend not only its basis, but also the bases of all the
alternative guesses. Therefore, we can only decide between them
by seeking quite different facts, some of which contradict one
false hypothesis and some another, and the whole of which
accord only with the true hypothesis. In this way we discover
our crucial instances. Moreover, this condition—that we must
appeal to different classes of facts—carries the corollary that we
must never formulate a hypothesis which is incapable of proof
or disproof by such an appeal. Thus, for example, we must not
suppose in science on the evidence of the heat and light of the
sun that a fire-breathing dragon exists within it. For sucha
hypothesis, since it is incapable of proof or disproof by appeals
to crucial instances, must for ever remain a mere guess. In science
we may, indeed we must, make use of guesses as we travel towards
the establishment of truth; but science has no room for guesses
which can never be known as true; which ean never be more than
guesses.

The classical example of the method just outlined was
furnished by Newton. On facts collected by Kepler he based
his hypothesis that material bodies attract each other directly as
the mass and inversely as the square of the distance. This was
his guess; he and his successors had to decide whether it was
true or not true. Thereupon, they proceeded to think of all
sorts of crucial instances and thereby call into court all kinds of
evidence, relevant but quite different from that provided by
Kepler. They declared, in effect, ‘‘ If Newton’s guess be true,
then certain other things must also be true; it must be in
harmony with all other known truth, for example, the ascertained laws of motion; planets, having certain momenta and
certain distances from the sun, must circle in certain paths;
tides must follow the sun and the moon; unsuppported bodies
must fall to the ground at certain rates of acceleration ; the free
surfaces of fluid masses must coincide with the general contour
of the earth in the latitudes in which they are situated ; and so
on, andsoon.” Having made these predictions inquirers looked
to see if they were true, and invariably found that they were
true. The sensational verification came when astronomers,
having noted deviations in the orbit of the planet Uranus, made
246 A. Reid:

predictions which led to the discovery of the Neptune; but from
Newton’s day to this the process of verification has gone on, as
doubtless it will do for ages to come—unless, as is now most
unlikely, a crucial instance is found which decides against it.
Thus Newton’s guess of universal gravitation was established as
a proved hypothesis, as a theory, asalaw. The four stages (a)
of observation, (0) of induction, (c) of deduction, and (d) of renewed observation, can be clearly traced in its construction.
Obviously, if nothing more had been done than to extend Kepler’s
observations, by collecting similar facts, the hypothesis would
have remained a guess.

Newton reared the noblest monument of thought that the
mind of man had yet created. Why is it of such splendour ?
Not because it was a very astute hypothesis, but because, notwithstanding centuries of criticism, it has been proved to be
true. Not because it isisolated, but because, through the testing
to which its students subjected it, it spread its tentacles wide, and
grasped, and harmonised, and explained, a universe of facts and
laws. And, last, but not least, because it inaugurated a new era in
science and furnished a model which, from that day to this has
been copied by all the great thinkers who have interpreted our
world to us.

Every hypothesis, no matter in what branch of science,
which has received universal assent, has been established by
Newton’s method. Every hypothesis, which has been received
with complete or partial dissent, has not been so established ;
or else the dissent, always merely temporary, has come from
men unaware of, or intellectuaily incapable of, grasping the
essentials of that method. The thinkers of the middle ages
accepted as unquestionably true certain statements found in the
works of Aristotle and their own books of divinity. From these
statements they argued closely, clearly and logically; but they
observed nature neither at the beginning of their thinking, nor
at the end of it. Their thinking was purely deductive. The
first, second and fourth stages of Newton’s method were omitted.
There was no basing of hypotheses on facts which could be
verified, nor any testing of them by more appeals to reality.
This ‘‘scholastic’’ method of thinking was destroyed as an
METHODS OF RESEARCH 247

instrument of science by Bacon, who insisted that our knowledge
of nature should rest on facts collected from actual nature. But
Bacon himself failed to create science. He made only guesses.
He founded his hypotheses on facts, but neglected to test them
by more facts, thus omitting Newton’s third and fourth stages.
After him came Newton who, rather by example than precept,
insisted that we should not only begin by observing nature, but
end by observing it; that we should not only base hypotheses
on facts, but test them by more and different facts. What is
termed pre-Baconian thinking, then, is that kind which is not
founded on observed facts; while post-Newtonian thinking is
that kind which is not only founded on facts, but is tested by
them. There exists, however, a curious delusion among the
students of living beings. Aware that Bacon condemned the
deduction of the scholastic thinkers—which consisted in piling
guesses on other guesses—and furnishing shining examples of
the proverb that a little knowledge is a dangerous thing, they
regard as pre-Baconian that employment of deduction which is
really post-Newtonian. Accordingly, we find that while the
real pre-Baconian employment of it is common with them, the
post-Newtonian use is very rare. But no biologist has ever explained how hypotheses may be proved except by the use of
crucial instances, or how crucial instances can be discovered
without the use of deduction.

Newton’s method was followed in almost all the sciences
as they became interpretative. Indeed they became truly
interpretative because it was followed. Thus, to this day, a
physicist or a chemist, if he founds a hypothesis on some facts,
endeavours to test it by other and different sets of facts. Usually
he has to resort to experiment. But here again I must insist
that there is nothing especially scientific in experiment—neither
when it is employed to gather facts on which to found a
hypothesis, nor when it is employed to gather facts by which to
test a hypothesis. It is a means of observing not of thinking.
It is a folly to employ it when we can observe directly. Suppose,
for example, I suspected a man of stealing my spoons; would
not my hypothesis be as certainly proved by seeing them sticking
out of his pockets, as by the experiment of turning them out
248 A. Reid:

and finding the spoonsthere? The laudation of the exclusive or
almost exclusive employment of experiment and other special
means of collecting facts with which we are so familiar in
biology, furnishes another example of the danger of halfknowledge. A fact which becomes observable after an experiment
is thereby merely placed in the same condition as one which was
observable without an experiment.

No one doubts that good work has been achieved through
experiment; no one denies that it ought to be used whenever
necessary ; but the truth that excellent results have been obtained
by means of it affords no excuse for neglecting facts otherwise
collected. Biology, as we have seen, differs from physics and
chemistry, and resembles astronomy in that, since so much may
be directly observed, the scope of experiment is greatly limited.
For instance, we cannot learn experimentally that men have
heads, and we have not learned experimentally that they have
children that resemble themselves. In truth, the scope of
experiment is so limited in biology that if we use only the facts
collected by means of it our interpretations can never proceed
beyond the stage of guessing; for then the other kinds of facts
needed for verification are lacking. I venture to prophecy that,
if you examine closely the words of any biologist who insists
that our knowledge of interpretative biology shall be experimental, you will find that, without giving valid reasons, he is
really insisting on the neglect of all other evidence, and that he
himself is only guessing. In his work you will discover plenty
of hypotheses which have been founded on experiment, but
never one which has been tested by experiment—or in any other
way. There will be guesses based on facts such as those
which Bacon made; there will be guesses piled on guesses
such as those the pre-Baconians made; but never a guess proved
and established as a law such as those which Newton constructed. If you think I am guilty of extravagance, I can only
challenge you to name a single hypothesis which an experimental
worker has proved, or in recent years even attempted to prove,
according to the ordinary canons of what constitutes proof.

Though I have described deductive verification as the
especial feature of Newton’s method, it would be a mistake to
METHODS OF RESEARCH 249

suppose that it was invented by him. He merely applied it to,
and made it fashionable in science. It had been used ages
before, by all men who strove to think accurately, and is still
employed by them. Suppose, for example, that a detective was
in search of a man who squinted with his right eye, had a birthmark on his left hand, and limped with his left leg ; suppose,
now, he observed a man who squinted with his right eye and
formed the hypothesis that this was his criminal. How would
he verify it? By appealing to another and a different set of
facts; by ascertaining whether or no, the subject of observation
had a birth-mark on his left hand and limped with his left leg.
Suppose, on facts observed by you, you formed the opinion that
you knew the character of an acquaintance. How would you
verify your hypothesis? By predicting that be would act in
certain ways In certain situations and then ascertaining that he
did so.

Accurate interpretation was slow in coming to biology.
The facts were very numerous and complex, and, what was even
more important, the formal training of its students was exclusively in descriptive science. In some measure Bacon’s lesson
was taken to heart; but not Newton’s extension of it.
Hypotheses were plentiful, but verifications of them were rare.
At long last there arose a man who, possessing the necessary
mental endowments, was the first to apply systematically the
method of deductive verification to hypotheses concerning living
beings—just as Newton had been the first to apply it systematically to the problems of inorganic nature. Doing a work as
great as Newton’s, he became Newton’s only peer. That man,
no formally trained biologist but the greatest of biologists, was
Charles Darwin. These two men are the glory of our nation and
of science. Never again, I think, will any man do work as good as
they did; for they have laboured and now the opportunity is
past. Kings and conquerors, statesmen and theologians die and
are forgotten; their work, undone by others, passes and is no
more. But, growing ever clearer and more potent, the voices of
Newton and Darwin come across the years and so will come I
think while human civilisation endures.

Darwin found his hypothesis of evolution through Natural
250 A. Reid:

Selection on the observed facts, (1) that offspring, while reproducing the parental type as a whole, tend to vary from it favourably or unfavourably in relation to the general environment ;
and (2) that, though offspring are more numerous than parents,
the individuals of species do not, as a rule, increase numerically.
Evidently there is a vast elimination which Darwin supposed
destroyed the unfit, and spared the fit, and so caused evolution
of the race. Reaching this conclusion when quite a young man,
he devoted the rest of his long life to its verification. If you
read almost anywhere in his works you will find.that he is saying,
in effect, ‘‘If my hypothesis is true certain other things are also
true. Let us see if they are true.’”’ The Origin, the Descent, and
Plants and Animals, for example, are nothing other than sustained
attempts at deductive verification. His reasoning convinced
most men of science, but some remained sceptical; and I think
that the numbers of the latter, owing to the extension of the
experimental school have, if anything, increased during recent
years. Many objections were advanced. Most of them were
prompted by prejudice, or by ignorance as to what constitutes
evidence and what proof, or by sheer incapacity to follow a more
or less difficult train of thinking. But one was fundamental. It
was said that since no one had seen Natural Selection in operation, it was only a guess; and that the idea that evolution was
due to it was nothing but another guess piled on top of it; the
facts were as well, or better explained by the doctrine of special
creations or the Lamarckian hypothesis of the transmission of
acquirements.

Many truths are revealed to us by the direct use of our
senses. Thus I can see that men have heads, and modern
astronomers, using their telescopes, can see that planets are
worlds. But some truths, such as that of universal gravitation,
can only be inferred. All men regard a truth which has been
observed as more certainly true than one which has only been
inferred, hence the queer expression one sometimes hears !that
such or such a thing “‘is a fact nota theory.”’ Thusthe inference
that planets were worlds was disputed till Galileo observed the
truth through his newly constructed telescope, and so ended all
controversy. So also you are more sure that a man is a thief if
METHODS OF RESEARCH 251

you see him stealing than if you only infer it. Of course, in
many cases, the more limited our intellectual powers the less
certain can we be of the truth of our inferences, for we are
proportionally less able to eliminate every hypothesis but the
right one by appeals to other classes of facts. The intellectual
powers of all men are limited; the best of us can never be
sure that we have taken every conceivable hypothesis into
account and considered every crucial instance and so included all
the relevant evidence. It is conceivable, though now immensely
improbable, that even the theory of gravity will be disproved
and a truer explanation found. Darwin and his immediate
followers inferred Natural Selection. Their facts were drawn
principally from plants and lower animals, which, when wild,
cannot be studied with such minuteness as to enable us to
observe selection, and which when domesticated are subjected
to artificial selection which, as it was contended, is a different
thing.

Let us see if we cannot substitute direct observation for
inference. Since we are men, man is the only wild type that
can be observed very minutely by us. Some Darwinians, not.
including Darwin, have declared that man has escaped from
Natural Selection. But turn to your own experience of human
lives. You have observed, not inferred, that many men die
early and leave no offspring, while others attain old age and see
their grandchildren. Of what do men die? What are the types
that die young? In the vast majority of instances, in England
at least, men die of microbic diseases ; they fall a prey to living
bacteria just as antelopes and rabbits fall victims to carnivora.
The types that die young are those which are specially weak
against one or other of the diseases prevalent in the country in
which they dwell. You know that consumption, for example,
tends to run in families; or in other words, that parents and
offspring, in this case as in others, tend to be of the same
type, and therefore, to be weeded out by the same prevalent
disease. If, because there are gradations between extreme
types, between extreme susceptibility on the one hand and
extreme resisting power on the other, you decline to admit

the existence of innately different types; but believe, on the
5
252 A. Reid:

contrary, that men are of the same type as regards disease and
differ only because circumstances raise or depress their resisting
power, then cast your net wider. Compare different races which,
after all, are only aggregates of genetically related families.
You will find, for example, that, taken on the average, Englishmen
are of one type as regards disease, West African Negroes of
another, and South American Indiansof athird. Thus Englishmen are now, and are known to have been for centuries, more
resistant to consumption than Negroes and Indians, but less
resistant to malaria, while Indians are less resistant to measles
than Englishmen and Negroes. You may take any lethal and
prevalent disease you like and somewhere in the world you will
find races that differ greatly in their powers of resisting it. These
racial differences are so marked under all conditions of health and
surroundings that there can be no doubt that degrees of susceptibility and resisting power in relation to diseases are innate
and transmissible in the same sense as differences of skincolouration are innate and transmissible. I do not know how it
is with you, but I have joined the Eugenics movement simply
because I hold that belief and others like it.

Here then is Natural Selection, not inferred, but observed.
Are you able any longer to doubt its existence? And if you
admit that it occurs among men, who are said to have escaped
from it, are you able to doubt its occurrence among plants and
lower animals ?

Unlike Natural Selection, the evolution which results from
it cannot be observed; our lives are not long enough nor our
powers of perception sufficiently delicate. It must be inferred.
But we can verify our hypothesis at least as thoroughly as
physicists have verified the law of gravitation ; for we can appeal
to as many, or more, crucial instances. Our hypothesis is that
Natural Selection is a cause of protective evolution. The
observed fact on which it is founded is the actual occurrence of
Natural Selection. Now, bearing in mind the alternative
hypotheses of special creation and the Lamarckian doctrine of
the transmission of acquirements, and bearing in mind also that
we must seek a class of facts different from those on which the
hypothesis was founded, let us hunt for crucial instances. If
METHODS OF RESEARCH 253

Natural Selection causes evolution, then certain other things
must be true also. Every human race that has been exposed
to any prevalent and lethal disease must be resistant to that
disease in proportion to the strength and severity of its past
experience of it. Ifthe doctrine of special creation, as opposed
to that of protective evolution, be true, then, since there is
agreement that all races of mankind had a common origin, the
races of the present day must be exactly alike—no race more nor
less resistant to disease than any other. If the Lamarckian
doctrine be true, then, such diseases as consumption and
malaria, which always weaken and never strengthen, must cause
steady deterioration, not protective evolution. Here are your
crucial instances. Turn now to the facts to which deduction
has directed your mind. You have for the purposes of your
examination the number of all the races and sub-races of mankind multiplied by the number of all their lethal and prevalent
diseases. In literal truth, you are able to appeal to thousands
of crucial instances. In each instance you will find that the
doctrine of evolution by Natural Selection is confirmed; for
every race is resistant to every disease precisely in proportion to
the length and severity of its past experience of that disease. On
the other hand you will find all other hypotheses, incompatible
with the theory of evolution by Natural Selection—the doctrine
of special creation, the Lamarckian doctrine, and even the
mutation and Mendelian theories—decisively negatived. They
are maintained only because they have not been thoroughly
tested by appeals to crucial instances—that is, because all the
facts have not been taken into consideration.

If you require still more proof, examine the evidence
concerning those lethal narcotics alcohol and opium which when
taken to excess never do other than injure or destroy the
individual and the use of which for different durations of time
and degrees of intensity has prevailed in many lands. People
vary in their susceptibility to the charms of alcohol and opium,
just as they vary in their susceptibility to disease and in their
relations to everything else. You may confirm this from your
own experience. You know how drunkards in every class of
society crave for excessive indulgence. Has experience of alcohol
254 A. Reid:

awakened in you, who are moderate drinkers, the same furious
desire? Do you spend your lives battling with it? On the
contrary, is it not the truth that experience of alcohol has
awakened in you no craving for excessive indulgence, or, at most,
only one that is weak and easily resisted. Obviously, then,
individuals vary in their susceptibility to the charm of alcohol
and this susceptibility is an innate and transmissible character,
a fact which is more vividly realised when individuals belonging
to different races are compared. Lethal narcotics weed out only
those that are greatly susceptible to their charm; for no one
else takes them to excess. Here, then, once more you are able
to observe Natural Selection. Turn now to your crucial
instances, and you will find that every race that uses alcohol and
is able to command a sufficient supply of it, is temperate precisely
In proportion to its past experience of the poison. Thus the
inhabitants of the vine countries in the South of Europe who, as
history tells us, were anciently very drunken, and whose supply
of alcohol has been continuous and very abundant are now very
temperate. So also are the Jews, and the savages of the
palm-toddy regions of West Africa. The inhabitants of North
Europe, whose supply has been less abundant, are more
intemperate. All savages, and only those savages, who have
had little or no ,experience of alcohol are so intemperate that
when able to command modern concentrated solutions of alcohol
they drink to extinction. Opium has been the cause of a similar
evolution. If you want yet more proof, consider that complex
of ill-conditions which prevails in the great cities of civilised life.
So far from having suffered deterioration, races are resistant to
city life precisely in proportion to their past experience of it.
Thus the Jews and Chinese are very resistant. The British, whose
ancestors within historical times were savages, are less resistant.
Savages who have had no racial experience of it perish more
surely in cities than Englishmen when placed under native
conditions in West Africa.

I have not the space to go into the intricacies of this great
subject. To do justice to it a big volume is needed as I have
found more than once to my cost. I canonly add that the more
you study man’s present evolution the clearer grows the proof
METHODS OF RESEARCH 255

that evolution is due to Natural Selection, and to nothing else.
Man’s ability to become civilised is conditioned by his power to
resist the evils which civilisation, with its crowded and settled
populations brings in its train—endemic disease, alcohol, and
the like. The races of the Old World underwent“this evolution
gradually, and therefore are flourishing to-day. But the races
of the Western Hemisphere were introduced suddenly to modern
civilisation by Columbus and his successors ; consequently their
death-rate exceeds their birth-rate and they are becoming extinct.

The theory of Natural Selection carries a corollary which is
not always perceived by students of the subject. Natural Selection works by means of injurious agencies, for example, diseases
which not only kill the weak but injure the strong. The question
before us, a very important question practically and scientifically,
is this;—do diseases, or any other agencies, which affect the
parental health and, therefore, the nourishment and the general
well-being of the germ-cells, tend commonly to alter the nature of
offspring, subsequently born, in such a way that the latter are
innately different from what they would otherwise have been ?
To put the question in a briefer way, are variations normally
spontaneous or are they usually caused by the environment of
the germ-cells? We are often told by biologists that we do not
know the cause of variations. Nevertheless they speak of spontaneous variations. On the other hand, medical men frequently
proclaim that various conditions—diseases, alcohol, slum-life,
and the like—are race-poisons which cause variations in offspring
and degeneration in the race. Before we can decide between
these contradictory hypotheses we must find crucial instances.
Malaria, since it is so prevalent in such countries as West Africa
that practically everyone suffers from it, since it is a disease of
long duration, since its poison is very virulent and soaks the
whole system including the germ-cells, furnishes a very good
instance. Presumably, since malaria is poisonous, it injures the
germ-cells as it undoubtedly does the other cells of the body.
Therefore, if it causes variations, these are in the direction of
deterioration, of degeneration. The poison of malaria is everywhere much the same, as is proved by its effects on the individual.
The germ-plasm of negroes is everywhere much the same, as is
256 | A. Reid:

proved by the resemblance of the individuals one to another. It
follows, if malaria causes variations, these must all, or nearly all,
be in the same general direction, and this must be true also of the
effects produced by every other injurious agent, each of which must
cause an alteration which is accentuated in successive generations, a dvtft which Natural Selection is powerless to check, and
which must lead ultimately to the extinction of the race; for,
obviously, when there is a general drift, when every child is
inferior to its parents, Natural Selection has no scope. On the
other hand, if variations are normally spontaneous, that is if they
depend on the nature of the germ-plasm, on the growth, activity,
and division of a living thing, then Natural Selection has scope,
and evolution must necessarily follow its occurrence. We have
now made our deductive inferences of consequences and found
our crucial instances: let us turn to the actual facts. Do races
drift and deteriorate when exposed to any of the million
influences—poisons, heat, cold, and the like—which kill and
injure individuals; or do they undergo protective evolution?
We have seen that the latter happens. Obviously, then, variations are, as a rule, spontaneous. I say asa rule, for we should
fall into the folly of extremes if we maintained that the germplasm is never permanently injured by the direct action of the
environment. All, therefore, that is maintained is that, like
other living things, the germ-plasm tends to recover from injuries
and return to the normal. If it is of such a type that it does
not recover, it is eliminated by Natural Selection, and the race
is continued by more resistant strains. 7

In biology, medicine, and sociology, we frequently meet
people who admit, on the one hand, that Natural Selection is a
source of evolution, and maintain, on the other, that injurious
agencies are causes of deterioration. That is, they believe that
races which constantly deteriorate ultimately achieve evolution ;
that races which constantly go down hill ultimately reach the
hill-top. They furnish shining examples of that evi] which has
made interpretative biology, unlike all other interpretative
_ sciences, a tumbling ground for whimsies, a field for unending
controversy, an incoherent collection of contradictory guesses.
In science we have the right to guess, but not to leave our
METHODS OF RESEARCH 257

guesses unverified; to hold opinions, but not contradictory
opinions ; to reach conclusions, but it is our bounden duty to
ascertain whether these conclusions are in harmony with one
another and with the whole of the relevant evidence. We
cannot know whether we are merely guessing, nor whether our
opinions are mutually contradictory, nor whether we are using
the whole of the evidence known to us unless we follow the
method of which Newton and Darwin were the great exponents,
and by means of which all established interpretative science has
been created. /

I pass now to another subject. Compare the mind of some
lowly animal, for instance a caterpillar, with that of man. A
caterpillar from the time he emerges from the egg performs by
instinct all the necessary actions of his simple life. There is no
evidence that he ever does or can learn anything. Certainly he
learns very little. His mind is severely limited, but within its
limits it works almost perfectly. Paley defined instinct very
well when he said it is ‘‘a propensity, prior to experience, and
independent of instruction.” On the other hand, the human
being owes almost everything to experience. At birth, his mind
is almost a blank; but subsequently, until he dies, he is for ever
learning. He learns to walk and to speak. He learns all that
speech conveys to him. What is not less important, he learns
to think skilfully about his stored facts and experiences. Thus
we send children to school not only in order that they may
acquire difficult items of knowledge, but also that they may
acquire the power to perform hard feats of thinking, as in
mathematics. Man has a few instincts such as imitativeness
and curiosity, but they are not nearly sufficient to enable him to
maintain independent existence, and, even so, the function of
most of them is to impel him to make those acquirements which
render him the most efficient of living beings. All his intelligence, his reason, his intellectuality, his morality, his modesty,
in fact his whole faculty for thinking, depends on his power of
making acquirements and on his having made them. Of what
could hethink, how could he think, unless he had learned something
to think about and how to think about it? Till he has made his
acquirements, he is, like the caterpillar, neither intelligent, nor
258 A. Reid:

moral, nor modest. Thesethingsarealllearnt. Between the man
and the caterpillar lie a chain of lower animals which we regard as
intelligent precisely in proportion as they are able to learn—to
profit by experience. You can teach the caterpillar nothing ;
but to the man you can teach a great deal. Theréin lies his
intellectual superiority. It is that which makes him a rational
aud moral being. Like a caterpillar, a human idiot is nonmoral and unintelligent, and for precisely the same reason—
because he is unable to learn. This incapacity to profit from
experience is the essential peculiarity of the idiot; and his idiocy
in any or all departments of knowledge or thought is complete or
partial in proportion as his incapacity to learn is complete or
partial. The whole structure of human society is based on the
assumption that man is pre-eminently the educable animal. For
that reason have schools, and laws, and religions, for example,
been established.

Students of heredity are now nearly all agreed that acquired
characters are not inheritable; by which they mean that the
acquirements of parents and ancestors do not tend to become
inborn traits in offspring and descendants. On the contrary,
they believe that, if a child reproduces the acquirements of his
progenitors, he must do it in the same way as they were originally
produced. Thus, they suppose that, if parents and ancestors
learned Latin or made any other acquirement, the child cannot
know the Latin nor develop the other acquirements except in
the same way—by acquiring them. He can never be born with
them, nor can he develop them in after life except by experiencing that which the parent experienced. One other
important distinction there is between innate and acquired
characters. Our power over the former is very limited; if the
individual lives they (for example, his heart, head and liver) are
sure to appear ; if we starve or otherwise injure him, we may influence them somewhat; butinnoother way. Onthe other hand our
power over acquirements Is very great. By giving or witholding
the right kind of training we can, within the limits of the individual’s capacity, cause the production or suppression of any of them
in almost any degree. Obviously then it is of the utmost importance to the Eugenist to ascertain whether the characters he proMETHODS OF RESEARCH 259

poses to modify are inborn or acquired. Ifthey are the former, his
only recourse is selective breeding ; if the latter, selective breedin,
is folly unless he has previously ascertained that everything possible
in the way of training has been attempted. And, even then, all
that can be done is to breed, not the thing learnt, but the
capacity for learning it—capacity for learning honesty, or
morality, or religion, or Latin, as the case may be.

I have adopted the same ‘conclusions as guide, in practice,
every parent, school-master, and legislator. In truth, I cannot
conceive how the moral and intellectual faculties can be other
than acquirements. If they are not acquirements, they must be
instincts—blind impulses with which morality and intellectuality
have no more to do than they have to do with hunger, or thirst,
or the wailing of a newly-born baby. But Professor Karl
Pearson, by a highly remarkable use of statistics and family
histories, has reached opposite conclusions. I must allude
directly to his work, because a great deal of Eugenic advocacy
is based on it. He supposes that the moral and intellectual
faculties “are bred not created,” t.e., acquired. He collected
statistics and found that English school-children reproduced
certain of the moral and intellectual traits of their parents
in the same degree as they reproduced certain physical
traits, such as eye-colour and hair-texture. We may grant the
truth of this statement; it is a bit of description, a simple
summary of Pearson’s statistics, which we have no reason to
suppose were erroneous. But on this description Pearson based
an interpretation. He declared ‘‘ The sameness surely involves
something additional. It involves a like heritage from parents.
The degree of resemblance between children and parents for the
physical characters in man may be applied to the degree of
resemblance between children and parents for psychical characters. We inherit our parents’ tempers, our parents’ consciousness,
shyness and ability, even as we inherit their stature, fore-arm
and span,’”’ Here we have an example of a conclusion based, like
many more of the conclusions of biometricians, on an ascertained
correlation. Itis assumed that, since offspring reproduce parental
mental characters in the same degree as their physical characters,
therefore, if the latter are inborn, the former must be inborn
260 A. Reid:

also. In other words, it is assumed that one kind of sameness
necessarily involves another and a different kind of sameness.

Now, though I have collected no family histories bearing on
the subject, I think that no one will deny that such characters
as heads, hearts, lungs, livers, and the like are inborn and
invariably present in parents and offspring—at anyrate in offspring
that reach school age. Here we have absolute certainty of
inheritance. Again, I think no one will deny that parental birthmarks, moles, and the like, are also inborn and that they are
hardly ever, if ever, reproduced by offspring. Here the degree of
inheritability is zero. Between these extremes of inheritability
lie the degrees of inheritability of allthe other characters. Some,
like ten fingers and ten toes, are reproduced almost as certainly
as heads; others, like eye-colour and hair-texture, with less
certainty ; others with still less certainty ; and so on, and so on,
till we reach characters the inheritability of which is hardly
greater than that of birth-marks and moles. Plainly, then,
since the inheritance of inborn characters, varies between
certainty and zero, Pearson’s statement is utterly without
significance, utterly void of all content. Founded with such an
air of scientific accuracy on statistics and family histories which
have such an appearance of scientific precision, it Is so vague
as to be quite nonsensical. By the use of his method any
character you like may be “‘ proved” to be inborn, for, if only
you seek conscientiously, you will be sure to find another undoubtedly inborn, which is reproduced by offspring in about the
same degree. Thus, all English children have heads, and all
speak English. If, then, you are satisfied with the method, you
may conclude that English speech in English children is “‘ bred,
not created.” Or, alternatively, that English children acquire
their heads ;-—for you are happy in always having these alternatives to choose from. But this is not the way in which science
is created—at anyrate not science the truth of which is confirmed
by every crucial instance that can be thought of and by the
whole of our available knowledge no matter how collected, not
science established beyond doubt and cavil.

If we wish to discover what traits are inborn and what
acquired we must hunt for crucial instances. Thus, we must
METHODS OF RESEARCH 261

study in the individual their mode of development (whether
under the influence of precept and example or under that of
inheritance); for instance, we must ascertain whether, or no,
the offspring of thieves and prostitutes develop identically when
reared in the parental environment and when reared in rescue
homes such as those of Dr. Barnardo. So also we must
study history and discover whether any nations and races have
ever changed their moral and intellectual traits rapidly; for
acquired characters may alter swiftly—in quite a few generations
—whereas inborn traits alter only during geological time. We
must compare, for example, the Greeks and Romans during
their periods of greatness and decline, Western Europeans before
and after the Renaissance, the Japanese at the beginning and the
end of the last century, and the civilised Maoris of to-day with
their blood-thirsty parents and grand-parents. In short, when
testing the correctness of our thinking, we must leave no stone
unturned. As long as there remains a crucial instance to which
we have not referred our hypotheses, or any relevant authentic
evidence with which we have not squared them, then, whether
we are biologists or tinkers, they remain mere guesses. If we have
collected facts by any special means, for instance by those excellent means biometry and experiment, we must ever bear in mind
that there are other ways of collecting, equally good, and that the
correctness of our facts affords no guarantee of the correctness of
the thinking founded on them. That can be guaranteed only by
a series of crucial tests. Again, if, as I fear sometimes happens,
we collect facts in some special way and then, while using no
other facts, found hypotheses on them, and afterwards declare or
imply, without at the same time furnishing proof, that only our
hypotheses are worth consideration, for they only are based
on ‘modern methods” and the right kind of facts—then,
I insist, we draw perilously near the borders of Charlatanism.
The fact that our evidence is precise is no proof that other
evidence is not equally precise. The fact that other people use
evidence collected in other ways is no proof that they do not
take into consideration the evidence collected in our way.
Without proof, without appeal to ‘‘a class of facts not contemplated in the construction ” of the hypothesis, our declaration,
262 A. Reid:

expressed or implied, is merely impudent, and puts us in the
position of the man who, wearing nothing but a shirt, maintains
that he only is properly clothed because only he wears a shirt.
It is urged sometimes that if an observer, purging his mind of
all previously known facts and all notions that have been based
on them, collects statistics and founds a hypothesis solely on
them, he is acting without bias. But think more closely, and
you will perceive that the real truth is that he is so extremely
biassed in favour of his own facts and his own hypothesis that he
considers none other, and that his thinking, therefore, is mere
guessing.

My space is nearly exhausted. For that reason I cannot do
more than allude to the Mendelian and mutation hypotheses
which are the special products of recent experimental work.
Here, again, we may grant the facts on which they are founded.
It is beyond the power of any man to verify for himself all the
facts on which his thinking is based, and, in any case, there is
not the slightest reason to doubt that in the present instance the
facts have been correctly described. The Mendelian facts are that
the production of some characters is alternative and independent.
A familiar instance of alternative inheritance is afforded by male
and female characters. A normal child is male or female; there
is no blending of the sexual traits. A familiar instance of independent inheritance is afforded by skin and eye-colour; thus, the child
of a dark and a fair parent may reproduce the dark skin of the one
and the light eyes of the other. The Mendelian Hypothesis is
that alternative and independent reproduction indicate alternative
and independent inheritance. A hypothesis to which the
Mendelian facts give equal support is that there is no alternative
and independent inheritance, but only alternative and independent
reproduction ; or, in other words, that the recessive element is
present, but latent, in the dominant; and the dominant element
in the recessive. In the whole range of Mendelian literature
you will find no attempt to decide between these two contradictory
suppositions. Evidence which furnishes crucial instances exists,
however, scattered, in large volume, throughout biological
literature; but to reach it you must go outside the range of
purely experimental work. The Mendelian hypothesis, therefore,
METHODS OF RESEARCH 263

is not only a pure guess, but also a guess which its supporters
believe on a fraction of the availabie facts.

The mutation facts are derived from the records of various
abnormalities occurring in living beings. Familiar examples in
men are club-feet, hare-lips, cleft-palates, idiocy, and the like.
The mutation hypothesis is that evolution is based on mutations.
The alternative hypothesis is that it is founded on normal or
** fluctuating ” variations. In the whole range of Mutationist
literature you will meet no material that can furnish a crucial
instance. Yet such evidence exists elsewhere in immense
volume. The mutation hypothesis, therefore, is also a pure
guess which might have been, but has not been, tested. I cannot
now attempt to demonstrate how completely the Mendelian and
Mutation hypotheses are disprovable; but I have tried elsewhere.

In conclusion, I can only repeat that, if interpretative
biology is ever to become a science in the sense that mathematics,
physics, astronomy, and chemistry are sciences, and, if it is ever
to be useful as the basis of sociology, and, more particularly of
Eugenics, then those who are engaged in the work of interpreting
it must adopt the same criteria for evidence and proof and the
same methods of establishing truth as are used in the other
sciences; or else they must show clearly that these criteria and
methods are wrong, and their own criteria and methods right—
a task which, as yet, has not been even so much as attempted.
Whenever a man is in earnest and has a good cause, he is sure
to be eager to fight for it. He is convinced that free discussion,
since it affords an opportunity of correcting misstatements and
clearing away obscurities and misunderstandings, can do nothing
but good. I have given people who disagree with the statements
made in this paper an admirable opportunity. They can now
come to the meeting on the roth of this month ready armed
with facts and reasons, to discuss conclusions which are definite
and sweeping. For their convenience I will summarise those
conclusions:

(1) All authentic and relevant facts, no matter how collected,
are equal before science. |

(2) Every hypothesis is a mere guess until every other

1 See The Laws of Heredity, Methuen & Co.
264 A. Reid:

alternative hypothesis has been considered, and it has been
demonstrated that only the chosen hypothesis accords with the
whole of the available and authentic evidence.

(3) This can be done only by making what logicians call ‘a
aeductive inference of consequences followed by an appeal to
reality ’’—that is, by continually appealing to crucial instances.

(4) This method, the only known method for establishing
truth, has, except by Darwin, been consistently neglected by
biologists who, as a consequence, hold all sorts of diverse criteria
for evidence and proof, and, therefore, all kinds of contradictory
opinions.

(5) In particular it has been flagrantly neglected by the
adherents of the experimental and biometric schools, whose
doctrines, as a consequence, are demonstrably mere guesses and
in most cases erroneous guesses. Thus, the “central” doctrines
of both Mendelism and Mutationism are demonstrably erroneous,
while the biometric supposition that moral and _ intellectual
characters are inherited in the same sense and in the same degree
as physical characters is plainly unmeaning and therefore nonsensical. Nonsensical too is all the Eugenic advocacy that has
been based on it.

(6) Natural Selection may be observed; its occurrence is
indisputable.

(7) Evolution through Natural Selection cannot be observed,
but its reality may be demonstrated as surely as that of any other
truth that has been inferred.

(8) The hypothesis that variations are normally spontaneous
is the only relevant hypothesis which is compatible with the
law of evolution through Natural Selection. The alternative
hypothesis, that variations are commonly caused by the direct
action on the germ-plasm of its environment, is demonstrably
erroneous. I use the word commonly because I am thoroughly
aware of what appears to be good evidence that in some cases
the germ-plasm of individuals, though not killed, is injured
beyond recovery. Such cases, however, must be very rare. If
they were common there could have been no evolution, and life
could not have persisted on earth. The doctrine of race poisons,
therefore, 1s untenable.
