FAMILY ENDOWMENT
Il.—A Proposal for Constructive Eugenics in England
By EVA M. HUBBACK, M.A., and M. E. GREEN

(An Address given to the Eugenics Society, March 14th, 1933.)

“HE case for family allowances is
often put as though it concerned only
those sections of the community

where our failure to make any direct provision for the maintenance of the next
generation results in actual privation; and
the most active propaganda has been in
favour of State-paid allowances confined to
the working classes—in the popular use of
the term. Whatever the eugenic results of
such a scheme might be, the motives of its
advocates have not been primarily eugenic.
It is rather interesting, then, to remember
that in the history of the movement the first
application.of family allowances was made
in a section not of the wage-earning, but of
the salaried classes nearly two centuries
ago, when John Wesley introduced them
into the remuneration of his ministers ; and
that what was probably the first public
exposition of the principle was given in a
paper entitled ‘‘ A Practical Eugenic Suggestion,’? read by Professor McDougall
before the Sociological Society in 1904.
The actual scheme proposed by McDougall for the higher grades of the Civil
Service may seem rather fantastic to-day,
but the biological assumptions on which it
rested have not only stood the test of time,
but have been strengthened by the trend of
events. Since the beginning of the century
the processes of selection which led the
early eugenists to maintain that the upper
and middle classes were likely to contain
proportionately more innate ability than

the strata below them, have been
made more effective through increased
educational opportunities and through

the diminished importance of hereditary
wealth. The new device of the intelligence
test has confirmed the prima facie belief
that, however wastefully and imperfectly
Cc

33

the competitive struggle works, there is an
unmistakable tendency for it to bring the
more able and vigorous types to the top.

Professor McDougall’s second contention—that the higher grades of society were
contributing much less than their share to
the growth of the population—received
startling confirmation in Dr. Stevenson’s’
analysis of the 1911 Census; and by 1921
the birth rate of the upper and professional
classes had fallen to nearly half that
recorded for unskilled labourers—98 per
thousand married men, as compared with
178. Moreover, the statistics indicate not
only a relative, but an absolute infertility.
Dr. R. A. Fisher has pointed out that, for
parents with £300 a year or over, the
current supply of children is not sufficient
to replace more than one-half of the
parental generation.

There can be little doubt, we think, that
the dangerously low birth rate in the
salaried occupations is very largely due to
voluntary restriction, and that the motive
in a great majority of cases is economic.
Parents in these classes have rising standards of comfort for themselves, and are
ambitious for their children; and there are
many who would gladly have more than
one or two children, if they did not know
that by doing so they would not be able to
give the ones who are already there so good
a start in the competitive struggle. But
there is, as Dr. Fisher has shown, another
and more far-reaching result of the relative
economic advantages given to children born
in smal] families; such children have a
greater chance of rising in the social scale,
and their mating with the sons or daughters
of successful parents links together in a kind
of suicide pact the hereditary factors of
infertility with those making for success.
34

A scheme of family allowances which
would distribute the cost of rearing the next
generation so as to equalize the economic
position of parents and non-parents, and of
children in small families with those in
larger ones, seems to be the only means
open to us to preserve the qualities of
eugenic value in the salaried and professional classes.

The economic case for family allowances
starts from a criticism of a system of distribution which makes no specific provision
for the replacement of the human capital
of the country. The children of one generation are expected to be maintained out of
the share of the national income which the
fathers of the previous one can claim in
virtue of their work—and this share is no
greater when it has to be redistributed
among a dozen people than when it is
destined for a single one. So we have a
misfit felt in every grade of society between
an inelastic income and an expenditure
swollen for a time by the needs of a dependent family. The standard of life in each
group is set by the majority who are either
childless or whose children are earning for
themselves. If this is to be maintained
during the period of child-dependency,
some measure must be adopted which will
secure a bulge in the family income to correspond to this temporary bulge in expenditure. This cau be effected by the payment
of an allowance to the parent during the
dependency of each child.

Three methods of financing such allowances have been suggested. They might be
paid for by the State out of taxation, or by
a system of social insurance as are health
and unemployment benefits; or they might
be provided by a redistribution of the
salaries bill among groups of workers in
particular occupations. Any one of these
methods could be applied to the salaried
classes. But if our aim is to wipe out inequalities caused solely by varying family
responsibilities (whether we think of them
as operating over a period in the life-time
of a single individual or at the same time
between two individuals), then the allowances must cover as nearly as possible the

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

whole cost of maintenance. In practice this
means that they must be graded roughly
according to income.

THE NATIONAL SCHEME

To devise a national scheme, either Statepaid or on an insurance basis, under these
conditions presents difficulties. If the birth
rate and the length of dependency were
approximately the same throughout the
social scale, the same percentage tax imposed on all incomes would yield the same
percentage allowance per child; and no
injustice would arise, because the higher
allowances (absolutely) in the higher-paid
classes would be financed by these classes
themselves through their larger tax contributions. But to allow for differences in
birth rate, and still more for differences in
the period of education in each income
group, the tax would have to be carefully
graded. Even so, the psychological problem would remain; it would never be easy
to persuade the uneducated voter, used to
regard taxation for social services primarily
as a means of reducing inequalities in
wealth, that it was just for the State to pay
his employer £2 a week for each child, while
it only paid him 6s.

The resentment against such inequalfty
would perhaps be less if a three-party
system of social insurance were adopted in
which the contribution of the State was the
same for all citizens, while the contributions
of the employers and the workers were proportionate to the salary or the wage. In
any case, the cry would go up that the State
was stereotyping a class structure that was
not obviously and indisputably based on
the social value of the services rendered. In
fact, where State schemes have been introduced in New South Wales and New
Zealand, the benefits have been confined to
the lower-paid workers.

For these reasons, and because we are
accustomed to take our reforms in this
country in small doses to begin with, it
seems likely that we shall start with
occupational schemes covering groups of
workers who accept roughly the same
sort of standards for the rearing and
FAMILY ENDOWMENT—IN ENGLAND

education of their children. This has the
obvious disadvantage that such schemes can
only cover part of the field, and that they
cannot easily be extended to self-employers
such as doctors and solicitors. But if we
want something done soon—and we do—
this is the most promising line of approach.

We could begin with those professions in
which a high degree of organization, continuity of employment, and _ recogni
scales of salary would make administration
a comparatively simple matter. Among
these the Church, the teaching profession,
and the Civil Service may be singled out as
three occupations in which standards of
education are high relative to remuneration, and where consequently the need for
family allowances is acute.

A SCHEME FOR THE CHURCH

Let us take the Church first. In 1931 a
Committee of the Church Assembly pointed
out that there were 6,000 benefices in the
Church of England with an income of less
than £400 a year. In other denominations,
though the inequality between incomes is
not so great, the average is probably no
higher. Such stipends must entail great
hardship on the younger married men who
have children to provide for. The vicarage
and manses have traditionally produced a
large proportion of men and women who
have served in positions of responsibility,
and it is important that the clergy should
not be forced by prudential motives either
to limit the size of their families unduly, or
to deprive their children of the educational
opportunities which they could use with
advantage. Here, where funds are so
limited, the argument that a higher standard of life would be secured if a small
proportion of the salaries bill were used in
family allowances, has special force.

The Churches have already made a
beginning. The system started by John
Wesley in the Methodist Church has been
extended and continued to the present day.
The scale is now a minimum of eight
guineas a year for each child up to 18 years
of age, with an additional allowance of £12
for each of the last six years of education.

35
In administration the scheme is a forerunner of the continental Equalization

Pools; the cost of the allowances is raised
by a charge on each circuit based on the
number of ministers and on its financial
strength. By distributing the cost of the
allowances in this way, the scheme ensures
that no circuit has any financial reasons for
preferring the appointment of childless
ministers.

More recently family allowances have
been paid by four dioceses in the Church of
England—Lichfield, St. Edmundsbury and
Ipswich, Southwark, and York. In the two
latter an allowance is also made for the
wife. The system might be extended diocese by diocese as funds became available,
or it might be applied over the whole
Church by a tax on clerical incomes, analogous to the contributions now enforced for
widows’ pensions.

TEACHERS—PRACTICE AND POSSIBILITY

In the teaching profession a working
model has been set up by the only academic
institution in the country devoted solely to
the study and teaching of economic principles. At the London School of Economics
there has been in operation for seven years
a system of educational allowances paid in
addition to the basic salary. £30 is allowed
in respect of each child from birth to 13
years of age, and {60 from 13 to 22, provided that the child is at a place of education
regarded by the authorities as satisfactory.
The cost of the allowances last year worked
out at 3°7 per cent. of the salaries bill.

There is a special case for the introduction of family allowances in the teaching
profession as a whole, because it appears to
be the only possible solution to the problem
of equal pay between men and women,
which would not either depress still further
the standard of the married men, or put
upon the Exchequer and the local authorities the burden of raising the additional
five million pounds which, it is estimated,
would be necessary to bring the women’s
scale up to the men’s.

The recent ‘ cuts’ have fallen specially
hardly on the men with young families, and
36

the depression of their standard of living is
likely to react on the status and attractiveness of the profession as a whole. At the
time of the 1921 Census of every 100 men
in the teaching profession, 66 had no children under 16 years of age, and of the
remaining 34, only 17 had two or more children. It is unlikely that any increase in
salary possible in the next few years will
be sufficient to afford a reasonable standard
of living to the men who at the time have
family responsibilities, unless part of it, at
least, is concentrated on relieving the financial burden of child dependency. A ve
small increase in the salaries bill will give
fairly substantial allowances. In the case
of elementary teachers, for example, an
addition of 3 per cent. would yield an allowance of about 12 per cent. of the salary per
child ; in the case of the secondary teachers,
where the cost would be greater because of
the smaller proportion of women, an addition of 4% per cent. would yield the same
proportionate allowance.

In either case the cost would be much less
than the all-round restoration of the recent
Io per cent. cuts.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

IN EMPIRE PUBLIC SERVICES

When we turn to the Civil Service, we
find very much the same problems, pointing to the same solution—the resentment
of the women at a lower scale of pay which
does not correspond in any real way to
differences in need, the dissatisfaction of
the family men with the comparatively low
standard of life that the Service affords
them, and the need for the State to use its
resources in the most economical way
possible. Family allowances are already
paid in the public services of Australia, of
the Irish Free State and of every other
European country except our own, Turkey,
and Russia. We can surely ask the State
to set an example to other employers in
adopting a measure which should prove a
valuable contribution both to the problem of
maintaining the best qualities of the race
and of providing a favourable environment
for the rearing of its future citizens.

Further information on schemes already in
operation or proposed for salaried occupations
may be obtained from the literature of the
Family Endowment Society, 52 Romney Street,

.W.T1.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXV, No. 1.
