THE FATE OF NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE:
TEST OF A THIRTEEN-YEAR PREDICTION

By RAYMOND B. CATTELL

Research Professor, University of Illinois

1. Historical Background of the Present
Research
T isa commonplace of genetics that under
| conditions of differential survival the
mean characteristics of a population are
likely to show a continuous trend in a certain
direction, which may be evaluated as eugenic
or dysgenic according to conditions and
standards. Twenty years ago there was considerable discussion as to whether the wellknown differential birth-rate by social status,
which had been strongly in evidence and well
documented by Heron and others since the
beginning of this century, might be producing
some dysgenic trends, notably in regard to
the mean level of general intelligence. For
whatever questions of value may arise to
complicate the question of the eugenic or
dysgenic direction of such characteristics as
increased stature or capacity for material
productivity, there can be no question that
our culture is one in which greater intelligence of the population is a boon to all and in
which deteriorations of the distribution can
lead to misery or catastrophe in ways
predictable even from our present grasp of
principles in social psychology.®
Since the attempts to infer changes in
intelligence from the social status differential
were fraught with excessive speculation a
number of investigators—notably Burt,}
Cattell?, 8. 4, Roberts,2° and Sutherland and
Thomson?! in England, and Lentz,!* and
Conrad and Jones?? in the U.S.A.—set out
to determine directly the relation between
intelligence and size of family. Incidentally
this theme of investigation seems to have
been pursued more vigorously and to more
definitive conclusions in Britain than elsewhere, despite comparative lack of research
funds for social science. An earlier and less
obstructed recognition of the importance, for

advanced civilization of a proper eugenic
regard for resources of innate capacities has
perhaps been responsible for this more determined attempt at understanding these particular social processes. However, it is to be
hoped that data of a comparable degree of
completeness will soon become available in
several other countries in order that the
methods of comparative cultural anthropology®* may throw still more light on the
culture pattern causes and consequences of
eugenic or dysgenic trends in average innate
mental capacity.

The present paper is the first of a trilogy
reporting new evidence on the question and
suggesting some methodological advances.
The first two deal with an attempt to measure
directly the change of intelligence in a community over a thirteen-year interval, and
with an examination of the present birthrate differential in relation to other influences,!® while the third is a summary and
discussion in relation to method?! and future
research.

Although the present paper discusses and
integrates with the recent observations of
Burt,! Roberts,2° and Thomson,?? it is most
organically connected with, and should be
considered an extension of, the research
carried out by the present writer in 1936-7.
That study, made possible by the generosity
of the Eugenics Society, through the medium
of a Leonard Darwin Research Fellowship,
set out to test the ten-year-old child population of (a) a typical industrial area—the
city of Leicester—and (b) a typical rural
area—the more remote parts of Devonshire
—using a non-verbal intelligence test based
on the best psychological theory then available. The results, published in two articles
in the EUGENICS REVIEW? 3 and in a book,‘
showed that size of family was negatively
related to child intelligence throughout the

136
FATE OF NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE

whole range of size and intelligence, and that
the differential was perhaps a shade steeper
in rural than urban areas.

A prediction was made from these results
to the effect that the mean intelligence in
these areas would decline by very nearly
one point of I.Q. in ten years. Incidentally
this figure was very close to that worked out
about the same time by Lentz upon the data
of his American study. It necessarily made
several assumptions, which cannot be discussed here but which are available to the
reader in publications referred to.?» ® 4
Essentially, the histogram of intelligence
distribution for one generation hence was
calculated by multiplying the number of
people at each intelligence level by the reproduction-rate at that level, though it was
recognized that regression to the mean and
differential death-rates might reduce the
change so calculated.

Naturally the opportunity to test this
prediction was‘awaited with keen interest.
The unsettled conditions after the war suggested the desirability of extending the time
of re-test beyond the ten-year period, and
it was in 1949, again by the generosity of the
Eugemcs Society and with the continued
co-operation of the Leicester Education
Committee, through the director, Mr. Elfed
Thomas, that the second survey became
possible.

2. Description of Test and Population

When a difference of only 1 point of I.Q.
is in question the psychologist has to carry
out his measurements with close attention
to many technical considerations of testing
and sampling. As far as the writer knows no
studies exist which pay sufficient attention
to these considerations to be regarded as
reasonably valid inter-generation comparisons, with the exception of the present study,
that of Thomson with the Population Investigation Committee?* and probably that of
Burt. But, even in these, certain weaknesses exist needing careful examination
later in this article.

In the present study the following conditions of constancy were maintained: (1)
The same intelligence test was used—the

137

Cattell Scale 1, Form A (G. G. Harrap and
Company), a non-verbal scale designed for
the age range 8-11 years ; (2) An assistant—
Mrs. Diana Meadows—who participated in
the previous study, was responsible for the
administration and scoring of the present
test. Although it is normally sufficient to
use a test with precisely defined conditions of
administration and with a scoring system
which leaves nothing to the individual
judgment of the psychometrist, we were
fortunate in this case in being able also to get
the ultimate constancy of having the same
examiner ; (3) The children were the same
age as in the previous study—centred upon
10 years—so that in the event of any distortion in the standardization of the test it
could not communicate itself to the figure
obtained for the difference between the two
groups ; (4) In both cases the ‘‘ sampling ”’
was guided by the directive to test every
ro-year-old child 1m the city, 1.e. to make a
complete cross-section of the population.
This involved preserving a correct balance,
in so far as any subsection should unavoidably remain incomplete, among the numbers
known to be in primary schools, private
schools, preparatory schools, and special
schools (physical or mental defectives, delinquents, etc.).* The only element of doubt
here concerns the number of children of
families in the city who are away in boarding
schools. This problem was met here as in the
previous survey by taking the estimated
number from nearby Uppingham School (a
public school) even if it involved overshooting slightly the 10-year-old limit.

For exactness of future comparisons it
seems desirable to list in detail, in Appendix 1,
the schools included and the number taken
from each. (Though in future comparisons
geographical migrations and changes of
educational practice may dictate a somewhat
different choice to get all the 10-year-olds

* The ratio of ‘“ elementary ” to “ private ’”’ school
population was 3-9 to 1 in the 1936 sample and I0°7 to I
in the 1949 sample. Since an attempt was made to get
all ten-year-olds in both cases we can assume either that
post-war conditions and the reforms in the State school
system have caused some movement out of private into
State schools, at least at this age level, or that the
earlier survey missed some of the elementary schools.
138

and near 10-year-olds as then distributed.)

Although the central tendency in our
sample is Io years (mean at Io-I years to be
exact) for the convenience of a large sample
and for uniformity with the previous survey,
we included also the 9 and 11-year olds who
happened to be in the same classes—standard
III (and in some cases IV) in the junior
modern school and their equivalent in
private schools. That is to say, we made sure

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the magnitude of any error introduced by
the trivial difference of mean age between
this and the previous 10-year-old group, as
a result of faults in the norms or of some
natural, systematic inconstancy of I.Q.
with age, would be negligible.

The description of the ‘‘ sample ” and its
comparison with the previous one requires
also that we note an absolute increase in size
of the 10-year-old group—3,832 as against

DIAGRAM 1
AGE DISTRIBUTION IN MAIN SAMPLE

 

12 US UF US HG WT US

tao 024 b22 ba8 lag a5 tae tay 023 127 190 tM

  

<————— AGE IN MONTHS ————_>

of getting all the 10-year-olds, but got some
others, too. The main sample, upon the data
from which the figures given in this article
are based, consists of the children aged 9 years
zero months through Io years 11 months, plus
the group from Uppingham School who were
somewhat older (13 years 1 month through
14 years 5 months, mean: 13 years
8-6 months). The actual age distribution of
the main sample by months is shown in
Diagram I.

Since the I.Q. (for the mean of any group)
is substantially constant over several years

2,873 in the 1936 population. This increase
is somewhat greater than would be expected
from the normal population increase for the
whole country. The increase may be due to
the net reproduction-rate being somewhat
higher here than for the nation as a whole, or
to a somewhat more practised search for
1o-year-olds in this second survey,* or to

*A more complete sampling in 1949 probably
accounts for most of the difference. The 1936 survey
covered 25 State schools and 5 private schools, while in
1949 the completeness of the survey, plus some actual

multiplication of schools, resulted in 42 State schools
and II private schools (see Appendix I).
FATE OF NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE

the migration into the city in the course of
its expansion. There is no particular reason
to believe that the last would be productive
of any change in I.Q. in itself. And since
the dysgenic trend with which we are concerned has been demonstrated to operate
throughout the country, i.e. to be characteristic of our culture and therefore to have
worked in the interval as much upon the
migrants as the residents, no error should

139

evidence of any difference in the two samples
likely to influence the mean I.Q. significantly
in either direction. Furthermore, as indicated
above, the test was administered and scored
in exactly the same way and the results
converted to I.Q.s by the same standardization table, namely that of the 1935
standardization table as published in the
present writer’s Guide to Mental Testing
(1937 and 1948 editions).

DIAGRAM 2

I.Q. DISTRIBUTIONS :

 

<—_———_ INTELLIGENCE

arise from that source either. Besides, this
British study has the advantage that geographical mobility is in Britain relatively
slight. No comparison has been made of the
sex ratios in 1936 and 1949, since the differences therein must be very small (see
Appendix 1) and, moreover, no significant
difference of test scores is normally found
between the sexes. All in all there is little

1936 AND 1949

 
 
  
   
   
 
 
 
  
     

75% ILE8
MEAN |.Q. FALLS BELOW

1949 — 110.98
1936 — 1.22

1949
-- -- 1936

 

PERCENTAGES IN EACH CATEGORY
1949, THUS 26
1936, THUS (20

        

no 20 «#613006«6640 C150 1HOsCsIFOsCABO

QUOTIENTS —————>

3. The Observed Change and the Hypotheses
that May Fit It

The populations of 1936 and 1949 may
now be compared for I.Q. distribution by
inspecting the results as shown in the
histogram in Diagram 2, in which the
distributions are superimposed, both having
their parts expressed as percentages of the
total distribution.
140

It will be seen that the difference between
them is very slight. The chief constants of
the curves (worked out from the grouped

data of the histograms) are as shown in

Table 1.
TABLE I

MEANS AND SCATTER OF I.Q. oF TEN-YEAR-OLD GROUP
IN 1936 AND 1949

Restricted
Popula- Popula- Population,
tion of tion of 1949
1936 1949 Ages 9: 6
to 10:5
Mean I.Q.* . 100°487 101:764 100°023
Standard deviation 21°94 20:22 18°69
Median I.Q. 97°61 99°80 ~ 98-70

The actual fate of the mean intelligence,
as measured by tests, is clearly not in accord
with that predicted in 1937.* The average
measured intelligence for the whole group
has, indeed, undergone a significant increase,
for the difference of means, namely, 1-28
points of I.Q., exceeds the standard error of
the difference, namely -5249, sufficiently to
be significant at the 1 per cent level (C.R.=
2°43 ; p=-0075, for an undirectional change).

On the other hand, if we restrict the
population to those who are between 9g years
6 months and Io years 5 months, inclusive,
as shown in the last column of Table 2, there
is a slight fall of I.Q. Records are not available as to what extent the 1936 sample overflowed the ten-year interval, but on the
evidence of those who scored the tests it
seems that the better comparison is with the
larger group. In the larger group, on closer
inspection of the actual distribution, we
notice that above an I.Q. of 130 a decline of
intelligence has occurred at about the rate
predicted. The overall gain 1s produced by a
shift to higher test score among those of average
and sub-average intelligence. If we break down
the distribution at the middle person, 1.e.
the median, and calculate the means of the
upper and lower halves of the population
separately, we see at once that they have
behaved very differently, and that even the

* The mean for the 1949 survey was calculated from
grouped data, despite its being possible to calculate it
from ungrouped, in order to make the results entirely
uniform with those of 1936, where the calculation was
on groups, counting the mid point of each group
ranging over 10 points of I.Q. at 4:5 points ; thus, e.g.
the 90-100 range actually includes I.Qs of 90 through
99, with the mid point of 94:5.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

whole of the upper half has suffered a
slight loss.

TABLE 2
CoMPARISON OF I.Q. CHANGE 1936-49 in UPPER AND

LowER HALVES OF THE POPULATION
Population Population

of 1936 of 1949
Mean I.Q. of lower half of population . 84°25 86°83
Mean I.Q. of ‘upper “half of
population .. wee 11673 16°70

What hypotheses are capable of reconciling
the above two principal findings with the
undeniable fact that there is a differential
birth-rate in favour of lower intelligence ?
As to the main finding of a slight actual
increase in mean score there are broadly
three kinds of appropriate hypotheses as
follows :

1. That the predicted fall in intelligence
has actually occurred, but that it has
been opposed by an advance in education and test sophistication sufficient to
produce an upward change in test score
of about twice the magnitude of the
downward genetic change. Thus on this
basis we should argue that wherever
test performance is no better in this
generation than the last there has
actually been a decline in innate capacity, because innate capacity now
enjoys greater educational opportunity
than then. This we may call (1) the
hypothesis of masking of loss through the
indicator being vulnerable to extraneous
influences ;

2. That the indicated scores represent the
facts and that there has been no real
decline in intelligence, because the differential birth-rate has been offset by
differential death, celibacy, barren marriage, etc., and by genetic masking
effects as discussed below. This hypothesis is one of (2) discrepancy between
gross birth-rate and survival-rate ;

3. That the original data on intelligence
and family size, not only in the main
studies here, 1) 4 12, 16, 20, 21, byt
incidentally occurring in many others,
merely represents an association between educational level and birth-rate.
FATE OF NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE
f

This hypothesis could be called one of
(3) confusion of education with intelligence.

4, Evaluation of the Hypotheses

The third hypothesis is mentioned in fairness to some earnest advocates, but cannot
longer be seriously entertained. Psychologists have ample factor analytic proof that
their tests—though doubtless somewhat contaminated with education—are nevertheless
substantially measuring innate mental capacity. Moreover, it has been shown* 2% that
in families at the same level of social status,
including education, the more intelligent tend
to have smaller families. The whole trend
cannot possibly be explained in educational
terms.

Without prejudicing our later discussion of
the second hypothesis (discrepancy of birthand survival-rate) let us say at once that there
is much evidence for the first hypothesis, as
follows. About ro to 20 per cent of the interfamilial variance in intelligence test scores
on such conventional tests as the Binet is due
to environment in all its aspects (education,
family background, accidents of disease).
While we cannot enter here upon an attempt
to estimate from this fact how much of the
inter-community variance can be traced to
similar causes, undoubtedly an amount sufficient to account for the present result could
be so traced. Finch?® has shown in some
remoter American communities, 1” which the
inter-generational increase tn educational facilities has been far greater than in comparatively
settled British cities (which exist in a later,
more flattened, part of the curve of cultural
maturity) that inter-generational increases
of the order of Io to 15 points of I.Q. occur.
A second piece of evidence, beyond that
relating test change to rate of community
education change, is found in sex differences.
In our own times, or a generation earlier,
the education of women has accelerated
more than that of men, toward catching up
to the latter, and it is significant that the
recently published Scottish Survey?* shows
that the 2:28 gain of mean intelligence for
the entire I1-year-old population between
1932 and 1947 was made up of a gain of 1-38

I4I

for the boys and 3:21 for the girls. Thomson
also reports that for eight years the norms on
the Moray House tests increased each year
more for girls than for boys. In the absence
of even a suggestion of evidence of sexlinked genetic factors in intelligence there is
positively no chance of accounting for such
a difference of trend in boys and girls as part
of a genetic change in the general population.
We seem justified, therefore, in concluding
that general educational levels have improved
in this generation and that this trend is
capable of producing significant upward
shifts in the scores on conventional intelligence tests.

Incidentally, when researchers are able to
examine this influence more closely, it would
be worthwhile to look for a generation’s lag
in certain effects. In intelligence test performance, aS in many other psychological
performances, it is the unconsciously imbibed
influences of the early years that are most
pervasive, and it may well be found that the
curve of increase of intelligence test performance correlates better with the gradient of
education at the time the child’s parents
were in school than in his own generation.
Closer inspection of the above-mentioned
data suggests this.

The above discussion has been careful to
refer to score on the conventional intelligence
test, usually largely verbal, because although
educational advance is capable of explaining
the Scottish finding of a 2 point score gain,
or of emphasizing that the slight genetic
losses found by Burt! must actually be much
larger,* it cannot be considered a substantial
cause of error in the Leicester results which
operated from the beginning upon a nonverbal intelligence test.

As Vernon?* has pointed out, environmental influence works upon intelligence test
results by affecting (a) the general level of
information and skills, and (0) test sophistica
* Burt made the best of circumstances by basing his
estimate solely upon those Binet items which might
be expected to be relatively free of educational influences, and it is striking that he obtained a decline of
1.Q. on this basis, whereas the Scottish Survey testing
yielded a significant increase. But this choice of a few
test items by inspection cannot be as satisfactory as
the use of a completely non-verbal and culture-free test.

D
142

tion, ie. a familiarity and skill specifically in
dealing with the operations and timing
arrangements in intelligence tests. Although
non-verbal and perceptual intelligence tests
escape much of the contamination of their
results by education they do not escape test
sophistication. In fact they may be more
liable to it. Improvement with practice on
intelligence tests occurs over the first four or
five repetitions, but the bulk of this total
gain occurs between the first and second
testing. Vernon and Parry?’ (p. 181) state:

Investigation of civilians (adults and children)
and of recruits show an average rise, on taking a
psychological test a second time, equivalent to
about 5 I.Q. points, apparently regardless of the
proximity of the retesting.

It is commonly assumed by educators—
and the sales of intelligence tests could be
quoted in support—that in Britain between
1936 and 1949 the use of intelligence tests
has increased considerably. But this would
be less true of Leicester than most places, for
Leicester, between 1928 and 1938 pioneered
in all kinds of school psychological services.
The Director of Education has kindly consulted with teachers of long standing, and
reports on present and past test sophistication as follows :

All children take an Otis test at the age of 8.
Some schools habitually give English attainment tests, which include objective type questions. Similar objective tests are given in other
subjects in some schools.

In addition, some schools use text-books which
give practice in objective-test answering. Such
books have become more popular in recent years.

Generally speaking, however, conditions are
much the same as in 1936 and our people do not
feel that there should be any appreciable dif
ference between the children now tested and
those tested in your earlier researches.

The conditions suggest some, but comparatively slight, increase in test sophistication.
It would, therefore, be a matter for debate
whether this change could account for a
1:28 points of I.Q. increase in mean performance were it not that a peculiarity of the
distribution—our second main finding—also
would fit into a test sophistication explanation. Let us digress into this possibility. The
argument is that the mcrease between 1936
and 1949 occurs almost wholely in the lower

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

part of the distribution, and that test
sophistication also tends to show its greatest
gains in the lower levels. For the sheer
mechanics of the novel intelligence test and
its instructions offer obstacles chiefly to the
less intelligent while the more intelligent are
held up only by the most difficult. zzems themselves. The recent results of Heim and
Wallace on sophistication with tests of the
very form used here, though based on far
too few cases for clear conclusions, nevertheless show a tendency for the less intelligent
to go on improving longer. Vernon and
Parry?’ (p. 183) conclude on this matter:
“ All our evidence, cited below, shows the
greatest rise among those scoring least... .”’
and in this they refer to an effect beyond the
usual ‘‘ regression to the mean ”’ effect.

On the other hand some recent findings of
the writer® with a culture-free intelligence
test show that test sophistication increases
are greater for those of lesser actual age
(8 versus 14-year-olds), but slightly less for
those of lower I.Q. in groups of the same age.
This conflicting evidence must leave the issue
unsolved. It is a complex matter ; for everywhere except in intelligence tests themselves
we expect the more intelligent to show
greater learning.*

Unquestionably our results show that the
1936-49 increase fails to show only in the
upper levels. In the uppermost quartile we
find the 1949 population to be 1-76 points

* When the results on the culture-free test, described
later, were divided, for ten-year-olds, into three thirds,
according to increasing I.Q., the gain between A and B
forms was 0°51 (18-61—18-10) for the dull, 0-86
(24:64 — 23°78) for the medium group and 1:19 (29°24 —
28-05) for the bright. While this agrees with the
general rule that the more intelligent learn more quickly
it disagrees with the expectation in the present peculiar
circumstances, with the more extensive results of
Vernon and Parry, and with our own findings that the
younger (and lower in mental age) improve more. The
last might be reinterpreted as meaning that age and
experience, rather than mental age, increase initial
test sophistication. On the other hand it could be that
the culture-free, perceptual test is so radical a novelty
for these children that our experiment is dealing with
the very first part of the learning curve, in which the
intelligent leap forward, whereas the result of repeated
exposure to such tests would result in a great overall
advance on the part of the below than the above
average intelligences. This last hypothesis—that the
sophistication gain is greater but slower with the less

intelligent—seems most likely, and in that case the
1936-49 comparison should show most gain for the dull.
FATE OF NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE

of 1.Q. below the mean of the 1936 upper
quartile. Whether this is due to the higher
incidence of private schools in the 1936
population, as already discussed, or to a
lesser test sophistication remains to be seen.

5. The Unknowns Needing Investigation

Our position so far is that we accept the
probability of a slight test sophistication increase since 1936 and the certainty of an
educational increase, the latter, however, not
to be expected in the test used here to the
extent found with the test used in the Scottish Survey. Accordingly we doubt whether
allowance for these influences would do more
than wash out the apparent gain, leaving the
conclusion that the 1949 population is not
significantly lower than the 1936 population.
If this is so the whole emphasis falls on the
second hypothesis above, namely, that there
is some influence at work creating a difference
between the gross birth-rate and the survivalrate. Indeed the present results suggest that
we must look for something operating most
powerfully to reduce the survival of the less
intelligent largely within the sub-average
entelligence range.

The present writer has already set out, in
discussions of the 1936 study,® the differentials which need to be investigated in making
a more accurate prediction from family size
differentials than he was then able to make,
and in view of the discrepancy here reported
between prediction and results it becomes
more important than ever that some social
researcher should be endowed to investigate
these influences. In this space they can
merely be listed as follows :

1. A differential death-rate (before re
production) ;

. A differential celibacy-rate ;

A differential barren, i.e. completely

childless, marriage-rate ;

. A differential length of generation ;

. Differences in completeness of families

in data here gathered ;

. Genetic influences which might exaggerate and temporarily mask the effect,
such as the degree of assortative mating,
degree of epistacy through Mendelian
dominants, etc.

Nn ub WN

143

As discussed elsewhere,® as far as our
general information on these matters goes,
they might be expected collectively just
about to balance,* and they have seemed
unlikely to be the sources of the discovered
discrepancy. But it is also quite possible
that our “‘ general information ’”’ is wrong
and that the barren marriage- and celibacyrates are significantly higher in the subaverage intelligence ranges, thus accounting
for our discovered reduction in the population in those ranges.

Until these powerful influences are investigated there is not much point in seeking
for more subtle or obscure possibilities, as
some earnest investigators have done. One
may question, for example, the strategic
aptness of the Scottish Research Council’s
debate on the possible influence of birth
order within the family, though Burt? also
seems to consider this a substantial possible
factor. To the present writer it seems that
in the many intelligence surveys that have
accumulated, none worked out with proper
statistical checks on family size, test standardization, etc., has ever yielded a significant birth-order difference, nor would one
be expected on genetic grounds, save for the
minute effect of the greater incidence of
Mongolian imbecile and injury births respectively in later and earlier births.

Penrose has suggested!® that the differential birth-rate is likely to be unimportant
because the gene loss can be masked by
dominants. This argument depends on an
unrealistic population structure and an oversimplified gene determination quite out of
keeping with the obviously multi-gene
determination of intelligence. But no
serious student can doubt that it would be
much more to the point in this important
eugenic problem to contribute data of good
statistical character on the more major
influences that are as yet completely uninvestigated—namely celibacy and childless

* If anything, a slightly better case can be made out
for their accelerating slightly the downward trend.
Burt, indeed, evidently takes it to be a “‘ sufficiently
established item ’”’ of common information that “‘ unmarried and childless adults... include a disproportionate number of persons whose intelligence is above
the average level ’’! (p. 16).
144

marriage-rates in relation to intelligence, as
listed in factors (2) and (3) above.

6. A Foundation for Further Research

While the evidence is being tightened on
the side of these survival factors—it can
simultaneously be tightened in regard to
exact determination of the real change in
intelligence levels over a period of time. In
regard to further work in this area the following points of technique should be emphasized,
which have as far as possible been followed in
the present writer’s attempt to lay down in
1949 a foundation in the Leicester area for a
re-test by some researcher ten to fifteen years
hence.

1. Since the difference of means to be
expected in a decade is quite small—1 point
of I.Q.—in relation to the known typical
reliability of the instrument, great care is
necessary with the test itself. Not only
should the testing be done by an experienced
and conscientious person, but the following
should be put on record for later researchers:
(a) a copy of the exact test material used ;
(6) the exact instructions followed ; (c) a copy
of the standardization table at that time;
(d) a note on general conditions, especially
season of year—trelative to climate, examinations, and vacations. This is the essence of
Burt’s recommendation! that “ inquiries
should be repeated with the same tests.”’

Copies, in duplicate, of these materials for
the new test foundation laid down in 1949
as described in (3) have been deposited by
the present writer with the Eugenics Society.

2. Similarly the population must be defined
exactly as to its distribution according to
schools and geographical regions, while an
area free from strong migration currents
should be chosen for the experiment.

This information has been set out for the
research just concluded in Appendix 1, and
for the research directed to the future in
Appendix 2.

3. General educational influence upon the
test score must be controlled. This can be
done partly by “ allowing ”’ in the test for
changes in educational efficiency, through
obtaining simultaneous measures of general
educational level on the two occasions, but

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

this is not very satisfactory. It is better to
minimize the role to be assigned to such
correction by using the new “ perceptual ”
or “ culture-free ’’ intelligence tests.

The Cattell Scale I non-verbal test used in
this study is not so culture-free a test as that
used in laying down the foundation for future
comparisons in Leicester. For some of the
non-verbal subtests are pictorial, i.e. having
reference to learning beyond the immediate
situation. But it is perhaps more so than
tests used by Burt, certainly more so than
those used by Roberts?® or the Scottish
Survey?’, and decidedly more so than those
used by Finch.?* It is relevant to point out
that the Scottish Survey shows more gain
than the Leicester Survey or Burt’s results,
and the Finch studies more than the Scottish
Survey.

4. A large size in the sample is not necessary. It is good for other purposes to have
samples of the size of the Scottish Survey—
70,000 to g0,000o—but a smaller sample,
observing the conditions here stated, is
better for the present purpose than a larger
one which neglects them. An observed difference of 1 point of I.Q., such as the hypothesis anticipates, is significant at the 5 per
cent level for a sample of 4,822 cases and at
the 1 per cent level for a sample of 8,263
cases, if we suppose a very large standard
deviation of 25 points of I.Q., as occurs with
the culture-free test. On the other hand,
with a standard deviation of 17 points, such
as has commonly been assumed with the
Binet and its derivatives, a population of
2,230 cases could give significance at the
5 per cent level and 3,844 at the 1 per cent
level ;* 3,000 to 10,000 cases would therefore
be an ideal to aim at in such research.

5. Test sophistication and motivation as
well as general educational level ((3) above)
need to be controlled. Within the range of
morale in ordinary schools differences in
motivation do not seem responsible for significant differences in intelligence test per
* If the hypothesis considers only a uni-directional
change, these population sizes would be for a standard
deviation of 25 points of I.Q. at the 5 per cent level,
3,383 ; at the 1 per cent level, 6,763 ; and for a standard
deviation of 17 points of I.Q. at the 5 per cent level,
1,564 ; and at the 1 per cent level, 3,127.
FATE OF NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE

formance. Test sophistication, itself, can
be effectively controlled by giving one or two
tests before the main test, the results of
which are thrown away, the penultimate test
being of the same type as the ultimate test.

Although the present writer is not likely
to be able personally to continue these
studies by a retest ten to fifteen years

145

standard tests while being significantly freer
of educational effects,? was given to about
1,000 children already tested by the other
test (Cattell, Scale 1, non-verbal). The
sample is defined in Table 2. To ensure full
measure of test sophistication the future
researcher should compare results only for
the B form. The age distribution of the

DIAGRAM 3
AGE DISTRIBUTION IN CULTURE-FREE SAMPLE

 

106 160 110 it 112 115 4 US Ne NIT Ne NO ZOlI 22 ZS 24 25 26 I27 128 129 130 i
<————_ AGE IN MONTHS ————>

hence, it seemed desirable to carry out a
testing in conformity with the above canons
of method on the same children as are involved in the study he is concluding, to
provide historical and scientific continuity
and to set down a firm reference point for
those social scientists who are likely to take
up this question. For this purpose a new
culture-free intelligence test (scale 2)® °®
which has been shown to involve as much
general ability as the Binet and other

sample and the I.Q. distribution are shown
in Diagrams 3 and 4.

The only respect in which this basis for
future comparison departs from the above
ideal conditions is that it is too small (as a
result of coming to the end of our research
endowment). However, it is to be hoped that
a social scientist in Britain will be able to
extend the testing in the next year or two
over the rest of the sample defined in Appendix I, perhaps making a_ three-year
146

sampling to be compared with a three-year
sampling beginning a decade hence.

7. Conclusions and Acknowledgments

1. Aslight but significant increase of mean
I.Q. was found between 1936 and 1949,
though the uppermést levels fell very slightly.
Increases in educational and test sophistication levels are of an order which might
account for this, but at least the predicted
decline has not occurred in the magnitude
expected. This conclusion seems to be midway between that of Thomson** and of
Burt.1_ The emphasis in research, therefore,
needs to be directed to, (a) more precise
measurement of the differences, and (0)
investigation of factors in differential survival by intelligence levels.

2. An analysis of these factors needing

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

quantitative evaluation in further definitive
research has been set out, together with the
beginning of new survey data employing a
special test and mode of administration
which should permit, when followed up, an

- umequivocal answer to the question of what

change in mean mental capacity is actually
occurring, regardless of the mechanisms at
work,

The writer wishes to express his great
indebtedness to Mrs. Diana Meadows, whose
skill and thoroughness in carrying out the
testing and whose genius for obtaining
co-operation have been the main factors in
the success of this study. It is a pleasure to
express warm thanks also to Dr. C. P.
Blacker, who represented the enlightened
support of the Eugenics Society and translated it into effective action. Finally the

DIAGRAM 4
I.Q. DistRIBUTION (FoRM B) IN CULTURE-FREE SAMPLE

I$ a
1m! s
a oo hal UH LL LY
{—- 31 — 41 ~ Si —
. 2150 140 5O ig

<———— INTELLIGENCE QUOTIENTS ———————>
FATE OF NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE

gratitude of all concerned must be expressed
toward Mr. Elfed Thomas, the Director of
Education, and his teachers in the city of
Leicester, who upset their time-tables to
help in a research which they felt to be of
social value and thus made the whole
inquiry possible. To my research assistant,
Edgar Haverland, I am indebted for his
painstaking care in making and checking the
statistical analyses.

 

 

 

APPENDIX I
LocaTION OF THE POPULATION TESTED
Junior Modern Schools Scale IA
Boys Girls Total

Shaftesbury Road = «79 80 159
Ingle Street 104 103 207
Slater Street... se. = 29 28 57
Taylor Street... 55 55 IIo
St. Matthew’s—Chester

Street wee - 24 15 39
Bridge Road .... .-- 30 52 82
Humberstone... 79 64 143
Desford Boys’ (Approved) Io oO 10
Manor Road (Experi
mental) ‘ 30 a 32
Western Park (Open Air) 19 12 31
Charnwood Street we) OSI 51 102
St. Peter’s om ne °) 23 42
Coleman Road ... we = 46 34 80
Avenue Road ... we = 30 34 64
Hazel Street... ws 40 43 83
Hinckley Road i 10) 43 79
Marriott Road ... .. 36 44 80
Catherine Street ws 34 59 93
Sacred Heart (R.C.)_... 8 10 18
St. Barnabas’ ... we 13 17 30
Belgrave C. of G. ws 22 25 47
St. George’s ons ws FB 15 27
St. Saviour’s.... --- 16 Io 26
All Saint’s 3 we = oS 13 28
Holy Cross (R.C. ) =»  r6 9 25
St. Andrew’s (Deacon

Street) eee ae 13 24
St. Mark’s . oes 8 II 19
St. Patrick’s (R. C) . 9 9 18
Collegiate Girls’ (Junior) oO 19 19
Granby Road ... 53 49 102
Mellor Street... we = -Q 98 194
Northfields House 116 Iro 226
Overton Road ... .. 69 55 124
St. John’s (Clarendon

Park) 40 45 85
Wyggeston Girls (Junior) o 17 17
Belgrave Road . 40 32 72
Alderman Richard Hallam 72 67 139
Braunstone Hall .-. 86 74 160
Caldecote Road ... wee = (52 58 IIo
Knighton Fields eee 35 47 82
Medway Street ... --. 22 121 243
Cort Crescent... .. 88 85 173

TOTALS .-. 1,750 1,751 3,501

 

 

 

 

 

147
Private and Preparatory
Schools Scale IA
Boys Girls Total
Uvedale High ... 6 4 Io
Stoneygate Girls’ College o 29 29
Aylestone High .. wee 2 3 5
Convent of Nativity oO 49 49
Lyndhurst i I 10 It
Woodbank Boys’ | School 23 oO 23
Clarke’s College .. 18 7 25
Mill Hill Boys’ 38 ° 38
Fosse High oO 30 30
Portland House 7 45 52
TOTALS 95 177 272
Public School
Uppingham 59 o 59
Tota PoPpuLaTION . 1,904 928 3,832
APPENDIX 2
Junior Modern Schools Culture-free
Boys Girls Total
Mellor Street... 65 64 129
Alderman Richard Hallam 69 64 133
Braunstone Hall ny £°) 71 150
Caldecote Road ... w= 36 32 68
Knighton Fields .2. 30 39 69
Medway Street ... w= 4 36 77
Cort Crescent... .. 86 84 170
TOTALS 406 390 796
Private and Preparatory
Schools
Uvedale High ... 6 4 Io
Stoneygate Girls’ College ° 29 29
Convent of Nativity - oO 49 49
Lyndhurst we I 9 10
Woodbank Boys” “School 2 3 o 23
Clarke’s College .. = 17 7 24
Mill Hill Boys’ ... us  §2 o 32
Fosse High — oe oO 30 30
TOTALS ... ny £°) 128 207
GRAND TOTALS 485 518 1,003
BIBLIOGRAPHY

1 Burt, C. L. Intelligence and Fertility. London:
Hamilton, 1946.

2 Cattell, R. B. ‘‘Is National Intelligence declining ?’’ EUGENICS REVIEW, 1936, 28, 181-203.

a ‘“‘Some Further Relations Between, Intelligence, Fertility, and Socio-economic Factors,” Evcenics
REVIEW, 1937, 29, 171-9.

The Fight for Ouvy National Intelligence.
London : P..S. King, 1937.

5 **Some Changes in Social Life in a Community with a Falling Intelligence Quotient,” Brit. J.
Psychol., 1938, 28, 430-50.

¢___. ‘* Effects of Human Fertility Trends Upon the
Distribution of Intelligence and Culture,”’ Thirty-ninth
Yearbook, National Soc. Stud. Educ., Bloomington,
Illinois ;: Public School Publishing Co., 1940, 221-33.

7 Feingold, N., and Sarason, S. ‘‘ A Culturefree Intelligence Test. II. Evaluation of Cultural

 

 

 

 
148

Influence on Test Performance,” J. Educ. Psychol.,
1941, 82, 81-100.

8 A Culture-free Test of ‘‘g’’ Scales, I, II, and
III, Institute for Personality and Ability Testing.
British agent, N. Barnes, The Grammar School,
Henley-on-Thames.

$a ____. ““ The Dimensions of Culture Patterns by the
Factorization of National Characters.”” J. Abn. and
Soc. Psychol., 1949, 44, 443-69.

9 Classical and Standard Score I.Q. Standardization of the I.P.A.T. Culture-free Intelligence Test. (In
press: J. of Consulting Psychol, 1951.)

10 The Trend Ovey 1936-49 in Britain in the
Differential Birth-rate According to Intelligence Level.
(To be published.)

11 An Attempt to Estimate the Neglected Factors
in Calculating Survival Rates for Different Intelligence
Levels. (To be published.)

12 Conrad, H. S., and Jones, H. E. ‘‘ A Field Study of
the Differential Birth-rate,” J. Amer. Statis. Assoc.,
1932, 27, 153-9.

18 Finch, T. H. ‘‘ Enrolment Increases and changes in
the Mental Level of the High School Population,” Appi.
Psychol. Monogr., 1946, 10, 75.

1¢ Heim, A. W., and Wallace, J. G. ‘‘ The Effects of
Repeatedly Re-testing the Same Group on the Same
Intelligence Test. II,” Quart. J. Exper. Psychol.,
1950, 2, 19-32.

18 Kohler, F. J. ‘‘ Cultural Differentials in Intelligence,” J. Soc. Psychol., 1943, 18, 279-303.

 

 

 

 

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

16 Tentz, T. F. ‘‘ Relation of I.Q. to Size of Family,’’
J. Educ. Psychol., 1927, 18, 486-96.

17 Muntijan, M. ‘‘ A Study of the Re-test Factor in
the Illinois Statewide High School Testing Program,”’
J. Educ. Research, 1947, 41, 183-92.

18 Penrose, L. S. ‘‘ The Supposed Threat of Declining
Intelligence,”’ Amer. J]. Ment. Def., 1948, 58, 114-18.

19 Pickford, R. W. ‘‘ The Genetics of Intelligence,’’
J. of Psychol., 1949, 28, 129-48.

20 Roberts, J. A. F., Norman, R. M., and Griffiths, R.
“‘ Studies on a Child Population, III. Intelligence and
Family Size,”’ Annals of Eugen., 1938, 8, 175-215.

21 Sutherland, H. E. G., and Thomson, G. H. ‘ The
Correlation Between Intelligence and Size of Family,”
Brit. J. Psychol., 1927, 17, 81-92.

22 Thomson, G. H. ‘‘ The Trend of National Intelligence,” EUGENICS REVIEW, 1946, 88, 9-18.

33 ,et al. The Trend of Scottish Intelligence.
London : Univ. of London Press, 1949.

_ “Intelligence and Fertility,’’ EuGenics REVIEW, 1950, 41, 163-70.

25 Thorndike, E. L. ‘‘ The Resemblance of Siblings in
Intelligence-test Scores,” J. of Gen. Psychol., 1944, 64,
265-7.

26 Vernon, P. E. “ Intelligence Test Sophistication,’’
Brit. J. Educ. Psychol., 1938, 8, 237-44.

ol , and Parry, J. B. Personnel Selection in the
British Forces. London: Univ. of London Press,
1949.

 

 

 

 

THE ECONOMIC JOURNAL

The Quarterly Journal of the Royal Economic Soctety

JUNE 1950
SOME PROBLEMS IN THE PURE THEORY OF INTERNATIONAL

TRADE
UNREQUITED IMPORTS

THE THEORY OF INCREASING UNDER-EMPLOYMENT

G. HABERLER
A. C. Picou

B. Hiccrins

THE SPRINGS OF TECHNICAL PROGRESS IN BRITAIN, 1919-39 R.S. Sayers

THEORIES OF THE 1937-38 CRISIS AND DEPRESSION

‘THE TRON AND STEEL ACT, 1949

THE UNITED NATIONS’ REPORT ON FULL EMPLOY MENT

M. D. Brockiz
S. J. LANGLEY
W. W. Rostow

REVIEWS : NOTES AND MEMORANDA : NEW BOOKS

Application for Fellowship to
ROYAL ECONOMIC SOCIETY, 4 Portugal Street, London, W.C.2

Annual Subscription £1 10s.

Life Composition £22 10s.

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLII, We. 3
