248 EUGENICS REVIEW.

but is regarded as inadequate by itself. Restrictive marriage laws and
customs are dismissed as unlikely to affect the “socially inadequate
classes.” For the more defective among them life segregation is the
remedy indicated, and sterilization is advocated “only as supporting the
more important feature of segregation when the latter agency fails to
function eugenically.” Eugenic education is commended as having an
important place to fill, but the committee do not seem to realize that
without it none of the other remedies can be made effective, because they
will not have sufficient backing of public opinion.

Bulletin No. 10B is a most useful record of legislation which, however it may be criticised, is an experiment of great interest. Its essential
features were communicated to the first Eugenics Congress by Mr. Van
Wagenen (Problems in Eugenics, Vol. I., p. 460), and so do not require
detailed notice on the present occasion. It is however worth while to
mention that some of the cases which were brought before the Courts in
America arising out of these laws are reported in the bulletin, together
with full particulars of the laws themselves, and Bills of a similar nature
which were introduced in some State legislatures, but did not reach the
statute book. EDGAR SCHUSTER.

Fairchild, H. P. Jmmigration. New York. The Macmillan Company;
19135 price 7s. 6d.; pp. XI. and 455.

THE problem of immigration is one of vital importance to America.
Since the original English colonisation at the beginning of the seventeenth century the increase in population has been effected to a predominant extent in this manner, and at the present day the stream of
immigration flows in an ever widening channel. The volume under
review is an attempt to describe the sources, course and conditions of
American immigration from the earliest times until the present day; to
study the fate of the immigrants in the country of their adoption, and
from these considerations to arrive at some solution of the immigration
problem. This problem Mr. Fairchild states in the following words :
“In the first place, it must be decided whether it is desirable for nations
consciously to interfere with, and try to control, such a natural movement as this; secondly, if interference is to be undertaken, whose welfare
is to be held prominently in view?” “There are four possible standpoints open to choice. First, that of the United States; second, that of
the countries of source; third, that of the immigrants; fourth, that of
humanity in general.”

In the historical and descriptive portions of the book Mr. Fairchild
has achieved a high measure of success, but when he attacks the exceedingly complex and difficult questions indicated above, though he is
always interesting, he sometimes appears rather superficial. For example,
when he says “the question of the desirability of immigration from the
point of view of humanity as a whole, . . . is a summation of the aspects
of the problem from the point of view of the United States, the countries
of source, and the immigrants,” he entirely disregards the effects which
the economic and ethical conditions of the countries primarily concerned
must have on the whole civilized world. Also his treatment of the
biological effects of immigration—the aspect of the question most
interesting to eugenists—is of an unsatisfactory nature. He is, perhaps,
not to be blamed for dismissing the important question whether race
mixture is beneficial or harmful with the statement that the authorities
seem equally divided, but when he discusses the effects of immigration
on the rates of increase in the various racial constituents of the American
nation he neglects much that is in the highest degree relevant. Thus he
affirms that the recent decline in the native birth-rate is due to economic
pressure caused by competition with backward peoples from south-eastern
Europe, accustomed to a very low standard of living, of whom the stream
of immigrants is now principally composed. That a corresponding
REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS. 249

decline, for which no such cause can be assigned, has affected the birthrate of all the more civilised European nations during the same period is
entirely ignored, which shows that this question has not been at all
deeply considered. The relations between birth-rate, density of population and standards of living are also matters which seem much simpler
to Mr. Fairchild than they actually are, but in spite of all these faults
the book may be commended as being most interesting and provocative
of thought. EDGAR SCHUSTER.

Aldrich, M. A., Carruth, W. A., Davenport, C. B., and others.
Eugenics. Twelve University Lectures. New York. Dodd,
Mead and Co.; 1914; pp. XIII. + 348.
THE progress of the eugenic movement both in the realm of practice and
in the realm of science depends largely on the success of the educational
campaign. This is obvious in the case of practice, and though less
obvious in the case of the science, is equally certain. For experience shows
that science advances most rapidly and with surest footsteps when some
benefit to mankind is its immediate goal, and the object of the educational campaign is to disseminate the conviction that the practice of
eugenics will confer benefits. The practical end stimulates both scientific
workers and their paymaster, and on the activities of the latter the
numbers and energies of the former in some measure depend.

Thus when Mrs. Huntingdon Wilson endowed a lecture at 32 of the
universities in the United States she earned the gratitude of all who have
the interests of eugenics at heart, and in publishing twelve of the
lectures together in the volume under review she has again laid them
under a debt. Acknowledging this, we yet feel bound to say that the
work as it stands cannot be recommended as a satisfactory introduction
to the subject. For the novice who has the perseverance and energy to
read a book of this length does not want to start the subject twelve times
over and to be introduced again and again to Mendel and the Jukes and
the Kalikaks, any more than a person desirous of climbing the
Matterhorn would be satisfied with an equivalent number of walks up
Primrose Hill. Nevertheless it must be understood that this is a
criticism of the necessary arrangement of the book, and not of the quality
of its contents. Although the twelve lectures are not conspicuous for
novelty, the method of presentation of their subject matter is in most
cases well calculated to have aroused the interest of the audiences who
listened to them, and to have convinced them of the soundness of the
eugenic appeal. They are the more forcible because characterized by
moderation and common sense. It is impossible to notice each separately
so we will pick out for special mention “The First Law of CharacterMaking,” by Dr. Holmes, of the Pennsylvania State College. Quoting
largely from “Rabbi Ben Ezra,” he starts by contrasting character as
shown in aspiration “ What I aspired to be and was not,” and in doing
“The vulgar mass called work,” and supported by Carlyle’s “ Know thy
work and do it,” inclines to the view that the latter is more important,
at any rate from the point of view of the eugenist. He then points out
forcibly with many instances how largely character as shown thus is
dependent on parentage, and concludes with a plea for the eugenic ideal
in marriage.

The subject of character and intellect is also treated by Professor
Thorndike, the psychologist, and his lecture is well worth reading, as it
contains an answer to an objection commonly made to eugenics in words
more or less like these, “ Even if you know the laws of heredity and how
to effect selective breeding in man you would not know what qualities to
select for.”

It is interesting to note in these lectures how seriously the
problem of selecting immigrants is being considered in America, and
this leads us to speculate whether Professor Ellwood, another contributor
