SOCIAL STATISTICS OF BRITAIN
By Sir CHARLES ARDEN-CLOSE, K.B.E., ERS.

Wales and of Scotland have introduced

“an innovation of considerable interest
and importance in the trend of census
development in Great Britain’? by the
publication of sample tables.* Part I, just
published, gives the analysis of the results
of a one per cent sample of the figures in
the four categories Ages and Marital
Condition, Occupations, Industries and
Housing of Private Households.

The reason for this innovation is the desire
to shorten the long period, which has hitherto
been necessary, between the taking of a
census and the full analysis of the results.
ane Registrars General describe the method

‘“ providing a quick advance picture of
census ‘features which will be treated at
length in later volumes.”

The method of sampling is very well known
to statisticians, the primary requirements
being that the samples should be fair and
representative, and that the numbers dealt
with should not be so small as to increase
unduly the chance of error. It is explained
that a 10 per cent sample involved far too
much labour. One per cent was chosen,
though this required much care in selection.
An account is given of the procedure adopted.
The methods were ingenious, but chiefly of
interest to statisticians, and we can now
turn to some of the results of the sample
analysis of the four categories dealt with.

It_is a great advantage that this report
deals with the whole of Great Britain. In
describing the report let us ignore the
refinements of calculation and indicate a few
broad outlines and the general character
of the results. Thus, as regards Mantal
Condition, it is well known that, in Great
Britain, in 1951, there were two million
more women than men. It appears that out

* General Register Office. Great

"[ Registrars General of England and

Census IQ5I:
Britain. One Per Cent Sample Tables. Pt. I. Ages and
Marital Condition, Occupations, Industries, Housing
of Private Households. London, 1952. H.M. Stationery
Office. Pp. 159. Price 17s. 6d.

of the total population of 48°84 million, a
little over 12 million of each sex were
married, say half. There were about three
times more widowed females than widowed
males, the sort of result that might have
been expected. The total number of divorced
persons, male and female, was somewhat
more than 200,000. The largest group of
married men is that between the ages of
40 and 45, and of married women, , that
between 35 and 40.

But this kind of statement will, it may be
feared, give little idea of the mass of information provided by these tables. There are some
twenty-eight pages of statistics concerned with
this heading alone, giving the facts relating
to marital condition with regard to standard
regions, counties, towns, administrative
areas and four “ conurbations,’’ an ugly but
useful word. If the inquirer, for instance,
should wish to compare the marital conditions of the Midlands with those of the
northern region of England, he will find the
material here. And so on.

The second section of the report is concerned with Occupations and this involves more
than fifty pages of statistical information.
There are twenty-seven categories, including
oneentitled Retired or Not Gainfully Employed,
to which the present writer belongs. It
would be difficult to convey in a few words
an adequate idea of the mass of information
presented. Thus, there are tables giving the
numbers by ages of the different groups,
their marital condition, and their distribution
throughout the country. If, for example,
you want to know how many married
plumbers there are at work, between the
ages of, say, 55 and 60, you will here find the
answer. There is considerable interest in the
table of the main occupations of the whole male
population. The largest group is that of the
metal workers, then those engaged in trans-_
port, then commercial occupations, then
unskilled workers, then agriculturists, then
the builders and then the black-coated

141
142

professional class, and down low on the list
the miners. The three defence services only
account for 558,000.

We may usefully say something of one
particular group out of the twenty-seven,
namely, the group of those employed in
agriculture, including horticulture and
forestry. These occupations are of more
importance to us than any of the others.
We find that there are only 448,000
male icultural workers. To these must
be added female workers, farmers, bailiffs,
market and other gardeners, giving a total
of a little over a million for Great Britain.
Then there are occupations ancillary to
agriculture, namely, those of land agents,
estate managers, and men concerned with
agricultural machinery. If we add these,
we get a grand total of 1-18 million engaged
in agricultural pursuits, out of a total
population of Great Britain of 48-84 million.
That is 2-4 per cent, a very low proportion.

SECTION III deals with Industries in the
space of a few pages. It is explained that,
in the industry tables, individuals “ are
classified according to the industries. to
which their occupation contributes. . . . Thus
a carpenter working for a brewer would be
classified occupationally under “‘ Carpenter ”’

but industrially under ‘“ Brewing.’””’ We
need not spend any time on this section.
SECTION IV is of more interest. It is

entitled Housing of Private Households and
takes up more than fifty pages of the report.
The headings are, briefly, Dwellings and
Households; Size and Rooms Occupied ;

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Households and Density ; and Households
Without Exclusive Use of certain Household
Arrangements. The term private household
means a group of persons living together in
the sense of sharing the same living room or
eating at the same table. There may be
more than one household in the same
dwelling. Persons living in hotels, boarding
houses, institutions, etc., are in non-private
households. | |

The total number of private households
in Britain is about 144 million, and the
average number of persons per household is
3°21. In England and Wales the number per
household was 3°72 in 1931, and it is now
3°I9, a considerable reduction. Persons
per room diminished from 0-83 to 073.
The student of social customs will be
interested to know that about 54 million
households, involving about 17 million
people, had no fixed bath in 1951. |

All this touches the housing problem. A
really valuable review of the condition of
housing. in this country and a comparison
of the state of affairs in 1951 with that in
193I, with reference to these statistics in
Section IV, and to such matters as rent
restriction, is to be found in a leading article
in The Times of August 7th, 1952.

In Part II of this report, which is yet
to be published, there will be more statistical
information about households, and there will
also be sections dealing with Education,
Nationality, Fertility and the Welsh and
Gaelic Languages, subjects at least as
interesting as those mentioned above.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLIV, No. 8
