EBUGENICS REVIEW

 

Editorial Offices: The Eugenics Society,
69 Eccleston Square, London, S.W.1.
(Telephone— Victoria 7302.)

Editor for the Society—Maurice Newfield.

‘Eugenics is the study of agencies under
social control that may improve or impair
the racial qualities of future generations
either physically or mentally.”

 

EUGENICS AND WAR

-A T the time of writing the immediate
crisis is over and only time can settle
the issue between those who believe

that the Prime Minister, by his gallant
enterprise, saved the peace of Europe, and
those who fear that he succeeded only in
putting off till to-morrow what it were
better to have done to-day. If in the most
anxious days one fact emerged about which
there could be no doubt whatever, it was
that the people of this country wanted peace,
and were prepared to support almost any
effort, almost any departure from conventional diplomatic usage, that might secure
it. For the moment it seems—and we can
but hope—that the danger which threatened
to engulf us and the whole of European
civilization has passed ; if it should prove
otherwise, if this newly-won peace should
after all prove to be but a prelude to battle,
we must take what melancholy satisfaction
we can in the swift disillusionment that
awaits those nations which by their rulers
are being taught to believe that love of peace
is a symptom of British decadence.

To eugenists war is and must ever be an

abomination. It may be justified as an
instrument of policy ; it may be inevitable

aS a means of meeting naked aggression.
But its influence on the qualities of future
generations cannot be other than disastrous.
There is perhaps some truth in the view that
modern totalitarian war will not discriminate
as did previous wars against the younger, the
more energetic, the more courageous and
enterprising members of society. Perhaps a
war waged on our doorsteps, against a whole
people, will spare them better than did the
wars that were waged between soldiers on
fields of battle. But even so, even if the
young survive, will they, in a sabre-rattling
world, have the will to carry on the race?
There can be but one answer to this question. The world is an insecure place and
they are becoming less and less inclined to
bring children into it. Even if not all young
people are of this mind, there are enough who
are to frustrate any policies that may be
adopted later for reversing the downward
trend in the birth rate. More calamitous still
is the fact that those who refuse to reproduce
are not the selfish or irresponsible whose
fertility could perhaps be spared, but the
sensitive and foresighted whose contribution
to the generations of the future would be their
greatest asset. War and the threat of war
mean fewer children from the best stocks.

That there is not to-day general war in
Europe is all to the good, but still not good
enough. Those of us who are concerned about
posterity cannot evade our responsibility for
making—here and now—a world fit for
posterity to live in. We must not be content
with a mere postponement of hostilities. The
hatreds that cause wars must be resolved ;
the economic and ethnic grievances that are
offered as its justification must be objectively
examined and, if well founded, removed.
With their fellow citizens of all classes and
all parties eugenists can serve the best of
mankind by taking part in activities to these
ends.

163
