PRE-MARITAL HEALTH SCHEDULE

Memorandum issued by the Schedule Committee

CONTENTS

1. Draft letter to doctor who applies to
the Society for a Schedule on behalf of
an applicant for pre-marital health
examination.

z. Pamphlet entitled Health Examination
before Marriage.

3. Parts I and II of the Schedule.

. Part III of the Schedule.

5. Notes on the Schedule for the examining doctor.

.

1. DRAFT LETTER TO DOCTOR

DEAR SIR, OR MADAM,

I enclose herewith the following documents :

(rt) Two copies of a pamphlet entitled
Health Examination before Marriage,
written in very simple language explaining the intentions of the Premarital Health Schedule to applicants
for pre-marital examination.

(2) Parts I and II of the Schedule.
(3) Part III of the Schedule.

(4) Notes on the Schedule for the examining doctor.

One copy of the pamphlet and Parts I and
II of the Schedule should be sent to the
applicant.

Please retain the second copy of the
pamphlet, Part III of the Schedule, which is
to be filled in by you, and the Notes for the
examining doctor.

If there are any points upon which I can
be of assistance to you, please do not hesitate
to communicate with me. |

- Yours very truly,

General Secretary,
Eugentcs Soctety.

2. THE EXPLANATORY PAMPHLET
HEALTH EXAMINATIONS BEFORE MARRIAGE

To those about to get married ; also to
their parents

If you are thinking of getting married, and
are a person of normal foresight, you may
feel the heavy responsibilities which you are
undertaking. You are going to promise
solemnly to bind yourself to another person,
for better or for worse. Together with that
person, you will probably bring into the
world children in whom the characteristics
of both of you—characteristics of body and
mind—will be fused together. You will want
these children to be healthy and happy, and
you will want them to have the best possible
home background and the best available
education. What greater undertaking than
this can be imagined—to give rise to a
new life which is a continuation of your
own life and to be accountable for that new
life until it is capable of fending for itself ?
Then you will also have responsibilities
towards the person you marry. If you area
man, you will probably have to support
your wife not only in her youth, but in her
old age; if you are a woman, you will have
to make a home for your husband and share
the ups and downs of his life. Is it surprising that people should sometimes feel misgivings before they get married ?

Like every reasonable person, you will
want to feel that there is a good chance of.
your marriage being successful. If you intend
to have children, you will want them to be
born healthy with a good hereditary equipment, and will wish to know that you and
your future partner are both healthy. You
may have certain secret worries that you do
not like talking to people about, perhaps least
of all to your parents. You may be anxious
about some minor complaint or ailment for
which you would like treatment or advice ;
you may have had some illness which you

306
PRE-MARITAL HEALTH SCHEDULE

think may have left harmful after-effects ;
or you may perhaps be disturbed about some
disease or defect in your family which you
suspect is hereditary, but which really may
not be so. If hereditary diseases are present
in a marked degree, you may wonder if you
are fit to have a family. Or you may be preoccupied about the physical aspects of
marriage. If you are a young woman, you
may be vaguely frightened of the sex act,
which you do not entirely understand, and
which may seem somehow repugnant to you,
or which you may have heard is painful ; or
you may for one reason or another be nervous
of bearing children. If you are a young man,
you may find yourself worrying about
whether you can properly perform the sex
act, or you may be anxious about the effects
of past habits or illnesses on your future
sex life. If you are a parent whose son or
daughter is thinking of getting married, you
will want to be sure that your future son- or
daughter-in-law is physically and mentally
fit, and free from communicable disease.
It is with the object of dissipating these
fears or, if they cannot be dissipated, of
obtaining the best available advice, that a
thorough examination by a doctor is recommended before marriage. How, exactly, can
this be done? You know that if you were to
decide to insure your life, and were to ask
for terms from an insurance company, that
company, before assessing your annual
premium, would require you to be examined
by a doctor with experience of the effects of
disease on length of life. Such a doctor would
base his examination on a form or
““schedule’’ in which certain carefullythought-out questions are asked. Life
insurance companies have accumulated much
experience on the bearing of certain illnesses
of body or mind upon length of life, and the
questions they ask in these schedules are the
result of this long experience. It is not always
necessary for the candidate for life insurance
to be examined by the company’s doctor. It
is sufficient if the examination be carried out
by a family doctor, but the latter is asked to
answer the questions in the schedule which
has been devised by the company’s doctors
and actuaries from their past experience.

307

Much the same can be done in the premarital health examination. A form or
schedule, suitable for this special purpose,
has been devised by the Eugenics Soctety
which issues this pamphlet.

The first thing to understand about prenuptial examinations is that they must be
entirely voluntary. You may perhaps have
read in the papers that, in some countries,
such examinations are obligatory, and that
people are not allowed to get married unless
the results have proved that they are fit.
This is the case, for instance, in Germany
and Turkey. Similar proposals have been
made for this country. But the Eugenics
Society does not think that at present asystem
of compulsory pre-nuptial health examinations would be wise, because of the ease with
which people who resented being examined
could conceal or distort important facts.

As has been said, an examination by a
doctor is necessary in every case. If he is to
form a proper opinion, the doctor must not
only examine the applicant physically ; he
must also obtain from him an accurate
medical history, an exact account of the
diseases from which he has suffered as well as
a truthful statement of personal particulars
of his life. For instance, it would be important to know if certain hereditary diseases
existed in the applicant’s family history, or if
the personal history showed him to be abnormal in any way which would threaten the
marriage. If the exchange of “‘ health certificates ’’ were compulsory, people who were
very anxious to marry—whether for love
or for less praiseworthy motives—would be
strongly tempted to conceal from the doctor
anything which might lead him to form an
unfavourable opinion. For instance a man
might deny having had a venereal disease of
which he felt ashamed. In this way, despite
the most careful examination, the doctor
might be seriously misled. But if the examination were sought voluntarily and entered
into in good faith by both parties, such
things would not be concealed and an
important need would be met.

If you wish to be examined before marriage, you should first apply to a doctor
(if you are a woman, you may prefer a woman
308

doctor) and explain your requirements to
him. Your doctor may have had previous
experience of examining people in this way
and know what questions to ask and what to
do. Or he may not have had such experience.
For this he is in no way to be blamed, because
very few people at present ask to be examined
before marriage. If he has not had much
experience, he may find the form devised by
the Eugenics Soctety useful and helpful.
This form should be applied for from the
Secretary of the Eugenics Society—by your
doctor.- It consists of three parts. The first
asks questions about the applicant’s heredity
and family history, and the second about his
previous health. Both these parts have to
be filled in by the applicant, to whom the
doctor would send them, on receipt of the
form from the Eugenics Society. The third
part of the form has to do with the results of
a medical examination of the applicant by
the doctor. This the doctor keeps in his own
possession, and fills in when he examines the
applicant. You would make arrangements
with your doctor about being examined by
him. When you see him for this purpose you
should bring with you Parts I and II of the
form which you will have completed, and
he will probably go through them with you,
and ask you some further questions on
doubtful points.

It is possible that, before giving an opinion,
your doctor may want to make some additional examinations or investigations. He
may want to examine your blood to make
sure that this is in good condition; or he
may require an X-ray examination of your
chest, or to have some other test performed.
You must come to your own arrangements
with him about the fees for these special
tests. In a small proportion of cases, it is
possible that, after he has obtained all the
necessary information, your doctor may
require a specialist’s opinion on some obscure
point. This might relate to an illness or
suspected illness in yourself upon which he
wished to have a second opinion. With your
consent your doctor would then send you
to consult a suitable specialist, exactly as he
would in the ordinary run of his practice if
he met with a puzzling or difficult case. The

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

specialist would then probably examine you
and make any special investigations which
he thought necessary.

But the problem might also be connected,
not with any illness in you yourself, but with
hereditary disease or defects occurring in
your family. You might want to know what
would be the chances of their affecting your
children. In order that such a question
should be answered, it is not usually necessary
for you yourself to be examined; all that the
doctor advising you need do is to scrutinize a
carefully prepared pedigree showing which
of your relatives were affected in various
ways and which were free; and he would
want some particulars of your fiancé(e)’s
family. Hitherto doctors have not often
been asked questions on this subject, and
they have less experience to guide them than
in other difficulties. In order to meet the
doctor’s requirements in such cases, the
Eugenics Society, which has special experience of the problems involved, has appointed
a small board of specialists who can be consulted about problems of heredity. The completed forms of both the persons who are
thinking of getting married should be submitted to this Board. This is necessary because the chances of children of a given
mating. developing a particular disease or
defect depend on the pedigrees not of one,
but of both the prospective parents. The
same holds if you or your fiancé(e) are suffering from a disability which might be hereditary. If you should feel reticent about
revealing your name to the Board, this can
be omitted from the completed forms when
these are submitted to the Board. The
Board will, in no circumstances, communicate directly with the applicants. It
is only prepared to deal with them
indirectly through the medium of their
doctors.

If, then, you are thinking of getting
married and have any misgivings or worries
about your fitness, consult your doctor. It
is possible that he may be able to give you
much needed help, and lift a weight off your
mind. He may also be able to give you
medical advice which may do a lot towards
making your marriage successful. And if you
PRE-MARITAL HEALTH SCHEDULE 309

are doubtful about whether, in view of any be able to obtain the best available advice.
hereditary or other abnormality, you should Issued by the Eugenics Society, 69 Ecclesget married or have children, your doctor will ton Square, London, S.W.1.

3. SCHEDULE: PARTS I AND II
(To be filled in by the applicant)

NAME  .orcsscecsevecscvececees ne 8M TA we AT mene mn Date Of Birth... ..ccceccevversscccccccccescesetsesseesseasscescence
GAGES ves.200 0 wax 0 on sem Wis 4 eNO ACHE 9K es 4 Ne Oe me LER 8 Whether previously marrted ..cccccccvsoccrecscccccesoscsesesers
5S CNT A EOE NOR WM ED WA, NUNN If so, children by previous Marviagel ..ccccccecssesssscesseee
QECPARION verse os curses £0 ce core ne RA mK CN Oe en wn IC Or Still Births or Miscarriages ? ...ccsecccccesencesveess $s wee
Date of filling im schedule.......cccccccsevevssscccscesceccencees Labour normal or abnormal? .......ccccccccscccsecceeecceeres
(To be filled in by women)
PART I
FAMILY HISTORY

Are you related by blood to your fiancé(e) ? If 50, ROW ?........cscecccceccscerencececenensssseeeaeesessasessseeeeseneesesseseooees
What is his/her age ?..c.cccsccsonsssscvcscccscovcsccescncusavensaceesecenaeneeeeseencoeaeeessessessseeeeonsns pane serneenueesossneencssesess
Kindly fill in the following particulars, where they are known, of your parents, grandparents, brothers, sisters,

uncles and aunts.

Age tf alive Age at Cause of
death death
FATHER ... eee wee nee wPeeeTEEEEESE | ESGORAGE CSTE I  NeWRaD ewan ae wes
MOTHER ... wee vee eee TT Te ee
PATERNAL GRANDFATHER — oes cecevccsccccces ceeccecccvecees  sesssesscesones
” GRANDMOTHER, is teiecessnessess «caeeseseyescszs exw annus aoe nee
MATERNAL GRANDFATHER — on cccccescccencce cevscccvecccers cence cece aE
” GRANDMOTHER — ose seccccscsccceee sancceeccccesee  ceeee saimwern 8
BROTHERS AND SISTERS ee ee et rt
Give list of your brothers and sisterS [........seceeceeeee nas Se Te
in the order of birth, including still 2. ...............06. ees cee kaeeenececseeee — ceceeceserscere — coveeveveeeeees
births and known miscarriages. Insert 3... ssc eeeseeeeeee wee see Seaeeanecccenan canscvsecscctce ceeeersensceees
half-brothers and sisters (if any), Dut 4. «..sseeseseeeeeees wee 5k IN ALO AU ATO BT A: TRKRTNTN OM Te One BLA BR wn Plbciene
do not include children of a Step- 5. ..ssssseesseeveee wee <<) SKESRM AE AE AG RAR “WleKe mem emeen | ba ka SEU OE ORS
parent by a previous marriage. Ge panne enn acurnn em wn Ac0 | SERERDARGUOSSee oo wenMean neers  hbeM He RRERS EOE
Ti ancsscunscccsscecs eee ae eee nenneeaeees cenneeeeeeences  senseecneveoens
B. cccsccscccccceccs tee ee tebe eeeeeccees  ceeeesceececces  ceceeeeeesesons
OQ. nswsewssenesaenees 80H MERM ANOS ERMOD Nonenenenembeey  &4RG AR RSERERORE
TO. ..00. SUUEKHAeeM eR 8 (AK RS OEOPET RD oo Senatemenrseeen | HERES ery re
FATHER’S BROTHERS*
AND SISTERS

Say whether uncle or aunt. Insert 1. ..ceseececverseees wee ie emneewemene wane memeneunhemdels: | 4066 bd www alte
father’s half-brothers and sisters, if 2. ....cccceeseseeeee wee en euemenameereted nsasavbeknkehdk S54 Re C4 FE FE EES
any. Be cvcvecceecceceeees wee are keidad bd besbeas «= pH ouasEREte Rae $4 0 oe an ws 0s 8
Ae seerevcsccccncenes eee ete tet ceteeee eens ceneeeccceeeees  eeevecescccenes
S. pesbsheeReeRSeOs 80 «OSS RAP UE EEESIR SOO mT eS 6 os econ
6. iiss 88 ONE 6 SEE Ree wm ae Oe Oe OO
, AYASIORMAEENAES | BRT ERTS I eeeeSN ES TEWeR san eH RS Oe RES
S. ssisimmisssspips 8 EASES | IRENE SO SRO Wee Oe Oman 6
Gi svigewemepssnjes 2 tes TR ANE iene wn en Ore ce
TO, gqevssecssgismce 89 eo RAR AMETSS NS | REA oe a MO

MoTHER’s BROTHERS*
AND SISTERS
Say whether uncle or aunt. Insert 1. ......-..ssseeeees ‘ua 68s SMES eesweRewOe | SESS TERE AWAES ee | tewasene oe wane 6
mother’s half-brothers and sisters, if 2. ......seseeeneeee wee ccc ceesececcccecce ceccccececccsce  cevccccceccoces
any. Qe sew sense sa me a enn vee see cenccenccceeces ceecccccccecess cescccccccccece

* Applicants may find it difficult to obtain exact information about the ages and causes of death of their
uncles and aunts. The information is desirable if it can be obtained, but is not essential.
310 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

PLEASE ANSWER THESE QUESTIONS VERY CAREFULLY

Are there, among any of the above, or among any other of your known relatives, any cases of the following :
nervousness, nervous breakdown, mental backwardness or defect, insanity, fainting spells, convulsions or fits,
suicide, drug addiction, heavy drinking, tuberculosis, diabetes, asthma, blindness or deafness in early life, or any
diseases or defects which are generally recognized, or thought by your family, to be hereditary ? If so, please give fullest
possible particulars, including age of onset and duration, and if necessary prepare a pedigree to indicate the
relationship. If information is lacking about any large groups of your relations please mention this.

If you yourself are suffering from a disease or defect which may be hereditary, it is desirable that you should
arrange with your fiancé(e) to have the completed forms of both of you examined either by your doctor or his/hers.

ILLNESSES AMONG KNOWN RELATIVES

SOOO H OHH TOSHHEHH HHH EHHSHHHEE EHH EEHEHE HES OHHH EHHEOEESEEEHESEOHTT OH ROE HEH OTE T ETO EH OTE SHORE EETH LETTS HHTEEEHTHHHH SHH EH SH OHTSEHEHOHEHHEHHOHRECESEEHEREEOE
SPOS CASE HHH OHHH HEE EH EEE HTHSSHOHOEESE SHEESH HHSEESETEEEEETTEHDHEHOOH HEEFT EETEHEESHEHOTOHESEHES OTE OFTESHHSHFSHESHHHELEHEDESORESEE ODE HS HHSZESSOBEHEED
COHORTS HE HH HEH HEHEHE ESE TEE SHEE OHH E HH ESHSEH ECE HPEEEREOEEOOREOEHH EEE EEETEASESEEHEH ESE SHEHEEEESERHE ETE SEH OH ESHELELEHEHSESEHAHEHESEESELECH ERO OSEED
PS PREO ASEH OTHE EHC ET OES THTHO SHEET HEHEHE OH ETHOS ESE EE EE RESO SHEET OHEFELEEEE EES EHEEOD DESH SEEEE ETO TESORO SE EHO VEHESHESES TEESE RES E SH HEHE EDEL OS ECROEEBEOE
POSES OHA EHO HHT ER OEE EE HHEHEAOH EEOC OH HEHE EER EE EEE EES ERO SEE SRE EEEREHHEEEE REESE EHRERSEHEEHHEEEEEEEEEEEHEHEHHHHSHEETETHEHHE HEHEHE HOD EOEEEASSESHESEDE
CRESS OOHHROHHHHOEH HEHE EHAEHH SHOES EE TO OHH ES HEHHEEEEEE TEE OC EEHE EEE EEESE SHEE REEEEEEESHOHEEOHESEEEEE HOH ELETHHSEHHFEHHHTHELEO HHS HOSEEESEES EH ES SOB OES
COTO EEHHH HEHEHE EEEEEHEHEETOH OEE EHH OHH HHEEEE EEE SEES EEECREEEHEO ETE SHE HEEHEHRESEEEHHEETEEHEHE EEE SEE THEHHHERHEOHEHEHEETOESEHOHOEHHHHESHEHEHHTESESE DS

PPS TCHSSSEHHEHHHHSAHHHSEREHAHEHHEHHESHEHHHHOHHH HEHE SESETEEEEESCEEEEHRHHH HEHEHE EHOETEHESHES HEHE HOHE ESHHAESEEHEKEESHEHHEHEHHASHHHHHSHHHEHEHEHHHESOE HECHT HEHEHE RHEE

PART II
PREVIOUS MEDICAL HISTORY
(To be filled in by the applicant)
Section A—THIS SECTION DEALS WITH PHYSICAL ABNORMALITIES

Have you, in the past, suffered from any of the following symptoms or diseases ? If so, give particulars as to
the dates of their onset, course and response to treatment.

. Asthma, hay fever or Dromchitis...............ccccsecsscceesccsscneccecesecnceess eee seeseneseeeeen eee e ese neeeensseneerenereneenaens
» PlOurisy..........cccccccscesceeceseccesnsecesaeenseeesssseeesnsseveseneessseees Shed 964 BH 95 POs Ba 9s 0 On UO Bae gO aN Om a Barn os Os ON oD
« BlOOd Spitting .....0..scescecscssesvesevaseetessetonsereennberseeene tere ee eee beeeeess oeee be osees ease naan secsasenn ae wen ce sore wis a wae
» PPOTSISCEME COUGDD its ia assis cic css Fin bce as ag arg nis bes a HE TS Hs ym Fo dT SSH OAIE 04 OS BN Hy ON ONO a WS ow. 0:8L8 Ue HW Bae ee a dO a AL a
~ Tetberculosis OF % Lag is cis is ss css ccs cc gccips wa ow a vg oa weaig aa. 0 ee an ois os 0g a Gn as ws RS Bean a ON We a LE sce hs 8 vin aca wa me ws wie .
SUNG x cc srs 0 0x ea ou 20 ewe recs ye ws wn we 0 eww Bs Bo 0 2 HS Ae we oe om ORO OE 8 esas re om wenn a
JROWMIES sss cs si ia os oe ow ee arrears a a Oca oe ea HO om acm. 4 ses ae se TCR Tem 54 Hoc suNROND oe wTe x eeceseeeee
OF aay Part OF Che: DOM Ye ac oc vis siesvsa sis a 5 ox vecowis oe vin wie ws sis wes oe wre oe noon sa wen on fae RS es a comers

6. Any other disease of the Chest...............cccscecseveeescencceceseescesssecereseesesssesceateneeseeseseneereenseeseeseeess saeKa
i, TRACING wr in ocr ans an exons ocr we een on 8 NO we KR ne eo RO HN A On Ce Nia me Se me os en Ebvo nb ee ome BR be HS 9G HD BR a Ba OO ownea
8
9

AhWD

. Palpitation, shortness of breath, pain in the chest, high blood pressure, or any disorder of the heart........ a a 9g

. Indigestion or pains after Catimg.............cccccceecsccceccccnscceonseeenssseneeseeeeneessceness eee eseessseeenseeensseneeeeeeees
FO, FCS pene cece cw oe vn on cree vane om on one pe we oe ee eevee we need enon ne cnneraeae pe hd bi bb bd Mdadg U6 Fd 6M bm OGIE. UE Gis OI 0G BUS 46.80.00 WTS Wr ie WIN WL We we aN WN COTS
11. Fainting spells or giddiness............. $8 Spiced ed ba 8 14 ed on FP ed ea Bg ge Oa On Bw a ee A i Os Oe oe a
12. Paralysis or loss of power in any part of the DOdY...........ccceccesescceeeees 4 5k Sn a Hes Ww SOR TOTO on OO ee ww Ow O
13. Has sugar or albumen ever been found im your UTie ?...........cccesccscccecncccscrceccceerscsenssseess 18 ie TON ES 0
14. Pain or difficulty im passSimg UTIMe...........ccccccccresccccecerscesceeesccscesceoeseesesneesensseseee nesses seeeeeneeeeeeeseseneeees
U5. Sheiri CSAS ic os se as ow as ws ee a en sn rere win win a BS a Sw Sa aw oe NR WO ON Ro SN 8 NR ON eaewesiaes
16. Malaria or any other tropical diseases..............cccesccccsncccscnceecccceccvccesssevessseseseescneceesesesseseeseseseesensesees
17. Discharge from the ear, seeing double or any other defect of hearing OF VISION..........s.ccrssesserecerevsoseesceecsees
TB, Grout, or wivermactle Fewer ee one 5s scare sea cnt en we we acu ements wr ew sees 8 mwa We ee A a 2 ume wa oe ers arn on mn ae Tre ies av
19. Any form of malignant growth (CAMCEeT)...........ccccccccccccnssccssccaceneeverenseesceccscnseoesseceessseersneeneseresneeseess
20. Have you ever had any surgical operations ? If so, when and what for? (If kKmOwn)...........escesesseseseesescecveees
21. Have you recently suffered from any of the following :

(a2) Loss of appetite 2.0.0.0... cece cece er eceoe nee eneaeeesaseeeseee oneness neeseneaeeee eee ees esas ee eessaneeeseeeseeseeenans
(D) Loss of Weight ?..........c:ccceensecserenersenseecuanvenecsseedsneeeseneseoensenseseese S008 ce ee ese neeseuese ee sees eeeeeseunens
(c) Night sweats ? .........cccccccevccsccssccceacencseeerecesessseesneebee seen eneeenesaesceee seen sesnsesenan sede ceneonssenseeens

22. If you have ever suffered from any diseases or illnesses other than those mentioned above, kindly specify which,
mentioning the date of their onset, their course and response tO treatMent..........seccscecssrcescecscecscnscnsscooens

Section B—THIS SECTION DEALS WITH POSSIBLE NERVOUS TROUBLES
1. Have you ever suffered from :

(a) Any mental derangement ? ...........ccccessessescseceenceeseentesresesenceee sense eee eeeene snes nesses ones nese ee ene eneenes

(6) Nervous breakdown, nervous exhaustion, undue irritability or other form of nervousness ?...............

(c) Depression or fits Of Crying ? .........ccccsccscecsccecceceeereenenereesseseereeeeeneeeeneees esses eeesenes nes neseeseesenes

2. Do you suffer from any morbid fears such as of traffic, heights, darkness, solitude, open or closed spaces,
thunderstorms, crossing bridges, animals, disease, insanity, death ?...........ccecseeeseereeeececeereccceeeeenscassaees i

3. Are there any other traits in your character which disturb you or which interfere in any way with your daily
life ? If so, what are they ? ........cccccssssccscssccscnssssecusscecressseeerseeeeeeeeseeeeees ses ssess nee nee nese eewseeeence hon ie esha
PRE-MARITAL HEALTH SCHEDULE 311

Section C—THIs SECTION DEALS WITH POSSIBLE SEXUAL PROBLEMS. (Please note you are not asked to write detailed

particulars, but only to delete ‘‘ Yes ’’ or ‘“‘ No’ as appropriate, so as to guide your doctor as to which subjects
to talk over with you.)

1. Do you understand fully :
(a) The physical differences between the Sexe ?............cccccccesecescencesscescersusccseseeceserecesecs Yes/No
Gy Dit: reeebame: GE EUS RE cs ec nee are ee erence ot ee a ee ee a RETIN Se OR A Og A Yes/No
QE) TB ree A Rae, He ene ses ne ee sn cs se 8 SR RENO LE ONE US UD BG Yes/No
2. Is the subject of sex at all repugnant to yOu ?.............cceseceeceseceereccceneorececsceeceecnseessseseseeseens Yes/No
3. Are you aware of any abnormal tendencies, fears or desires in your Sex Mature ?...........cceeseceeecenees Yes/No
4. Have you any worries about your past sex life or habits or about your future sex life which you
would like to talk over with a COCtOr ?........ccsccseccsceneesrestesseessseseccneeseneseesseseaeensereasteesenseeees Yes/No
5. Have you discussed sex matters with your fianc€(e) ?.............sccesscccceescccessccssscccesseccescseescsences Yes/No
To be answered by women.
6. Do you understand about pregnancy and childbearing ?...........cccscescssccceesscesssccetscceseseesnceecs Yes/No
7. Do you feel any fear about this ?..............cccsceceesceeereccecseenceeer ence aces ceesesnseeseeeeeassaenasenseeees Yes/No

-~

¥

eS Oe

ro.
rm. S
12.

13.
15.

N.B.—If you have any difficulties or misgivings about sexual matters, you must discuss them fully and

openly with your doctor when he examines you.

4. SCHEDULE: PART III
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
To be retained and filled in by the doctor. Not to be shown to the applicant.

Kindly record the following particulars :

General APPCaTaNce, oi va oes cece ss cin se vas as esse seaeon bad ps eeseceeeo0004 bs es utes bewenes ns enon exe ne nn 99 ORANG 9 0008 w8 Ba Oe SE wOSE US ON EES 08
FRGIRDE sca ceaneas ins av on oe cous wu 0 pe i 8.0 65 wy Fe HERAT WN HOU 98 FONE BH Ld AN FUE Ti on ore cg eoxpcene ne an Big ecniecRI fom We wn ATE TENTS ss WK WS ats BG
WIDE seca asccies wins a 20 a 0 wis 0s 0 is 0:8 0 8 0 On 88 EH OS HE AS BG BG THRE TSEEE BG 0 pes Co erene 09 ww ENE ON 8 Wa HN HLS ON BN EN Oe ORS
Has the weight recently changed ; if SO, explaim..............cscccscccccsccesecccevctececcceccsersccccssucesccuceccoees
Chest measurements at level of fourth costal cartilage f{ Inspiration ................ccsccccececcccscscvecscesesccseues ,
at full inspiration and expiration. Expiration ..........ccccecceccecceccecseccsssesccecccesescoes
Abdominal measurement at level of UMbIL]ICUS................scccsccecssccecccceesccorevcesessceasccccescscecesececeserensoncs
Blood pressuret SyStOlbe. x ccses ss an cw ne ce we cn ec we oe sie enw eceK He HI COUNOOIG SG 66 B45 HRS ONOMI Bd ba Sd teen ect ne on on om core me ooo ew EO
GIASTOHG — sen ssev nw enna wean Wc ASI RT AS ALN. SSS BS B58 Fo ed on oe ne oe an on one OO On eS

PRTG i ESRC x en servrvrcecon na cr oe won 0 es cscs Ss os aN HN WO ER MENTION WEN Me NA EG EAR Pd ve ars ue me ox re Prete mn ax Berne ear

3. rhythm ; if irregular, give details .............csccsscoscoscsscceccscceccussuctscesseveeecsesensesssesessenconseess
Urine : Colour .........ccsccccscccccccsccccssscccccssssnscecescssseescsnteseesenssceccecsscosevecsesssseceserteeseesesecnseseeccvccees

Do you find, on physical examination, any abnormality of :
. The Central Nervous System : Pupils .............scscossecccecccecscssscsccssessassssccsssescnenessecessuseeeeecscssssesusaens

Temdon reflexes ......cscccccccccescesceccsccscccssccscsccsvesctcreervesevesscecvcccecsceseece
Tr@mor .....cccccsccccccccccccsccccscscccsscacccces Gee eececsaccceceveeseescccccessuceesesevecvecs

READS ex acess mes ess How wom es Mu wae US GLAS ae WUE OE He PELL BS Bd eure esornrs potas A WU GH aD ee EX wx Wm WE WaR OE GA mA EEE TaM BE OSs EsEReREE

. Eyesight : If defective, state nature of defect...........ccccccccsccsscescceesceeccescees HR Wm Wi HO AC ge wie aE ALE he 8
Hearing : Discharge from €€F............::sccoccessessensscnscancceeeeesnesteesesseeneneeseesenssseseeeeesceeceeseseesesenenseness

SCHR HSSTHESEE SHAS SHE HHEAHEEEASESEEERHHEHHEHEEHEEEEHOHSESHEOSHHE EHO HHEHET OHHH OSH OH EEE EREHHAEEHHEEHEEDEEETERHEMEHHE HEROES ER EEE EEO EOEEES

BRIA GTTy UES: ce con 0s conere nn en on a ecard 5-H a, oh bre on ov ae eoermrert ne ee oa me sneer ata wn wok wt
» OTBAas OF IATEGAAL SECHETON. rns wn nos 0x cecms.sse. wn wo ws OR SONINNE REIN HS OW TUNA RS BH BO BS OSL 0d im bp ohh pereorene Ba OO a eececeesesseseees
SPOR OTA 2 ATTY ORAL TS Fa oe cme memacene aw vn sameeren ws os emsaas saa. ae ae IS ORANG gd FU BY 665 Sg EA Hid un we edieceomece se ne eae rae

Any reason to suspect the presence Of ZOMOTTHOA?.......... cc csecesscscaceescescscscecececsceceesececscesees
312

16. Wassermann reaction: Do you think this test n

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

ecessary
If so, have you suggested it to the applicant ?.............cssccccssssscnccscsscceccessscecceeees
If so, has he/she consented to its being performed ?.............ccccocsscscoscsccecesseccneseecs

Result of test..........cccceccess

COSHH OTHE SEEOHHESE HES EEE EEE EH HEHEHE HOHE EERO EHH EES ECE EHR DOSE OELEEE OSS

17. Any reason to suspect the presence of Sexual Deviations ?...............cccccescocsescecscececsasscssesecscacecereceeseceveeee

18. Any reason to suspect drink or drug addiction ?........
19. Any abnormalities not mentioned above.................

To be filled in in the case of women only :

STOO AEH HEH RESETS EEE H HELO EEEEHEE EE HER EOE DESO OH HOH HES EEE HEHE DO LEASE ORORECS

SOOTHE EEE ETE HEE EH OEE HOLE HEH HEH HEEL EH OEE EHE OHHH DHE EH EEO EOES DEDEDE DeeeeeS

20. (a) Menstruation : Date of onset ? Periodicity ? Pain present ?
sortecrws am ; wiigtion aad severity mmm oansessreirari rare ‘nai discharge 77777
(b) Has a vaginal examination been performed? If so, any abnormalities Deesccsesesseseessacsesssstsvsessesesaseers
(c) Pelvic measurements: Intercostal ...........ccccescscseccssceecssceeesscsccnscsscssencceceeseeseusasseususeseseuceseseneucs
Interspinous .......cccecossescascvenscscscesssscssanscsceebscescessevoscecssceeuscneassenevsovenceens
External comjugate..............cccecsccscscscsscsecccerscsceerscessssseusssssscssgecseeseeeersecs
2x. Any general remarks or special problems for Consideration...............cseccsecoecossecsecssceeceesevcsececsccseconsenscs

5. NOTES FOR EXAMINING DOCTOR
Confidential—Not to be communicated to the
Applicant

NOTES FOR EXAMINING DocToR
Please retain these Notes with Part III

OBJECTS OF PRE-NUPTIAL EXAMINATION

Though the schedule has been devised by
the Eugenics Society, it is not intended solely
to serve the purpose of preventing dysgenic
marriages or of checking the fertility of
undesirable stocks. It has the further aim of
improving the prospects of the marriage in
various ways which are described in the
leaflet. Its object is not only to serve the
interests of the race; it is also intended to
promote the happiness of marriage.

REASONS FOR WHICH EXAMINATIONS ARE

SOUGHT

There are several reasons for which a
health examination may be sought before
marriage. The following are the commonest :

Preoccupation of Parents. The girl’s
parents may make it a condition of consenting to the marriage that her fiancé be first
passed as physically fit. In France, this
requirement is often met by the parents
asking him to insure his life, a first-class life
being taken as evidence of fitness. In these
circumstances, one of the applicants* may
submit himself for examination reluctantly.

* The candidate for pre-nuptial health examination
will be referred to as ‘‘ the applicant.” Applicants can
be of either sex : the masculine gender will be used for
brevity.

Hereditary Diseases or Defects. One of the
partners may have misgivings about abnormalities in his family history which he thinks,
rightly or wrongly, are hereditary. The
motive is here eugenic, and the doctor may
be asked to give an opinion upon whether
the marriage should or should not take place,
or upon whether the marriage should be
childless.

Present abnormalities. One of the engaged
persons may himself be actually suffering
from an illness or disability which, it is felt,
might jeopardise the marriage. Doctors are
not infrequently consulted about the significance, in this connection, of heart disease,
glycosuria, albuminuria, fits, fainting spells,
psycho-neuroses, and many other abnormalities.

Past Diseases. Either party may, in the
past, have suffered from some illness, and an
assurance may be needed that recovery has
been complete. Anxiety may be felt about
past venereal diseases, certain acute illnesses
such as rheumatic fever, tuberculosis in
various forms, tropical and other diseases.

Desire for specific reassurances. Many
people come for general reassurance and
advice. Usually they want to be told that
they are fit for marriage, but are very willing
to act on any medical advice that may be
thought appropriate. More often than not,
the applicant in this category is found to be a
young person who is much in love and who
puts a very high value on the person to whom
he is engaged. He wants to prove himself in
all respects worthy of that person. He is
PRE-MARITAL HEALTH SCHEDULE

willing, indeed anxious, to follow any discipline or treatment which he thinks will
achieve this end, and is very grateful for
guidance ; but the last thing he will do is
to give up the loved person. In this class of
case, it is rare that either partner would
follow a medical recommendation to forego
marriage. Childless marriage is preferred to
no marriage. Reassurance and guidance upon
sexual problems are frequently sought.

Desire to break an engagement. On the
other hand, a pre-nuptial examination may
be sought by persons who have become
engaged but who, consciously or unconsciously, have later come to wish that they
could escape this commitment. In such
cases, symptoms of past diseases may be
magnified or even invented. Most doctors
have had experience of the neurotic person
who develops ailments which serve the purpose of postponing a marriage which is not
really desired. The patient says that he does
not want to get married until he is entirely
well, and with the passage of time it becomes
clear that he is not going to get well. A man
has been known to ask to be examined and
draw attention to some real or imaginary
disability in order to get out of an action for
breach of promise.

These are the commonest reasons for which
a pre-nuptial health examination is sought.
The doctor will generally find it easy to
discover the motive, and it is desirable that
he should do so.

R6LE OF THE GENERAL PRACTITIONER

It will be abundantly clear that, in issuing
this schedule, the Eugenics Soctety is in no
way trying to override the functions of the
general practitioner. On the contrary, the
general practitioner or family doctor is made
the central agency through whom the
schedules will be used, and their exchange
would be impossible without his co-operation
and guidance. If the general practitioner is
in doubt about the significance to attach to
any of his findings, he is obviously at liberty
to seek the opinion of any consultant he
pleases. The board appointed by the
Eugenics Soctety, which is mentioned in the
leaflet Health Examination before Marriage,

313

only comes into the picture when its help is
needed on a genetic problem. The names of
the members of the board will, if desired, be
sent to any doctor who asks for them, and
the board will be glad to give what assistance
it can ; but it does not propose to enter into
correspondence of any kind with individual
candidates for pre-nuptial examination. The
board is prepared to perform a réle analogous
to that of a consultant, on problems that
present genetic difficulties. Its opinion is
available only if it is sought.

NEED FOR CAUTION IN GIVING OPINIONS

It is obvious that no opinion on the prospective success of a marriage is infallible,
however searching the questions asked, or
however thorough the physical examination.
Doctors will be well advised to emphasize
this point when communicating opinions to
applicants. This holds especially of genetic
forecasts. Except in a very small number of
cases no certainty attaches to these. The
most that can be given is an estimate of
probability.

When marriage is keenly desired, the
responsibilities of giving an opinion that one
of the partners is unfit for marriage are
obvious. In these circumstances, an opinion
unfavourable to the marriage is likely to be
resented and ignored. There is nothing to
prevent the disappointed applicants from
repairing to another doctor with standards
which they hope will be less strict; or a
shadow may be cast over the subsequent
marriage and more harm done than good.
Responsibilities as great attach to certifying
a person as fit for marriage when subsequent
events prove that he is not.

QUESTIONS ASKED IN THE SCHEDULE

Parts I and II of the schedule are to be
filled in by the applicant and should be submitted to the examining doctor when he
makes the physical examination required in
Part IIT.

Part I of Schedule. This relates to the
applicant’s family history. The first question
relates to consanguinity. A considerable
proportion of the applicants for pre-nuptial
314

examination will be people who are contemplating marriage with, or actually engaged to, their first cousins. They want
information about the supposed dangers
attaching to cousin marriages. In general,
the marriage of first cousins is to be discouraged if there exists in the common
ancestry of the two cousins any persons exhibiting diseases, defects, disabilities or taints
which have not obviously been brought about
by environmental agencies and which are
recognized as hereditary. It is now known
that all human beings “carry” in their
germ plasm recessive genes which, in conjunction with other similar recessive genes
in the germ cell of the other parent, may
produce various abnormalities. If two people
are related by blood the chances of their
both carrying the same genes are considerably greater than if they are unrelated.

If, however, the ancestry is good on both
sides, a cousin marriage is not contraindicated. It must be clearly understood,
however, that in no case is it possible to
prognosticate with certainty ; the most that
can be done is to give an estimate of probability.

It will be seen that questions are asked
about the age, if alive, age at death and
causes of death, of parents, grandparents,
brothers and sisters, uncles and aunts. Experience has shown that few applicants have
the answers to these questions ready to hand,
and that various enquiries are usually necessary. The applicant is told that this information is useful if it can be obtained, but it is
not essential.

Part I ends with a comprehensive question
about the incidence in near or distant relatives of diseases or defects which are thought
to be hereditary. More importance must be
attached to the applicant’s answer to this
question than to particulars of the ages and
causes of death of his near relatives.

In the replies to Part I, the doctor will
have before him information bearing upon
the longevity of the applicant’s near relatives
and about any familial diseases or defects.

Part I is drawn up primarily with a view
to throwing light on eugenic problems, but
it may also yield information which might be

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

helpful to the applicant in the conduct of his
life. Thus a family incidence of tuberculosis,
arthritis, cardiovascular disease, deafness,
peptic ulcer or alcoholism might suggest that
the applicant would be well advised to follow
certain simple guiding principles in his daily
life.

Part II of Schedule. This is divided into
three sections, A, B and C, in which questions
are respectively asked about previous physical diseases, psychological abnormalities and
sexual problems.

The questions asked under Section A,
relating to physical health, have been largely
drawn up in the light of the experience of
life assurance companies. Those under headings B and Crelate to psychological and sexual
difficulties and are based on the experience
of medical psychologists and of persons who
have been consulted about problems of
marriage.

The questions under Section A are selfexplanatory, and it will be clear to the
examining doctor what points they are
intended to bring out. The applicant generally has no difficulty in answering them
quickly and accurately.

The answers in Section B will throw light on
the mental stability of the applicant. They
will show whether he has suffered from any
psychotic or neurotic disorder. Neurotic
persons are more frequently preoccupied
about sexual difficulties than normal people,
and if the applicant is neurotic it is likely
that he will benefit from a frank discussion
with the doctor on whatever problems might
be suggested by his answers to questions in
Section C which relate to sexual problems.

It is not always easy to forecast what will
be the effect of marriage upon a neurotic .

person. The symptoms may obviously be

connected with sexual or familial difficulties
which will be resolved by marriage. Difficulties arising from masturbation usually
disappear after marriage; so do family
problems arising from obvious disharmony
with parents. If the applicant realizes this
clearly and if he had made a generally satisfactory adjustment to life, it would be a
mistake to attach too much importance to
such symptoms. But if there is no obviously
PRE-MARITAL HEALTH SCHEDULE

adequate cause of the symptoms, and if the
applicant has failed to adapt himself to more
or less ordinary environmental demands, it
is improbable that marriage alone will effect
radical changes for the better; it may,
indeed, produce changes for the worse. Some
of these cases are curable by psycho-therapy ;
others are little helped by it. In giving an
opinion, the fact should not be overlooked
that the tribulation of being married to a
partner who suffers from a purely physical
disability can be small compared to that of
being tied to a chronic hysteric or obsessional
or hypochondriac or to the victim of paranoid
jealousy.

Questions in Section C relate to the applicant’s knowledge of and attitude towards
sexual matters. It will be found that a proportion of persons who ask to be examined
before marriage do so because they suffer
from sexual difficulties about which they
want to be reassured. It is obviously undesirable to ask a timid applicant to answer in
writing questions of a perhaps compromising
character which bear upon his sexual habits
or his past conduct. This point will be further
referred to in connection with venereal
diseases. These questions are non-committal
and are to be answered by deleting either
of the words ‘‘yes”’ or “‘no.’”’ They should
cause little or no embarrassment ; yet they
should provide guidance as to the subjects
upon which the applicant might want information or reassurance from the doctor, with
whom he is urged to discuss his problems
freely in a recommendation at the end of
Part IT.

It is a fact that a considerable number of
persons who now ask to be examined before
marriage suffer from apprehensions of a
sexual nature. In the early stages it is likely
that, among the applicants for these examinations, will be found a certain number of
conscientious, timid or mildly neurotic
people. Many young persons, when they
become engaged, look forward to their
future sexual life with quite groundless
misgivings. The belief is widespread that
the practice of masturbation in the years
following puberty causes disease of the
brain and central nervous system, and

D

315

may lead to insanity. Many men who have
been unable to control this practice fear that
the first physical contacts of marriage will
show them to be impotent, and very frequently a sense of profound moral inferiority
is evolved which makes them feel unworthy
of any woman who commands their respect.
The resultant frame of mind is inimical to the
satisfactory consummation of the marriage
in its very early stages. The young bride
who is ignorant of the differences between
male sexual reactions and her own may feel
herself outraged by her husband’s failure,
and in this way the seeds of future marital
disharmony may be sown.

The young girl also may suffer before
marriage from various baseless anxieties.
She may be completely or nearly completely
ignorant of what is implied by coitus. Or she
may believe that the first intercourse necessitates a sort of physical mutilation. The process of defloration may be pictured in terms
of rape with physical violence, involving pain
and bloodshed. Lurid impressions may have
been derived from sensational newspaper
accounts or from stories told by other girls,
or even from a mother with disagreeable early
experiences of marriage. Or the girl may be
afraid to have children, having had a friend
or relative who died in childbirth or having
been frightened by the discussions in the
press about maternal mortality. The doctor
will find that a considerable proportion of
persons who come to him for examination
fall into these categories. It requires no
special experience of medical psychology to
abolish these fears. The man can be emphatically assured that the past practice of
masturbation can have produced no adverse
effect upon his potency ; the woman that
it will not have impaired the prospects
of her future sexual life. It is sometimes
desirable to warn the man that it may
produce a tendency to premature ejaculation
when coitus is first attempted, but he should
be informed that this experience is very
common and should not alarm him or make
him feel that his marriage is a failure. The
girl may be warned of the same thing. She
can be told that if her husband has not had
previous sexual experience, he may not be
316

able to perform the sex act normally at the
first attempt. But she must, on no account,
allow one or two initial failures to make her
feel that all her ideals of marriage have been
destroyed.

It is often desirable to advise the couple to
read a book on the subject. The Sexual Side
of Marriage, by M. D. Exner (Geo. Allen
and Unwin, 3s. 6d.), if read during the
engagement will be found helpful to many
couples, and is recommended. In general, it
is desirable to urge the engaged couple to
discuss these matters freely together, so that
they can enter marriage properly informed
and with their eyes open. The man, moreover, should be aware of the importance,
when coitus takes place, of bringing his wife
to a successful climax. It sometimes happens
that the applicant has a physical preoccupation which weighs on his mind. He may be
worried because he has a tight foreskin which
retracts painfully or improperly, or he may
think that pains in the epidydimis or along
the course of the vas, occurring under the
stimulus of sexual excitement, mean that he
has inadvertently contracted venereal disease from a drinking vessel or a lavatory seat.
Women may place sinister interpretations
upon occasional dysmenorrheea or menorrhagia, or may dread the pain of rupturing the
hymen, which, with the fiancé’s consent, it
may be desirable to stretch. Apprehensions
of a quite fantastic kind could be cited,
occurring in young people, socially normal in
all respects, who have asked to be examined
before marriage. The doctor should be on
the look-out for such fears and misgivings,
because it is in precisely these cases that
simple reassurance does most good.

The questions in Seciton B of Part II will
now be considered. :

Question I is a general question bearing
upon the applicant’s mental stability.

Question 2 relates to the commoner
phobias. The commonest psycho-neurosis,
specially frequent in engaged persons, is the
anxiety state, and it is rare for a sufferer
from this not to have, in mild or severe form,
one of the fears here mentioned. It is, moreover, the neurosis which yields best to psychotherapy. |

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Question 3 is a comprehensive question,
designed to pick up any psychological problems or difficulties missed by the first two
questions.

The answers to these three questions may
suggest that the applicant would benefit from
a short course of psycho-therapy. 7

Proceeding to Section C, question 1
will throw light on the applicant’s knowledge of sexual problems. Question I (ce)
relates to birth-control. If the applicant
is ignorant of the subject and wants information, the following book is recommended: Parenthood: Design or Accident P
by Michael Fielding (Williams and Norgate,
2s.). If the applicant objects to using contraceptives on religious or other grounds, but is
willing to make use of the “‘ safe period,”’ the
following book, which has the nzhil obstat and
imprimatur of the Roman Catholic Church,
is recommended: The Sterile Period in
Family Life, by the Rev. V. J. Couke and
J. J. Walsh, M.D. (B. Herder, 33 Queen’s
Square, London, W.C.1). In this book it is
claimed that the chances of conception are
very small if coitus is restricted to the premenstrual week. While it is yet impossible
to say actually how small these chances are,
there are good reasons for supposing that
they are smaller during this period than
during other phases of the cycle, and to this
extent the book may be helpful to persons
who object to using mechanical or chemical
appliances. |

Questions 2-7 are self-explanatory. The
answers may reveal doubts or difficulties.
which can be removed by a frank talk with
the doctor.

Part III or SCHEDULE

These notes are added because, though the
points mentioned may be familiar to most
doctors, they have been found important by
life assurance companies in forecasting the
liability of individuals to the incidence of
disease in after-life.

Question x. The build, in which is included
the height-weight ratio and the chest expansion, is specially important in relation
to the liability to tuberculosis. Generally
speaking, the tall, thin type with poor chest
PRE-MARITAL HEALTH SCHEDULE

expansion is particularly liable to this
disease, especially in the second and third
decades. The liability is clearly increased if
there is any family history of tuberculosis.

Loss of weight in young people may
indicate early tuberculosis and suggests also
a possibility of diabetes, or hyperthyroidism.
In older people malignancy has to be considered.

Question 2. The state of the cardiovascular
system is obviously important. An average
systolic pressure should not exceed I10
added to half the age. A diastolic pressure of
over 100 is almost certainly pathological.
These points are very important in relation
to the possibility of cardiovascular accidents,
such as coronary thrombosis, cerebral hzmorrhage, cardiac and renal failure.

Rapid pulse (over 90) may be due to
nervousness, which may also cause a rise in
systolic blood-pressure. Abnormal reading
should be checked by taking further observations at the end of the examination. Irregularities should be accurately described if they
cannot be confidently diagnosed.

Question 3. The specific gravity of the
urine should be over 1,012. Low readings
may be due to recent intake of fluid or cold
weather; such an explanation should be
noted if it applies.

Sugar and albumen may be quite innocent.
As a rule glycosuria indicates the necessity
for further tests, before and after a meal. If
it is constantly present a full glucose tolerance test should be advised.

Albuminuria in young people is often
postural. To determine this, a specimen
passed first thing on rising should be tested.
If albumen is persistent, microscopic examination should be made. In some cases, it
may be desirable to advise more elaborate
tests for renal efficiency, such as a blood
urea or urea clearance test.

Question 4. Nervous system. Any alteration in the tendon reflexes should indicate
the necessity for testing the plantar responses.
Tremor of tongue or fingers may indicate
alcoholism or early hyperthyroidism.

Question 5. Heart. Murmurs, especially
systolic murmurs at the base, are often
functional. Rheumatic history and syphilis

317

should be excluded and the nature of the
murmur accurately noted, especially in
relation to its point of maximum intensity;
its variations on change of posture and after
exercise should also be noted, and its
relation to respiration. In all cases where
cardiac disease is suspected an exercise
tolerance test should be applied. The
pulse rate before exercise is recorded,
and then a set exercise (e.g. 15 “ toetouches ’’) given. The rate should return to
normal in two minutes or less.

Question 6. Lungs. Tuberculosis is the
most important disease to exclude. Unilateral crepitations are significant, especially
if brought on after coughing (this test should
always. be applied), or if they fail to clear up
after coughing.

Question 7. Peptic ulcer, gall bladder and
appendicular disease are the common conditions. The history should be carefully gone
over if any of these is suspected.

Question 8. The mouth and fauces may be
important in relation to focal sepsis or other
conditions if any disease which might be due
to these is present.

Question 9. Defective eyesight may be an
indication of organic nervous disease, and it
must be remembered that certain eye conditions are inherited.

Question ro. A chronic aural discharge
may be a serious defect. The frequency and
severity of intermittent discharge should be
noted. |

Question rz. The skin may be very important in relation to allergic diseases, such
as asthma and hay fever. Some diseases,
such as acne and psoriasis, may be very
disfiguring, and it might be wise to advise
treatment before marriage.

Question 13. Enlarged glands should
always indicate a thorough examination for
splenomegaly to exclude early blood diseases.
In certain cases it may be wise to suggest a
blood count.

Questions 14 and 15. The sex glands and
organs of internal secretion can be considered
together. They are more important in females,
especially in relation to menstrual function.
But the possibility of thyroid, pituitary or
adrenal lesions should be borne in mind.
318

Questions 15 and 16. Venereal diseases: In
the questions contained in Part II nothing is
specifically asked about venereal diseases.
No enquiry is made about a sore on the sex
organs, discharge from the sex passages, or a
rash with sore throat. These omissions are
intentional. If it fulfils its purpose, this
schedule will be used by persons of all ages
and types, among others by young girls who
may shrink from physical examinations and
resent questions reflecting on their past
conduct ; this resentment, moreover, may
be felt by the girl’s parents. But a question
which shocks when seen in print may seem
natural in the course of a confidential talk
with a doctor. At first sight it might seem
natural that a Wassermann test should be
performed upon all applicants, whether male
or female. If the doctor suspects that the
applicant has been exposed to the risk of
infection a Wassermann test should be
strongly recommended. In the event of its
being refused, the matter should be noted on
the schedule. In practice, it has been found
(notably in certain American States), that if
these investigations be inexorably demanded
in all cases, the scope of premarital health
examinations is thereby restricted. The
difficulty especially arises in the case of
young girls of whom the family doctor may
feel with almost complete certainty that
there has been no risk of exposure to infection. Nevertheless, it is always possible to
examine the blood for a Wassermann test
without explaining the exact nature of
the test. Blood is frequently examined in
other tests, e.g. for anemia or blood sugar.

~~

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Moreover, a good many applicants expect
that the blood will be examined without
knowing precisely for what purpose.

In this connection the examining doctor
may be asked questions by male applicants
about the effects of a past attack of mumps
or gonorrhoea upon fertility. In these cases
he should use his discretion about doing a
semen test.

Question 17. Sexual Deviations: Masturbation. Reference has been made to this
above. It very rarely produces, in either sex,
effects chronically inimical to marriage.
Homosexuality : It is common for boys and
girls, in adolescence, to pass through a
homosexual phase. But if strong homosexual impulses predominate over hetero-.
sexual in fully adult life, the question of
marriage will deserve serious consideration.
Psycho-therapy is usually helpful in cases
of homosexual men with strong maternal
fixations.

Other sexual deviations will not frequently
be encountered in connection with prenuptial examinations. They are of serious
import if they persist into adult life despite
heterosexual opportunities and experiences.
The doctor confronted with such problems
will find the following book helpful : Psychology of Sex, by Havelock Ellis (Heinemann,
1933, 12s. 6d.).

Question 18. Drink Addiction. If this is
suspected, the history should be scrutinized
with care, the liver examined and evidence
of tremor noted.

Questions 19 to 2r.
planatory.

These are self-ex
 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVII, No. 4,
