OUR NATIONAL BURDEN

A Survey of the Report on Mental Deficiency
By ELDON MOORE

ings; and eugenists may perhaps be
forgiven if they indulge for one
moment in a shout of ghoulish triumph over

\ } INDICATION induces pleasant feel
the Report of the Mental Deficiency Com
mittee.* Seldom have uneasy suspicions,
warnings, direct prophesies, been so utterly
justified as those of biologists and eugenists
for the past twenty years are now justified
by this Report.

It confirms—and amplifies—our fears on
all three main counts:

(1) We have asserted the hereditary
nature of amentia. The Report endorses the
assertion and goes further, strongly suggesting (as has E. J. Lidbetter) that the
disease is largely segregated among a few
thousand family stocks who breed in and
through, but not much with, the normal
population.

(2) We have warned that the falling death
rate would cause an increase in the number
of aments. The Report shows that they have
increased—terribly.

(3) We have found that amentia was
linked in the same families with other
human deficiencies, insanity, pauperism,
‘slumdom,’ unemployability—general innate inefficiency—and constituted with them
a major national danger. The Report comments again and again on this link, regarding the deficient and the inefficient as but
different aspects of the same racial problem,
and outlines a scheme, on national lines, for
dealing with the two as one group.

The Report is in four parts: Part 1,
** General,’? and Part 2, ‘‘ The Mentally
Defective Child,’’ both by the whole Committee ; Part 3, hitherto suppressed by order
of the late Cabinet; and Part 4, ‘‘ Report

* Report of the Mental Deficiency Committee,
being a Joint Committee of the Board of Education
and Board of Control. Parts 1, 2, and 4. London,
1929. Stationery Office. Pp. xi and 168, and x and
239. Price 5s.

by Dr. E. O. Lewis on an Investigation into
the Incidence of Mental Deficiency.”’

This investigation, which occupied two
and a half years, was in many ways similar
to that of the Royal Commission of 1904,
from which it chiefly differed in being entirely the work of one man—assisted, of
course, by a secretary, preliminary investigators, local advice, etc.—instead of several.
Such slight personal bias, therefore, as is
inevitable in deciding the condition of
border-line defectives, was entirely uniform.
Dr. Lewis’s investigation also differed from
that of 1904 in being more concerned with
administrative than scientific problems. But
the scientific, and particularly the genetical,
aspects of amentia were far from neglected :
indeed, Dr. Lewis gathered more scientific
data than it has hitherto been possible to
correlate and publish, and he promises its
appearance later. Meanwhile he gives us a
few significant pedigrees and details of
families containing mental defectives.
Evidently, too, there is a lot of valuable
work on the heredity of amentia in the
suppressed Part 3, as hints at it abound in
the published parts, and there is one specific
reference to a chapter on ‘‘ Mental Deficiency as a Social and Genetic Problem.”’

Six.areas, of approximately 100,000 population each, were chosen, as nearly representative as possible of the geographical,
social, and industrial conditions of the
country as a whole. Apparently the inhabitants or local authorities were not anxious for
this type of publicity, so the areas are
‘anonymous.’ This is a pity, since it makes
it impossible for others to check their representative character. But later, if anyone
wishes—and it would be most desirable—to
follow up Dr. Lewis’s work, it should not
prove difficult to identify the areas in the
Census or Statistical Review from the population details given.

The first of them, Area A, is urban, an

117
118

extra-metropolitan district with a population of 105,065; B is also urban, being one
of the chief centres of the weaving industry
in the north of England, with a population
of 103,344; C, urban too, is a Midland coal,
steel, and engineering district, with a population of 109,280; D is a typically rural
district in the eastern counties, population
99,204; E ‘‘ must be regarded as a hybrid
rural and urban area’”’ in the south-west,
population 103,937; F is a “‘ typically rural
bilingual district in Wales,’’ population
106,742. Together they constitute about
one-sixtieth of the population of the country,
and do really seem, from the details given,
to be representative. Moreover, the ascertainment of amentia by local authorities
averaged out for these areas as practically
the same as that for the whole country, while
the incidences of insanity and of the mentally infirm in receipt of Poor Relief were
also fairly close to normal.

The method was to attack the schools
first, weeding out the backward children
with the aid of preliminary investigations,
teachers’ estimates, and group. tests, until
the residue of apparent defectives was left
for Dr. Lewis’s personal examination. This
part of the investigation was probably complete : it tells neither the best nor the worst,
but the truth. From information gathered
at the schools, from local authorities,
charitable institutions, police, clergy,
medical men, and so on, the adults were
then traced. Practically all were personally
examined, and no doubtful cases were included in the ascertainment figures. This
part of the investigation, therefore, was not
complete, but was probably at least as
thorough as that of 1904.

It is impossible to describe here the
standards and classification adopted in defining the grades of amentia. The important definition is the upper limit, that separating the feeble-minded person from the
normal, if very dull or backward, individual. The criterion adopted was ‘‘ the
ability of the person concerned to suit himself to his environment and live an independent life as an ordinary citizen. The
nature of the deficiency in fact is essentially

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

one which manifests itself in failure of
social adaptation.’’ (Part 1, p. 21.) This is
in line with the standards adopted in 1904
by the Royal Commission, and since then
by Tredgold and other expert investigators,
and it agrees with the definition of the
Mental Deficiency Acts of 1913 and 1927.

But it was also necessary, in ascertaining
children, to conform to the educational
standard laid down by the Education Act of
1921. ‘This, therefore, is a new standard,
not previously used, and draws into its net
a certain proportion of children who escape
the other Acts, children who, while not
capable of benefiting by instruction in the
schools, are yet able to manage themselves
and earn their own living in after life. While
not personally so undesirable as the children
who later fail to adapt themselves to life in
the community, these are really part of the
same problem. At the same time, it is
necessary to deduct them from the total
number of defective children ascertained,
when making the comparison between the
incidence to-day and that in 1906.

Table I (from p. 170 of Part 4) summarizes the ascertainment.

HIGHER RURAL INCIDENCE

So aments are commoner in the country
than in towns—a point to be discussed later
—and it is necessary to make allowance for
this when estimating the total incidence
throughout England and Wales, whose
population is three-quarters urban and only
one-quarter rural. Dr. Lewis, therefore, has
applied ‘‘ the incidence rates for the investigated Urban and Rural areas to the
Urban and Rural populations of the country.’’ Table II (adapted from Tables 10 and
1 (B) pp. 180-83 of Part 4) gives the results.

This Table, however, does not fully represent the situation, and the first thing to
do is to eliminate the children who are only
defective in the educational sense. Dr.
Lewis had found that about one-third of
the feeble-minded children who attended
special schools were afterwards able to fend
for themselves, and could not, therefore, be
said ‘‘ to require the care and control which
OUR NATIONAL BURDEN

 
    
    
 
 
     
   
 
     
   
 
    
   
 
    
   
   
     

   
 

  
  

     
  
 

 

   
 

  
    
  

       
  
    
    
 

  
 

  
 

TABLE I—SUMMARY OF ASCERTAINMENT
Total Numbers | Ascertainment
Ar of Defectives per 1,000 of
ea. ascertained. {Total Population.
Urban A _ Children* ...
Adultsf
Total ...
Urban B ...| Children ...
Adults
Total ...
Urban C ...| Children ...
Adults i
Total ...
Rural D ...| Children
Adults
Total ..
Rural E_...| Children ... 500
Adults 635
Total ... 1,135
Rural F_...| Children ... 491
Adults 609
Total ... 1,100
Six Areas ...| Children 2,604
Adults 2,730

   

Total ... 5,334

* Under 16. ft Over 16.

TABLE II—ESTIMATED INCIDENCE OF MENTAL
DEFECT IN ENGLAND AND WALES

 

   
 
 
   
   
   
  

 

Estimated
Area. Age. Total Population*. similar in- en
vestigated country
areas.
Urban...
\ 31,233,100 104,447
Rural ... 41,558
} 8,056,904 44,306
All areas | Under 139,743

 

148,813

     

, 39,290,000 ¢ '

Aj Areas| All Ages...) 39,290,000 288,556

 

* Registrar-General’s estimates in July 1927.

119

is necessary in the case of a feeble-minded
adult.”? So he deducts one-third of the total
feeble-minded children (110,956), and
arrives at a round figure of 250,000 aments
of all ages and grades. Even this he does
not consider sufficiently accurate, on account
of the inévitable failure to ascertain all
defective children below the age of 7 and
from ages 14-16 (i.e., after school age), as
well as all adult defectives in the investigated areas. The latter he is forced to disregard, but he feels justified in assuming
that all children aged o-16 are proportionately as numerous as the fully investigated
group aged 7-14. ‘‘ The figure thus obtained enables us to state with some measure
of confidence that the mean incidence of
mental deficiency for England and Wales is
about, 8 per 1,000 population.* This incidence applied to the total population yields
an estimate of about 314,000 mentally defective persons of all ages and grades in the
whole country.’’ (Part 4, p. 82.)

At least one person in every 125 is inherently incapable of rising to that minimum of citizenship, the ability to look after
himself—and this does not include the insane, epileptic, generally ‘ neuropathic,’ and
subnormal, the estimation of whose probable
numbers had best be attempted later.

The important question at the moment is
whether the aments, taken alone, have increased not only absolutely, but relatively to
the general population; for that figure of
314,000, high as it is, need not cause us
such very great concern if it only represents
a normal state of affairs.

DOUBLED IN TWENTY YEARS?

The Royal Commission reported that in
1906 aments numbered 149,000, a figure
which Tredgold (on the ground that it included a number of non-defective epileptics)
reduced to 138,529—4.03 per 1,000, or one
person in every 248.

* A footnote to this statement runs, ‘‘ It is of
interest to note that when the Group Tests were
applied to the American Army during the Great War
the incidence of persons who scored a mental age of
8 or less (approximately the standard adopted for
adults in the present investigation) was also eight
per thousand.”’
I20

Taken at their face value, the figures
seem incredible, for they imply that aments
have increased over I00 per cent. during
twenty-one years, while the normal population has only increased 14 per cent. Since,
therefore, we can be sure that the 1927 figure
is not a bit too high, it seems as if the 1906
figure, thorough as that investigation was
believed to have been, was too low. Probably it was : but this can explain only a part
of the apparent increase. Dr. Lewis and the
Committee evidently think that there has
also been a real increase; and one of their
reasons for thinking so is interesting :

** According to the findings of our investigation the incidence of lower grade defect,
that is, of imbecility and idiocy, in the areas
investigated was 1.87 per thousand population, a figure which is almost exactly double

that found by the investigators under the’

Royal Commission, namely, .98 per thousand. It is highly improbable that the
earlier investigators would have failed to
discover any large proportion of the lower
grade defectives, since these must have been
recognised by the various authorities,
clergy, doctors, social workers, police
officers and others who formed the main
sources of information, and the large
majority of them must therefore have been
brought to the investigators’ notice. No
doubt our ascertainment was more complete
than the earlier one, even in respect of
lower grade defectives, but this factor
would certainly not account for the doubling
of the numbers found.

‘‘It is, moreover, a striking coincidence
that notwithstanding the disparity between
the numbers of lower grade defectives found,
the relative incidence of the three grades
should have been almost identical in the
two investigations. Dr. Tredgold has calculated on the basis of the figures of the 1906
investigation that in every hundred aments
in England and Wales there were found to
be six idiots, eighteen imbeciles, and seven
ty-six feeble-minded persons. According to |

Dr. Lewis’s investigation the corresponding
numbers were five idiots, twenty imbeciles,
and seventy-five feeble-minded persons. One
would naturally have expected from what

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

has been said above [about the greater
thoroughness of Dr. Lewis’s investigation |
that the lower grade defectives would have
borne a considerably higher ratio to the
feeble-minded in the earlier investigation,
and the strikingly close similarity between
the findings of the two investigations in this
respect is by no means easy to explain.”’
(Part 2, pp. 78-9.)

his, in fact, is very strong internal evidence that the two investigations were
almost equally successful in discovering the
true facts* ; and it is worth while to pause
for a moment and see whether it would be
biologically possible for the numbers of
aments to double in twenty-one years.

It is tolerably clear that there are many
forms of amentia, inherited in different ways
—some ‘recessive, some dominant, some
probably sex-linked, or due to multiple
factors, and possibly others which are the
reflection of a hybrid condition of different
complementary factors. But pedigree and
statistical investigations show that the
commonest form (or forms) behaves like a
simple recessive or semi-recessive to normal
mentality. If so, and if we take the round
figure of 140,000 aments in 1906, then there
would be at that date about 280,000 heterozygous ‘ carriers.’

Remembering that, theoretically, a very
healthy, long-lived, and fertile population
can just double its numbers in 17%
years, it does not seem so impossible that
140,000 aments and 280,000 ‘ carriers ’+
should, with a fair degree of inbreeding,
produce 300,000 aments in twenty-one years.
It is, of course, true that their death rate
would be high, higher than normal; but
against that must be put not only the
notorious fertility of aments, but also the
equal fertility of the parents from whom
they spring. This high fertility of the
families which produce aments is less well

*It is also significant that though there were
several investigators in 1904-06, each covering a
different district, their ascertainments and estimates
of the amount of amentia coincided with remarkable
closeness.

+ Possibly many more were scattered about the
population.
OUR NATIONAL BURDEN

recognized, though it is equally well established; and the Ljidbetter studies suggest
that ‘carriers’ are perhaps more fertile
than aments themselves—a factor in the
increase of amentia which has hitherto been
too little considered.

THE FALLING DEATH RATE

The excessive fertility of aments and their
kin is sometimes resentfully regarded as a
sort of wantonness on their part. In fact,
it is an essential and inherent part of their
make-up. Defectives of all types are common throughout the world of life; but only
those whose fertility is sufficiently high to
compensate for their high death rate have a
chance of racial survival. Human defectives
can only exist in the same world with
normal people as long as they have more
children; if fertility fell even to average,
they would die out in a few generations. It
would also be a mistake to ascribe their increase primarily to this excessive fertility,
since it is the quality which has always
marked them. The important factor is the
one that is comparatively new, the fall in
the selective death rate. Upon this Dr.
Lewis and the Committee are insistent,
making constant references to it, with some
exact comparisons of the correlation between
healthy living conditions, a low death rate,
and the high incidence of amentia. In one
passage Dr. Lewis writes :

‘The fact that there are larger numbers
of lower grade defectives living to-day than
twenty years ago does not necessarily prove
that larger numbers have been born. A
more probable explanation is that a larger
proportion survive; and this may be attributed to the attention given by public
authorities in recent years to Maternity and
Infant Welfare work. ‘These services can
scarcely be claimed to benefit the community
if this were the only result achieved by
them ; but there is ample evidence that they
have succeeded in saving for the nation not
only its liabilities but, to an even greater
extent, its assets. Antenatal care and improved midwifery and better infant nursing
have undoubtedly saved many more normal

I2L

than mentally defective children.” (Part 4,.
p. 84.)

While agreeing in the main with this.
passage, biologists and statisticians will be
apt to quarrel with certain points in it.
What, for instance, is true of lower grade.
defectives applies equally to the higher
grades: more of them are living—as Dr.
Lewis indicates in other passages—and are
living to breed. Secondly, it is by no means
certain that better care has saved ‘‘ more:
normal than mentally defective children.’’
Thirdly, if it is literally true, it is statistic-.
ally misleading. Without any care, only
healthy and normal children would survive.
Care that results in the survival of
even one defective child increases the
proportion of defect, even if at the same
time it saves double the usual number of
normal children. The disproportion is.
emphasized when the birth rate of normal
children is falling while that of defectives.
remains high.

THE RURAL CONCENTRATION

Dr. Lewis and the Committee alike attach:
much importance to one of the most marked
discoveries of the investigation, the great:
difference in the incidence of amentia.
between the rural and urban areas, and they
tend to look upon it as one of the causes of
the general increase in the defect. The disparity is certainly very marked, aments in
rural areas numbering 10.66 (per 1,000 sex
population) against the 7.34 of those in
urban areas.

Possibly the ascertainment of adult:
aments was not quite so thorough in urban
districts, which lack social cohesion, as in
the country, where everyone knows his.
neighbour. But the disparity, which is confirmed by the findings of the Royal Commission, is undoubtedly real; and Dr. Lewis.
writes : ‘‘ The actual numbers of mentally
defective persons in rural areas are increased
by the tendency of families with mentally
defective sons and daughters to move from.
urban to rural areas... . The high inci-dence of mental defect among adults in rural.
areas is also partly explained by the fact:
122

that mentally defective persons live longer
in the country than in the town. The higher
rate of child mortality in the urban districts
would lower the incidence of mental deficiency; mental and physical weakness are
closely correlated, especially in the lower
grade cases, and undoubtedly a relatively
larger proportion of mentally defective than
normal children die at an early age... .
Even when allowance has been made for the
factors we have just mentioned, it seems 1mpossible to avoid concluding . . . that the
incidence of mental defect among adults is
intrinsically higher in rural than in urban
districts.”? (Part 4, pp. 71-2.)

Further on he writes, ‘‘ The agricultural
depression of the last century and the
phenomenal development of industries in
urban areas caused a steady stream of
migration from the countryside to the town ;
and, in the main, it was the young and virile
section of the population that left the countryside. It is not unreasonable to suppose
that this section also comprised the more
intelligent members of the rural community.

This selective process has been at
work on a large scale in this country for the
greater part of the last hundred years. .. .

It is not improbable that the cumulative 
result . . . is that the rural areas have been
left with a population containing a relatively
large proportion of persons of low mental
endowments.’’ (Part 4, p. 73.)

He notes that his results confirm those of
the Royal Commission, and adds that the
disparity between town and country appears
to have increased. ‘‘ Therefore,’’ he continues, ‘‘ if the incidence of mental defect is
really increasing in this country, the increase is occurring chiefly in rural areas.
The mental deterioration, if there be any,
is not associated primarily with the bad
housing and industrial conditions of our
large towns—although there is much evidence in our data that these contribute
materially—but rather with the biological
selective process in our rural districts,
where, according to available vital statistics,
the conditions are most favourable to health
and longevity.

*‘'The removal from rural districts of

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

large numbers of families of sound stock
would in itself increase the incidence of
mental defect in the population in these
districts even if the actual birth rate of
mental defectives remained the same; and
conversely, the incidence of mental deficiency in urban areas would be decreased. If
this is all that has occurred there is no cause
for anxiety; but the possibility, and even
the probability, that the high incidence of
mental deficiency in rural districts may be
due to two or three generations of selective
breeding from the poor mental stock left in
these districts should make us apprehensive.
The same laws of heredity, according to all
the scientific evidence we have, determine
the transmission of mental endowments as
that of physical features ; and it is inevitable
that the cumulative effects of inbreeding of
a group of persons of low intelligence should
result in an increased incidence of mental
deficiency. It may be that for the first time
in the history of this country the distribution of the population, due to the phenomenal industrial developments of the last century, has become such as to make intensive
inbreeding of poor human stock possible on
a relatively large scale. If so, the problem
is a serious one.’’ (Part 4, pp. 73-4.)

In a later passage he adds that if the
selective process can be proved to have taken
place, ‘‘ leaving behind in the rural areas
many persons of an inferior stock who have
inter-married, then it is difficult to avoid the
conclusion that there has been in the rural
areas an increase in the birth rate of the
mentally defective. A close study of the
family foci of mental defect in some of the
rural districts which we investigated caused
us to feel that this conclusion cannot be dismissed as altogether impossible.’’ (Part 4,
p. 85.)

The Committee write in much the same
strain.

I have quoted these passages at some
length not in order to illustrate the gravity
of the situation and the confirmation of
eugenic theory, but rather because they
modify old theories and indicate that the
situation is not as dark as it seems.
OUR NATIONAL BURDEN

THE ENCOURAGING ASPECT

While I, like many others, knew that
amentia was probably confined to a relatively few strains among whom there was a
certain degree of inbreeding, I do not think
anyone was prepared to find the inbreeding
so close nor the concentration of the defect
in certain areas so intense. If these are
really the facts, far from viewing them, as
do Dr. Lewis and the Committee, with
gloomy forebodings, I look upon them as the
brightest spot on our racial horizon. If
aments are mating at random, they are
poisoning healthy stocks; if heterozygotes
are continuing the process, the genes of
defect will be so widely scattered among the
population that nothing short of drastic
natural selection could save us from racial
decay. But here we have evidence—I have
not quoted a third of it—that the reverse is
happening: defectives and ‘ carriers’ are
breeding together, concentrating the defect
in certain areas, and bringing it to the surface. Very little of the poison is escaping
into the main stream of the nation’s blood.

Here is precisely that process of inbreeding, growing progressively more intense,
which, as I mentioned earlier, would render
the rapid growth of the disease possible or
even likely in comparatively few years.
Here, too, is remarkable confirmation of
the opinion expressed some years ago by
Lidbetter that a few thousand family
stocks, breeding in and through, but
not very much with, the normal population,
are responsible for almost the whole national
burden of disease, defect, and pauperism.

As everyone knows, the worst is over
when the gumboil gathers in a gross, unsightly swelling on the jaw. Most of the
poison is out of the general system, and has
concentrated where it can be eliminated by
the lancet.

If the evil is not lanced, the poison flows
back into the blood.

It is a cheerful thought that the causes of
racial decay should now be presenting themselves in such a tangible, manageable form,
to be eliminated, if we have but the courage
and common sense to rise promptly to the

123

occasion, in the course of a few generations.
But that cheerfulness requires some modification. Dr. Lewis says that the disparity in
incidence between rural and urban areas
appears to have increased since the Royal
Commission. He may be correct, but he
does not give the two sets of figures, and
a rough calculation I have made from those
of the Royal Commission (taken from A. F.
Tredgold’s Mental Deficiency, sth edition)
indicates, on the contrary, that the disparity has somewhat decreased :

Date. 1906. 1927. & Increase.
Urban average* .. 2°63 6°71 155
Rural average* 4°38 10*49 139

 

* Incidence per 1,000 population.

If any reliance can be placed on this calculation, it suggests that the proportionate
numbers of aments in towns are beginning
to catch up with those in the country. This
does not, of course, imply that amentia is
not concentrated in certain family ‘ pockets ’
in the country, because it obviously is.
Neither need we assume that where it
occurs in towns it is widely disseminated
among the normal population. On the
whole, it appears to be only a little less concentrated in urban areas than in rural. The
towns, as other social enquiries suggest, are
now breeding their own types of population,
which may include an urban variety of
amentia. Certainly the Lidbetter studies
indicate the existence of a defective type
which flourishes in slum surroundings and
outbreeds its normal neighbours.

In surveying the Report, one feels
crippled by the lack of Part 3—what,
indeed, must the writers think of its suppression? The published parts, for instance,
make comprehensive recommendations for
dealing with defective children, but these
are of little use without the recommendations
in Part 3 for controlling defective adults. It
is quite clear that the Committee consider
amentia, either in children or adults, cannot
be separated from the borderline conditions.
124

In their view, retarded children and ineffective adults present different aspects of the
same racial problem, and they definitely recommend that ament and retarded children
should be embraced by the same administration.

The biologist here would be apt to
murmur that the retarded were heterozygous ‘ carriers’ of mental deficiency: the
Committee explicitly suggest this explanation (Part 2, p. 92), and Dr. Lewis’s findings are certainly most suggestive. He
“formed the opinion in every school that
he visited that for every child whom he
classified as feeble-minded there were two
or more children of only slightly higher
mental and educational capacity.’’ (Part 2,
p. 91.) If this rough proportion held, on the
average, for individual schools, it would
strongly suggest that the retarded were
the hybrid ‘ carriers ’ of the same defect in
a semi-latent form.

It is difficult to guess from their hints
how the Committee suggest adult defectives
should be controlled ; but I have reason to
believe that sterilization is at least discussed
in Part 3, and that the main proposal is for
the setting up of a Ministry which will enforce existing laws, introduce new ones, and
generally tackle the whole problem on
national lines.

Again, Part 3 contains such data as
emerged from the investigation on the fertility and families of aments, on their biological pedigrees, on the links between
amentia, insanity, pauperism, and the rest—
all vitally important stuff, without which the
rest is mutilated, incomplete, full of tantalizing hints. For example, one of the
chief methods of tracing defective adults was
through their relationship to defective children examined in the schools. Dr. Lewis
also found that in those districts where
amentia was high among children, it
occurred with similar frequency among
adults, especially in the country. ‘‘ In town
and country the mental defectives were
mostly found in ‘ pockets ’ ; there were geographical foci of mental deficiency. . . . In
the large towns our work in connection with
the ascertainment of both adults and chil
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

dren was mostly in slum areas. So muck
was this the case that we were inclined to
generalize rashly that slumdom is largely
the problem of the subnormal mentality of
the inhabitants. Slumdom, not poverty, it
is necessary to emphasize, for the distinction
is important. Some of the homes we visited,
where there was real poverty, were by no
means slum homes. . . . (Part 4, p. 74.)

“‘'When a cluster of mentally defective
persons was found in a rural district we
discussed the matter with some responsible
person who was interested in social problems.
and who knew the district well. Not infrequently the explanation given was that a
generation or two ago a family of poor intelligence had settled in that part; the children had married others of much the same
mentality and had produced the present
stock of mental defectives. We were able to
obtain fairly conclusive evidence of this in
some districts. . . .’’ (Part 4, p. 77.)

Similar passages, stressing consciously or
unconsciously the hereditary cause of
amentia, continually occur; and the Committee remark that when the geographical
foci, in town or country, of the disease were
studied, they were found to be family foci.

I have barely skimmed the main outlines
of the Report, necessarily leaving much of
the utmost importance unmentioned—such,
for instance, as the discovery that the
feeble-minded seem to derive proportionately
more benefit (as reflected in death rates)
than the lower grades from healthy surroundings, and also more benefit than does
the normal person: ‘“‘. . . the physical fitness and longevity of the normal person is
not so dependent upon environment as those
of the mentally defective person.”’

A further very interesting discovery, confirmatory of much random observation, was
that idiots and imbeciles were relatively as
common in good as in bad homes and seldom
had family histories of mental disease, while
the feeble-minded, who had usually bad
pedigrees, were by far the most common in
homes of the poorest type. This suggests
that while feeble-mindedness is hereditary
in origin, the grosser grades of defect are
simply due to accidents of development.
OUR NATIONAL BURDEN

THE AMENT IN INDUSTRY

Dr. Lewis also sheds a sidelight on the
frequent statement that aments and their
kin are in reality a social asset, since they
supply the need of our civilization for hewers
of wood and drawers of water. He found
that for many years a large number of girls
in the Midland area C had been employed
at a box factory, but that of late it had
become increasingly difficult for the subnormal girl to get work there. ‘‘ We found
that the employers had opened a school at
the factory; and all girls admitted were
expected to spend six months on probation
at this school before they were permanently
employed. During this time each girl was
judged from various standpoints—general
intelligence, educational attainments, vocational fitness, temperament and character—
and if she were deemed unsuitable on any of
these grounds she was rejected. We were
given to understand that the employers
found the experiment a distinct success in
securing the most efficient type of girl.
Several of the retarded girls we interviewed
were among the rejected, much to the disappointment of the girls themselves and
their parents. The rejection of a number of
feeble-minded girls by these employers in a
single town may not in itself be of much
importance; but if as is probable in the
future employers in all parts of the country
adopt similar methods of acquiring the best
human material for their factories and workshops, this trend of events is of considerable
significance. . . .”’ (Part 4, p. 95.)

After all, it is not so very surprising to
find that if you want good work you need
good workers.

THE TOTAL OF MENTAL DISEASE

Finally, the following estimate may give
a rough idea of the total amount of those
heritable mental diseases which reduce the
sufferers below the rank of human.

To the 314,000 aments should be added
double that numbér of ‘ carriers’ and the
134,000 insane persons known to the Board
of Control. The latter, it should be noted,

125

do not include those who have previously
been under care and discharged as ‘ cured’
—though most of them will return to the
asylum from time to time—nor those children and young persons, at present below the
age of insanity, who are destined to lose their
reason. Also there are no data for even
guessing at the numbers of epileptics. So
it is an under-estimate simply to add up the
aments, ‘ carriers,’ and insane—1,076,000,
over 2 per cent. of the population, or about
one in every forty persons.

Members of an official enquiry such as this
would be false to the responsibility entrusted
to them if they allowed their personal
theories, however sound or likely, to outrun
the facts : it is their duty to be conservative.
The passages which follow, therefore, should
carry added weight, and they may perhaps
show those who still doubt us, that
eugenists, on the whole, have not exaggerated the need for racial reform.

I quote from p. 82 of the whole Committee’s survey :

‘*, . . this feature of our findings...
seems to establish the fact that feeblemindedness is more likely to occur among
populations of a generally low mental and
physical level than elsewhere, that is to
say, in slum districts and in rural areas
with a poor type of inhabitant, and that
broadly speaking it is likely to be most prevalent in a certain limited group, which may
be termed the sub-normal group, of the
general population. The evidence is not
conclusive, but it does at least point to there
being some relation between the slum problem and the problem of mental defect, as we
shall see below [the reference here is to Part

3].

“A MAJOR SOCIAL PROBLEM ”

‘“‘ Certain other features in Dr. Lewis’s
Report point in the same direction. It is
generally accepted that certain diseases and
physical defects . . . are more commonly to
be found in slum areas and in association
126

with poor and dirty home conditions than
elsewhere, and it is not without interest to
know that according to the findings of our
investigation the occurrence of these very
diseases and defects is many times more
frequent among mentally defective children
than it is among the general school population. Again, a fact which has some bearing
on this question and which has _ been
observed elsewhere was noted in one of the
investigated areas, namely, that after a slum
area has been cleared and the population
moved to well-designed houses and to generally hygienic surroundings, the very conditions which it was hoped to remedy soon
recur and oblige the Local Authority to intervene to prevent the emergence of a new
slum area. It was in such a district as this
that our Investigator found one of the

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

highest incidences of mental defect found in
any area of comparable size.

‘* If, as there is reason to think, mental
deficiency, much physical inefficiency,
chronic pauperism, recidivism, are all moré
or less closely related, and are all parts of a
single focal problem, can it be that poor
mental endowment, manifesting itself in an
incapacity for social adjustment and inability to manage one’s own affairs, may be
not merely a symptom but rather the chief
contributory cause of these kindred social
evils? If so, then the problem of mental
inefficiency, of which mental deficiency is
an important part, assumes a yet wider and
deeper significance and must indeed be one
of the major social problems which a
civilized community may be called upon to
solve.”’

EEO

PART THREE PUBLISHED

Part 3 of the Report has just been published, at the moment of our going to press.
It largely deals with the administrative
problems to be faced, and will therefore be
reviewed, with the recommendations in the
other parts, in the October REviEw. It does
practically involve the creation of a new
Ministry.

Sterilization is definitely recommended in
certain cases, and hesitatingly considered in
others. But it is thought—on weak grounds,

in my opinion—that it would only go a short
way to reducing primary amentia. Better
segregation and “socialization ’’ are the
other alternatives suggested, although they
would be no more effective in achieving this
main aim.

The fertility of aments and ‘ carriers,’ the
heritability of the defect and its connection
with slums, pauperism, etc., are further enlarged upon, but there are few of the exact
details we had been led to expect.

EK. M.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXI, No. 2.
