‘ Eugenics is the science which deals with all influences that improve the inborn qualities of a race; also
with those that develop them to the utmost advantage.’—SIR FRANCIS GALTON (1904)

The Eugenics Review

EDITORIAL OFFICES: THE EUGENICS SOCIETY * 69 ECCLESTON SQUARE : LONDON ° SWI °

Editor for the Society: Mrs. K. Hodson

VICTORIA 2091

 

NOTES OF THE
QUARTER

CONTENTS OF
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

IT IS DESIRABLE that the editorial policy of
every journal should be reconsidered from time
to time, and the Council of the Eugenics Society
has recently given some attention to the format
of the REVIEW in the light of suggestions that
more original work might be published in its
pages. The result was a reaffirmation that among
its functions there should be included: (i) the
making of comments on the general eugenic implications of current developments of all relevant
kinds, whether economic, political or scientific;
and (ii) the giving of succinct accounts of recent
researches, in a form in which members of the
Society generally should be in a position to
appreciate their significance.

Subject to these considerations, the REVIEW
will from time to time publish both original
scientific material and comprehensive summaries
of current research and of accumulated knowledge in particular fields of inquiry.

If any readers care to make particular suggestions concerning the contents of the REVIEW,
the Editorial Committee will be glad to receive
them.

Fellows and members of the Society are also
invited to comment similarly on the general
programmes for the two Symposia that have so
far been held. While the total attendance at the

ER—A

sessions was excellent, it is noteworthy that nonmembers heavily predominated in the audience.
Members who, one would expect, should have
a special interest in the proceedings did not
attend in strength. .

JAPANESE FERTILITY

IN AN ARTICLE in the present issue of the
REVIEW, Dr. Samuel discusses the decline in the
birth rate in Japan in recent years, and its implications. In this connection, the opinions of
Japanese demographers, as expressed in their
current writings, are of some interest. One (Dr.
Muramatsu) describes it as very difficult to
evaluate the role performed by government
measures in bringing down the rate, and surmises
that the present low level could have been reached
anyway—sooner or later—even if there had been
no government-sponsored efforts at all. Nevertheless, he feels that official action has been
beneficial in diffusing the knowledge and practice of family planning rapidly and extensively.
This view of the part the government has played
accords well with Dr. Samuel’s analysis.
Another writer from the same country (Dr.
H. Mizushima) has drawn attention to the fact
that the net reproduction rate there has now
fallen to below unity and speaks of the necessity
of raising its level if eventual depopulation is to
be avoided. For technical reasons, it seems
possible that the picture presented at the moment
by the reproduction rate may be unduly pessimistic, and in any event those with memories
of the scare in the 1930s about British
depopulation will be rather sceptical of the
need for alarm at this stage. Moreover, the
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Japanese population is even now expected to
rise for some years, and any decline in total
numbers seems unlikely to begin before the end
of the twentieth century.

Amid these developments, it is of interest to
note that, according to Dr. M. Kimura there
has been a considerable narrowing in the dispersion of fertility between occupational groups,
even in the relatively short period 1955-60.
Although traditional views are still held by some
people in rural districts, the younger generation
is being largely absorbed into industrial life in
the cities and is conditioned to a small family
size. “With wage levels still insufficient to meet
prevailing material and cultural aspirations, a
continuation of the current low level of fertility
is in prospect, at least for the immediate
future.”

The views to which reference has been made
were expressed at the World Population Conference last year, and they emphasize the unique
demographic position of Japan at the present
time. Dr. Samuel rightly selects only some of
the features of the scene in that country as providing suitable lessons for India and other
nations.

INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION
OF UNIVERSITY WOMEN
Conference, Brisbane, August 1965

MISS I. A. LAURENCE writes: The Conference
theme was “The Impact of Population Change;
Social and Educational Implications”. It was
developed in addresses from seven distinguished
experts.

In her opening paper, Dr. Swaine Thomas
traced the history of the study of population over
300 years since the time of John Graunt, dwelling
on the difficulties and uncertainties attached to
any estimate of world population. Estimates
indicated that the world population had doubled
itself in the 200 years from 1650 to 1850, doubled
again in the ninety years from 1850 to 1940, and,
on the assumption of continuing trends, might
again be doubled by 1980, a period of only forty
years. The recent rapid growth was due to falling
death rates in the under-developed countries
while their birth rates still remained high. She
stressed the need for economic development and

2

education in these countries if the “population
explosion”’ were to be checked.

Dr. Mohiuddin Ahmed, in a detailed paper
dealing with population growth at different
levels of living, with density of population and
possible future shortage of land in certain parts
of the globe, said that the rate of world increase
had moved from 1-1 per cent a year during
1930-40 to about 2-1 during 1960-62. Most of
the growth was taking place in areas of acute
poverty amidst hunger and malnutrition, and
the rates of increase in these areas were outpacing their rates of economic betterment. If
these areas were ever to improve their standards
of living, their rates of growth must decrease.

Miss Kamudini Dandekar illustrated the
problem by reference to India, which had accepted the need for population control. A programme
involving clinics, the manufacture of contraceptives and the acceptance of sterilization where
there were three or more children, had been
drawn up. By 1966 it was hoped there would
be 12,000 family planning clinics and the aim
was to reduce the birth rate to 25 per thousand
by 1973. At present it was 39, though in cities
like Bombay, Madras and Poona it was under 30.

Mrs. A. F. M. Ahmed spoke of the position
in Pakistan. In the first years of that country’s
independence, in power politics, human resources
were counted as a blessing to justify various
social programmes, the necessity for new markets
and industrialization. In the mid-1950s_ the
intellegentsia realized the need for population
control. They now had a family planning scheme,
on a voluntary basis, consisting of surveys
among those who were in receipt of Government
medical help, the creation of groups of enlightened people in the villages who would undertake
education of their fellows and the setting up of
family planning clinics (about 1,600 are now in
operation). So far, very few people had taken
to family planning, and she instanced certain
drawbacks to the plans, such as insufficient
funds and the reluctance of the Government to
have open propaganda.

Dr. Hilde Wander compared Indonesia with
Western Germany, countries which had both
suffered from war destruction and had had
rapid increases in population since, but in the
former it was all natural growth, whereas in
NOTES OF THE QUARTER

Germany about three-quarters of the increase
was due to immigration. This immigration was
political and non-selective, so that it had had
little effect on the age-distribution of Germany’s
population. Indonesia was suffering all the
difficulties of a developing country with a large
natural increase. West Germany, on the other
hand, having got over her food, housing and
other problems of accepting about ten million
refugees into her war-disrupted economy, had
now expanded industrially.

Professor E. W. Emmens described the role
of the International Planned Parenthood Federation, whose views he to some extent represented,
and whose primary aim was to advance education in family planning and responsible parenthood. He outlined measures being taken in
Singapore (for South-East Asia), Pakistan,
Ceylon, Latin America, the United States,
Great Britain and Japan. He concluded with
some observations on modern methods of birth
control.

In the final paper, Dr. Jean Bourgeois-Pichat
dealt with the relationship between cultural
factors and demographic events. He discussed
social customs and taboos in various parts of
the world (defining ‘“‘cultural order” as a set of
values common to a social group) and their
effects on marriage, intercourse, reproduction,
mortality and migration (including urbanization). Of the three main factors affecting population growth, migration was most clearly linked
to cultural orders, fertility second and mortality
last. In conclusion he warned that all the cultural orders were about to share one feature,
birth control; if easy and efficient contraceptive
devices became available, reproduction might
drop to a dangerously low level. Would it be
possible to establish new cultural orders to
avoid the eventual disappearance of the human
species?

THE STATE OF FOOD AND
AGRICULTURE, 1965

IT IS CUSTOMARY to review in these columns
the annual publications of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
under the above title.* That for 1965 is of more

 

* Rome, 1965. Pp. xi-+273. Price 37s. 6d.

than usual interest because it surveys “the
second post-war decade” and contrasts it with
the ten preceding years. The Report is of ample
length and the text is accompanied by a comprehensive set of tables and charts.

Much of the account is of a technical nature,
especially in relation to farming, fishing, forestry,
economics and trade. It contains references not
only to national planning but also to an Indicative World Plan for Agriculture Development

upon which work is now being started. This

exercise sets out to show the levels of production,
consumption and trade in produce that should
be attained by the developing countries by
1975—and even 1985—if their economic and
social objectives are to be realized. (Developed
and centrally-planned economies will be considered in terms of their impact on developing
nations.) It will recommend a pattern of action,
policies and measures appropriate to the
achievement of this target. The Plan will be
presented to a World Food Congress in 1968.

The Report contains a short section on nutritional requirements, with two interesting tables
in which average daily supplies of calories and
proteins in each country are compared with
estimated average needs. According to a recent
document published jointly by an expert committee of WHO and FAO, meeting the protein
requirements of man is “perhaps the most important nutritional problem that is still not fully
solved”, especially in relation to children.
According to the October issue of WHO
Chronicle, anything up to 9 per cent of children
under age five in the developing countries suffer
from severe protein deficiency disease, while
perhaps one-half have mild or moderate protein
deficiency.

Members of the Eugenics Society will be
particularly interested in Chapter II in which
the relative growth of population and production
during the past ten years is measured. The
world summary of these statistics is charted on
the cover of the volume, and shows that for the
last six years the rates of increase of the two
elements have just kept pace with one another.
Further charts on page 17 indicate that during
this period agricultural production per head
actually fell in the developing countries—in
Africa, Latin America and the Far East alike—

3
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

while rising steadily in the developed regions.
Production itself grew at the same rate in both
types of area. It is in the population growth
that the difference lies, and in this respect the rate
of increase is twice as high in the less favoured
nations than in the more fortunate.

QUALITIES OF FREEDOM

“FREEDOM IS A U-word, and together with
“human rights” can be used attractively in presenting an argument. Words of an opposite
sense tend to be pejorative. When, therefore,
A. V. Hill in his presidential address to the
British Association in 1952 queried whether the
rights of man could be held to include the right
to unlimited reproduction, he might have
appeared to some people to be suggesting a
curb, and this might have tended to arouse unfavourable reactions. Sir Dugald Baird put the
same case in a more encouraging light when, in
a recent article in the British Medical Journal,*
he suggested that mankind should be granted
another freedom. In addition to the four proposed by Franklin D. Roosevelt (of speech, of
worship, from want, from fear) he postulated
“freedom from the tyranny of excessive fertility’.

For Sir Dugald, this means making contraceptive advice freely available under the National
Health Service and offering tubal ligation to
women who have the desired number of children,
leading in turn to more independence for the
female sex and a greater use of their education
and skill for the benefit of the national economy.
Not only women would gain, however; the
advantage to children is obvious and men too
would gain by the general relief from overcrowding. To reduce the problem to its most
succinct and elemental terms, might not Sir
Dugald have asked for “freedom from pressure”
by his fellow men?

THROMBOSIS AND THE PILL

IN AN ARTICLE in the British Medical Journal,t
Illis, Kocen, McDonald and Mondkar discuss
four cases in which arterial occlusive episodes
developed in young women within a few weeks

 

* 13th November 1965, pp. 1141-8.
+ 13th November 1965, pp. 1164-6.

of starting on oral contraceptives. It was not,
however, possible to draw any conclusions about
a possible causal relationship between “‘the pill’’
and thrombosis; in two of the cases there had
already been a similar episode before the taking
of the pill began, and contrary to popular belief
cerebral arterial occlusion is not altogether unknown among young persons.

A letter in the Lancet of the same date gave a
report from the Committee on Safety of Drugs
in which it is stated that approximately half a
million women used oral contraceptives at some
time during 1965. The committee estimate that
on the average 400,000 used them continuously,
and on this basis it is reckoned that, in a period
of twelve months, thirteen deaths would be
expected from cerebral thrombosis or embolism,
coronary occlusion, pulmonary embolism or
infarction and mesenteric infarction. The actual
number of deaths from these causes among pilltakers was sixteen.

As the committee emphasize, no firm conclusion can be drawn from the very limited data
so far available, but the inference for the present
is that there can be no objection to the marketing
of oral contraceptives. Without question, the
future development of the situation will be
watched with great care, but so far as we know
at the moment there is very little to fear.

PRIMATE FOSSILS IN THE FAYUM

MR. DAVID PILBEAM writes: Since 1961
Professor Elwyn L. Simons of Yale University
has been leading yearly fossil-collecting expeditions to the Fayum Depression, a desolate area
on the edge of the Western Desert, some forty
miles south-west of Cairo, UAR. The area is
famous for the discovery of the archaic primates
Propliopithecus, Moeripithecus, Apidium and
Parapithecus, found by Markgraf during the
first decade of this century, and described then
by Schlosser and Osborne. These forms were,
until recently, the earliest animals assignable
with some certainty to the Higher Primate suborder Anthropoidea, the zoological group to
which we and our ancestors, recent and ancient,
belong. The last five years have seen an enormous
increase in the number of specimens known
from the Fayum, and the discovery of several
NOTES OF THE QUARTER

new genera as well as new species of previously
known genera. The deposits are of Oligocene
age, 30-40 million years old.

The Fayum deposits consist of sandstones
and gravels, laid down by ancient seas, deltas
and rivers. The fossil-collectors rely on erosion
produced both by the wind and by their own
hand-powered brushes. A typical day involves
crawling across a wind-blown quarry for all
available daylight hours, one’s face a few inches
from the sand, hoping to sight one of those
precious primates. Difficult indeed to imagine
when surrounded by the bleak emptiness of the
desert that this was once lush tropical forest.

Upper jaws—normally rare in comparison to
mandibles in fossil assemblages—of Apidium and
Parapithecus have been recovered, as well as
many additional lower jaws. It is now clear that
these two forms were closely related, that
neither had much to do phylogenetically with
fossil tarsioids, and that neither is related closely
to the ancestry of living Higher Primates. One
problem at least which has vexed palaeoanthropologists has been solved by the new Fayum
discoveries: the lower dental formula of Apidium
and Parapithecus is neither 2.1.2.3. nor 1.1.3.3.
but 2.1.3.3. The medial incisors had been lost
from the Parapithecus type specimen. The most
primitive of the new forms, and the most primitive of known fossil Higher Primates, is Oligopithecus, a tiny primate related perhaps to the
Eocene prosimian family Omomyidae. Aeolopithecus, so-called because of the wind erosion
suffered by the type specimen during its 35million-year history, is thought by Simons to
be related to the ancestry of the gibbons.

Perhaps the most exciting new find is that of
several specimens of a new fossil ape, Aegyptopithecus. Aegyptopithecus was gibbon-sized and
is probably the earliest known pongid, that is
belonging to the family of living and fossil apes.
Morphologically it appears to be ancestral to
the Miocene Proconsul-Dryopithecus group that
later gave rise to the modern great apes. Propliopithecus and Moeripithecus are now known
to be synonyms. Because little is known of the
stratigraphical position of the new finds relative
to the original type specimens, and because our
knowledge of structural variability in these
forms is so meagre, it is difficult to say anything

definite about the relationships of Propliopithecus and Aeg yptopithecus. However, Aegyptopithecus is an ancestral ape, and Propliopithecus
is not an ancestral gibbon (as had been previously
suggested). Propliopithecus may be the earliest
known primitive hominid, and the Fayum may
be a sampling in time close to the bifurcation of
the ancestral stocks of men and apes.

SUCCESSFUL STRATEGY

DR. G. C. L. BERTRAM writes: The recent
agreement of certain London Boroughs financially to support the special work on problem
families of the Eugenics Society’s subsidiary, the
Marie Stopes Memorial Foundation, affords an
occasion for referring to an important mode of
leadership in a sophisticated society.

Propaganda, education, research and leadership have all been overlapping facets of the
Society’s activities for over half a century. But
the stress changes from decade to decade with
changes in fashion, public opinion and social
necessity. It is also to be recognized—though
some find it hard to accept—that in the United
Kingdom the mark or reward of successful
voluntary effort by a specialized society is that
public opinion is at last convinced and Government takes over. The early work of the British
Social Biology Council (formerly the Social
Hygiene Council) on venereal diseases is a case
in point. Some may dare to hope a like “‘fate”’
for the Family Planning Association, the
Abortion Law Reform Association, the Euthanasia Legislation Society, even the Marriage
Guidance Council, to limit the present list to a
particular area of interest. Arguments over the
relative efficiency of private endeavour and
nationalized welfare are relevant but will not
here be expounded.

Consider in this light two related matters
where the Eugenics Society subsidized activity
later to be taken over by a more substantial and
less catholic voluntary body, and by local
authorities.

In the 1920s the Council of the Eugenics
Society realized that in a modern society
differential fertilities—the whole basis of potential eugenic advance—could only be brought
about by appropriate voluntary means when

5
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

effective, cheap and acceptable contraceptives
had become universally available. The Society
therefore spent much in the stimulation and
support of research into contraceptive effectiveness, notably in the work of Dr. J. R. Baker at
Oxford on spermicides. The Volpar series was
the direct result. This important work was real
pioneer effort, later to be taken over and extended until its evolutionary product to-day is
the whole testing apparatus of the Family
Planning Association and other testing laboratories. Is the time now ripe for an Industrial
Research Association in the contraceptive field?
{s contraception now an industry? The answer
must be affirmative.

To take a second example: thirty years later,
in the late ’fifties and early ’sixties, consider the
growth of domiciliary birth control assistance.
Pioneers in Newcastle upon Tyne and Southampton demonstrated how kindness and tact

could gain entry for medical women into the
often squalid homes of the feckless. Sympathetic
discussion and the provision of free contraceptives could result in a remarkable limitation
of problem families, whose mothers were eager
to do just that, given the right help.

The Eugenics Society quickly grasped the
opportunity, subsidized this work substantially,
and extended it to London through the Marie
Stopes Memorial Foundation. It encouraged
the calculation of the detailed cost of this contraceptive service against the saving to the
community in grants and allowances for the
children whose birth was avoided. And the
figures are striking indeed.

The subsidization of personal service to those
who needed it was throughout a tactic within
the main strategy of promoting differential
fertility of a favourable sort, and of persuading
the public authorities to pay for its promotion.
