The Danger of Degeneracy.
By Proressor Herman Lunpgorc, M.D.

II.
Eugeniz theses and guide-lines.

(Conclusion to the paper appearing in Vol. XIIT, No 4).

A.

1. A good natiunal-material is the greatest riches a country can
possess. The material of the people depends in the highest degree upon
the quality of the hereditary mass. This is different in different
nations. ee 
2. Heredity and selection are the chief influences which govern life
in this world. Environment is certainly also of significance, although
it cannot develop new qualities but can only modify those already
present, in the one or the other direction.

8. Families and nations are governed by strict laws in the same way
as the private individual. One of the first tasks laid upon every
civilized nation is the careful investigation of these biological laws of
nature, and afterwards the regulation and arrangement of the conditions of society to suit these laws. If we break them we must ourselves
bear the consequences: we degenerate and go under. These laws,
however, are not altogether and only stern avengers. Rightly understood and obeyed they form a richly yielding source of improvement
and progress. 83: ge8 Woe i= Sey Pele Belpees> Ele

4. A glaring waste of the national-material is to be found at
present among many of the civilized nations and cven with us. Material
of great, and to a large extent irreplaceable, value is being lost with
alarming rapidity. And it cannot be recovered in the same hasty
manner as it is being thrown away.

5. Many reasons co-operate in bringing this about. The principal
seem to be: (a) the sinking birthrate among the middle classes (among
the peasant population) who possess strunger race energy than the other
strata of society; (b) great industrial activity; (c) hasty racemixture between nations, who from a race-biological point of view,
stand too far apart; (e) luxury and the worship of mammon with the
destruction of moral worth, which accompanies it, etc.

6. The system of having none, one or two children practised by the
more valuable strata of the people, while at the same time the lower
and inferior strata increase relatively quickly , must lead to the deterioration of the race and the degeneration of the nation. The hetter off
classes, especially the women of these classes, without any valid reason,
show an increasing disposition to withdraw from parenthood. By so
doing they shirk their duty and betray their own people. The
decided individualism of our time, the great claims made on ife,
together with the decided over-estimation of the power of environment
and education, are important reasons leading in this direction. The
42 EUGENICS REVIEW.

public opinion in a country and the authorities of the State have also a
heavy burden of guilt to hear in this respect.

7. Industrial and agricultural occupations demand, at least at
times, increased and new energy. Partly for this reason and partly to
defend the country from outward foes, owing to a low birth-rate in a
country , foreigners belonging to an inferior race must he called in. In
ancient Rome during its decline and fall the circumstances were
exactly the same. Race-mixtures arise in such cases causing a mixed
nation of inferior quality. This must sooner or later overthrow the
ancient civilisation of the country. Chaos and anarchy become the
ruling powers. Other nations force their way in and gradually the
older civilisation is obliterated.

8. It certainly lies within the boundaries of possibility to take up
seriously the struggle against these threatening and destructive factors.
Such a course implies, however, that all good citizens within a country,
irrespective of their social, political and religious views, should unite
their forces and work together for a common goal, rich in promise, the
defence of their own nation against internal revolutionary and racedegenerative tendencies.

For this is demanded: good will and combination, financial selfsacrifice, greater morality and real love of humanity.

* *
*

B.

1. An energetic work of enlightenment on the subject ought to be
carried on. Beginning with the Universities, High Schools and
Training Colleges as the starting point, public opinion ought to be
worked upon by means of hoth lectures and writing. Medical men and
teachers ought to be specially educated in the science of heredity and
race-culture. The feeling of responsibility towards the coming
generations must be aroused. No full-grown person ought to- be
‘ignorant concerning the great significance of parenthood. and a]! must’
learn to understand the meaning “of well-born from a biological point of

VIEW .
2. Race-biological institutes for investigation with the object of

studying hereditary questions and eugenic problems on all sides ought
to be established in every civilized country as soon as possible. This
has already been done in Sweden. The institute ought to be guided by
genealogical, medical-biological, and social-economical principles.
The instinct of self-preservation ought now, after the world war, to
drive the civilized nations towards starting this work without delay.

3. Severe diseases among the people such as alcoholism, sex diseases
and tuberculosis must be fought against strenuously.

4. 4 simple and industrious. manner of life must be inculcated
among all classes of the population, at the same time that due exercise
of the body and sound sport are striven after. Luxury and an unchecked desire for pleasure do not. bring honour to any nation; they
counteract the development of race in a favourable direction.

5. Sucial ‘‘swamps’’ ought to be drained by means of wise

reforms and far-sighted law-making. The necessary supervision and.
THE DANGER OF DEGENERACY. 43

care is not yet given to individuals who are really degenerate—and
such are to be found in large numbers. both in our own land and in other
civilized countries— but they are allowed to influence the race in an
obstructive and dangerous manner. We ought to pay the greatest
attention to political questions regarding the population and allow the
euzenic point of view always to have full consideration.

6. The State and private persons ought to unite in building
pattern homes out in the country as a counter-balance to the industrialism which so often proves an enemy to the race and to the health
of the people. A sound agricultural population with a high birth-rate
is a necessary condition of life for a nation that does not wish to
degenerate. An independent peasant class makes the groundwork,
‘‘backbone’’ of a nation. This class ought therefore to be helped and
cherished as much as possible. The de-population of the countryside
must be sternly opposed, but not by the introduction of industrialism
there also. Home colonization ought to be encouragcd.

7. Emigration, which has caused a considerable drain on the
life-blood of the nation, ought, if possible, to be regulated and kept
within proper bounds.

8. We must also pay great attention to immigration so that
inferior individuals belonging ¢ to foreign races cannot enter the country
and settle without any hindrance. A mixture between nations who,
from a race-biological point of view. stand high and others containing
lower race- -elements, such as gipsies, Galicians, certain Russian tribes,
etc., is certainly to ‘he condemned.

9, The science of eugenics, which is a real patriotic movement
according to the true meaning of the words, has for its object the
strengthening and improvement of our people both bodily and mentally, and ought therefore to be able to reckon on having the support of
all classes of society.

10. Widely spread national socteties ought. to be formed in all the
civilized countries with the object of working for race-culture, the
health of the people and the improvement of morality.

Rich citizens within the country could hasten the spread of
eugenic ideas in a high degree by means of financial and moral support.
These ideas ought not to remain in the long run only futile desires.
