Havelock Ellis

AVELOCK ELLIS was born on FebruHe 2nd, 1859. In this year of the cen
tenary of his birth many appreciations
of his work and character have appeared in the
Press and in full-scale biographies. As a tribute
to a one-time Fellow of the Eugenics Society—
from 1921 until his death in 1939—as well as to
a figure of world-wide renown in the field he
made his own, we print below some of his
thoughts on eugenics and race-regeneration followed by a note on Havelock Ellis contributed
by Mr. Paul Bloomfield.

Thus had come about the recent expansion
of that conception of Eugenics, or the science
and art of Good Breeding in the human race,
which a group of workers, pioneered by
Francis Galton—at first in England and later
in America, Germany and elsewhere—have
been developing for some years past. Eugenics
is beginning to be felt to possess a living actuality which it failed to possess before. Instead
of being a benevolent scientific fad it begins
to present itself as the goal to which we are
inevitably moving.

... Human eugenics need not be, and is not
likely to be, a cold-blooded selection of partners by some outside scientific authority. But
it may be, and is very likely to be, a slowly
growing conviction—first among the more intelligent members of the community and then
by imitation and fashion among the less intelligent members—that our children, the
future race, the torch-bearers of civilization
for succeeding ages, are not the mere result of
chance or Providence, but that, in a very real
sense, it is within our power to mould them,
that the salvation or damnation of many
future generations lies in our hands since it
depends on our wise and sane choice of a
mate.

The Task of Social Hygiene. (1912)

For those who have been taught to believe
that man was in the first place created by
God, it should not be difficult to realize the
Divine nature of the task of human creation
which has since been placed in the hands of
men, to recognize it as a practical part of
religion, and to cherish the sense of its responsibilities. Moreover, it is not true that men
have ever felt free to choose their mates for
life at random. The savage and the civilized
are alike bound by restrictions which few dare

to overpass. There have always been castes
and classes into which a man is free to marry,
and a much greater number of castes and
classes from which by rigorous custom, or
even severe penalties, he was prohibited from
marrying into. There is no great hardship in
the injunction to marry into the caste of. the
well-born, the class of the healthy, and the
less hardship since those castes and classes
will always be, on the whole, the most
attractive.

The Problem of Race-Regeneration. (1911)

Eugenics constitutes the link between the
Social Reform of the past, painfully struggling
to improve the conditions of life, and the
Social Hygiene of the future, which is authorized to deal adequately with the conditions of
life because it has its hands on the sources of
life. On this plane we are able to concentrate
our energies on the finer ends of life, because
Wwe may reasonably expect to be no longer
hampered by the ever-increasing burdens
which were placed upon us by the failure to
control life; while the more we succeed in
our efforts to purify and strengthen life, the
more magnificent become the tasks we may
reasonably hope to attempt and compass.

The Task of Social Hygiene. (1912)

Every fall in the birth-rate means a fall in
the death-rate, in the disease-rate, in the rate
of misery, an immense saving not only in
money but in human happiness and social
effort. Thus it is that though the birth-rate in
England has steadily fallen during the past ten
years the increase in the population, though at
a somewhat lower rate, has been, absolutely,
greater than ever before, for the death-rate is
also falling. Any attempt to put a spoke in the
wheel of progress by reducing the fit to the
uncivilized level of the unfit, even if it were
possible, would be useless, for it would merely
serve to increase the death-rate, the diseaserate and the misery-rate. It is worse than idle,
therefore, to listen to those who pine for the
days, seventy years gone by, for at that time
in some of our great cities (such as Manchester and Leeds) of every thousand children

‘born, six hundred died before reaching the

age of five.
The Problem of Race-Regeneration. (1911)

Henry Havelock Ellis, the son of a sea captain
and of a fundamentalist mother related to the
hero of Lucknow, died in 1939 in his eighty-first

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, October 1959, 51, 3.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

year after making two important contributions
to human welfare. He had laid humanity at
large under an obligation to himself by his
pioneer effort to study the natural history of
man’s sexual behaviour in all its variety (as if
this was natural), and secondly, by his life as
well as by what he wrote, he helped to give
people, especially the inhibited English people,
the courage to start talking about sex, love and
marriage more openly and rationally.

The Ellises were lower middle class; and this
was fortunate. For the well-born and rich
minority had usually had plenty of common
sense about sex, at any rate heterosexual sex,
and in the main had managed to do what they
wanted—had practised without first nerving
themselves by preaching. No member of the
Establishment would have found it necessary
to start a pseudo-religious movement, like
Thomas Lake Harris or James Hinton, in order
to provide himself with mistresses. In polite
circles the Amphitryon situation could be
laughed off, but even if it led to a duel or a
divorce, that was nothing to the peculiar
ignominy it can still mean in a suburb, a slum
or a housing estate where the police news is
taken seriously. Till lately Church and State
have required the ordinary man and woman to
be lucky in their sexual relations, or else . . .

Early in life Ellis was impressed by the
enormous over-simplification, or untruth, that
official morality sustained in this matter. He
knew it wouldn’t do, because he, an honest
man, had, with his narcissistic self-regard, a real
gift for introspection, and was himself a kind
of fly-paper for interesting individualistic people
and neurotics. When at the age of twenty-one
he came back from a spell of teaching in the
Australian bush, where he had experienced a
kind of “‘conversion” (getting from it, whatever
it was, a sense of mission), there was a moment
when his want of sophistication—and of backing—might have let him down. He came into
the orbit of the free-love prophet Hinton. But
there was always a tendency for Ellis to be
lucky, not purely lucky, since up to point it
no doubt is true that character is fate; and now
his luck held. To begin with, Hinton was dead.
Further, Hinton’s sister-in-law was so pleased
with Ellis that she put up the money for him

146

to study medicine. This also left him free to
re-interpret the late ‘“‘Wizard”’, and the result
was not an attempt to found some new Oneida
community but an impetus towards “progressive’’ thought in general. The Fellowship of the
New Life, started by Ellis and others in 1883,
developed under the influence of Frank Podmore into the Fabian Society—it seemed more
intelligent to most of the idealistic New Livers
to direct their efforts to social reform rather
than personal perfection. Ellis, who was not
politically minded, was again left free, this
time to get on with his medicine and improve
his already considerable knowledge of literature.

Free—without being heart-free. The first of
the five principal women in Ellis’s life now
came on the scene. She was the talented South
African writer, Olive Schreiner, who had in
common with Ellis, if not much else, a proneness to rather complicated personal entanglements. Since what was sympathetic and creative
in Ellis was correlated with his curious blend
of emotionalism with intermittent sexuality—a
sort of reflection of his mother’s necessarily intermittent connubial life—it would be wrong
to be impatient with the details his biographers
give us of his relations with the temperamental
Olive, the Lesbian Edith (whom he married),
the comfortable Amy, the very remarkable
Margaret Sanger and the devoted Francoise.
Two eminent homosexual friends of Ellis’s
early days, J. A. Symonds and Edward Carpenter, brought out the paladin in him: he had
Symonds’ co-operation for the first draft of
what became the first volume of the Studies in
the Psychology of Sex: the subject, sexual
inversion. This marked an epoch.

The book appeared in 1897. Six months later,
owing to his unfortunate choice of a publisher,
Ellis became involved in an irrelevant prosecution for obscene libel known as the Bedborough
Case. At the end of it he found it expedient to
publish his further Studies in America: at the
same time he had become, at the age of forty,
a world figure, respected by serious psychologists and looked on—and up to—by a great
many unhappy and maladjusted people as “a
Sage of Sex, a healer possessed of rare powers’”’.
To Mr. Collis* he is a Sage; to Mr. CalderHAVELOCK ELLIS

Marshall} he would be one but for his want of
theology. Ellis had an equally pragmatical view
of religion and love, since both seemed to him
equally real to those who felt them: equally
real, and, according to him, equally “natural”
—and of course to his Christian biographer this
will not do. A marked difference between Ellis
and the Kinsey team, of whose Reports he was
so to speak the grandfather, is that while they
compile records of people’s sexual habits without mentioning “‘love’’, Ellis, full of solicitude
for human sensibility, was always talking about
it. About the time of the Bedborough case, too,
Ellis and Freud, his senior by three years, began a correspondence and kept it up spasmodically for the rest of Ellis’s life. Mr. Vincent
Brome’s{ account of this relationship is of the
greatest interest. Approaching the subject that
Ellis had made his own from a very different
direction, Freud, with his formidable, hard
intelligence was soon to offer the world an
irresistible hypothesis and to score a success
that at moments, no doubt, piqued Ellis. For he
also had had intimations of the truth about
auto-eroticism and the significance of dreams,
and had guessed that incestuous feelings were
far from unusual. There were some collisions,
as for instance over homosexuality. Freud had
noted that all the male inverts he knew had had
a childhood fixation on a woman, usually the
mother; Ellis believed there was an inherited
element in it too.

The importance of the study of heredity, and
of a forward-looking policy for eugenics, was
clear to Ellis, and he discussed the matter in his
Task of Social Hygiene and elsewhere. The
increase of human numbers worried him more
and more—thus in the last volume of Impressions and Comments he comes back to it three
times, declaiming bitterly against those who
seemed afraid “that Man is not multiplying at
the rate at which it is theoretically possible for
him to multiply’.

Ellis was modest; he was not out for money
or honours, and since there is a certain truth
in the nursery proverb that “‘those who don’t
ask don’t get’, he was not overwhelmed with
either. His independent vein of literary criticism
and causerie provoked one man of letters to
remark, lately, with avowed snobbism, that
Ellis was never “‘accepted” in the best literary
circles. Yet it was something to have planned
and launched the Mermaid series of Elizabethan
dramas, and From Rousseau to Proust is good
and readable. Though, for all his work gathering data for the medical psychologist, Ellis
had not moved much in medical circles either, it
was a fitting tribute that the Royal College of
Physicians paid him (at the instance of Lord
Horder) when they made him an Honorary
Fellow. The occasion was to have been celebrated by a banquet, but “Ellis said he would
rather forgo the Fellowship than speak in
public. A compromise was reached by Horder
and two of his colleagues taking him out to an
informal dinner.”

When Ellis knew he was dying he characteristically wished to do something useful about
it: “it should be a blow struck for euthanasia.”
But it was Francoise who would have had to
strike the blow and bear the consequences; he
died in time to save her from having to take
either of two grievous alternatives. For his
faith, his courage and his works we can reckon
him a great Englishman. He helped society to
understand itself better, and our society to become more consistent and more charitable, in
the moral sense.

PAUL BLOOMFIELD

* (Calder-Marshall, Arthur. Havelock Ellis: A
Biography. London, 1959. Hart-Davis. Pp. 292. Price
S

30s.

+ Collis, John Stewart. An Artist of Life. London,
1959. Cassell. Pp. vii+ 245. Price 25s.

t Brome, Vincent. Sigmund Freud and Havelock
Ellis, London, 1959. A contribution to the March
number of Encounter.

147
