EUGENIC INFLUENCES IN ECONOMICS*
By SIR JOSIAH STAMP, G.B.E.,, LLD., D.Sc., F.B.A.

AREFUL examination of the aims
and scope of eugenics convinces me
that they all must issue in effects upon
the size of population, i.e. its total numbers,
its distribution and its stability. Put negatively, I cannot find that any eugenic aims,
effectively secured, will leave the numbers
and dynamic quality of population unaffected, and influence merely its moral or
social structure, its standard of life, or its
individual happiness. A society having,
unitedly or individually, eugenic aims will
ultimately almost certainly result in total
numbers different from what would result
if, collectively or individually, it had no
eugenic knowledge or objectives. Even if
one realized the mathematically almost
impossible and the two totals were identical
at some point of time, they would almost
certainly diverge in the course of time. It is
not necessary to make any Malthusian
assumptions about an unchecked tendency
to multiply to the limits of subsistence in
this argument. |
- The aims of eugenics, while no doubt
having quantitative effects, are actually
directed at qualitative improvements—a
smaller proportion of defective individuals
and a larger of competent ones; what is
loosely called negative eugenics being aimed
by common acceptance at the former, and
positive eugenics, less commonly received,
at the latter. But it nowhere appears
whether it is an aim to balance the repression
of every birth below the modal line by the
gain of an extra birth above it, so that the
numbers of the population remain unchanged, and I should imagine that no
eugenist has any programme so precisely
quantitative.
But we aim at eliminating anti-social
elements, and so a higher average quality of
the race for social action to the common

* The Galton Lecture, delivered before(the Eugenics
Society on February 16th, 1934.

advantage must follow, with immensely
potent results. The aim that stands in the
forefront is, of course, the improvement of
the individual himself, to live and lead the
good life, and the changes in the distribution
of the population in quality are an inevitable
corollary.

But suppose that the population has been
brought by eugenic methods to an ideal state
for potentially enjoying the good life, it may
be that the methods would then actually
prevent that enjoyment, if they were so
inhibitory, so drastic, so contrary to ideas
of liberty, that life is hardly worth living.
Eugenics would then be like the mother
taking her blubbering small boy out: “I
brought you here to enjoy yourself, and
you’ve got to enjoy yourself, so shut up.”
If the only conditions on which the position of
perfect enjoyment can be attained are those
which prevent its being enjoyed when it 7s
reached, if we must go on enduring them,
then the population and distribution we
secure will be unstable and not durable. I
distinguish sharply between reaching a state
and establishing a process.

If we could quantify the individual
physical fitness of the population, I imagine
it would give the normal curve of error, with
a very large mode of average quality and
relatively small numbers on either side of
exceptional fitness and unfitness. But quantifying individual mental capacity (above
the deficiency level) would I think give a
different distribution, despite the braincapacity normal curves given by such
observers as Dr. H. L. Gordon, writing on
‘““Amentia in the East African.’’* Like the
empirical Pareto law for the distribution of
wealth, I believe it would be found to be
along a diagonal line practically straight,
except for the two extreme ends, when
plotted against a vertical axis representing

 

* EUGENICS REVIEW, Vol. XXV, January 1934, p. 223.

107
108

degree of mental capacity, and a horizontal
axis for the numbers exhibiting that degree
or more, both axes being expressed logarithmically. Now the slant of this line would be
of immense eugenic significance. If great
intelligence were in rather high proportion,
and small intelligence relatively low, the
straight line would tend to be more upright.
If great intelligences were few and small
intelligences were more numerous, the line
would slant more severely, i.e. have a more
acute angle with the base. If birth control
knowledge and habits are confined to the
professional, educated, and most able classes
the effect is dysgenic, and the distribution
line gets more acute. If it eats away at the
mass of lower intelligence, it tends to be
eugenic, and the distribution line becomes
more upright. If it applies equally through
all classes of the population, the index, or
slant of the line, may be restored to its
original degree, but, the total population
being then so much less, it must lie strictly
parallel to the first, in a position considerably
to the left. I am not sure then that contraceptive practice can be called strictly
eugenic at all, for eugenics has had so little
to say upon the absolute numbers of the
population. So long as birth control is being
advocated in certain classes to compensate
the dysgenic influence elsewhere, or so long
as it applies solely to the less developed
intelligence, it is eugenic, and as that is the
predominant case at the present time, birth
control tends to rank as a eugenic aim. The
day may easily come when it will not be so
readily accepted.

EUGENICS AND TOTAL NUMBERS

The truth is that the main body of eugenic
teaching has not yet crystallized around any
specific doctrine of population. Birth control, in certain circumstances, birth encouragement in others, and a _ continually
improving social environment which, however kind to the individual during his life,
will not unduly endow the weaker, from an
heredity point of view, nor burden the
stronger from the point of view of spoiling
his environment or affecting his heredity :
all these doctrines lead to a continually

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

improving quality, but they prescribe nothing
as to total numbers. Total numbers must
be what they will be, as a result of this
process.

Does eugenics demand a _ continually
increasing total, or a stationary or a falling
population? I imagine that if there is a
continual upward shift qualitatively in its
component parts, any one of these will
satisfy eugenic aims, although there is an
implied preference for the increasing total
if it is equally compassable without giving
anything of this qualitative change away.
But if the eugenists were presented with an
alternative between a rising total with a
moderate upward qualitative shift, and a
stationary or slightly falling total with a very
great upward shift in quality, they might
differ among themselves as to the true choice.
They would almost inevitably be driven
to apply some such tests as are involved
in the economic concept of the optimum
population.

Sargant Florence declares that what really
distinguishes the economist from the eugenist
is his concentration upon quantity rather
than quality of population. His marginal
man is not one who is inferior in industrial
capacity, but any one of a group of given
size. It is the given size that matters.*

In economics, we conceive at any particular point of time, and for a particular
area, a population large enough when
applied to the natural resources of that area,
to get a total production which, when
divided by the numbers of the population,
gives a maximum quotient or standard of
life. Every additional person taken into an
under-developed area can increase that
average, but every additional person in an
over-developed area lessens it. The economic
optimum is the maximum average. Now
obviously, this is not necessarily stable.
The natural resources may be increased, or
new ones discovered, by science, the resultant —
birth-rate may move the population higher
or lower than this optimum number. Moreover, the resultant density of population and
average income will vary greatly in the

* EUGENICS REvIEw,Vol. XIX, April 1927, p. 66.
EUGENIC INFLUENCES IN ECONOMICS

different areas. Free trade may increase the
quotient for some much more than for others,
and the increase in standard may be purchased at the cost of great instability in the
standard. An area may choose a lower
optimum point, with less risk of disturbance
from outside forces. This is aimed at in
the most respectable types of economic
nationalism.

I am by no means sure that the eugenic
optimum is the same. The eugenist will
probably say that he is not bigoted about
the absolute size of the population. In so far
as life is a good thing and full of opportunity
for self-realization, not necessarily by excessive leisure leaning to over-indulgence, but
biologically stable, then let there be as many
people as possible to enjoy that good life.
But when numbers become so great as to
endanger the social or national conditions of
this life, then possibly the eugenic optimum
is passed. We can conceive a community
with the ideal density and concentration for
adequate and happy government, becoming,
without loss of economic well-being, by
increase of population, too cumbrous for the
methods and organization in force. Taking
an analogy, consider a succession of cars
along a highway, the occupants perfectly
happy and free from care and well provided
with provisions. Now multiply the number a
hundredfold, each car’s occupants just as
well provided as before with good things,
but the congestion and discomfort of the
traffic rendering the journey unhappy and
anxious. As material economic progress
frees our leisure and attention for the other
values of life, the conception of a good life
will contain more and more of those values in
proportion, and an optimum population
from an economic point of view is less and
less likely to coincide with the optimum
population from the other points of view.

Again, in the absence of complete free
trade, and free movement of surplus populations to the areas relatively most eligible,
those parts of the world with the best
developed natural resources will have a
higher density of optimum population, or,
at any rate, a higher standard for their
optimum density than the less favoured

10g

portions. If the eugenic aim of the highest
good life is identical with the economic
optimum in sections, it would have to vary
with the abolition of national boundaries, it
would have to postulate wide variations in
its own ideal, and the anomaly would not be
removed until the population of the world
were looked at as a whole, with an identical
standard of life.

It is possible to view the ideal in another
way, that of a population in numbers and
quality ideally fitted to the physical and
intellectual demands of a smooth working
society, without waste of ability or shortage
of it. A good population requires a supreme
leader, a number of high administrators, a
certain quota of professional men (in medicine, etc.), an appropriate number of
machinery experts, of industrial leaders, of
educationists, of scavengers and cleaners and
manual workers. If there are a thousand
Mussolinis there is waste; if not enough
intelligences for certain grades, there is
ineffective adjustment, and if too many of
the lower range, excessive population, judged
by fitness of means to ends. It may be the
eugenic aim to produce a highly differentiated and yet integrated organism, rightly
adjusted in its parts, so that each is of
maximum service to the whole, and no part
has unused or unoccupied ability, and no
function is under-manned. Dr. Dublin says:
‘““ Experiments are being made to demonstrate that the most effective society is that
in which every man is a significant unit—an
end in himself—irrespective of class, station
or tradition. If this aim is realized, the
individual will come into his own. Under
such conditions, if the people of Russia,
India and China continue to people the earth,
they will in all probability dominate it also.”’
Sismondi said: ‘‘ Statesmen should endeavour to find the relation between wealth and
population which shall ensure the greatest
sum of happiness to the human race.” A.
Landry* defines a maximum population
really in terms of saturation, when increase in births entails a larger increase in
deaths. This is virtually now an unrealistic

* Scientia, XLV.
IIo

conception. His idea of an optimum population is economic, because it depends upon
a standard of living and not of culture.

Professor Pearl’s suggestion that eugenics
preaches the freedom of birth as restricted
to superior people only, was indignantly
repudiated in the Eugenics Journal. ‘‘ The
mediocre are obviously as necessary for the
world’s work as the superior. A too great
increase in the supply of the latter might
indeed result in a lack of employment worthy
of their capacity ; but on the other hand,
any absolute decrease in their number would
be a real calamity.”

In proportion as getting a living tends,
under progress, to become more and morea
subordinate part of total life, I do not regard
it as calamitous that intellectually a great
many people may be better than their jobs.
The gillie in Barrie’s Mary Rose was none the
less living the good life because he kept
Euripides in his pocket, the while his wellborn employer didn’t realize that he knew
Latin. If the intellectual and emotional life
is fully extended in leisure, the best brains
may, without deterioration, be engaged upon
relatively minor and unexhausting duties.

German writers have expressed the view
that we insist too much on the value of contraceptive ideas in the sections having the
lower wage-earning capacity, bringing about
a reduction of numbers and racial improvement. They prefer a different angle—a
certain population density is the necessary
biological foundation of any sort of culture,
and this “ density is severely threatened by
the fall in the birth-rate, so that they cannot
obtain a qualitative race improvement by
quantitative reduction in population.”

But these close adjustments are idealisms
and in the meantime the economic is still so
dominant a factor, that the optimum population in each present given area, regardless of
the variations, may be taken as probably the
unconscious eugenic aim for that area.

It is latent in Colonel Sir Charles Close’s
conclusion to his lecture on “ The Situation
in South and East Asia’: ‘Should a
philosopher statesman prefer an India of 350
millions of shortlived, underfed, uncultured
people, or an India of half that number, but

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

fitter in mind and body, with greater opporopportunities for self development and
expression. ’’*

THE ECONOMIC OPTIMUM POPULATION

That being so, we ought perhaps to stay for
a while and examine more closely the economic doctrine. This concept lines up to-day
from beginnings with Malthus. He thought
of two absolute quantitative series coming
into conflict—absolute numbers of people and
absolute quantities of food, with a limiting
factor rather than a causal nexus. That an
increase of general prosperity should be the
vesult of an increase in population, did not
enter his head—his concept was agricultural.
John Stuart Mill and others strengthened the
argument by bringing in the law of diminishing returns for agriculture. Ricardians had
not distinguished the time element—what
may be true for instantaneous variation at
any point of time, may not be true for a
gradual change over a period. ‘‘ From the
fact that if at any time, the population
exceeds a certain definite size the additional
work it is able to do will not be commensurately productive, they quite illegitimately
inferred that as population actually grows,
so the return to its efforts must diminish.
They elevated, that is to say, what is properly a law of static economics, into a law of
dynamic or historical development.’’f

About a hundred years ago, however, in
another connection, viz. the defence of
machinery against the charge that it created
unemployment, we find the Society for the
Diffusion of Useful Knowledge, in a volume
The Working Man’s Companion, openly
basing their exhortations on the causal
principle. For example, in the Results of
Machinery they say: “Inasmuch as the
steam engines increase the productions by
which men are maintained, they increase the
men. What has increased the population of
England nearly tenfold during the last five
hundred years, but the improvements of the
arts of life, which has enabled more men to
live within the land? . . . The multiplication

* Population, Vol. I, No. 1, June 1933, p. 67.
¢ L. Robbins: “ The Optimum Theory of Popula
_tion,’”’ London Essays, p. 107
EUGENIC INFLUENCES IN ECONOMICS

of produce multiplies the consumers of
produce. There are probably upon the
average no more hats made in the year than
there are heads to wear them, but as there
are fifteen millions of heads of the British
subjects of King William IV and there were
only five millions of the British subjects of
Queen Anne, it is self evident that the hatmakers have three times as much work as
they had a century and a quarter ago.
What has given the hat-makers three times
as much work? The trebling of the population. And what has trebled the population ?
The trebling of produce—the trebling of the
means of maintaining that population.’’*

J. S. Mill, to some extent, combined the
concepts: ‘‘ Improvements counteract the
law of Diminishing Returns, but they do not
make increased numbers any less undesirable.”” Mill’s optimum was a stationary
fixed one, whereas the modern concept is of
an optimum always shifting. Mill thought
that if the population had not increased so
much with the improvements, there would
have been a larger per capita quotient. The
late Victorian economists got slowly away
from this, and Robbins thinks Sidgwick was
the genuine forerunner of Cannan, in bringing out the true implications of the optimum
in 1888. By 1903 he stated the principle of
maximum production “‘ constantly shifting,
generally in the direction of increasing
the population which is consistent with the
maximum productiveness possible at the
time.”’ Later “‘ maximum return ”’ was the
expression used. Robbins says that Wicksell
first used the term ‘‘ optimum population.”’

Some developments of the concept may be
briefly noted, since they are of high significance when determining the relation between
a eugenic and an economic optimum.

1. Pressure on subsistence is not a determinant. On the modern theory an area is
over-populated when total returns per head
are less than they would be if the population
were a little smaller, and this is a point which
may be reached long before there is any
question of such pressure. Theoretically, a
community with a millionaire standard

* P, 190.

IIT

might be over-populated in an economic
sense, if the elimination of one millionaire
increased the per head return to the rest.

2. The wages fund or lump of labour
theories, are much affected—less labour may
not mean a rise in wages.

3. “ It may quite well be that a population
which was at the optimal point with a
certain amount of property distributed in
one way would be either too small or too
large with same amount distributed in
another way.’’ The changes in numbers may
mean a change in the form of organization.

4. Professor Robbins points out the fallacy
of supposing that a steady increase of average
real income per head (as in England in the
nineteenth century) is evidence that there
was no Over-population. It may have been
below the point of maximum return throughout because of over-population, but less so at
one point than another; or it may have
been unequally distant from the changed
optimal point. ‘‘ Over-population may be
present long before real incomes begin to go
down.”

5. Particular inventions may shift the
optimum one way ov the other.

6. A community cannot have an optimal
point independent of all others. “An
agricultural invention in the Antipodes, a
stable government in a Central American
State . . . may affect the point of maximum
return for the most parochial central European statelet.”’

7. A distinction has been made between
absolute over-population and relative overpopulation when a unit of labour is less
productive than elsewhere. Nationalism is
often a struggle to prevent any equalizing
tendencies where differentials exist.

8. It may be necessary to give a commodity equivalence to leisure in order to
weight it in with physical satisfactions in an
economic total, or otherwise comparison
between two optimal points may be meaningless. ~

All these concepts are impossible to
quantify, in the present state of our statistical knowledge, and the very rapid flux
in which we live. But they serve to show
us some of the issues involved in making
IIZ

the economic and eugenic optimal points
coincide.

THE COMING OF A STATIONARY POPULATION

There are three rapidly changing factors :
first, total size of population; second,
differential birth-rates, and the quality and
density of those populations, and_ third,
natural and scientific resources. We are now
in sight of the time when one of these three
will become relatively stable in several large
countries. In Britain the maximum population between 48 and 49 millions is due
between 1940 and 1950, and it remains
practically stationary for many years—the
disproportion between the sexes will diminish, the age distribution will give a shift
upwards, so that the oldest classes will be
in a higher proportion. (Bowley’s results
quoted by Carr Saunders: Encyclopedia
Britannica.) In America the maximum
comes a little later, between 1960 and 1970,
at 148 millions, sinking to 140 by the year
2000. The proportion of persons 50 years
old and upwards will be 353 per cent. against
23 in 1950 and I5 in 1920, and America will
be a population of old people instead of
youthful as it is now.* Belgium’s maximum
comes in 1940 at 8,110,000 and gets to
6,725,000 by 1980 according to Professor
Baudheim.t Germany, contrary to most
views, is also on the same road. It has been
computed that her maximum is reached
about 1940 at 654 millions, and one
authority} roughly estimates a rapid decline
to 59 millions by 1960 and 494 millions by
1975. He gives the economic consequences as
increasing real wages and a rising standard
of life, culture expenditure increasing considerably, with agriculture and building
depressed.

Now this represents a phase, not indeed
new in all history, but new in such a stretch
of modern experience as is covered by

* Dublin, L.: ‘‘ Outlook for the American Birth
Rate,’ Problems of Population.

jt Ibid., p. 247: ‘“‘ Future of the Population of
Belgium.”

t Kahn, Ernst: Der Internationale Geburtenstreck.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

scientific and industrial progress and conscious social direction.

What is the attitude of the eugenist
towards a stationary population? Is it
possible to raise that population steadily in
average value, or is it better to aim at some
continued upward movement because of
ultimate general gains on the economic side,
at the sacrifice of average quality? It is
probable that by then, the prceblem of
defectives as dynamic dysgenic agents will
have been largely solved and the tasks of
negative eugenics mainly achieved. Shall we
have made enough advance in the knowledge
of human genetics to formulate a positive
programme ?

The economics of a stationary population
will certainly present some important differences from those of populations that have
been growing steadily for a long period of
years, and where the economic structure and
habits have accommodated themselves to
progressive increase. This is not the place to
develop that theme in any detail, but one or
two broad indications may be given. First,
let us assume that with increasing capital
wealth, the unit dividend of the stationary
population continues to rise. A total purchasing power may double because a
stationary number of people have twice the
average income, or because double the,
number of people have the same average
income. The direction and intensity of the
purchasing power, and its effect upon
supplies of different kinds will be _ profoundly different in the two cases. Where
two people are demanding instead of one,
they naturally duplicate demands over a
considerable range of essential products.
Where one person has a double income his
elasticity of demand for the first essentials
changes rapidly, and his additional demand
passes into a totally different range of commodities. I anticipate a profound change in
this respect within the next 30 or 40 years.

In the second place, the whole tempo of
of progress, particularly for the introduction
of new things, is altered, and the supply of
those products for widely expanding markets,
dependent upon increasing population, may
be completely changed. Within a zone of
EUGENIC INFLUENCES IN ECONOMICS

time from any particular point of time, it
may be said that the purchasing power is a
fixed quantity and demand for every new
attraction is a subtraction from the demand
for some prior one.

Third, apart altogether from the outlook
for innovation in a marketing sense, there
will be quite a different degree of adjustability, without human suffering, to innovations successfully received. When there was
a constantly expanding market through an
increasing number of new mouths and new
bodies, there was a capacity for adjustment
to an altered stream of supply, which introduced a very elastic element into society.
But now that so many civilized countries are
heading for a stationary population, this
safety-valve no longer exists, and the full
force of every change in demand, through
innovation, is expressed in an alteration in
the demand of a certain fraction of the
population and a corresponding immediate
derangement of a certain fraction of supply.
The suit that is no longer wanted by Jim
cannot be passed on to his younger brother,
Bill; Elsie’s frock is no longer cut down for
Mary Ann, and the alteration this introduces
into the fempo of economic change is farreaching and makes the modern problem all
the more difficult. Change is more rapid and
the capacity to meet it more restricted. Thus
1,000 workers supplying a commodity to
10,000 consumers might formerly have
become, on a 20 per cent. increase in population, 1,200 supplying it to 12,000 consumers.
If an innovation had lessened demand by 16
per cent. the increased population would
want no more than could be supplied by
1,000 workers, but no actual unemployment
would result, and the additional 200 new
young men would go into the innovating
industries. But with a stationary population, an innovation that reduces an existing
demand by 16 per cent., puts that percentage
out of work until they can learn new jobs,
move their homes, and perhaps even change
their nationality and become citizens of
other countries.

While I must not spend time on this, it is
interesting to give the conclusions of one or
two of the writers upon the economic effects

II3

of present tendencies. Professor Warnring,
University of Copenhagen, gives as the
economic effects of birth control in Denmark :*

1. Progress of all kinds will become slower.

2. The rate of interest will become lower ;
the supply of capital will be greater,
and the demand smaller.

3. The land rent will not increase.

4. A smaller proportion of the population
will be engaged in the trades, producing
capital goods.

5. When we install plant, build factories,
schools, etc., we should be very careful
not to build them on too great a scale,
or they will tend not to be used to full
capacity.

6. Adjustment to new structural conditions will be more difficult and expensive, when relative decrease for a
certain trade also means absolute
decrease.

7. But the periodic depressions will be
milder when the towns do not grow,
their growth cannot be discontinuous.

. Migrations will be fewer.

g. A greater proportion of the population
will be in the older age-groups, supported by old-age pensions.

oO

Generally, conditions will become so
altered that we older economists and statisticians, familiar with constant conditions in
the growth of population, will have much
difficulty in understanding the new age.

Again, as regards the United States, P. K.
Whelpton has depicted the situation, now
unescapable, in the near future: population
increasing at a slower and slower rate up to
an estimated maximum of 144°6 million in
1970 and declining thereafter.

The age group 20-49, which includes the
best period for physical work, will show little
relative change, amounting to about 43 per
cent. of the estimated 1980 population as it
now does. The group 50-69 will amount to
about 24 per cent. in 1980 against 13-9 per
cent. in 1930, and those 7o or over nearly
7 per cent. instead of 3-1 per cent. It will be
as though one-third of the children and

* Trends in Agricultural Production in Denmark.
114

adolescents of to-day were transformed overnight into men and women all past middle
age—some in their dotage. The effects, he
says, are that it will be hard on extreme
optimists and boosters. The idea of rapid
population growth as being the normal thing,
is so firmly engrained that it will be a shock.
I, personally, should liken it socially’ to
treading on the top step of the stairs that
isn’t there. He goes on to say that the spirit
of optimism engendered by our rapid and
continuous population growth has been
suggested as partially responsible for the
efficiency of their industrial development.
If this disappears, it may lead to great
caution in many ways. For example, there
may be less readiness to allot funds to install
up-to-the-minute equipment in place of
highly serviceable but slightly obsolete
methods. It is likely to make competition
increasingly keen in industry and commerce.
He refers to the additions now being planned
to production units which will not be
justified, and sees the proper outlet, an
increase of the purchasing power of the bulk
of the population through a more even
distribution of income, a goal which seems
difficult to reach in the present capitalistic
structure. There will be increased U.S.
competition in the export trade. But there
will be offsets such as educational facilities
at last catching up, and less necessity for
Treasury grants for paving, and building
sewers, so that there will be more available
for beautifying cities and providing amenities. The changes in age composition will
make for greater conservatism, the continuation of older men in positions of control
and a check on the rapid rise of youngsters.
If older workers are kept profitably employed
in future, the change in age composition may
work to increase economic prosperity. The
ageing will have a marked effect on the
consumption of various products and possibly on the system of taxation.

The spread of a differential birth-rate is a
more significant fact for the future of
society than any discovery of physical
science or other solvents of the old social
order—at present national but soon international.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

THE DEMANDS OF STATIONARY POPULATIONS ON EUGENICS

Whatever may be the economic situation
and tendencies for stationary populations,
one thing is clear to me, that it will make
even greater demands than in the past upon
leadership, organization, power of co-operation, socially and internationally. That
beautiful momentum that has come about
by processes I have described, due to
increases in population, being no longer
available, if civilization is to prevail, its
component parts must be of finer material.
Here then come in the ideals of eugenics.
The necessary components are :

(x) the elements of genius ;

(2) an adequate contribution of mass and
specialized talent ;

(3) higher intellectual and moral qualities
in the mass of the people, and ability
to make use of a growing complex social
heritage without being dangerously and
vulnerably parasitic upon it.

The facts for 1940-50 are unalterably
before us at a short distance of time. Eugenic
changes can operate only slowly. It seems
to me therefore that any formulation of a
eugenic programme must be suited to the
new outlook and the economic probabilities
of stationary and ageing populations, and is
already belated and ought to be vigorously
pursued. May I sketch briefly under these
three heads what I imagine to be the
immediate position of eugenic thought ?

GENIUS AND INSANITY

There is a strong—almost incurable—
popular sentiment that genius is akin to
madness, not only in character and habit of
life, but also genetically, and that it is a
pretty close thing whether a person goes
over the border of general sanity or remains
on the right side of it with abnormal powers.
Two hundred years ago Dryden wrote :

‘‘ Great wits are sure to madness near
allied,
And thin partitions do their bounds
divide.”’
EUGENIC INFLUENCES IN ECONOMICS

The suggestion is that if, through eugenic
aims, we had no epileptic, neurotic, or otherwise abnormal people, we might get no
Keats, Shelleys, Popes and other geniuses.
In this sense, it is urged the birth of a great
number of doubtful lives is the price we pay
for an occasional genius, and if we cut off the
supply of the one, we risk getting none of the
others. There are no doubt problems of
definition, and the aim of positive eugenics
might be achieved by the constant increase
in the number of talented people and an
improvement in their talent, but it might be
quite unable to control or encourage the
production of that subtle quality we call
“ genius.”

For the purpose of further analysis, let us
assume this to be true. From an economic
point of view how important is it ? Genius in
music, poetry, art, literature, however important, has no immediate bearing on improvement in the economic standard, but genius
in science and engineering and government
certainly has. A Newton, Faraday, or
Mussolini makes a profound difference in
this field. It is, however, still open to question whether more is not going to come as
the result of a mass attack of high talent, all
along the front, than of individual genius in
the future, and if we had a certain alternative between a eugenic system which guaranteed the increase of advanced talent on a
wide scale, or the possibility of an occasional
genius, we might well, in the economic field,
choose the former. I would not tilt at this to
such an audience, but for the fact that no
eugenic address ought to risk leaving it out.

This popular view is of course receiving a
great stimulus by that arresting play, A
Sleeping Clergyman. In the third (or more)
generation of abnormality, the eccentric Dr.
Cameron, whose genius saves the country
and gets him world honour, is the standing
type for this argument. His guardian
declares: ‘‘ Laddie, you’re the son of a bad
man and a foolish girl—and it gets worse as
it goes back. If I’d been one of those eugenic
madmen, I’d have drowned you when you
were a pup.’’ Cameron declares heredity to
be rot. “‘ You say I’m a mixture of blackguards and idiots, well, you'll have to let the

II5

mixture be and hope for the best.” Dr.
Marshall rejoins: ‘‘ But there is genius in
the mixture, too, Charlie, we mustn’t let
that .. .”’ Cameron: “Let it be then;
what sort of a man are you to bring genius to
heel and teach it dog’s tricks! ”’

Even if it were true that an occasional
genius seems to be the reward for suffering a
great mass of defectives, we certainly can
state that not all genius has been so evolved,
and there is no evidence that we cut off the
whole supply, or possibility of supply, of
genius by the elimination of defectives.

Eugenists do not generally admit any
association of this kind between genius and
mental deficiency. Professor Ruggles Gates
speaks very positively : ‘‘ The loss of a whole
feeble-minded stock would not involve the
suppression of a single genius. No record
exists of the birth of a genius among the
offspring of feeble-minded parents.’”’* In his
Galton lecture several years ago, Dr. Tredgold
asserted roundly that there is no correlation
between genius and insanity.t

THE BURDEN OF DEFECTIVES

It may be that if eugenics could produce
one genius that would otherwise never have
been born, it would do more for economic
standards than shutting the door of birth
upon a potential ten thousand mental
defectives.

What is the actual economic burden of
defectives ? They represent a certain proportion of the population as a burden upon the
rest, for food and clothing and perhaps
social services, such as specialized education,
taking from the general heap of production.
without adding to it any essential items for
the general standard of life. In this they are
akin to an addition to a standing army, |
except so far as the presence of an army is
an essential feature in allowing the general
heap of production to be piled up in security,
and to be larger than it might otherwise be
in an unprotected state. But he would be a
bold man who asserted that the additional
production due to this cause is greatly in

* Heredity in Man. London, 1929.
¢ EucEnics REvigEw, Vol. XIX, April 1927, p. 1.
116

excess of the unseen subtraction from production, due to the withdrawal of the
soldiers from the productive field. Now I
may take as a parallel, any class Kept in
idleness, through unearned income drawn
from the general production. In this case,
however, the existence of such a class, and
the possibility of joining it, may act as a
general incentive to enterprise and effort
affecting a considerable number of producers,
so that general productivity may not suffer
to the full extent. But the burden on the
standard, due to the defective population, is
a dead weight burden, without any such
compensating secondary counterweights.

What is its magnitude, as a subtraction
from the ordinary order of the standard ?
Let us take the direct burden. According to
recent reports there are 300,000 defectives
of all ages in England and Wales. If they
were all non-producers, at about {65 per
annum each they represent a total deduction
of {19,500,000. This represents a maximum,
because of course by no means all the workers
are non-producers, and many are earning
something. We must remember that many of
them are either below or above the earning
age, but I make no deduction because I
assume that in a eugenic scheme they would
not exist at all. So I assume some {15
million is the dead weight burden. This is
less than 6d. a week from the ordinary
income as a deduction, and may be taken as
the direct effect. I ignore the direct costs of
criminality, etc., as it is unproven whether
the proportion is greater from this section.
(Vide Mental Hygiene, January 1929.)

But there are two considerations at this
point. The taxation or other deduction
from wealth to supply the fund, is not merely
a reduction of income, it is a depressant to
general enterprise. It is easy to exaggerate
the effect of taxation of this range, and there
are some counter-effects which would take
me too far into the field of economic psychology. In general, there is no direct relation
between height of wages and intensity of
work—the only real depressant is a direct
tax consciously paid and resented.

The second point is more material. I have
assumed so far that the section of defectives

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

would no longer exist, and there would be
a clear deduction of that number from the
population. But defectives do not result
wholly from the mating of people all defective. A defective may be born to parents of
whom one only would count as defective,
and the eugenic fulfilment would leave the
sound parent in being as the potential mate
of another sound person. In other words,
the birth of defectives is not wholly additive,
it stands in part in place of potential sound
births that do not take place. How many
sound people mate with defectives, and if
there were no defectives, would mate with
sound people at present unmated? As there
is a surplus of women already, this process
could only make additions to their ranks,
and give no further births. But in so far as
sound mates are now mating with female
defectives, they would then be able to mate
with sound females, who are now surplus,
and additional sound population would
result.* This addition would add to the
total mass of production, but only a perhead addition, and would scarcely raise the
standard of life of all the rest of the workers,
and the calculation already made is not
really affected.

The discussion has so far been on the
static influence of mental deficiency. Its
progressive influence, now assumed to be
checked by eugenics, might be far worse.
Some people see nothing but a kind of racial
genetic entropy ahead of us, and a stock
of deficients, not only increasing absolutely,
but also, in a relatively stationary population, becoming a progressively larger fraction of the population, with a general depreciation of the quality of the stock which is
mentally competent. The Brock report was
reassuring, so that this appears an exaggerated view. On the other hand, it is quite
possible to conceive a society in which the
standard of life is continually being raised
by individual genius and mass scientific
talent, and enjoyed by the mass of people
who themselves contribute less and less to its
efficiency, and are more and more parasitic
upon their environment and social heritage

* Vide EUGENICS REVIEW, Vol. XXI, April 1929, p. 69;
on the statistical tendencies of these mixed marriages.
EUGENIC INFLUENCES IN ECONOMICS

for the good life. It is not possible, therefore,
to make any economic assessment of the
long-run effects of the removal of defectives,
as distinct from a general qualitative change.
But there is no reason to suppose that that
effect in the long run will be less than in the
short run.

INHERITANCE OF ACQUIRED TALENT

If genius is elusive, but certainly not in any
danger from the elimination of aments, what
shall we say of talent and general educability ? It is natural for anyone nursing any
doctrine of social progress to cherish a belief
that somehow the inheritability of acquired
characters must eventually be scientifically
established, despite all the abortive or
negative attempts that have piled up in the
effort to revert from Weissman to Lamarck.
If rats obey Professor McBride, the outlook
gets rosy. If they are obstinate, we may
decline to acknowledge that what obtains in
physical or physiological reaction has any
necessary relevance to the possibilities of
human intelligence. We welcome Mr.
Dufton’s recent contribution to the British
Association, indicating that capability is in
no small degree an acquired character, and
is directly transmitted, so that there is a
significant correlation between the age of
parents and the ability, or rather attainment,
of the sons and, less emphatically, of the
daughters.*

I will not indicate where my own sneaking
fancy lies. The Spencerian doctrine of social
progress, from which we have now well
emerged, certainly rested implicitly on a
high degree of such inheritance. But we
may take our position anywhere on the long
line from, let us say, Benjamin Kidd at one
end to Alderton Pink at the other, both of
whom have applied the latest biological or
genetical findings of their day to the social
problem. Kidd, in the Science of Power,
had a pathetic belief in the power to make
an almost instant change in the mass:
“Give us the young and we will create a
new mind, and a new earth in a single

* EuGENIcCS REviEw, Vol. XXV, Jan. 1934, p. 245.
Vide also Major Hinton on ‘“‘ Habit and Environment,”’
EvuGENICS REVIEW, Vol. XIX, July 1927.

117

generation.”’ He was to do this, I know, not
so much by inborn heredity as by social
heredity, which he said had been inextricably
confused. But unless the infant life was
taken from its mother instantly at birth, the
whole complex of fears and aptitudes was
mysteriously conveyed to it in a few moments
of time. At any rate, however defective his
experiments, or his reasoning from them,
may have been, they led opinion to the extreme educability of the race. Pink, on the
other hand, is the arch pessimist. The vast
mass have now only the most limited
educability, and never can have more. Nonheritability has such a blind hold on the
race that democracy is a pathetic impossibility, education having the most complete
finality in diminishing returns. But increasing the proportion of educability by breeding
is a possibility, and as Aldous Huxley says
in his preface to Pink’s Realist Looks at
Democracy, education can only bring increasing returns on one condition. No form of
social progress is possible unless there is a
continuous improvement of individuals. We
can, of course, acknowledge that Spiller’s
“interlearning”’ is the great agency of
improving life. The best of each generation
may contribute an advancing body of
knowledge to the continuous environment,
and the mass of each generation may,
without any innate advance, enjoy a steadily
advancing standard of life. On the other
hand, the environment may be conceived as
relatively stationary, and each succeeding
generation inherently improve in its ability
to absorb and utilize, and make that environment subjectively valuable. I cannot conceive that these alternatives are really
independent. The more complex the environment, the more qualities must be
demanded by the average man and the
civilization to master and manage it—it is
not a matter merely of absorption, but even
if it were, he must be a continuously better
man to withstand the processes of moral
deterioration.

THE EUGENIC PROGRAMME
We must persevere, even at the risk of
over professionalization, encourage and keep
118

up the birth-rate in the section of real
mental achievement. This is valuable whichever of the four agencies is valid and
dominant, i.e. whether we are depending for
our results upon genetic transmission of the
natural ability which has led to the achievement ; or upon some degree of transmission
of the talent acquired by exercising such
education, intensely and professionally ; or
upon the family environment and nurture
created by the parents ; or upon maintaining
the aggregate of workers in the field of
talented research and management. But
even if it be proved that the doctrine held by
Fisher and others is true, that the present
type of society tends to ‘couple genetic
qualities, making for economic and social
success, with those making for low fertility,”’
even if it is true in the extreme event that
those making high contributions to their
generation are pro tanto less likely to make
contributions by fertility to the future, I
should not despair, provided the flow of new
ability from the other ranks is kept strong
and encouraged by every known device.
This may be, indeed, the way nature intends
to work, and the idea that every grade should
be self-supporting genetically, seems to me
not the only possible one for stable progress.

I have been discussing the influences of
eugenic aims upon economic conditions. I
can only touch for a moment upon economic
means of promoting eugenic aims, in the
well-worn topics of family allowances, migration and differential taxation. If it is true
that the method of computing unemployment relief, however justified from a humanitarian point of view, is dysgenic* it must
probably be also true that a family allowance
system in the lower paid ranks, not far
removed in reward from unemployment pay,
would be almost equally so. It might, therefore, be considered desirable to limit the range
of allowance to several children or make it
on a diminishing scale for additional births.
But if it is desired to encourage the birthrate at a different level, the system seems to
be more defensible in the strata of professional and higher manual workers. The

* Vide Economic Journal, Supplement, Jan. 1929.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

London School of Economics, having a
certain sum with which to increase annual
emoluments, decided to apply it in the form
of children’s allowances, and thus to afford
the maximum real satisfaction with a sum
which, evenly spread over all, might have
had little general effect. The Wesleyan
Methodist Church have for long had such
a connexional system. This seems to be
thoroughly sound eugenically. I am not
saying anything against the theoretical
economic soundness of the general scheme,
if practical ways can be found of working it.
Society has in some way to maintain every
factor of production, not only in its existing
form, but also for its continuation and
wastage. It does this clumsily now in a wage
to every worker alike, which has this
renewal allowance in it, whether he has
responsibility for renewals, i.e. children, or
not. The family allowance system would
pay direct the net personal reward of the
worker, and, through a central renewal
fund, a children’s allowance quite separately.
Now if some renewals are of a type not so
socially desirable as others, it may certainly,
if not actually dysgenic, be not as highly
eugenic as a more discriminating scheme.
Children’s allowances by way of taxation are
not based on eugenic considerations, but
upon the faculty principle of taxation in an
attempt to adjust the marginal incomes to
equality of sacrifice, according to unescapable subsistence obligations incapable of
bearing taxation. There is all the difference
between a subsidy of the fax upon the
allowance, and the amount of the allowance
itself. As a eugenic stimulus it is negligible,
because negative, though as a removal of a
dysgenic discrimination, it is not to be despised. A bonus of the same sum, given
positively, would have greater effect. Death
duties differential by kinship are too involved
for mention here.

Much more is to be done by keeping open
the educational ladder, and facilitating rise
for the slightest promise, not merely into
black-coated ranks, but also into technical
accomplishment. Still more may be done by
raising the dignity of home service and help
as a calling, so that young wives on not overEUGENIC INFLUENCES IN ECONOMICS

expansive incomes can rear several young
children without the nightmare of domestic
Over-pressure. We must be prepared for a
good deal of educational waste—people
being as the Duke of Wellington said,
“‘ educated beyond their brains,” in the hope
that a slow deposit of general mental power
may indeed be laid by each successive
generation, but still more in the less theoretical and less unproved assumption that
we shall get every promising personality on
to the next rung of the ladder. The effect of
promotion by seniority delaying marriage in
the higher earnings and blocking the ladder
of promotion is also important. How far the
smallness of birth-rate in such classes is due
to infertility is doubtful. American writers
attribute the apparent correlation between
fertility and social status to a real direct
association between marriage age and social
status ;* while a Swedish investigator finds
the true fertility rate is 20 per cent. higher
in the highest social class than for the next,
and the next is 15 per cent. higher than the
two lower classes, or that the sterility
percentage is 24 per cent. lower in the highest
than the next, and that is 12 per cent. lower
than the lower middle class, which is 20 per
cent. again below the lowest.f

Meanwhile, let us make an ever-improving

\* Dr. Frant Notestein in Problems of Population.
t Edin, Karl, Problems of Population, p. 89.

119

environment, not by means of cushions and
buffers, but by eliminating, sifting, and
sorting ; by punishing, exacting standards,
rewards and incentives; also let us try
experimental genetics in all directions, and
then testing in human affairs by scientific
means, even if free agency is retained.
Perhaps we may realize the hope of my
predecessor: ‘“‘The power acquired by
civilized man to control to-day, perhaps
only the quantity, but to-morrow the quality
of human life, will also enable man to change
human nature and to raise mental and moral
capacity to a higher level.”” Oreven justify Dr.
C. C. Hurst’s peroration that man’s destiny
depends entirely on his response to the new
knowledge, that if he so wills he can “‘ create
a race of supermen to enjoy life in a more
comprehensive way than we can hope to do.’’*
It is difficult to pass beyond Lucretius :

“So, nought is lost that seems to
pass away.
Nature is aye rebuilding, and
there comes
Nothing to birth untouched by
what is gone.”’f

My plea is that before every eugenic
programme we pose the imminent question :
What do I want to do in a stationary
population ?

* The Mechanism of Creative Evolution, p. 322.
t Denis Turner’s translation.

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVI, No. 2.
