New Data on the Genesis of Twins.
By R. A. Fisuer, M.A.

The subject of the genesis of human twins, apart from its intrinsic
interest, has a special importance for eugenists. According to the
commonly accepted doctrine twins are of two kinds: the so-called uniovular or identical twins, which are supposed to have the whole of their
heritable nature in common, and the so-called biovular or fraternal
twins which are supposed to be related genetically no more closely
than ordinary brothers and sisters. It is clear that, if this view be
correct, human twins provide a test case for measuring the importance
of hereditary factors in the determination of human characters. For
by measuring the degree of resemblance in any character between
identical twins, we might obtain an upper limit for the effects of heredity, while by comparing the resemblance of fraternal twins, with
that known tc exist between ordinary brothers and sisters, we might
measure the effects of early environment and especially of intrauterine
environment. The importance of human twins as a test case for eugenics was appreciated by Galton, and since the publication of his work,
the conclusions at which he arrived have been repeatedly quoted by
other writers.

Current opinion generally accepts the division of twins into the
two classes distinguished above, classes both cf which have analogues
in the animal kingdom. Great disparity of opinion exists, however,
as to the frequency with which these two classes occur. Some biologists believe that identical twins are relatively frequent. Extensive
statistics show that twins of unlike sex occur in about 8 cases out of 8 ;
and if we argue that of the fraternal twins nearly 50% must be of unlike
sex while all identical twins must be of like sex, we are led to the conclusion that about one pair of twins in 4 must be an identical pair.
Others, however, ignoring the distribution of sex , believe that identical
twins are excessively rare. It is generally believed that the two types
of twins may be distinguished by an examination of the foetal membranes, but the proportions arrived at in this way by gyrcoecologists are
excessively divergent, and according to Davenport, twins of unlike sex
are frequently reported to be uniovular in contradiction of the current
theory.

The only extensive body of measurements of twins was taken by
Thorndike, and published 16 years ago. It is not sufficiently recognised that his results are clearly inconsistent with both of the views
currently held. The 50 pairs of twins observed by Thorndike do not
fall into two distinct groups, but show themselves on examination to
be a single humogeneous group. The most delicate tests prove that
those pairs of twins most like in any one trait, are not more alike than
pthers in other traits. The whole group arise apparently by a
116 , EUGENICS REVIEW.

single mode of genesis; and those of unlike sex are not sensibly less
alike than those of like sex. If we adhere to the theory of the dual
origin of human twins, we must conclude from Thorndike’s data,
either, that (1) all or nearly all the twins examined were ‘‘fraternal,”’
in spite of the facts (a) that the proportion of like sex is much greater
than .5, and (0) that the level of resemblance in all traits is much higher than that found between brothers and sisters, or (2) that all or nearly
all were ‘‘identical’’ in spite of the facts (a) that 9 pairs were of unlike
sex, and (b) that the general level of resemblance is considerably less
than we should, for other reasons expect between genetically identical]
individuals; for example several pairs differ considerably in eye colour
and hair colour.

For these reasons, after a statistical examination of Thorndike’s
data, I have brought forward (Genetics 4, 489, 499, September, 1919)
the tentative suggestion that the ordinary mode of genesis of human
twins is intermediate in character between the fraternal and identical
modes of genesis, and in particular that while the maternal inheritance
is identical, the twins being derived from a common ovum, the paternal
inheritance is merely fraternal, the twins being derived from different
spermatazoa.

The purpose of the present note is to present such new data as I
have been able to collect in testing this particular suggestion.

Children of the same parents may differ in a Mendelian factor, if
either or both of the parents are heterozygous; these differences will be
apparent if neither parent is a homozygous dominant. To make clear
how the suggestion may be tested, the following table shows the percentage of unlike twins produced, on each of the possible modes of genesis,
according as the mother, the father, or bcth parents are hetorozygous.

Mother hetero. Father hetero. Both parents

; hetero.
Fraternal oe .e 50 50 87 .5
Semi-identical ws 0 50 25
Identical a . 0 0 0

It is apparent from this table that if twins are really produced in
the manner here tentatively suggested, we may lay down the rule,
which should be capable of definite proof or disproof, that all] twins unlike in any Mendelian factor, have fathers heterczygous in that factor.

The most suitable factor to choose for carrying out this test would
seem to be eye colour; for although recent observations have thrown.
doubt upon the simplicity of the inheritance of yellow pigment on the
iris, it appears in the majority of stocks to be inherited as a simple
dominant. Valuable cases also occur occasionally in some rare defects, which are known to be due to simple Mendelian factors; of these
a number of cases are on record in which albinism appears in one twin
and not in the other. The cases which I have hitherto obtained in
which twins have been observed to differ in what is believed to be a
simple Mendelian factor, are set out below.
NEW DATA ON THE GENESIS OF TWINS. 117

Father heterozygous Father homozygous

Albinism 4 0
Eye Colour .. 2 oO!
Other Cases. . 2 0
Total 8 0

It will be seen that no case has as yet come to light in which the
father is homozygous; cases in which both parents are heterozygous
have not here been recorded, so that on the current theory we should
expect to find the father homozygous in one half of the cases.

The above numbers are far from conclusive, and have been put
forward to show that the subject should be thoroughly investigated.
We hope that this may be done in London, where over a thousand pairs
of twins could rapidly be obtained ; but at present the work is delayed
for lack of funds. In the second place, it should be possible quickly
to ascertain whether or not the father of unlike twins is always heterozygous. One hundred accurately recorded cases should settle the
whole question; of course out of a hundred cases we must expect a
certain number of exceptions owing to the wrongly ascribed paternity,
but in such a number it would be amply clear, whether or no there were
a real difference between the paternal and the maternal inheritance
of twins.

Feb. 2nd, 1921.
