REVIEWS OF BOOKS

POPULATION

United Nations. World Population Prospects, as Assessed in 1963. Population Studies
No. 41. New York, 1966. U.N. Pp. vii+ 149. Price $2.00.

PROJECTIONS OF FUTURE world populations have been made by the Population Division
of the United Nations Organization on four occasions. The results may be simply illustrated
by reference to the range of possible figures for the year 1980 (world population in thousand
millions): |

1951 projection : 3-0-3-6

1954 projection : 3-3-4-0

1958 projection : 3-9-4-3

1963 projection : 4-1-4-6

It will be seen that on each successive occasion the assessment has been raised by
roughly 10 per cent. Effectively, future prospects have been increasing at some 2 per cent
per annum—just about as fast as world population itself.

This development in the expectations is probably the reflection of the increase in the
rate of population growth recently. Probably also it is attributable to the improved data
that have been collected. The method of calculation may also have contributed something
to the increase; it has certainly been applied in much more detail than the previous assessments. While an extension of the amount of work undertaken does not guarantee that the
results will be more reliable—the general approach to the calculations and the basic
assumptions made are vastly more significant—the general impression to be gained from
reading the new report is one of greater confidence than before, arising from improved
technique.

It is interesting to note that this report was issued for limited circulation three years
ago, to enable demographic experts all over the world to comment and suggest changes.
In the event, the estimates of projected population have been altered but little as a result
of these consultations, but the manner in which the report is presented appears to have
been improved. The new text is sharper and it is easier to find the figures one is looking
for than it was in the draft.

Ease of reference is important, as this work is likely to provide a standard for some
while to come. Indeed, its only rival appears to be the rough shot offered by Professor
Boyarsky at the World Population Conference in Belgrade in 1965. The Professor’s view is
that world population will rise a good deal less fast than is expected by the Population
Division of the United Nations. While the Russian’s basic assumptions do not appear so
reasonable as those emanating from New York, the extent of the difference, and indeed
the marked way in which the United Nations assessments themselves have varied, emphasize
that great caution should be the watchword in interpreting the findings of hazardous exercises
such as this. P. R. C.

Agarwala, S. N. Some Problems of India’s Population. Bombay, 1966. Vora. Pp. iii+ 151+2.
Price Rs. 10.
IN THIS BOOK the author discusses the demographic situation in the country and analyses
the social factors which have influenced fertility.

The population in India has increased from 238 million (the 1901 Census) to 439 million
according to the 1961 Census. A study of the growth of population in various states of

114
