POST-WAR FERTILITY TRENDS IN FRANCE
AND THE UNITED STATES
By JOHN BLACKER

Recent Population Trends and New Methods
of Analysis

SUBSTANTIAL increase in the birthAz often referred to as the “ baby

boom,’ has occurred in most western
countries during the post-war years. Much
public interest has been shown in it, the
more so, perhaps, because it was largely
unexpected and unforeseen. It is true that
the years immediately after the first world
war witnessed a similar upsurge of births,
but to the demographers and economists of
the 1930s the possibility of any substantial
revival of fertility seemed unlikely. Writing
at the time of the great depression, they were
unable to appreciate how far the low ebb to
which the birth-rate had sunk was in fact
due to the temporary postponement of
marriages and births which would be made
up in later years. The population projections
which they made at that time envisaged
neither the increase in the birth-rate nor
the striking reductions in mortality, especially in infant mortality, which have been
such prominent features of the past decade.
Thus many dire prophecies of depopulation
were made which would seem to have been
falsified by subsequent events.

This inability of the demographers of
the 1930s to appreciate the full nature of the
fertility trends of those years has since been
shown to have been largely due to the fact
that the statistical techniques of demographic

analysis used at that time were inadequate

and often misleading. Before the war the
net reproduction rate was regarded by many
as the be-all and end-all of such analysis;
its calculation the last word the demographers could say. Since then, however,
certain defects of this index have gradually
been revealed. Not least among these is its
over-sensitiveness to cyclical fluctuations
in fertility—its failure to take account of
possible postponements or advancements of

marriages and births which ultimately may
not greatly affect completed family size in a
community where effective family planning is

‘prevalent. Thus in their report, published in

1949, the Royal Commission on Population
lay greater stress on average family size as an
index of fertility trends, and many demographers have now come to regard the net
reproduction rate as having scarcely more
value than the crude birth-rate as a measure
of fertility and replacement.

Thus the need for more refined measures
has led demographers in many countries to
investigate new methods of analysis, particularly with a view to answering the important question—is the post-war rise in the
birth-rate a mere “flash in the pan’’, due toa
temporary increase in the marriage rate,
or does it represent a genuine reversal of the
long-term downward trend in family size?

Important inquiries along these lines have
been proceeding in France and in the United
States: but it must be said at once that
whatever the type of analysis that is used
it is still not possible to give a definite
answer to the above question. The majority
of the women who were married after 1943,
and who thus contributed towards the rise
in the birth-rate, are still well within the
child-bearing age-groups. Thus, since we
cannot know how many more children they
will have, we cannot know either what
the completed size of their families will be.
Much will depend, therefore, on the trend of
fertility during the next two decades, and
any conclusions which may be drawn now
will clearly hinge largely on the types of
projections that are made for this period.

In terms of the crude birth-rate, both
France and the United States have substantially higher fertilities than this country.
After reaching a peak of over twenty in 1947,
the birth-rate of the United Kingdom now
seems to be settling down between fifteen

242
POST-WAR FERTILITY TRENDS

and sixteen per thousand. That of France,
however, is about nineteen, while that of
the United States is over twenty-four per
thousand.

The research in the United States has been
conducted at the University of Miami in the
Scripps Foundation for Research in Population Problems, under the directorship of
Professor Paschal K. Whelpton. The results of
‘many years’ work have now appeared in a
massive volume,* which, in order to expedite
publication, has been produced in the form
of a typescript. There are seven chapters,
covering some 280 pages of text, which are
followed by a further 100 pages of tables,
and at the end of the book there are yet
another 100 pages of appendices.

In France, work along similar lines is
being conducted in M. Alfred Sauvy’s
Institut National d’Etudes Demographiques,
and the results have appeared in a number of
the Institute’s publications. As_ early
as 1947, an article was published in the
quarterly journal Population by M.
Paul Vincent, entitled ‘“‘Comment Determiner la Tendance de la Fécondité? ’’;
this was followed in 1950 by a “ cahier’’ by
M. Jean Bourgeois-Pichat, entitled Mesure
de la Fécondité des Populations, and in 1953
by another “cahier’’ by M. Louis Henry,
entitled Fécondité des Maniages—Nouvelle
methode de mesure. The most recently
published results, however, are to be found
in an article by M. Henry in the Population
of April/June 1954, entitled “‘ Mise au Point
sur la Natalité Francaise ’’. |

The French and. American publications
make an interesting contrast. In Professor
Whelpton’s volume every effort has clearly
been made to put the full basis of the calculations before the reader; massive and detailed
tables are presented, and estimates are
made for all possible sources of error. When
one looks, however, for the basic conclusions
that can be drawn, it is only with difficulty
that they can be extricated from the body of
the work. Even the summarizing paragraphs

—_—_

* Whelpton, P. K. Cohort Fertility: Native White
Women in the United States. Princeton University
Press, 1954. (London: Geoffrey Cumberlege.) Pp.
xxv + 492. Price 48s.

younger child-bearing ages.

243

at the end of each chapter do not seem to
piece together into a coherent picture, and
the reader is left with the impression that the
answers to many essential questions have
somehow been lost in the welter of statistics.
When one turns to M. Henry’s work, on the
other hand, some of the methods of the
calculations he has used may be felt to be
inadequately explained, especially as regards
the basis of his projections, but his conclusions are stated clearly, unequivocally,
and in italics.

‘It is not proposed here to describe in
detail the techniques used either by Professor
Whelpton or by M. Henry. Both involve
the analysis of births according to “parity’’,
—1.e. whether a birth is the mother’s first,
second, third, etc.—and these are then
related to a given “cohort” of women.
Demographers use the term ‘cohort’”’ to
denote a group of individuals with some
common characteristic whose experiences
are followed over a period of time. An important difference between Professor Whelpton’s
and M. Henry’s work is that whereas in
the former the births are related to cohorts
of women born in a given year, in the latter
they are related to marriages of a given year.

 

Results of the American and French Studies

Of the seven chapters of Professor Whelpton’s book, the first three are devoted to an
introductory description of the techniques
used and the assessment of: error. The last
four chapters then describe changes in annual
and “cumulative ’’ fertility, the postponement, making-up and advancement of
births, and finally prospective fertility trends
in the 1950s and later years. It is shown that
the post-war rise in the birth-rate has been
due not to an increase in the proportion of
large families, but rather to an increase in
the proportion of women with one, two or
three children, with a corresponding decrease
in the proportion of those with none. This
trend is most marked among women in the
At the same
time, Professor Whelpton shows that the
shortage of births between 1929 and 1943
was largely made up after 1944: ‘‘ Combining
the estimates for all cohorts indicates
244

that the departures from the timing of
child-bearing ‘expected’ from the pattern
of the 1920s (a) decreased the number of
births during 1929-33 by between 730,000
and 850,000, during 1934-38 by between
1,180,000 and 1,520,000 and during 1939-43
by between 200,000 and 890,000, and (6)
increased the number during 1944-48 by
between 850,000 and 2,100,000”’.

In the final chapter, entitled “ Fertility
during the 1950s and later years’’, three
forecasts of population trends, high, medium,
and low, are projected. Professor Whelpton
believes that future trends will in fact
lie somewhere between the high and the
low series, and he concludes: ‘‘ Only with the
high assumptions—a moderate increase in
the size of completed families and a moderate
decrease in age at marriage and child-bearing

——are somewhat larger numbers of births |

forecast during each of the three periods than
occurred during 1944-48. Even the high
series, however, shows a trend that is
temporarily downward rather than upward.
In the low series there is a large decrease
in births from 1949-53 to 1959-63, the result
of the assumptions of a moderate decline in
the average size of completed families, a rise
in the age at marriage, and the postponement
of births because of unfavourable conditions.
The medium series, which assumes the
stabilization of average family size near that
of the 1900-09 cohorts and the continuation
of rather high first birth-rates at the younger
ages, shows about 1,000,000 more births
during 1949-53 than 1944-48, but 1,400,000
and 2,400,000 fewer during 1954-58 ‘and
1959-63 than 1944-48 ”’.

As in America, the French rise in the
birth-rate has not been due to an increase
in the number of large families. While the
proportion of childless couples has not
altered substantially, first births have tended
to come earlier in marriage than before the
war, and second and third births have been
relatively more numerous. This, says M.
Henry, constitutes a strikingly different
trend from that of the inter-war years. The
new trend began to appear in the marriages
formed in 1941 and 1942, and became most
marked in those formed in 1943. After nine

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

years of matrimony, women married in
1943 had produced as many children as had
been produced after fifteen years by women
married in 1925; and even if in future years
the women married in 1943 have very few
children, the size of their families will nevertheless be substantially larger than those of
women who married thirty years ago.

Such a fall in fertility, however, M.
Henry thinks unlikely. Projections are
made, based in some obscure fashion on the
fertility pattern of France in 1907 and of
pre-war Czechoslovakia, and he concludes
that the most probable average size of
completed family will be about Io to 15
per cent higher than that of marriages
formed between the wars.

The new trends in fertility M. Henry
attributes primarily to the influence of the
pro-natalist population policy promulgated
by the French Government in July 1939.
The most important feature of this policy
is the elaborate system of family allowances,
and M. Henry considers that the stability of
the new fertility pattern will depend chiefly
on the stability of the pro-natalist legislation.
“If this stability is maintained,” he writes,
“a rapid return to a more Malthusian.
[i.e. small family] pattern appears to us to
be very unlikely. If this legislation is called
in question, or if the value of the allowances
is permitted to decline, it is, on the other
hand, probable that fertility will fall rapidly.”’

Conclusion: The New Trends and Eugenics

In conclusion, a number of important
considerations may be mentioned.

Until about 1930 the birth-rate in most
western countries fell mainly because more
and more married couples were beginning
to plan their families effectively, so that the
ratio of small planned families to large
unplanned families was increasing. Thus
the trend in the birth-rate was influenced
chiefly by those types of factors that tended
to promote family planning—the growth
of education and the spread of knowledge
of birth-control techniques, the growth of
science and rationalism, the declining influence of religion, the emancipation of
POST-WAR FERTILITY TRENDS

women, the widening of the horizons of
social ambition, the general rise in the level
of living, and so on.

Since 1930, however, family planning has
become so nearly universal, and large families
so rare, that what changes there may be in
the proportion of the population whose
families are still unplanned can no longer
affect the birth-rate appreciably. Instead,
small changes in what the majority of
parents feel to be a convenient family size
now have a noticeable effect. Thus the
fluctuations of the birth-rate are now shaped
chiefly by a new set of factors—those
tending to influence the size of the planned
family, such as economic depression and
unemployment, the cost of living and the
economic remunerativeness of children, population policies and the Welfare State.

This distinction is brought out in the
evidence of both the French and the
American studies. The fact that in neither
country can the: post-war rise in the birthrate be attributed to an increase in the
numbers of large families is clearly due to the
fact that since the majority of these families
are in any case unplanned, they are unlikely
to be affected either by economic depressions
or by. pro-natalist systems of family
allowances. |

The eugenic implications of these developments are obvious, for it will be seen that any
system of family allowances may be regarded,

245

in a broad sense, as being a measure of
positive eugenics. For the only people
whose fertility such allowances are likely
to affect are, first, those who plan their
families efficiently, and, second, those who
would like to have more children anyway,
and both these characteristics are generally:
considered eugenically desirable qualities.

Secondly, we can now see how the demographers of the 1930s came to mistake what
was really only a temporary reflection of an
unfavourable phase of the trade cycle for a
continuation of the long-term secular trend
in fertility. Largély as a result of their
failure, it has sometimes been said that the
most prominent feature of all population
forecasts is that they are always belied by
the turn of events. It is certainly true that,
however elaborate our analysis of present
and past trends on the basis of such things as
age-specific rates, parity, spacing, or the
experience of other countries, we still cannot
know how many children married couples
may have in the future. As Professor
Whelpton says in his monograph, fertility
trends are likely to be shaped largely by the
fluctuations of trade cycles (the possibility
of future wars being excepted), and if the
economists could tell us more about the
probable nature of these cycles, then we
could see possible future population trends
in clearer perspective.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLVI, No. 4
