AN INVESTIGATION INTO ASSORTATIVE
— MATING*
By ELIOT SLATER, M.D.

Y assortative mating we mean the
| Bexseey of one sort of person to

mate with another specific sort of
person, and not entirely at random. One
might think perhaps that the dark-skinned
and dark-haired might be especially attracted
to the blue-eyed and fair-haired, and vice
versa. In fact, wherever the matter has
been gone into, it is the opposite that holds,
and it is always a matter of like attracting
like and never unlike. This is true of such
things as hair and eye colour and other
anthropometric characters, and perhaps most
importantly of intelligence. Husbands and
wives have been found to resemble each
other as closely in intelligence as brothers
and sisters (Jones, 1929).

The importance of this from the evolutionary point of view cannot be overemphasized. A general tendency of like to
mate with like, what is often called homo
gamy, if it extended over a wide range of |

hereditarily determined biological qualities,
would amount very nearly to intensive inbreeding. It would have the same effect
as inbreeding in increasing the variability
of the population, and so increase its genetical instability and vulnerability to selective forces. If, as seems~-certain, the
intelligent have 4t the present time fewer
children than the unintelligent, then the
marriage of two intelligent people to each
other means that both of them are part
sterilized ; whereas if they both married unintelligent partners, whether the marriage were
fecund or not, both intelligence and the lack
of it would be equally penalized or favoured.

Nearly all the work on assortative mating
has been done in the U.S.A.. by sociologists,
and relates to modes of social behaviour,
attitudes and interests. There is also a
certain amount of work on physical characters, but extremely little in the realm of
psychiatry. Professor Penrose (1944) has

*A paper read before the Eugenics Society on

January 15th, 1946.

was also given.

27

shown that for one mental hospital in
Canada the frequency of both husband and
wife being admitted with a psychotic illness
was much greater than chance probability
would suggest, and he concludes that assortative mating does exist “with respect to
traits which form part of the background of
mental disease.’ On the other hand
Leistenschneider (1938) found that the incidence of schizophrenia in the families of
the consorts of schizophrenics was not
significantly greater than in the general
population. This finding, of limited interest
though it is, is of great significance when
the highly debated mode of inheritance of
schizophrenia is considered.

Everyone who has been concerned with
the problem during the past war has been
greatly impressed with the great frequency
and importance of neurotic illnesses in the
population. It is generally agreed that,
however reactive these illnesses may be to
various forms of environmental stress, they
have also a genetical basis which can show
itself in emotional instability and various.
deviations of personality. I was therefore
very glad to take an opportunity, which was
made possible by the munificence of the
Rockefeller Foundation, to institute an
enquiry into the intensity of assortative
mating as far as traits of personality were
concerned. The investigation was planned
in the following way. A psychiatric social
worker, Mrs. Moya Woodside, our second
speaker to-night,* interviewed a number of
soldiers from the neurotic wards of my
hospital. From each of them she obtained
a social and psychiatric history, including
family history, number and ages of sibs,
early life and upbringing, school and occupational career, and the history of the
marriage. A specially devised test of temperamental traits, which has been standardized on normal and neurotic soldiers,
She also obtained from the

* See this issue, p. 29.
28 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

men permission to visit their wives, from
whom an exactly equivalent history was
taken. This group of families were controlled by exactly the same procedure being
followed with soldier patients from the
general wards of the same hospital and
Horton Emergency Hospital, by the kind
permission of Dr. Nicol. When the investigation is complete, as it is likely to be
in a few weeks, roo soldiers of each kind
will have been investigated, making with
their wives 400 persons in all.

Some of the selective factors in the investigation must be briefly mentioned. Every
man had to be married, and his wife had to
be living in an accessible district; this
meant that only those living in London and
its outskirts came in question. All subjects
were of the less prosperous socio-economic
classes. As no civilians were included, such
groups as highly skilled technicians and
those unfit for military service were not
represented. As only those wives could be
visited who would agree to it, pairs in open
conflict with one another had to be left
out. Nevertheless I believe the sample
collected to be roughly representative of an
urban working class, and I think that some
of the findings that Mrs. Woodside will be

discussing will be found interesting on that

account. In what she will report it will be
noted that she has not distinguished between
the neurotic and the non-neurotic groups.
For the purpose of a provisional communication such as this, such a procedure is
justified by the fact that no obvious and
large differences in behaviour in the two
groups have impressed themselves on us,
and the groups are very similar in other
qualities (see table below).

It might well be questioned whether the
physically sick give an adequate control for
our neurotic material. I believe that in the
present instance they do. Although in
general the physically sick are a special
selection, in the present case the illnesses
were of a kind to which all soldiers are almost
equally liable. Among the first 50 cases,
which are all I have had time to analyze for
this paper, the diagnoses of the physically ill
men were : Wounds and injuries 22, common

infections 14, respiratory diseases 5, hernia

and piles 3; and only 6 men. fell into the
suspect groups of “‘ gastritis,” “‘ rheumatism,”
“ vertigo ’’ and “ painful toes.” Of the total
of 7 neurotic men found in this group, 2 had
one of these suspect diagnoses. Accordingly
I think it fair to say that we can interpret
the main differences found between the
neurotic and control groups as due to the
special nature of the former.

CorreMen Wives lationr
1. Age 32°5 29°8 + -88
Neurotic 2. Stature 67°7 63°9 +°52
Group 3. Sibs 4°4 5°4 +°21
(50 families) 4. Children 58 61
5. Neurotic 50 14 ‘
1. Age 32°2 30°3 +°74
Control 2. Stature 67:9 63°7 + -38
Group 3. Sibs 5°2 4°8 + +03
(50 families) 4. Children 67 70

5. Neurotic 7 7

1. Mean age in years. 2. Mean stature in inches.
3. Mean number of sibs. 4. Total number of children.
5. Number of propositi who were adjudged neurotic.

I have now to show you the results of
some of the findings in the first 50 families
in each group. As you can see, differences
in age and height are negligibly small; they
do not approach statistical significance.
None of the other differences are significant
either ; but it is interesting that the neurotic
soldiers are themselves less fertile and come
from less fertile families than the others.
This fits in with a finding I have reported
elsewhere (Slater, 1945), that the neurotic
constitution is associated with an impoverishment of sex life. The findmg that is of vital
significance, if confirmed on the total
material, is that the incidence of neurosis is
twice as high among the wives of the
neurotics as among the wives of the nonneurotic soldiers. Furthermore, it is to me
very interesting and quite unexpected to
obtain from the correlation coefficients an
indication that assortative mating may prove_
to be more intense among the neurotic than
the normal population.

REFERENCES

Jongs, H. E. (1929) Am. J. Sociol., 35, 369.
LEISTENSCHNEIDER, P. (1938) Zéschr. f. d. ges.
- Neurol. u. Psychiat., 162, 289.
PrenrossE, L. S. (1944) Psychiat. Quart. Supp.
SLATER, E. (1945) J. Neurol., Neurosurg. and

Psychiat., 8, 12.
