WEALTH AND ABILITY //
Eugenics in the Professions and Crafts
By B. S. BRAMWELL

NE comes across much loose talk

on the correlation of wealth and

ability. Further, wealth may be
inherited and we speak of ability being
inherited, which fosters confusion... I think
it would be well if we could dissociate the
public mind from any idea that we hold the
possession of wealth or rank as a sure indication of intelligence. I include rank
because everyone is aware that many titles
have been awarded on a purely plutocratic
basis during the last fifty years.

It would be easy to show that many of the
ablest strains in the country have never
pursued wealth; their abilities have been
such as to enable them to earn without diffculty in some congenial pursuit amply sufhcient for their needs and the education of
their family, and on their death they have
left little in the way of accumulations. If
this is true of families, it is also true of
selected individuals of high ability. Nearly
thirty years ago, when it was decided to
abandon placing wranglers at Cambridge in
order of merit, I wrote an article, which was
published in the Scotsman, on the careers
of the senior wranglers in the last hundred
years. Needless to say, they were distinguished, but mostly in an academic way.
There were plentiful indications that they
could succeed in less cioistered conditions.
For instance, in the ’sixties three were
called to the bar. They all reached the
bench, two as Lords of Appeal in the House
of Lords and one as a Lord Justice of
Appeal. I cannot recall that any one of
the senior wranglers took to finance or the
Stock Exchange. This, I take it, was from
lack of inclination and not aptitude.

Many will remember a high wrangler
who died recently, leaving a large fortune
to his college, University, and to Oxford. I understand he inherited means

23

and by judicious investment amplified them
several times over—and this, by the way,
in the midst of a busy hospitable life fully
taken up with academic and municipal
duties, besides many outside activities. In
this case the aptitude was there, but finance
was a pastime to be pursued out of working
hours.

I think, then, that we can say the pursuit
of wealth makes little appeal to many of the
most intelligent.

If one considers the professions, one could
hardly say that the average entrant has any
confident hope of achieving a large fortune.
No doubt he expects to make a living and
feels that there are big prizes to be won—
by the few. Under present conditions the
average medical practitioner makes more
than the average army officer, who in turn
makes more than the average clergyman,
who, strange as it may appear, probably
makes more than the average practising barrister. The earnings of the latter are said
to be less than those of a compositor. The
prizes to be won by the successful barrister
are, from the material point of view, very
much greater than in the other professions.

These relative earnings may fluctuate
very considerably from time to time. The
average general practitioner is said to be
distinctly better off than thirty years ago;
the pay of an army officer is distinctly
higher than before the War ; the clergyman,
I suppose, is in much the same position, and
the average barrister worse off. The earnings of professional men are very sensitive
to increases and decreases in numbers of
practitioners. A few years before the War,
perhaps owing to increases in the Services
and public health appointments, “‘ locums ”’
were not to be had by the medical profession and one vacancy was actually filled
from the casual ward of a workhouse. Ten
24

per cent. either way may mean comparative
affluence or distress as the case may be, and
numbers take long to adjust themselves. A
young man starts to qualify for a profession. Six years later, when qualified, conditions may have changed considerably.
Numbers do adjust themselves slowly and
somewhat. At the Scottish Bar they have
a Widows’ Fund; it is compulsory for all
advocates to belong to it. Thirty years ago
there were over 400 members, this year
there are 322. The adjustment to changed
conditions is far from complete.

But while, as between professions, earning power and wealth may be poor indications of worth and ability, within any one
profession the reverse may be the case.

So far as hereditary dignities are concerned the professions differ extremely.
Some barrister is sure to be raised to the
peerage every few years: soldiers are more
seldom raised, except as a reward for war
service ; I can only recall four instances of
doctors being raised to the peerage, and as
for the Church, Lord Davidson is the only
case that comes to mind. Yet no one suggests that the descendants of barristers are
more likely to be able and worthy than
those of soldiers, doctors, or parsons. So
rank fails as a deciding test. In certain cases
it may even be an indication the other way
—where, for instance, in ten generations a
family with many surrounding advantages
has not had the energy or ability to rise
a single step.

In productive work it is common, though
not invariable, for the ‘‘ brain ’’ to be someone other than the head. He may not even
be a shareholder of any importance. He is
generally quite well paid, and may be very
well paid, but the profits and the honours
are more likely to go to the titular heads
and chief shareholders.

When we come to finance, dealing in
money and speculation, it would be idle to
say that the clever financier does not make
money. At the same time, there are many
others who make money by sheer luck in
speculation. The extreme instance is the
winner of the Calcutta or Irish Sweep;
behind him come numerous other less pro
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

nounced cases. If I toss pennies, I am very
unlikely to toss ten heads in succession, but
if 1,024 people toss, the chances are that one
will; and if 1,050,000 toss twenty times
each, probably one man will toss twenty
heads. The number of speculators is very
great, so there must always be a considerable number of people who have made big
fortunes by pure luck. In the past, if they
have wanted to do so, they have been able
to acquire titles.

What about the retention of wealth? The
adage that a fool and his money are soon
parted suggests that a man who retains his
inheritance intact is no fool. I think this is
true: a passive line will soon be stripped
of great wealth by death duties. To retain
it, grit and mental powers above the average will be required. If the estate is in
land, the position is practically impossible
in the ordinary case. One doubts if anyone
working with great ability could regain
from the land in an ordinary lifetime a sum
equal to the death duties taken out of it.
If so, and we have no modification of duties,
great estates must be broken up, more is
the pity, and the country probably defaced.

As regards the effect of death duties on
stocks and shares the result is surely different. In the first place, I am not sure if the
Treasury need fear this source of revenue
drying up. I imagine four out of five millionaires are the engineers of their own
fortune. This will continue to be the case.
A millionaire dies possessed of all the
ordinary shares in his business and no other
estate. A large portion of the shares must
be sold to pay the duties ; they will probably
be sold for less than they would have fetched
if he had disposed of them piecemeal in
his lifetime. They will very likely be
bought, in part, by those working in the
business. The business does not suffer; it
is not ‘‘ a parcel of boilers and vats ’’ that
are sold, but a portion of the “‘ potentiality
of growing rich beyond the dreams of
avarice ’’ at a reduced figure. His heirs
suffer, both by payment to the Treasury
and by the method by which they accomplish it, a forced sale of shares; the purWEALTH AND ABILITY

chasers score by buying their shares below
their real value.

THE WORKING CLASSES

iNow passing to the consideration of
working men, we find exactly the same
conditions occurring as in the professions.
In my own works we employ members of
many different unions. An outsider might
think that a man’s worth and ability was
proportioned to his pay. He would find, on
closer investigation, that an engineer is paid
very little more than a labourer; printers
in general taking 60 per cent. more than
engineers; lithographical printers double,
and lithographic tin printers still more.
Why are engineers so lowly paid? I suppose one reason is: ‘‘ Owing to the cessation of naval building.’’ It will right itself
in time, but the lag is very long and painful. Printers’ wages have fallen very little
from the highest points reached. This is
largely because of the big numbers employed by the daily Press. Their wages
form but a small fraction of the costs of production. It is not worth the newspapers’
while to risk a strike and a cessation of
issues and advertising revenue, so there is
not sufficient unanimity amongst employers
to oppose successfully the unanimity of the
unions.

Lithographic printing on tin is easier
than on paper as there is no stretch in the
material, yet the operatives are paid more
because they are few in number; here the
lag is assisted no doubt by union rules as to
apprenticeship. ‘These are not always bad.
It is a pity to degrade ruthlessly a skilled
occupation by introducing too many operatives. One good man for one good job is
better in the long run for the community
than two men for one job or two jobs for
one man. Rate of pay, then, is no criterion
of ability as between different trades,
because of the lag in adjustment and the
difficulty of a trained man, especially if no
longer young, changing from one occupation
to another. ‘‘ Supposing a rural dean to be
unfrocked, does he fall to be a major? Suppose a captain to be cashiered, would he fall
to be a puisne judge? ’’ But as in the pro
25

fessions, so within his trade his pay may be
a very good indication of the operative’s
worth.

There are strong indications of heredity
amongst apprentices. I think about 50 per
cent. of our apprentices are the sons of
journeymen employed by us. Sometimes, I
am glad to say, the sons aim higher. Social
promotion or the reverse is always of
interest so I quote a few instances that I
have observed. The son of one foreman is
training to be a chartered accountant; the
two sons of a sub-manager are in a leading
insurance company ; the son of an engineer
foreman is taking the examinations for the
Institute of Electrical Engineers. In each
case the father has risen from the ranks and
the sons aim higher.

One is sometimes surprised that people
who have risen still wish their sons to serve
an apprenticeship, as they put it, to have
a trade whatever happens. It is sometimes
amply justified ; one apprentice of ours was
in fact, if not in mame, a foreman in an
intricate department before he had served
his time, and an under-manager a few
months after he came out. There is a type
of the very best craftsman who prefers to
pursue his craft to rising to positions of
management. The ability may be there,
not always perhaps, but the soul is in
creative work and is not to be tempted.

Another family is of interest; for three
generations they have served in the army,
in the same regiment and then in our
works, in no higher sphere but with adaptability, trustworthiness, and_ efficiency.
There is a machine-minder whom no one
would take as other than a working man.
He is of high efficiency in no simple
process, but still a working man. I am told
his direct ancestor commanded one of His
Majesty’s ships in the Napoleonic Wars.
We have one or two labourers of marked
aristocratic feature, such as was so marked
amongst many of the Australian troops.

So there is ample evidence in our little
cosmos that some are going up, others are
static and some have come down. A
portion of our apprentices are the sons of
labourers who have been in our employment
26

for years, a fine type of man to whom the
term ‘‘ casual labourer ’’ is quite a misnomer. These men are loyal and knowledgeable in the internal working of the
firm; their work is far from being
unimportant.

From the point of view of eugenics a
tendency to reduce the amount of labour
required for handling material is of importance. The amount of skilled labour tends
to increase relatively to that of unskilled.
One would rather apprentice the sons of the
skilled than those of the unskilled en masse,
though the latter, being the sons of men
in regular employment, come from decent

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

homes and are well brought up. Family
tradition, that hybrid of heredity and
environment, is in them, and
regular work is the habit of their fathers.
But here again the size of the family is
dropping. It will not be from such stock
that the future operatives will be recruited
in the main, but from some grade definitely
below this in the present scale.

It is important that people should realize
that the average trade union member comes
definitely in the upper half of the community, that his family is much smaller
than it used to be, and that the increase
in the population comes from lower strata.

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXV, No. 1.
