The Eugenics Education Society.

President: Mayor Leonarp Darwin.

Vice=ePresidents:
Sir JAMES BARR, M.D. Hon. Sir J. FinpLAay, K.C.M.G.
SiR JAMBS CRICHTON-BROWNE, F.R.S. PrRoF. STARR JORDAN.
Mr. MONTAGUE CRACKANTHORPE, K.C. Dr. A. PLOETZ.
BisHOP D’ARcyY. ProF. SEWARD, F.R.S.
Mr. W. C. MARSHALL.
MMembers of Council:
Mr. CROFTON BLACK. LADY OWEN-MACKENZIE.
Sir E. BRABROOK, C.B. Dr. F. W. Mott, F.R.S.
Mrs. THEODORE CHAMBERS. Mr. G. P. MUDGE.
Hon. Srr JOHN CocKBURN, K.C.M.G. Mrs. G. POOLEY.
Mr. R. NEWTON-CRANE. PrRoF. E. B. PouLTON.
Mr. A. E. CRAWLEY. Mr. W. REA, M.P.
Sir H. CUNNINGHAM, K.C.I.E. { gz Dr. A. REID.
Dr. LANGDON Down. {j/ . £3¢ MR. JOHN RUSSELL.
Mr. HAVELOCK ELLIs. si tle R. ETTIE SAYER.
ProF. J. FINDLAY. ‘ ad F.C. S. Scuitrer, D. Sc.
Dr. GREENWOOD. - Pror. A. ScHUSTER, F.R.S.
Dr. W. HADLEY. EpGAR SCHUSTER, D.Sc.
Mrs. H. C. HEATH. Dr. C. G. SELIGMANN. |
ADMIRAL HENDERSON. Mrs. SYMONDS.
Major HILLs._ ProF. J. A. THOMSON.
Dr. INGE, THE VERY REV. THE DEAN OF Dr. TREDGOLD.
St. Pauv’s. Mrs. ALEC TWEEDIE. |
Mr, Hops-JOngs. Mr. W. C. D. WHETHAM, F.R.S.
Miss KIRBY. Mr. ARNOLD WHITE.
Mr. ERNgSsT LANE, F.R.C.S. Dr. DouGLas WHITE,
Mr. W. C. MARSHALL. Dr. A. GORDON WILSON.
Hon. Treasurer: MR. P. VON FLEISCHL. Hon, Secretary: Mrs. A. C. GorTro.
Members representing Branch Councils are nominated by the Branches.
Birmingbam:
Mr. CAREY GILSON. Mr. HuMPHREY HUMPHREYS. Mrs. JORDAN LLOYD.
Liverpool: Mr. R. T. BODEy, | Mr. D. LAURIE. Dr. W. B. WARRINGTON
‘baslemere : Beltast : . Glasgow :
Mr. E, NETTLESHIP, F.R.S. Pror. J. H. LINDSAY. (To be appointed.)
Rew Zealand:
Tue HIGH COMMISSIONER OF NEW ZEALAND. ADMIRAL HENDERSON.

“ Eugenics 1s the study of agenctes under soctal control that may improve or tmpatr
the racial qualtties of future generations either phystcally or mentally.”

 

OBJECTS.

Persistently to set forth the National Importance of Eugenics in order to modify public opinion,
and create a sense of responsibility in the respect of bringing all matters pertaining to human
parenthood under the domination of Eugenic ideals. .

To spread a knowledge of the Laws of heredity so far as they are surely known, and so far as
that knowledge may affect the improvement of the race.

Itl.
To further Eugenic Teaching, at home, in the schools, and elsewhere.
SUBSCRIPTION. .
' Membership - - - - - One Guinea per Annum.
Associate Membership § - - - - Five Shillings per Annum. -—
PRIVILEGES.

Attendance at Lectures, Discussions, and General Meetings, Use of Library.
Members ox/y receive THE EUGENICS REVIEW free.

Forms of Atplication for Membership and Associate Membership and full particulars of the Society
can be obtained of the Hon. Secretary. -.

OFFICES: Kingsway House, Kingsway, w.c.
OFFICE HOURS: 10.30 a.m. to 5 p.m., Saturdays 10.80 a.m. to 1 p.m.
THE

EUGENICS
REVIEW

 

Vol. V.

APRIL, 1913—JANUARY, 1914.

PUBLISHED QUARTERLY
BY THE EUGENICS EDUCATION SOCIETY,

KINGSWAY HOUSE, KINGSWAY, W.C.
CONTENTS. |

ARTICLES. PAGE
CARR-SAUNDERS, A. M.: A Criticism of Eugenics 214
DaRWIN, Major L.: The Cost of Degeneracy. Being Part of

the Annual Presidential Address ‘ 93
FISHER, R. A.: Some Hopes of a Eugenist 309
GOTTO, MRS. : Eugenics and Public Health. Report of the Public

Health Conference, Paris, 1913 157
HANSEN, S.: The Inferior Quality of the First-born Children

(Translated by H. M. Kyle) ‘ 252
JORDAN, D. STARR: The Eugenics of War . 197
LANGDON-DowN, R.: The Mental Deficiency Bill . 166
Linpsay, J. A., M.D., F.R.C.P.: The Influence of Disease upon

Racial Efficiency and Survival . 10]
McDouGALL, W., M.B., F.R.C.S. : Psychology in the Service of

Eugenics . . . 295
MarRcH, L. : Depopulation and Eugenics (Translated by Hon. H.

Onslow) Part I., 234; Part II. 343
MARSHALL, W. C., M.A.: The Effect of Economic Conditions on

the Birth-rate. . 14
OnsLow, Hon. H.: The French Commission on Depopulation 130
Our CRITIC CRITICISED

I.—DARWIN, MAJOR L._. 316

II.—ScHILLEeR, F.C.S., D. Se. 325
IIJ.—Bonp, C. J., F. R.C.S. 333
SCHUSTER, E. : Eugenics as a Branch of Medical Sociology.

Report of Discussion at Meeting of British Association,

Brighton, 1913 . 270
Wuitre, D.: Eugenics ‘and Venereal Disease 264

CORRESPONDENCE.

Alleged Inferiority, The, of the First-Born. J. A. Cops 357
Depopulation. DEAN W. R. INGE. . . 261
Eugenics and the Sunday School Teacher. ‘K. B. BAMFIELD 262
Heredity and Environment.

Major L. DaRwWInN . , ; ; ; 153, 260

E. SCHUSTER , ’ ’ . 260
Information on Adopted Persons. L. F. RICHARDSON 67
Inheritance of Fecundity. TERENCE CONNOR 154
Medical Marriage Certificates. JESSIE FIELD . . 263
Recent Eugenic Legislation in the United States. L. J. CoLr 354
Standardisation of Pedigrees.

E. NETTLESHIP and — MARSHALL 66

EUGENICS EDUCATION CONFERENCE.

Morning Session.
Papers.
Badley, J. H.: How the Difficulties in Teaching Eugenics
may be Overcome _.. 3 12
Darwin, Major L.: The Eugenic Ideal 2
Faithfull, Miss : How the Difficulties in 2 Teaching Eugenics
in Schools had been Met. 18
1V CONTENTS.

EUGENICS EDUCATION CONFERENCE (continued). PAGE
Nicholls, W. A.: The Difficulties in Introducing the Subject
of Eugenics into the Elementary Schools 9
Speakers in Discussion.
Bonwick, Miss . . 2 , ‘ ‘ « 2
Edgar, Professor. , . - 31
Haywood, Dr. : 2 . . . . 23
March, Miss . ‘ : : 5 ‘ . 3x
Murrell, Dr. Christine. , ; , . . 24
Plum, H. V. . : 2 , . . . 26
Russell, J. ; 2 . ; ; . . 32
Wood, Miss ; . . . . . . 26
Afternoon Session.
Papers.
Lyttelton, Rev. and Hon. E., DD.: Racial Responsibility as
a Factor in the F ormation of Character ; 34
Thomson, Prof. J. A.: The Method of Introducing the
Eugenic Ideals into Schools 47
Tuke, Miss: The Eugenic Ideal as a Factor in the Formation
of Character . . - 43
Speakers in Discussion.
Broome, Miss ‘ , : . ; . . 62
Darwin, Major L. . . : : 61, 62, 64
de Burgh, Colonel , . . . . . 3§7
Golledge, Mr. . : . . . ; . 59
Graham, Mr. . . . . ‘ ‘ . 58
Grant, Rev. C.. ‘ . . . . . 57
Kimmins, Mr., Proposing Vote of Thanks to Chairman . 64
Lewis, G._. . . . . . . . or
Low, Miss . . ; . . . 62, 64
Macnutt, Mr. ; . . . . ‘ . 61
Mortimer, Mr. . : . . . . 63, 64
Sawtell, W. . ‘ ‘ . ‘ . 60
Thomson, Prof. J. A... . . . . . 62
Resolution passed at. ‘ : 63, 64
Deputation subsequent to, to Board of Education.
Speakers,
Darwin, Major L. . . . ‘ . 65
Bonwick, Miss : . . 65
Lyttelton, Rev. and Hon. 'E., DD. “ . 65
Nicholls, Mr. (N.U.T.) . . . 65
Tuke, Miss : . 65
Trevelyan, —, M. P., Reply for Board of Education . . 65
GALTON DAY , , ; . . . . . 351
NOTES AND NOTICES.
American Genetic Association, The . . . . 387
Aphorisms on Marriage, from the Indian Sages . _ . 386
Assistance to Large Families in France . . . Ig!
Biological Training of Medical Students 192
Birmingham Meeting, The, of the British Association for
the Advancement of Science . . . . 289
Birth-Rate Commission, The 380
Dean, The, of St. Paul’s (Dr. Inge), on Medical Influence in
Social Reform 288
Debate, The, on Eugenics, at the Oxford Union. ; . 385

Depopulation in France 4 . . . 290
CONTENTS. Vv

NOTES AND NOTICES (continued). PAGE
Eugenics in Austria . 387
Eugenics at the International Congress of Medicine ; . 287
Eugenics and Public Health . , ; . 290
Family Investigations , : ‘ . 86
Family Records 2
Formation of Continental Eugenics. Societies in F rance, Italy

and Denmark ‘ 2 86-7
Formation, The, of a Dutch Eugenics Society . . . 192
Groundwork, The, of Eugenics, Lecture Courses ‘ . 191
Health Declarations before Marriage . ; , . 289
Italian Eugenics Committee, An. , , . 387
Lectures on the Groundwork of Eugenics . ; . 385
Letters of the late Dr. Alfred Russel Wallace. . 387
Marriage Regulations in Ontario, as to Defective Persons . 385
Mental Deficiency Act, 1913 . . 290
New Branches at Edinbur h, Oxford and Brighton’ . 384
New Vice-Presidents and ‘Honorary Members . 383
Permanent International Eugenics Committee, T he, Meeting of 286
Poor Law Conference, The . 8
Present State, The, of the Science of Eugenics , 383
Professor Weismann’s Letter on Election as Honorary Member of

the Society 383
Proposed Bibliography of Literature dealing with ‘Eugenics . 86
Psychological Laboratory, The, at Kingsway House ‘ . 287
Royal Institute of Public Health, Congress of, in Paris 87
Rules for the Use of the Library by Members and Associates

of Branches 190
Statistical Methods in Relation to Eugenics ; , . Ig!
Wanted, Eugenics Review, Vol. I., No. 2 . . ‘ . 387

OBITUARY.

Crackanthorpe, Montague, K.C. . - 352
Nettleship, Edward, F.R.S., by W. C. Marshall . . - 353
OFFICIAL PUBLICATIONS ‘ ‘ : ; ‘ 179, 293
PROCEEDINGS OF THE SOCIETY (Quarterly Chronicle) 1, 87, 193;
291, 387

PUBLICATIONS RECEIVED : gO, 194, 294, 390

REVIEWS.

ANON.: Mental Deficiency : ‘ . - 73

ASHLEY, ANNIE: Birmingham ‘Studies in Social Economics ;

III. The Social Policy of Bismarck . . 73
BaKER, HELEN: Race Improvement or Eugenics 178
Boaz, F.: Changes in the Bodily Form of Descendants of

Immigrants 76
BUTTEL-REEPEN, H. VON. ‘Man and His Forerunners 367
CHATTERTON-HILL, G. : The Philosophy of Nietzsche: An Exposi
tion and an Appreciation . . 72
CLOUSTON, Sir T., M.D., LL.D. : Morals and Brains (New Tracts

for the Times) . . ‘ . . 178

DANIELSON, FLORENCE H., M. A., and C. B. DavenporRT: The
Hill Folk: Report on a Rural Community of Hereditary
Defectives. Memoir No. 1, Eugenics Record Office . 172
v1 CONTENTS.

REVIEWS (continued). PAGE
DAVENPORT, C. B.: The Family History Book, Bulletin No. 7

Eugenics Record Office 172

State Laws Limiting Marriage Selection, Examined in the Light |

of Eugenics + 372

DENDY, PROF. A. : Outlines of Evolutionary Biology . . . 168

ELDERTON E. M., A. BARRINGTON, H. G. JONES, E. M. M. de G.
LAMOTTE, H, J. LASKI, K. PEARSON: On the Correlation of

Fertility in the Social Value. A Co- -operative Study - 3069
ENGEL, DrR.: The Elements of Child-Protection 74
ESTABROOK, A. H. and C. B. DAVENPORT: The Nam Family : Study

in ‘Cacogenics. Memoir No. 2, Eugenics Record Office . 172

EUCKEN, R.: Main Currents of Modern Thought: A Study of the
Spiritual and Intellectual Movements of the Day (Translated
by M. Booth) 77
FINOT, J.: Problems of the Sexes (Translated by Mary Safford) . 281
FOERSTER, F. W.: Marriage and the Sex Problem (Translated by

M. Booth) . 75
GIUFFRIDA-RUGGERI, DR. V.: Homo Sapiens, Einleitung zu einem

Kurse der Anthropologie . 368
GODDARD, H. H.: Echelle Métrique de PIntelli ence de Binet
Simon : Resultats Obtenus en Amérique 4 Vineland . 280
HAMILTON, Cosmo: A Plea for the Younger Generation . . 370
HAMILTON, Lorp E.: Involution . . . . 277
HeaAPE, W.: Sex Antagonism ‘ : < . 2977
HERBERT, DR. S.: The First Principles of Evolution . 371

HERON, D., D.Sc.: Mendelism and the Problem of “Mental
Defect. I. A Criticism of Recent American Work. Ques
tions of the Day and of the Fray . ; . - 385
Hosuouss, L. T.: Development and Purpose; an Essay towards

a Philosophy of Evolution . 169
HOFFMANN, G. VON.: Die Rassenbygiene in den Vereinigten | Staaten .

von Nordamerika . 279
HorsLey, Rev. J. W.: How Criminals are Made . . 373
Hourwicu, I. H., Ph. D.: Immigration and Labour . , . 178
HUBBARD, A. J.: The Fate of Empires. . . . . 71
ISAACSON, E. : The Malthusian Limit . ' : . 73
KERR, Mrs. G.: The Path of Social Progress. . . . 173
Key, ELLEN: Love and Ethics . . . . . - 92
KITCHEN, S. B.: A History of Divorce . 68
KUHLMANN, F.: The Results of Grading Thirteen Hundred Feeble
Minded Children with the Binet-Simon Tests . . . 280
LogeB, J.: The Mechanistic Conception of Life , ; . 71
LODGE, SIR O.: Modern Problems 77

LUNDBORG, DR. H. VON. : Medizinisch-biologie Familien F orschungen
innerhalb eines 2232 Kopfigen Bauerngeschlechtes in

Schweden (Provinz Blekinge) . . 274
MUNSTERBERG, H.: Psychology and Industrial Efficiency ‘ . 176
Social Studies of To-day 282
NICEFORO, Pror. A.: Su alcuni Indici ‘della Distribuzione ‘dell’Intelligenza e delle Attitudini tra gli Domini . 175
PEARSON, K., E. NETTLESHIP, and C. H. USHER: A Monograph
on Albinism in Man 370
PEPLER, D.: The Care Committee, the Child, and the Parent . 173
PERIODICAL LITERATURE . 80, 183, 283, 374
Picou, A. P.: Wealth and Welfare 5 » 275
PONSONBY, A., -M.P.: The Decline of Aristocracy . 372

REPORT, Papers and Proceedings of the Conference on Prevention of Destitution . 173
CONTENTS. vil

REVIEWS (continued). PAGE
SALEEBY, Dr. C. W.: Woman and Womanhood ‘ - 74
SCHUSTER, Pror. E.: Eugenics: A Science and an Ideal . . 4170
SEMPLE, ELLEN C.: Influences of Geographic Environment: On

the Basis of Ratzel’s System of Anthropo-geography . 281
SMITH, NELLIE M.: The Three Gifts of Life. 177, 392
WALLACE, Dr. A. R.: Social Environment and Moral Progress . 360

WALLIN, J. E. W.: Experimental Studies of Mental Defectives :
A Critique of the Binet-Simon Tests and a Contribution to

the Psychology of Epilepsy : ‘ ’ . 363
WALLING, W. E.: The Larger Aspects of Socialism ; . 368
WARD, PROF. Jy Sc.D. : Heredity in Man . 371

WHETHAM, W. C. “5 and C. D.: Science and the Human Mind:
A Critical and Historical Account of the Development of
Natural Knowledge , : 2 . 78
Woops, F. A.: The Influence of Monarchs : Steps in a New Science
of History . 5 ‘ ‘ . 362
PERIODICAL LITERATURE.

SCIENCE PROGRESS IN THE TWENTIETH CENTURY, January, 1913. The
Mechanism of Infection in Tuberculosis. R. R. Armstrong, B.A. The
author points out the universal distribution of tuberculosis throughout
the animal world. He emphasises the fact that there is a great variation of relative susceptibility to tuberculosis in different races of man.
The Jewish race is now possessed of a high degree of natural immunity.
The diagnosis of tuberculosis, the nature of tuberculosis, human and
bovine sources of infection are described.

LONDON QUARTERLY REVIEW, January, 1913. Zhe Hidden Secret of
Life. J. Arthur Thomson. This essay deals with the Presidential
Address delivered before British Association, at Dundee, September,
1912, by Professor E. A. Schafer. The search after the “origin
of life” has led to great discoveries for the benefit of mankind, but in
Professor Thomson’s opinion modern work has tended to accentuate rather
than diminish the “apartness” of living organisms, and has increased
the difficulties of thinking of the possible synthesis of living matter. The
mechanistic hypothesis is useful for chemical, physical, and medical
work, but it does not give satisfactory answers to the more fundamental
biological questions.

THE DUBLIN REVIEW, January, 1913. The Mental Deficiency Bill.
Thomas J. Gerrard. An attack on eugenic principles as expressed in the
Mental Deficiency Bill.
JOURNAL OF MENTAL SCIENCE, January, 1913. Care of the Defective
in America. Winifred Muirhead, L.R.C.P., Edin. An account of visits
to institutions for the care of the feeble-minded in various parts of
America, and a description of the methods of segregating the defective.

Presidential Address, delivered at the opening meeting of the section
of Psychiatry of the Royal Society of Medicine, October 22nd, 1912, by Sir
George Savage, M.D. A large part of the address is devoted to the question of heredity and insanity. Sir George Savage confirms the statement
that one-third of all the patients admitted to asylums have insane blood
relations, and he touches on the law of anticipation and the subject of
“ Masked Inheritance” in connection with the transmission of insanity.
He refers to the importance of recognising the eugenic principle in
dealing with defectives.

EDINBURGH REVIEW, January, 1913. Marriage, Divorce, and the
Divorce Commission.

SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW, January, 1913. Js Insanity on the Increase?
F. W. Mott, F.R.S. Dr. Mott admits the great increase of
registered insanity—since 1864 the registered insane in all classes
have risen from 44,795 to 135,661—but he thinks this increase may be
partly explained by a diminution of unregistered insanity and by the
accumulation of patients detained for life in asylums. The relationship
of pauperism and registered lunacy, heredity and insanity, and the causes
of insanity and mental deficiency are discussed.

Mythology and Life. An Interpretation of Olympus: With Apbplications to Eugenics and Civics. Professor Geddes. Abstract of a paper
read before the Sociological Society, October, 1912.

BEDROCK, January, 1913. Zhe Warfare against Tuberculosis, by
Elie Metchnikoff. This article is a translation of the Priestley lecture recently delivered by Professor Metchnikoff before the National Health
Society. The distinguished author sketches the history of opinion respecting the nature of tuberculosis, and very clearly describes the
essential facts of pathology as now understood. He passes in review
the various expedients which have been adopted in the war against
tuberculosis, and his estimate of their results is not very flattering.
Professor Metchnikoff holds that there is some truth in the belief that
PERIODICAL LITERATURE. SI

a predisposition to the disease may be innate or, under certain conditions, acquired, and thinks that immunity is attained by natural processes of which man is unconscious. These processes may, perhaps, be
a sort of natural “ vaccination,” the organism acquiring immunity as a
consequence of repeated slight infections. We think this paper should
be of much service to the eugenic movement. Professor Metchnikoff
can hardly be accused of a bias in the direction of eugenic propaganda,
yet his judgment on the claims of modern “ conquerors ” of consumption
closely resembles the utterances of those who are regarded by popular
medical authorities as mere fanatics unworthy of serious consideration.
It remains to be seen whether Professor Metchnikoff’s views will fare
better than those of less distinguished inquirers. M. G.
JOURNAL ROYAL STATISTICAL SOCIETY, LXXVI., 1913, p. 165. On
the Use of the Theory of Probabilities in Statistics Relating to Society.
(Presidential address to the Royal Statistical Society, delivered on December 17th, 1912, by Professor F. Y. Edgeworth.) In this address
Professor Edgeworth discusses some of the conceptions upon which the
theory of statistics is based. With the help of ingenious illustrations he
indicates the genesis of a “normal” frequency distribution, and notes
the conditions which must be fulfilled by actual data before we can confidently apply to them methods founded on the classical theory. Some
of the modern developments associated with the name of Professor Karl
Pearson are also touched on, and the views expressed well deserve consideration. Professor Edgeworth’s general conclusions do not, perhaps,
contain much which is actually novel, but his treatment is striking and
relieved by welcome touches of humour. Those eugenists who employ
statistical methods should certainly not neglect to read the paper. M. G.

BULLETIN DE LA STATISTIQUE GENERALE DE LA FRANCE, Tome II.,
fasc. 1i., Janvier, 1913, contains a statement of the births, deaths, and
marriages in France for the first half-year of 1912. The fact that a
slight natural increase is shown during this period instead of an actual
loss as in the corresponding six months of 1911 is due to a decrease in
the death-rate, for the birth-rate appears still to be falling. Another
interesting feature of this number is the publication of tables of mortality
for Sweden and Japan, and a comparison of the percentage of survivors
at different ages in these countries and in England, Denmark, Norway,
Austria, Hungary, Germany, Holland, Belgium, France and Italy. The
Scandinavian countries occupy the first places for all ages; Germany,
Austria, and Hungary the three last.

L*ANNEE PSYCHOLOGIQUE, Tome XVIII., 1912. Za Mesure du
Développement Intellectuel chez les Jeunes Déliquantes, by Dr. Sullivan.
This paper records the results of applying Binet-Simon tests to girls
between the ages of 16 and 25 years who, for one reason or another, were
detained at Holloway. These well-known tests are arranged in a series.
of groups according to their difficulty. Each group is devised to fit the
intellectual level of normal children of a particular age, thus when it
is found that any person can perform satisfactorily in the tests of a given
group but not in those of the next most difficult group, his or her degree
of mental development can be expressed as being that of a child of so
and so many years old. Dr. Sullivan divided the girls he examined
into six classes: (1) Non-criminal; (2) prostitutes; (3) habitual criminals;
(4) occasional criminals; (5) impulsive criminals; (6) moral imbeciles.
He found a considerable range of variation in each class, and the numbers:
he examined were not sufficient to enable him to make a satisfactory
statistical comparison between the different classes. In spite of this
his results are very interesting and suggestive, and have enabled him to
reach the conclusion that “ Mental deficiency, at least in the intellectual
sphere, has not the importance as a source of crime that has sometimes
been attributed to it.”
82 EUGENICS REVIEW.

Work of this kind is of the utmost importance for the advance of
criminology, and has a direct bearing on eugenics, as it may help
to throw light on the relative influence of “nature” and “ nurture ”
in the genesis of the criminal, and on the innate qualities of different
sections of the community. It is difficult and laborious and much
patience, tact, and skill on the part of the observer are requisite
conditions of success. EDGAR SCHUSTER.

CHICAGO MEDICAL RECORDER, January, 1913.

The Development of Child Study, by Dr. D. P. MacMillan, giving
the history of the origin and development of the child study movement
in the United States of America.

The Suppression of Vice Diseases through Personal Prophylaxis and
Municipal Control of the Saloon and Courtesan, by Colonel L. Mervin
Maus, Medical Corps, U.A. Army.

The Medical Reserve Corps—its Duties and Relations to the Army in
Peace and War, by W. B. Bannister.

THE CHICAGO MEDICAL RECORDER, February, 1913, contains, among
other matter, an interesting series of papers on the social evil and an
account of the work of the Vice Commission of Chicago.

NATIONAL TEMPERANCE QUARTERLY, December, 1912. Zhe Social
Economics of Abstinence. John Longden. An essay on economics of
abstinence which won a prize in a competition by students of Ruskin
College, Oxford.

REVIEW OF REVIEWS, November, 1912. The Life Blood and the
Empire, by Colonel Rawson, Chairman of the R.C.I. Commission on Child
Emigration. He strongly advocates the sending of Poor Law children
to the Colonies, but mentions that Canada is at present the only dominion
where a scheme for child emigration has been organised. He thinks
that the regulation which allows guardians to contribute a sum up to
£13 for outfit, passage, etc., but not for maintenance out of the United
Kingdom, should be altered. By this regulation a society is prevented
from taking a child at the age of seven or eight, considered to be the
most eligible age for child emigration, as no emigration society can
entirely maintain the child for six or seven years until it is self-supporting.

ARCHIV FUR RASSEN-U. GESELLSCHAFTS-BIOLOGIE IX., Heft 4. JulyAugust, 1912 (published December 24th).

G. P. Zeliony (St. Petersburg): Uber die zuktunftige Soziophysiologie.
A paper read before the Philosophical Society of St. Petersburg, March 19,
1909. The author recognises that at the present time there is a general
tendency, especially among German sociologists, to lay too much stress
on social psychology and too little on.the physical and physiological side
of social phenomena. His own position is diametrically opposed to the
psychological or subjective method, for which he would substitute a
purely objective “physiological sociology” or “sociophysiology.” The
paper, although one-sided, is of considerable interest; but, as A. Nordenholz, one of the editors of the Archiv, points out in a footnote, in reality
a combination of both methods must be used if one expects to make a
thorough study of the subject.

J. Grassl (Kempten): Die Wanderungen der bayrischen Bevolkerung und ihre Einflisse auf die Rasse. A study in statistics. Among
other interesting data, Grass] finds that almost one-half of the populations
of Munich and Niirnberg are the children (first generation) of people
who were born in the country. The losses to the country districts
through migration to the towns vary from 8 to 4o per cent. according
to the district. In 1900, 320,000, or 64 per cent., of the population of
Munich had not been born there, and at the end of the nineties and
beginning of this century, of every 100 brides, 66 were from the
PERIODICAL LITERATURE. 83

country, 5 from other parts of Germany, 4 of foreign birth, and
25 born in Munich. The corresponding figures for bridegrooms
were 65, 9, 5, and 20 per cent. Of persons under 16 years
of age born in Munich, at the most 22 per cent. are the children
of Munich parents; the parents of 65 per cent. are from the country,
and of 10 per cent. from other parts of Germany, or foreigners. In 1882,
509 per cent. and 36°6 per cent. of the Bavarian population were employed
respectively in agriculture and industry ; in 1907 the figures were 40°3 per
cent. and 459 per cent. Grass] arrives at the following conclusions :—1.
The Bavarian people have been for centuries predominantly agricultural,
and although the marriage-rate has been comparatively low, the birthrate has been very high, yielding an almost maximum number of
children to each household. By adhering to this social system Bavaria
has succeeded in surmounting all the perils to which it has been exposed
both by war and pestilence. An increase in the birth-rate has always
followed a sudden decrease in the population. The losses suffered during
the Napoleonic wars were made good in two generations. 2. In the
middle of the thirties of the last century the younger generation in the
agricultural districts, especially the children of the peasants, found that
there was no longer sufficient room for them at home and began to
migrate. 3. These migrations have now been continuing for 80 years
and have taken a very characteristic course. 4. The movement of
the population began with migrations from village to village and from
district to district. A preference was as a rule shown for the chief
district towns. As time went on, the boundaries of the provinces were
passed, and the stream of migration directed itself mainly to the centres
of industry, although a certain proportion of the emigrants left the
country altogether, either for other parts of Germany or beyond the sea.
5. In whatever direction the stream of migration poured, industry, commerce and wealth arose, and wice versd, in the districts where trade and
industry flourished, the people gathered together in masses. 6. The
causes of the local movements of the people are twofold, that is to
say, active, a direct result of the surplus of children born in the country
districts who are drawn by the greater attractions of life to the towns,
and therefore seek industrial or commercial employment, and passive, a
result of the fact that in Germany and Bavaria the number of available hands has not kept pace with the rapid expansion of trade and
industry. The country population is absorbed by this vacuum.
7. During the process of migration the country people lose characteristics
which have been bred into them, as it were, by centuries of stationary life.
The loss of these characteristics is often accomplished in so short a
time that it is evident that they cannot have been permanent racecharacters, but simply habits or customs acquired through tradition
and conscious imitation. 8. Of all the characteristics that are lost, the
most important is the tendency to have large families. The habit of
voluntarily limiting the number of one’s children which is acquired in
its place is, no less than the former tendency, a result of economic
motives. The original union of sexual impulse and parental instinct is
destroyed. The parental instinct falls under the control of the will and
deteriorates. The sexual impulse degenerates into love without marriage.
g. While in the originally agricultural condition of life, bodily strength
and dexterity were qualities of the greatest importance to the individual,
the tendency is for these characters to recede more and more into a
subordinate position among the people who have migrated to the towns,
with whom intellectual capacity and education have become the most
highly desirable characteristics. 10. There are also changes in physical
characters. The body becomes taller and more slender, the development
of fatty tissue is increased, the muscles, bones, and especially the skin,
become more delicate. The capacity of the body to withstand the effects
84 EUGENICS REVIEW.

of the climate is diminished, as well as the power to bear hunger, thirst
and want of sleep. The work of rendering the environment hygienic
becomes of relatively greater importance, and sometimes mofe than comnsates for the unhealthy conditions of life and labour in the manuacturing centres. Since it is mainly the more intelligent and capable
and physically stronger country-people who migrate to the towns, there
is an unmistakeable tendency for the more efficient stocks to be lost
to the rural districts. It is only because life in the country is a powerful
factor of regeneration that the agricultural population is still able to
maintain itself. 11. The original religious conception of a direct or
indirect intervention of a personal God in the human affairs becomes
transformed first into a belief in the creation of natural laws by a deity,
later into the rejection of the idea of a personal God in favour of a divine
principle, and finally into a purely mechanistic conception of life. 12.
The further the individual is removed from “nature ” the stronger becomes
his belief in the ability of man to control the world of phenomena. 13. A
rapid rise of industry and commerce, such as has taken place in Germany,
is possible only among a people that has been employed for centuries
in agriculture and has a very large supply of “hands” to draw upon.
14. Further progress in industry and commerce will depend upon the
capacity of the rural districts to supply the towns with labour-power. 15.
The supplying of labour-power by the country districts will be possible
if the generative power of the peasants, including the agricultural workers
is carefully fostered and protected, and if the endeavour to introduce the
sexual habits of the towns into the country is suppressed. 16. A further,
but only temporarily, effective means of enabling the rural districts to
continue to supply workers to the towns would result from the introduction of machinery as a substitute for human labour into agriculture.
17. The more equal the proportions of the inhabitants dwelling in town
and country, the smaller becomes the relative percentage of country-bora
people in the annual increase of population in the towns. 18. For this
reason also, for opportunities for employment in the country should be
carefully preserved (domestic colonisation, v. Gruber). 19. The attractiveness of the towns for the country population can be decreased by
assimilating the conditions of life in the country, so far as is possible,
to those of the towns. 20. Contemporaneous with the domestic migrations,
is a stream of foreign immigration from countries of a lower level of
civilisation. The latter consists for the most part of economically and
genetically unproductive classes, who are of permanent value neither
from the economic nor generative point of view. oo
Agnes Bluhm: Zur Frage nach der generativen Tiichtighkeit der
deutschen Frauen und der rassenhygienischen Bedeutung der aratlichen
Geburtshilfe. The concluding part of a paper begun in the last number
of the Archiv. Continuing her discussion of the capacity for child-bearing,
Dr. Bluhm’s final conclusion is that although there is still a great
lack of: trustworthy statistical material, nevertheless, it is certain that
the capacity for child-bearing of German women is not only greatly
inferior to that of the women of primitive races, but also to that of other
European peoples, the women of Norway, for example; and that there are
signs of a further deterioration in the capacity for child-bearing of German
women. The trouble is due in part to the unhygienic manner of life of
to-day, in part to the advance in obstetrics, in so far as the latter favours
the hereditary transmission of incapacity for child-bearing. Although
this department of medicine has been of great advantage to the race
from the quantitative standpoint (fall in rate of infant mortality), it is
unquestionably a source of danger to the quality of the race. Since the
chief cause of incapacity for child-bearing is narrow pelvis, and since
narrow pelvis is usually a result of rickets, an energetic endeavour to
stamp out this disease would be the best protection against an increase
PERIODICAL LITERATURE. 85

of the incapacity in question. Even if the result of improved obstetrical
methods is to increase the number of individuals who are tainted with
rickets, much may be done to check the development of the disease by
a hygienic manner of life combined with breast-feeding and sunny, airy
dwellings. In regard to the capacity for resistance to diseases during,
and immediately following, confinement (4), we have no statistical material
and consequently can draw no conclusions. On the other hand, Dr.
Bluhm is of the opinion that there are as yet no absolutely certain proofs
that the capacity for breast-feeding (5) is declining, and that as yet the
most that can be said is that “ one has the impression that it is declining.’
As is well-known, Dr. Bluhm (comp. Die Stillungsnot, etc., Leipzig,
1909, and various articles in the IV. and VII. volumes of the Archiv) does
not agree with the views which have been expressed on this subject by
v. Bunge and Claassen.

F. Siebert (Miinchen): Der Neumalthusianismus und die offentliche
Ankiindigung der Verhutungsmittel.

Siebert hardly touches upon the question of the prevention of
conception for purely medical reasons (where no public advertisement of Neomalthusian appliances is necessary), and is apparently inclined to ignore the eugenic standpoint, as, for example, when he says
that, “ When one’s attention is drawn to the waste of strength and
money of the people that results from women having to go through so
many periods of pregnancy in vain—such a large proportion of the
infants born dying sooner or later—one can reply that in Bavaria the
districts that have actually the highest birth and death rates also succeed
in bringing the greatest number of offspring to maturity.” His paper
is, in fact, an attack on Neomalthusianism as such, and especially when
considered as a means of social reform. He asks, “ Ought we not to look
upon it as a misfortune if the increase of population is no longer a result
of the growth of the native element (in Germany), but merely of the
immigration of foreigners of greater generative capacity?” “If the
nation were really over-populated to-day, and the misery in which large
groups of our people live were actually a result of over-population, the
effect of Neomalthusian practice would only be that the descendants of
aliens would live in the same misery and owing to the same causes.”
He considers the Neomalthusian movement to be a sign of degeneration. His argument is, that the sexual impulse is an offshoot
of the instinct of self-preservation projected beyond the individual
to the species. An important part of the reproductive life
is the care of the young. The family is in last instance an
imstitution for the care of the young; and since the family is the
foundation of the State, the State itself is an enlarged institution for
the care of the young. It is our instinct of self-preservation that
renders the State so significant in our eyes; but as soon as the instinct
of self-preservation is weakened, its component parts begin to disintegrate: the feeling for family and State is gradually lost, and the
reproductive instinct, deprived of several of its integral characters,
becomes wholly identified with the sexual impulse. Hence, he
says, a frequent accompanying feature of degeneration is the endeavour to do away with the inhibitions which now tend to restrain
the sexual impulse. The feeling of pity for the unfortunate,
which is so often shown by Neomalthusians, like the compassion
which can be considered as one of the motives underlying the
peace movement, is, according to Siebert, a sign of degeneration
and weakness, for the reason that it prefers to subordinate the interests
of the race to those of the individual, just as the peace movement
prefers the economic struggle with its strikes, lock-outs, and revolutions
to the sharp brief conflicts of war. It is, he says, a sign of weakness,
rather to suffer a long and tedious illness than submit to a swift if
painful operation. e seems, however, to forget that the economic
86 EUGENICS REVIEW.

misery of our time is quite independent of warfare. His great fear
is that, although Neomalthusianism is a useful means of eliminating
undesirable individuals, it may, if legally recognised, act contagiously
on the sound. Here, again, his reasoning is apparently false, if we
assume that on the whole the well-to-do classes contain a larger proportion of sound individuals than the very poor. As we all know, it is
the well-to-do who least need to be informed of how to limit the number
of their offspring. Siebert proposes as remedies for the fall in the birthrate, the improvement of the conditions of life of the poor—better dwellings and conditions of labour—the encouragement of co-operation, the
effective prevention of speculation in land and food products, an improved colonial policy, the encouragement of emigration (to the German
colonies’), and the taxation of people who have no children and of the
unmarried. His article, although interesting, is marred by a vulgarity
of expression to which one is not accustomed in the Archiv.

HENRY BERGEN.
NOTES

Family Investigations.—The Research Committee of the Eugenics
Education Society have planned a statistical research into fertility and
the incidence of mortality in early life. It is earnestly hoped that many
members of the Society may be willing to assist by filling in “ Family
Investigations: Schedule A.” This schedule asks for information,
obtainable without excessive labour, concerning married couples and
their children, information of a kind which people should not be unwilling to furnish. In order that the research may be carried to a
successful issue, it is necessary that at least 10,000 schedules should be
filled in, in spite of the fact that the inquiry is to be limited in the first
instance to marriages which had lasted at least six years and to the
“educated classes.”

Members willing to help would probably each be able to fill in
several forms, dealing with themselves and their own children, with
their parents and brothers and sisters, and with the families of remote
relatives and friends. It is also hoped that they may be able to interest
as many people as possible in the inquiry.

Blank schedules, which are self-explanatory, may be obtained on
application to the Chairman of the Research Committee, Eugenics Education Society, Kingsway House, Kingsway, W.C.

* *

% *

Proposed Bibliography of Literature dealing with Eugenies.—
In order that the Society may serve as an information bureau on
Eugenics, it is proposed to start a classified bibliography on the subject,
which shall, wherever possible, include brief indications of the nature
of the books or memoirs dealt with, in addition to the usual information
as to author, title, and date and place of publication. A large amount
of work will necessarily be involved in its production, as it is important
that all the references should be verified, in order to prevent the accumulation of inaccuracies which result when dates and titles are taken at
second and third hand. The Honorary Secretary will be pleased to hear
from any member who will be willing to assist in this work.

* * * *

The Formation of Continental Eugenics Societies. — It is with
great pleasure that we can announce the formation of the Société
Francaise d’Eugénique. It was founded on January 29th, 1913, with
the following officers :—President, M. Edmond Perrier; vice-presidents,
M. le Dr. Landouzy, M. le Dr. Pinard, M. F. Houssay; general secretary,
M. le Dr. Apert; treasurer and librarian, M. Lucien March.

The objects of the Society are defined as :—(1) The research into, and
the application of knowledge bearing on, the reproduction, conservation
and improvement of the species; particular attention being given to the
QUARTERLY CHRONICLE. 87

heredity and selection in their application to the human race, the questions of the effect of environment, economic conditions, legislation, and
manners and customs on the quality of future generations, and on their
physical, intellectual, and moral capacity. (2) To co-operate in the
development of those branches of science which bear on the studies of
the Society. (3) To encourage eventually the formation of branch
societies having the same objects in view. (4) To disseminate among
the general public ideas favourable to the improvement of future
generations.

The Society projects the publication of a monthly or quarterly
journal, which will be edited by the secretary under the general direction
of the Council. The formation of the French Society may perhaps be
justly counted as one of the indirect results of the International
Eugenic Congress, especially in view of the fact that the original
council is almost identical with the Consultative Committee formed to
organise the French contributions.

We also hear from Professor Niceforo, of Rome, President of the
Italian Consultative Committee of the Congress, that an Italian Eugenics
Society is in process of formation, and will shortly be formally
inaugurated.

In Denmark the Anthropological Committee, at the instigation of
Dr. Soren Hansen, have organised a special Eugenic Section.

* * % *

The Poor Law Conference.—The forty-first annual Central Poor
Law Conference met on February 11th and 12th, at the Guildhall, under
the presidency of Mr. Morton Latham. The first day was devoted to a
discussion on the eugenic aspect of the Mental Deficiency Bill. Major
Darwin delivered a paper on “The Mental Deficiency Bill from the
Eugenic Aspect,” which was opposed by Miss Fortey, B.Sc., Poor Law
Guardian of Leicester. “The Administrative Side of the Bill” was
dealt with by the Rev. P. Propert, and a resolution finally passed
recommending the permanent care of the mentally defective, and that
for reasons of efficiency and accuracy the control of lunatics and all
mentally defective persons should be vested in one authority. (The
papers will be published (price 1/-) by G. Lewis, 100, South Hill Park,
Ealing). % # * *

The Royal Institute of Public Health.— The Congress will meet in
Paris from May rsth to 19th. The Eugenic Section is under the presidency of M. Lucien March, Directeur de la Statistique Générale de la
France. Papers have already been promised by M. March, Dr. Theodore Thomson, Dr. Hyslop, Professor J. A. Lindsey, Dr. D. White, Dr.
Saleeby, and Professor Houssay. Two days only will be devoted to
eugenics, as a subdivision of the section has also to provide for the
discussion of school hygiene.

QUARTERLY CHRONICLE

CENTRAL SOCIETY.
PROGRAMME.

February 6th.—Professor Geddes, at the Grafton Galleries, 5.15
p.m., on “The Course of Life, its Rises and Falls, a Standard and
Notation for Eugenics.” The President in the chair.

March 6th.—Mr. W. C. Marshall, M.A., at the Grafton Galleries,
at 5.15 p.m., on “ The Effect of Economic Conditions on the Birth-Rate.”
The President in the chair.

January 17th.—Mr. E. J. Lidbetter, at the Theatre, Burlington Gardens, at 8.30 p.m., “ The Social Application of Eugenics,” No. IV.,
“ Social Sanction versus State Control.” Mr. Newton Crane in the chair.
88 EUGENICS REVIEW.

February 28th.—Professor J. Edgar, at the Theatre, Burlington Gardens, at 8.30 p.m., on “ Eugenics and Patriotism.” The President in
the chair.

March 14th.—Miss N. March, at the Theatre, Burlington Gardens,
at 8.30 p.m., on “ Methods of Introducing Eugenics into Education.”
The President in the chair.

A YEAR’S COURSE OF LECTURES ON THE GROUNDWORK OF EUGENICS.
SPRING TERM.

At the Imperial College of Science, South Kensington, from January
0 hn 1913, On Tuesdays, at 5.30 p.m., by Mr. Clifford Dobell,
I. January 14th

II

III. ” oak The General Anatomy and Physiology of a

IV. February 4th Mammal.
V. » 11th

VI. 9 a The General Anatomy and Physiology of

VII. a 25th a Flowering Plant.

VIII. March 4th.—Outlines of Cytology.

Ix. 6th } Anatomy and Physiology of the Reproductive
X. 55 11th Systems of Mammal and Flowering Plant;
XI. » 13th Gametes,_ Fertilisation and Embryonic
XII. 9 18th Development.

MEETINGS.

January 11th.—Mr. R. Dixon Kingham gave a lecture to the Children’s Welfare Exhibition, at Olympia, on “ Eugenics: the Patriotism
of the Future.”

January 17th—Mr. A. H. Fenwick addressed the Shoreditch Public
Welfare Association on “ Eugenics.”

January 2oth.—The Rev. Edward Clarke lectured on “ Eugenics” at
the Archway Road Baptist Guild.

January 21st.—Miss Miller lectured to the Margate Pioneer Society
on “ Woman’s Responsibility to the Race.”

January 31st.—Miss Trench lectured before the Haslemere Society
on “ Eugenic Education in the Home.”

February 4th.—Miss Trench lectured to the Margate Pioneer Society
on “ Eugenic Education in the Home.”

February 17th.—Mrs. Gotto lectured on “ Practical Eugenics ” at the
Foresters’ Hall, Margate.

March 4th.—Miss Trench spoke at a debate on “ The Methods of the
Eugenics Society,” at 16, Fellows Road, Hampstead.

March oth.—Mr. Rolleston Stables lectured at the Peel Institute,
Clerkenwell Green, on “ Eugenics.”

March 1r2th.—Mr. R. Dixon Kingham lectured at Birmingham before
the Workers’ Educational Association on “ Eugenics and Social Progress.”

April 1sth.—Miss Trench lectured to the West Essex Women’s
Franchise Society on “ Eugenics in the Home.”

COMMITTEES.
January 1oth.—Executive Council Meeting, 4.30 p.m.
93 17th.—Special Research Committee Meeting, 11.30 a.m.
” 24th.—Research Committee Meeting, 5.30 p.m.
3,  . 29th.—Education Conference Committee Meeting, 5.30 p.m.

5 31st.—Research Committee Meeting, 10.30 a.m.
QUARTERLY CHRONICLE. 89

February 7th.—Executive Council Meeting, 4.30 p.m.

14th.—Research Committee Meeting, 10.30 a.m.

» 28th.—Research Committee Meeting, 10.30 a.m.

March roth.—Education Conference Committee Meeting, 5.30 p.m.
” 14th.—Executive Council Meeting, 4.30 p.m.

19th.—General Council Meeting, 3 p.m.

39

39

LIVERPOOL.

Council meetings were held on January 24th and February 12th. The
annual meeting took place on January 31st in St. Andrew’s Lecture
Hall, when Dr. Nathan Raw, F.R.S.E., delivered an address on “ The
Influence of Environment upon the Individual.” The report and
accounts for 1912 were presented and received, and have since been
circulated to the members. The three officers were unanimously reelected; Mr. G. Hall Neale and Mr. G. Chambers were elected to
the Council vice Mrs. Lyle Rathbone and Professor Paterson, resigned.

Our very hearty thanks are due to Major Darwin for his kindness in
coming down to Liverpool. He addressed a large and influential
assembly, numbering over six hundred, in the Concert Room of St.
George’s Hall on the subject of “Large Families or Small?” Such a
meeting should materially add to the power of the Society to effect
public opinion in this neighbourhood.

The paper promised by Mr. D’Aeth has had to be postponed under
his doctor’s orders, but will be given later in the year.

The Secretary addressed the South Church Working Men’s Club
on February 18th upon “The Eugenic View of Some Modern Problems ”; and opened a discussion on March 3rd in the Debating Society
of the David Lewis Working Men’s Club upon “ Population Facts
and Problems,” which led to a vote strongly in favour of heredity as
the best clue to the solution of social problems.

R. T. Bopey, Hon. Sec.

MANCHESTER AND DISTRICT .

The Manchester Branch has held two very satisfactory meetings
during the last quarter. The first was addressed by Dr. Melland on
the subject of “ Legislation for the Mentally Deficient,” the chair being
taken by Mr. J. H. Reynolds, M.Sc. The attendance was very satisfactory, and the discussion very suggestive of the misrepresentations
ave so extensively concerning the Bill brought forward in the last

ession.

In March a second lecture, given by Dr. Sandiford on the “ Inheritance of Mental and Physical Qualities,” was even better attended. The
President of the branch, Bishop Welldon, was in the chair, and emphasised the folly of the usual objections to the study of eugenics. The
questions asked were extremely good, and showed a very intelligent
interest in the subject. J. D’Ewart, Hon. Sec.

BELFAST.

A meeting of this branch was held on November 27th, 1912, at
which the Bishop of Down presided, and Dr. W. A. Potts, Birmingham,
delivered a lecture, the subject being “ The Feeble-minded.” At the
close of the address the following resolution was passed unanimously :
“The Belfast Branch of the Eugenics Education Society very earnestly
expresses its regret that the Government has abandoned the Mental
Deficiency Bill, and yrges that the matter should be reconsidered. It
also presses upon the Government the extreme importance of extending
the provisions of the Bill to Ireland.”
go EUGENICS REVIEW.

At a meeting held on 27th January, 1913, in the Medical Institute,
the first annual reports of the Committee and of the Treasurer were
adopted. Six retiring members of Committee were re-elected, and Dr.
W. James Wilson was elected junior secretary in place of Professor
Gregg Wilson resigned. Subsequently a most instructive and _ illuminating lecture on “ Heredity in relation to Eugenics ” was delivered
by Professor Gregg Wilson, and a discussion followed.

On the 28th February, 1913, the Right Rev. C. F. D’Arcy, D.D.
(Bishop of Down), introduced a discussion on the “ Moral Aspect of
Eugenics.” There was a good audience, and the subject was ably discussed by a number of members, and at the end Bishop D’Arcy replied
to the critics. M. ANDREWS, Hon. Sec.

HASLEMERE.

A course of three lectures has been given this quarter on the eugenic
education of children:—No. 1. “ Eugenic Education in the Home,” by
Miss Violet Trench. No. 2. “ Eugenic Education for Girls in the School
and Training College,” by Miss Norah March, B.Sc. No. 3. “ Eugenic
Education for Boys in the School,” by Mr. W. Hope-Jones, B.A.

L. E. Muir, Hon. Sec.

PUBLICATIONS RECEIVED.

Heterochromosomes in Mammals, by H. E. JORDAN. (Proceedings of the
Society for Experimental Biology and Medicine. Vol. 10. No. 1.
October 16, 1912).

The Need for Genetic Studies of Pulmonary Tuberculosis, by H. E.
JORDAN, M.A., Ph.D., Professor of Histology and Embryology,
University of Virginia. (The Journal of the American Medical
Association, October 26, 1912. Vol. lix.; pp. 1518 and 1519.) One
or two pedigrees suggesting the Mendelian inheritance of the
phthisical diathesis are recorded and discussed.

The Eugenical Aspect of Venereal Disease, by H. E. JORDAN, Ph.D.
This is a paper which was read before the American Association for
the Study and Prevention of Infant Mortality. Dr. Jordan emphasises
the dysgenic influence of venereal disease, and advocates its compulsory notification, the isolation of afflicted persons and immediate

' efforts totally to eradicate prostitution.

Eugenics: The Rearing of the Human Thoroughbred, by H. E. JORDAN,
Ph.D. This is an address which was delivered before the American
Association for Study and Prevention of Infant Mortality, at Cleveland, on October 3rd, 1912. A general introduction to the subject,
which contains a plea for rather drastic legislation for eugenic
purposes.

Cults, Myths, and Religions, by SALOMON REINACH. Translated by ELizaBETH Frost. (Publisher : David Nutt, 1912. Price 7s.6d. net. Pp. 209.)
This volume gives an account of some interesting customs of early
European civilisation, and an especially interesting account of the
religious cults in Asia and Europe at the dawn of the Christian era.

Pathological Inebriety: Its Causation and Treatment, by G. W. ASTLEYCooper. Introduction by SiR DAVID FERRIER, M.D., F.R.S. (Publishers: Bailliére, Tindall and Cox, 1913. Price 3s. 6d. Pp. 151.)
Attempts to put in popular form a statement of the present legal,
social, and scientific position of the study of alcoholism and the
inebriate. Several family histories are given showing the inheritance
of the defect.

A Catechism of Life, by ALICE M. BUCKTON. (Publishers: Methuen &
Co. Price 1s. Pp. 46.) A suggested catechism to be given by
parents to children on elementary physiology and ethics.
PUBLICATIONS RECEIVED. gli

The Andrological Institute: Its Schedule and the Measurement of Perseveration. (Published by The Association of Standardised Knowledge, Ltd. Price 7s. 6d. net. Pp. 20.)

Daughters of Ishmael, by REGINALD W. KAUFFMAN, with an introduction
by JOHN MASEFIELD. (Publishers: Stephen Swift & Co., 1913. Price
6s.) A powerful novel, exposing some of the evils of the white slave
traffic in America.

The White Slave Market, by MRS. ARCHIBALD MACKIRDY (Olive Christian
Malvery) and W. N. WiLis. (Publishers: Stanley Paul & Co.
Price 6s. Pp. 290.) A book that should be read by all social workers
in order that they may have some understanding of the methods
employed by the procurer and procuress, and the far-reaching consequences of allowing the present state of affairs to continue unchecked.

Perfect Health for Women and Children, by ELIZABETH SLOAN CHESSER,
M.B. (Publishers: Methuen & Co., Ltd. Price 3s. 6d. net. Pp. 276.)
This volume is primarily a handbook on hygiene in the home, but
the whole subject of family life and the training of children is so
admirably dealt with from the eugenic standpoint that it should be
of real service to many parents. The chapters dealing with “ Training for Motherhood ” and “ Health and Eugenics” being especially
valuable.

The Education of Women in India, by MINNA G. Cowan, M.A. (Publishers: Oliphant, Anderson, and Ferrier, 1912. Price 3s. 6d. net.
Pp. 256.) The author urges the need for an increase in the number
of English women as educators of Indian girls.

Short Study of Ethics, by CHARLES D’ArRcy, D.D. (Bishop of Down).
(Publishers: Macmillan & Co., second edition, 1912. Price 5s. net.)
A short but comprehensive introductory to ethics, treating the subject mainly from the philosophical standpoint. The author seems
to share Mr. Balfour’s view that there is no moral principal to be
found in nature, as he answers in the negative the query, “ Can the
theory of evolution presented by Darwin, Spencer, and others be
made the basis of a theory of ethics?” In the chapter on “ Evolutionary ethics ” the whole question is fully considered and the evolutionary standpoint clearly and fairly stated, it leads the author to
believe “that the less a man knows of ethical science the better
for his morals! ”

Four Epochs of Life, by ELIZABETH HAMILTON-MURIAL, M.D. (Published
by Munich Sanatorium, Brooklyn, U.S.A. Price $1.50. Pp. 272.)
The title in a measure describes the scope of the book. In narrative
form it gives the history of a family, fixing attention on the four
epochs of development—birth, childhood, adolescence, and marriage.

Conscious Control, by F. M. ALEXANDER. (Published by Methuen & Co.
Price 2s. 6d.)

Cancer: The Problem of its Genesis and Treatment, by F. W. FORBES
Ross. (Published by Methuen & Co. Price 5s. Pp. 261.) (To be
reviewed.)

The Christian Powers and Weaker Races, by THE VENERABLE ARCHDEACON
POTTER. (Price 1s. Pp. 14.)

The Winter of Our Discontent, by MRS. MACKENZIE KENEDY. (Published
by Bodycot, Mussoorie. Pp. 126.)
