OTHER NOTICES

Chesser, Eustace. Living with Suicide. London, 1967. Hutchinson. Pp. 176. Price 30s.

“THE RIGHT TO choose one’s time and manner of death seems to me unassailable.” By
dissecting out the taboos concerning death and suicide, Dr. Chesser aims to create the
social atmosphere in which a man will have this right without leaving a sense of guilt in
his survivors.

He discusses the meaning of life and how it should be lived by those who do not
have the beliefs and ceremonial of religion. He inclines towards evolutionary humanism
and concludes: ‘“‘The meaning of life is therefore the unlimited possibilities it holds for the
progress of mankind as a whole’. As far as the progress of the individual is concerned,
we should live by the reality principle and seek to fulfil ourselves as much as we can; we
have the comfort of knowing that when fulfilment is no longer possible the option of
suicide is always at hand.

He is particularly interesting about the lack of ritual which the decline of religion
has left in our lives, and the relationship between this and suicide. We all need to undergo
a sort of pruning process at regular intervals, to cut off modes of behaviour we have grown
out of and the encrustations of daily life. It is important to prune, but important not to
prune too much.

Some forms of attempted suicide are seen as a sort of over-enthusiastic pruning
process, in w ich the main stem is attacked rather than the suckers. Those who have
religious ceremonies, whether a complete death and rebirth enactment or simply the
confessional, have their pruning requirements taken care of in a controlled and orderly
fashion. The rest of us have to do our own pruning and apart from being told to make good
resolutions at the turn of the year we do not have much training for it. Hence we have
this tendency to encrustation at the one extreme and to suicide at the other.

This and others of the author’s ideas are stimulating, and it is pleasant to have these
subjects discussed in simple language by a well-informed, clear thinking and humane
man. In other circumstances the book might have been published as a collection of sermons.
As it is, each chapter would make a good starting point for family or group discussion,
and can be recommended for reading aloud on Sundays. JOHN PRICE

Lenhoff, Edward S. Tools of Biology. London, 1966. Collier-Macmillan. Pp. vi+ 120.
Price 15s. Paperback.

IN A LITTLE over a hundred pages the author tries to cover the whole field of instrumentation for biologists. The depth and detail is thereby inadequate for a specialist but the
book makes an excellent introduction for the layman. The emphasis is upon the new
techniques centred around chromatography, isotopes and electronics, which have revolutionized experimental biology and broken down the old interdisciplinary barriers. Light
and electron microscopes, spectrometers, photometers, lasers, ultrasonics, respirometers,
kymographs, centrifuges and balances are mentioned. There is a chapter on the use and
importance of isotopes; other chapters on data processing, electronics and various types
of cold, dark or germ-free rooms. Oceanography and the biology of space flight are touched
upon. In England this is the type of book which one might well give to a scientificallyminded sixth former, or it could be a starting point for the arrangement of an advanced
course for research students. G. A. H.

202
OTHER NOTICES

Medawar, P. B. The Art of the Soluble. London, 1967. Methuen. Pp. 160. Price 25s.

THIS COLLECTION OF eight previously published essays by (it must have been said before)
our science-age Voltaire is preceeded by an explanatory introduction. The title of the
book is derived from the observation that since no scientist is admired for failing in an
attempt to solve a problem beyond his competence—“‘research is surely the art of the soluble
... not merely grappling . . .” with problems.

Certain it is that Sir Peter Medawar’s impatience and detestation of anything which
smacks of pomposity or humbug endears him to many but must make enemies of many
more. Few can hope to escape from his brilliant swordsmanship and not emerge as mincemeat—and even the best seem to reappear slightly the worse for wear—yet where honour
and respect are due there is no one who could be more generous. Poor Darwin for instance,
so long suspected at best of hypochondria and at worst of feigning illness to escape the
rigours of becoming famous, is fully reinstated. Excellent evidence is adduced for him
being a sufferer from a “chronic and disabling infectious illness called Chagas’ Disease”’
caused by the microorganism Trypanosoma cruzi contracted when spending a night in an
Argentinian village now known to be infested with the benchuca bug and which is the
chief vector of 7. cruzi. The disease was not identified until twenty-seven years after
Darwin’s death.

Teilhard de Chardin comes in for a dreadful battering, and likewise Arthur Koestler,
but the remaining essays are concerned with what can only be described as the philosophy
of science. They reveal an immense erudition and—since it is quite impossible to condense
the many recondite concepts and arguments in the course of a short review—should be
carefully read and thoroughly digested. C. W. U.

Smith, Alwyn. Genetics in Medicine. Edinburgh, 1966. Livingstone. Pp. 71. Price 6s.

THIS SEVENTY-PAGE PAMPHLET written by a teacher in Public Health covers in eight
short chapters the aspects of medical genetics that are needed for the Diploma of Public
Health. It is clearly written. A good feature is the chapter on polygenic inheritance, a topic
all too often omitted from elementary texts, but which is, as Dr. Smith points out, very
pertinent to the genetics of the more common disorders. Such weaknesses as there are
come perhaps from a lack of personal familiarity with medical genetics, which leads to
statements such as that selection against lethal conditions will keep the frequency of
genetically determined congenital disease low. In fact, selection against the foetus and
even more the embryo is an economical way of dealing with the mishaps of a generally
valuable genetic variability. Probably one zygote in twenty-five has a major chromosomal
anomaly and perhaps at least as many a disadvantageous fresh gene mutation.

The chapter on the contribution of genetics to medicine is somewhat unimaginative.
The future public health doctor should be led to think of the value of extensive screening
procedures for genetically determined disease, both at birth and, before long, even early
in pregnancy. He should think about the means for detection of heterozygotes for autosomal, X-linked and recessive genes. He should think about the effect of changing patterns
of differential fertility by socio-economic class on infant mortality, morbidity and the pool
of intelligence. Dr. Smith however finishes by clearly making the point that we need a
reorientation of preventive medicine which will increasingly “depend on adjustment of
the personal environment in respect of individuals identifiable as being subject to special
risk”. C. O. CARTER

203
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

United Nations. World Population Conference 1965. Volume I: Summary Report. New York,
1966. United Nations. Pp. vit+349. Price $7.50.

THE WORLD POPULATION CONFERENCE, held in Belgrade from 30th August to 10th
September 1965, was the second scientific conference on the problems of population to
be convened under the auspices of the United Nations. It was reported in the March 1966
number of the REVIEW.* Eighty-eight countries were represented and more than 500
scientific and technical papers were presented.

Volume I of the Proceedings gives an account of the organization of the Conference;
programme of meetings; summary report of meetings; lists of officers of the Conference
and members of committees and the names and addresses of participants and observers.

Volumes IT, III and IV are to contain selected papers and synopses of others given at
the meetings. However, twenty-six background papers, which summarized the present
state of knowledge and formed a basis for discussion at the various sessions, have been
reserved for publication in the revised edition of The Determinants and Consequences of
Population Trends and are therefore not included in the Proceedings.

World Health Organization. Biology of Fertility Control by Periodic Abstinence. Report
of a WHO Scientific Group. Technical Report Series, No. 360. Pp. 20. Price 3s. 6d.
Available through HMSO.

ABSTINENCE FROM SEXUAL contact during the fertile period of the menstrual cycle is a
widely practised method of regulating fertility. The scientific basis of this approach
involves a number of biological variables, and this report which outlines existing knowledge of the menstrual cycle, ovulation, and fertility, in so far as it is relevant to the concept
of periodic abstinence, should contribute towards a better understanding of the method.
The Group emphasizes that the report is not intended as a manual of instruction, but
hopes that it will be helpful to those who might be called upon to teach and explain the
method to others.

The crucial factor in fertility regulation by periodic abstinence is the timing of ovulation. The Scientific Group concluded that all tests of ovulation now in use have the
inherent weaknesses of being retrospective rather than anticipatory, or requiring elaborate
laboratory facilities. It was recognized that periodic abstinence as a method of fertility
control would be much more effective (and might then gain greater acceptance) if an
accurate and simple test that could be used in the home were available for predicting or
anticipating ovulation. Research aimed at developing such a test, some of which is
receiving the support of WHO, is at present being conducted in many research centres
in the world.

Of the three most used methods of determining the timing of ovulation, two make
use of basal body temperature curves, while the third, the “‘calendar” method, relies solely
on past menstrual history. Methods using basal body temperature curves are based on
the shift in temperature from a lower to higher level at the time of ovulation. Not all
women, however, show regular or typical shifts and the interpretation of basal body
temperature curves may require expert assistance.

Genital and extragenital changes that occur during the interval from the first day of
bleeding in one menstrual period to the first day of bleeding during the next one are
described. Wide variations in the patterns of these changes are mentioned but it is pointed

1365, 58, 7. Peter R. Cox, John Peel and Clifford J. Thomas: The World Population Conference, Belgrade,

204
OTHER NOTICES

out that much of the published data relate to groups of women and that regrettably little
is known about variations in individual women.

In assessing the results of studies based on different methods of timing ovulation,
the report draws attention to the distinction that must be made between various types
of studies. In use-effectiveness studies all conceptions are considered failures whereas
biological effectiveness studies are concerned only with those failures that occur when
the method is being strictly followed. Some of the common causes of failure are indicated.

The Report includes a number of graphs and figures and ends with a list of ““Research
needs”.

205
