NEWS FROM THE U.S.A.
By NORMAN E. HIMES, pap.

WORLD POPULATION TRENDS

CCORDING to a survey published in
the Statistical Bulletin of the Metro
politan Life Assurance Company
(November 1935), the world birth-rate continued to decline in 1934. This downward
trend is evident in twenty of the thirty-four
countries whose 1934 rates are now available.
However, in the United States the 1934 rate
was higher than that for 1933 (17°I per
I,000 as compared with 16:6). There was a
drop of less than 1 per cent. in four countries
(the Netherlands, Italy, New Zealand, and
Venezuela) ; and in five the 1934 rate was
identical with that of the preceding year
(the Irish Free State, Norway, Sweden,
Poland, and the Union of South Africa). In
fifteen countries the decline is still evident,
the decreases in 1934, as compared with 1933,
ranging from 1-2 per cent. in France and
Switzerland to 5-4 in Spain, 5:6 in Austria,
and 6-3 in Palestine.

The Statistical Bulletin also notices a considerable rise (22-4 per cent.) in the German
birth-rate,* attributing it to the ‘‘ marriage
aid loans’ and “‘ the subsidies for births of
German children born of these loan-aid
marriages.”’ There are undoubtedly other
reasons for the rise. Dr. P. K. Whelpton, in
an article in the American Journal of Sociology for November 1935, entitled ‘‘ Why the
Large Rise in the German Birth-Rate? ’’,
calls attention to a probable decline in
abortion. Dr. Whelpton, who is an associate
of Professor W. S. Thompson at the Scripps
Foundation for Research in Population
Problems, Miami University, Oxford, Ohio,
points out that the rise of birth-rate in the
large cities preceded and was greater than
that in the remainder of the country. He
is inclined to discount a “ psychical rebirth
of the German people ’”’ as a chief cause of
the higher rate, and regards the suppression

* See EuGENIcs REVIEW, 1935, XXvii, 207.

of abortion as more important, probably,
than the marriage loans. Economic assistance has been too small specifically to
influence the birth-rate. Marriage loans,
being inaugurated in August 1933, “‘ succeeded rather than preceded the rise in the
matriage-rate which began in the second
quarter.”

In my own view this increase cannot be
other than temporary. In addition to the
factors already mentioned, I am inclined to
believe that there is a “ pent-up effect ”
operating here. The economic crisis doubtless: caused the postponement of many
marriages. Even slight economic assistance
in the form of loans looks big in such circumstances. This doubtless increased the
marriage-rate and consequently the number
of births. But the movement will soon spend
itself. Doubtless there has also been a
spurious prosperity, owing to the expulsion
of the Jews and to various nationalistic
economic measures aiming at national selfsufficiency. These measures are, however,
false trails and will eventually be discovered
to be such.

BIRTH-CONTROL

On December 2nd, 1935, the American
Birth Control League held a mass meeting in
Carnegie Hall, New York City, to discuss
whether or not it was fair to withhold contraceptive information from families on relief.
Protestant and Jewish points of view were
put forward by Bishop Francis J. McDonnell
of the Methodist Episcopal Church and
Rabbi Sidney E. Goldstein of the Free
Synagogue. The Catholics refused to present
their view, though invited to do so, the
League having been informed by Mgr.
J. Francis A. McIntyre, Chancellor of the
Catholic Archbishopric of New York, that
“ the Catholic position in the matter of birthcontrol is well known. . . . With Catholics, it
is a moral, not a social issue. Consequently,

303
304

I can see no purpose to be gained by presentation of the Catholic doctrine on this occasion.’’ Other speakers at the meeting were
Oswald W. Knauth, chairman of the Emergency Relief Bureau; Rose Schneiderman,
President of the Women’s Trade Union
League, and Mrs. Thomas N. Hepburn of
Hartford, Connecticut, the mother of Katharine Hepburn, the motion-picture actress, and
prominent American birth-control advocate.
The chairman was Dr. Eduard C. Lindeman,
Professor of Social Philosophy at the New
York School of Social Work. It may be
added that a few days later, on Sunday,
December 8th, Cardinal Hayes made birthcontrol the subject of a scathing sermon in
St. Patrick’s Cathedral, New York.

Dr. Eric M. Matsner, Medical Director of
the American Birth Control League, has
recently returned from a survey of birthcontrol clinics abroad.* In an interview with
the Press he pointed out that the United
States now has more clinics than any other
country in the world—somewhere between
225 and 250. He declared, however, that
public opinion in Great Britain and the
Scandinavian countries as well as in the
Soviet Union was in advance of American
opinion, in that these countries regarded
contraception as a public-health measure.
Though materials are definitely inferior in
quality in Russia, the Soviet Commissariat
of Health is making determined efforts to
improve contraceptive methods.

THE ROMAN CATHOLIC ATTITUDE

A despatch from St. Paul, Minnesota, last
August - reported that Archbishop J. G.
Murray of the Catholic Church issued an
official pronouncement throughout the archdiocese ordering all Catholics to renounce
membership and employment in organizations advocating contraception or sterilization. The decree was read in all Catholic
churches. It especially affected physicians,
nurses and social workers. The Archbishop
compared supporters of birth-control with
the ‘‘ Dillinger mob.”’ Both were “ organized
to commit murder.”’ “ I see little difference,”

* See EuGENICS REVIEW, 1935, XXVii, 232.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

he avowed, “‘ in killing an unborn child and a
living person.’’ The Archbishop considered
his decree to be in accordance with the
doctrines laid down in the Papal Encyclical
of 1931. The immediate reason for the decree
in the archdiocese, which includes Minnesota,
North and South Dakota and Montana, was
the recent inclusion of a Minnesota birthcontrol organization in the Minnesota conference of social workers.

More recently in Los Angeles, California,
the Catholic Women’s Club withdrew from
the General Federation of Women’s Clubs
because the Federation endorsed enactment
of birth-control legislation. The Catholic
group considers the endorsement un-American and un-Catholic. The Catholic group
represents a membership of about 450.

That the leaders of such Catholic organizations have little conception of the American
attitude toward freedom of discussion and
freedom of individual opinion is evident from
these and numerous other tactics that could
be cited. I know an eminent gynecologist in
a large city on the eastern seaboard, who a
few years ago signed a medical petition to
the Legislature endorsing a move to liberalize
the restrictive statutes on contraception.
Priests of the Catholic church immediately
began a systematic boycott of him, with the
result that his Catholic practice, which was
considerable, was ruined. I also know an
instance of a school physician who signed the
same petition and lost his position for no
other reason. The American public has no
conception whatever of the extent of these
activities ; and even so-called enlightened
liberal opinion in the United States has little
if any conception of the extent to which
American institutions are being undermined
by organized intolerance of the character
mentioned above. One wonders how long
the American public will put up with it.

“ JOURNAL OF CONTRACEPTION ”

The first issue of the Journal of Contraception, edited by Dr. Abraham Stone,
appeared in November.* It is beginning very

* This Journal is the subject of editorial comment on
page 270.
. NEWS FROM THE U.S.A.

modestly. It is a twelve-page periodical in a
format of 54 in. x 7} in. It is described as
being “‘ devoted to the biological and clinical
aspects of human fertility and its control,”
and is designed to keep the medical profession informed of the latest developments in
the contraceptive field. Its subscription
price is one dollar per year. The editorial
address is 17 West 16th Street, New York
City. The American Birth Control League is
also now issuing a similar periodical, called
the Clinic Courter. It has similar purposes
and is distributed free of charge.

PROGRESS IN BIRTH-CONTROL
MOVEMENT

A few miscellaneous news items on birthcontrol. The October Birth Control Review
reports that five clinics are already established in Maine. Brunswick opened its first
centre in August 1935; and the Portland
clinic has had over 300 patients, many of
them from rural districts. At the Brookline
(Massachusetts) Mothers’ Health Office,
Roman Catholic patients comprise 50 per
cent. of those treated. A third clinic in
Massachusetts was opened in Worcester on
September 11th, 1935. One of the main
purposes of the Michigan Maternal Health
League is to extend contraceptive advice to
the population of the upper portion of the
state, a large percentage of whom are on
relief. Arrangements have been made for
lectures before County Medical Societies.
The Minnesota Birth Control League has

305

been accepted by the Minnesota Conference
on Social Work as an associate group. This
acceptance has been thought in many
quarters to have prompted Archbishop
Murray’s decree noted above. The Maternal
Health Association of Missouri reports more
than 2,000 cases advised since its opening in
August 1932. The association now has five
clinics in that state. The Pennsylvania Birth
Control Federation has new headquarters at
253 South 15th Street, Philadelphia. A
clinic was opened in Waverly in the summer
of 1935. At the present time only eight of
sixty-seven counties in the state are without
co-operating physicians to whom the Federation may refer patients for contraceptive
advice. A clinic has been opened in Newport,
R.I. The State Federation of Women’s Clubs
in Rhode Island also went on record for birthcontrol in 1935.

“POPULATION LITERATURE ”

The Population Association of America
continues to publish Population Literature,
an extremely useful bibliography of literature on that subject. This should be carefully
surveyed by all students of eugenics, population, contraception, etc. The annual subscription is $3.00, and the editorial office is
308 Victor Building, Washington, D.C. It
is to be hoped that the bibliography will
not have to be suspended owing to lack of
proper financial support. Population Literature is photolithographed in quarto size,
not printed.

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVII, No. 4.
