ON CATHOLICISM
As Revealed in the latest Encyclical of His Holiness Pope Pius XI

N this, the Casti Conubsi, the Pope
| aeuves an uncompromising ultimatum

not only to eugenists, but to all who seek
to order their own affairs in the light of
science and human judgment. It is a defiant
return to medizvalism and by far the most
courageous of recent Papal utterances; for
it will undoubtedly drive many from the fold
and deter many more, while it will regiment
the faithful into a compacter body of ardent
and well-disciplined militants. It is characterized by that beauty and dignity of language which are the peculiar prerogative of
them that believe they are but the vehicles
of thoughts greater than themselves.

It was to be expected that the Church
would reaffirm the sacramental and indissoluble nature of marriage, and there is
nothing surprising in the renewed unqualified condemnation of divorce, as not only
sinful, but impossible, since the sacrament
is eternal.

But what is both new and disturbing is
the declaration of all marriage, Catholic or
Protestant, Christian or Pagan, as equally
sacred and indissoluble. His Holiness calls
upon the civil power to respect this law of
nature and God, and he thereby implicitly
adjures the faithful in all lands to exercise
their influence against measures of divorce,
whether or not they affect Catholics—

‘* Hence it is clear that marrjage even
in the state of nature and cértainly long
before it was raised to the dignity of a
sacrament was divinely instituted in such
a way that it should carry with it a perpetual and indissoluble bond which cannot
iheretore be. dissolved by any civil
aw....

“Wherefore, both for the private good
of husband, wife, and children, as likewise for the public good of human society,
they indeed deserve well who strenuously

defend the inviolable stability of matrimony.”?

4t

This can scarcely mean less than that
Catholic electors should seek control of nonCatholic marriages.

THE SUBJECTION OF THE WIFE

Of less moment, but more surprising, is
the Pope’s uncompromising return to the
medieval attitude towards the mutual relations of man and wife.

** Domestic society being confirmed,
therefore, by this bond of love there should
flourish in it that ‘ order of love,’ as St.
Augustine calls it. This order includes
both the primacy of the husband with regard to the wife and children, the ready
subjection of the wife and her willing
obedience, which the Apostle commends
in these words : ‘ Let women be subject
to their husbands as to the Lord, because
the husband is the head of the wife, as
Christ is the head of the Church.’ ”’

Howsoever the pill is later gilded by a
glorification of wifehood, it requires courage
to command an educated modern woman to
recognize her husband as her master. This
command will probably do more than any
other to make apostates, deter the wavering,
and strengthen the hearts of the truly
faithful.

Also of more moment to general humanity
than of particular eugenic interest is the
unqualified denouncement of abortion. In
no circumstances may the “ innocent ”’ be
murdered ; and neither may the mother die
to save her infant, nor the fetus be killed to
save her pain, her health, her life. While
thus condemning many a woman to die in
the hopeless agonies of childbirth, His Holiness reminds her that, however great those
sufferings, she will be amply rewarded in
Heaven.

‘However much we may pity the
mother whose health and even life is
42

vely imperilled in the performance of
the duty allotted to her by nature, nevertheless what could ever be a sufficient
reason for excusing in any way the direct
murder of the innocent? This is precisely
what we are dealing with here. Whether
inflicted upon the mother or upon the
child, it is against the precept of God and
the law of nature : ‘ Thou shalt not kill.’
The life of each is equally sacred, and no
one has the power, not even the public
authority, to destroy it.’’

The attitude recalls that which, for the
integrity of the Church, condemned Joan of
Arc to the stake.

BIRTH-CONTROL—AND THE SAFE PERIOD

The same attitude characterizes the renewed condemnation of birth control in any
circumstances whatever, whether the family
is already over-large and poverty acute,
whether merely to space the births, or even
when another confinement would cause an
abortion, a defective child, or the death of
the mother.

“* Holy Mother Church very well understands and clearly appreciates all that is
said regarding the health of the mother
and the danger to her life. And who
would not grieve to think of these things?
Who is not filled with the greatest admiration when he sees a mother risking her life
with heroic fortitude, that she may preserve the life of the offspring which she
has conceived? God alone, all bountiful
and all merciful as He is, can reward her
for the fulfilment of the office allotted to
her by nature, and will assuredly repay
her in a measure full to overflowing.”

The reason given is that the reproductive
act is itself as sacred as marriage and must
not be performed to its own frustration.
Hence celibacy, abstinence from intercourse,
and — curious inconsistency —the ‘ safe
period ’ are the only alternatives for good
Catholics.

This renewal of the licence of the ‘ safe
period ’ is doubly surprising, not so much

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

because recent research has thrown yet
further doubt on its safeness, but mainly
because, in so far as it is effective, it
deliberately frustrates the results of intercourse no less than does contraception.

It is strange that Catholics so seldom,
if ever, advance the strongest, least
answerable, and surely most ‘ natural’
objection against contraception — the
zesthetic objection. If an act is repugnant,
there’s an end on’t.

But many as are the other inconsistencies
in Catholic attitude and writings, even
within this little Encyclical, it is not our
aim here to expose Catholics to themselves,
nor to dispute on the debatable premisses
they adopt. As eugenists, our interest lies
in the practical effect of their doctrines ; and
this Encyclical deals the final blow to our
hopes of coming to an agreement with them
—writing as long ago as 1921,* indeed, the
Dean of St. Paul’s said that such an agreement was no longer possible. But though a
few eminent theologians had hitherto
strongly supported sterilization, though
others had theoretically admitted its moral
justification, and though many had long
been opposed to the marriage of mental
defectives, the Pope here issues an unqualified condemnation of both sterilization and
the prohibition of marriage.

STERILIZATION TO BE ILLEGAL

Voluntary sterilization he declares to be
unholy, partly because, like birth control,
it frustrates the procreative act, and partly
because it is permitted to none to mutilate
himself. As for State action, His Holiness
writes :

“ Finally, that pernicious practice must
be condemned which closely touches upon
the natural right of man to enter matrimony but affects also in a real way the
welfare of the offspring. For there are
some who over solicitous for the cause of
eugenics, not only give salutary counsel
for more certainly procuring the strength

 

* EUGENICS Review, Vol. XII, No. 4.
ON CATHOLICISM

and health of the future child—which,
indeed, is not contrary to right reason—
but put eugenics before aims of a higher
order, and by public authority wish to
prevent from ing all those who,
even though naturally fit for marriage,
they consider according to the norms and
conjectures of their investigations, would,
through hereditary transmission, bring
forth defective offspring. And more, they
wish to legislate to deprive these of that
natural faculty by medical action despite
their unwillingness ; and this they do not
propose as an infliction of grave punishment under the authority of the State for
a crime committed, nor to prevent future
crimes by guilty persons, but against
every right and good, they wish the civil
authority to arrogate to itself a power over
a faculty which it never had and can never
legitimately possess. ...

‘Those who act in this way are at
fault in losing sight of the fact that the
family is more sacred than the State, and
that men are begotten not for the earth
and for time, but for Heaven and eternity.
Although often these individuals are to be
dissuaded from entering into matrimony,
certainly it is wrong to brand men with
the stigma of crime because they contract
marriage, on the ground that, despite the
fact that they are in every respect capable
of matrimony, they will give birth only to
defective children, even though they use
all care and diligence.

““ Public magistrates have no direct
power over the bodies of their subjects;
therefore, where no crime has taken place
and there is no cause present for grave
punishment, they can neyer directly harm,
or tamper with the integrity of the body,
either for the reasons of eugenics or for
any other reason... .”’

The authority here quoted is St. Thomas
Aquinas (Summ. theol. 2a, 22, q.1080a 4 ad
2 um.), which is curious, since the Angelic
Doctor himself, in a much more relevant
passage, gives express permission to the
State to protect itself even by castration (see
the January 1930 issue of this REviEw).

43

Surely what the State can do by force, is
still more permissible with the consent of
the object? And if the major operation of
castration is allowable, how much more so
must be the minor operation of sterilization ?

But this is another lapse into dialectics on
premisses with which no non-Catholic can
agree. The important point is that Catholics,
who have hitherto been in many ways
strongly sympathetic with eugenic aims,
though disapproving of some _ eugenic
methods, have now declared themselves unalterably opposed to the two remaining
methods, whether they affect themselves or
those of other faiths.

But there is more than that.

SCIENCE AND LIBERTY OF THOUGHT

At the beginning of this survey it was
written advisedly that the Encyclical was a
return to the Middle Ages. Its medizvalism
is carried so far as to ignore all anthropology, all history not contained in Genesis,
and to attack not only the practice of
eugenics, but also the underlying biological
bases. Not only is current biology specifically attacked, but an onslaught is made on
the whole texture of science and the liberty
of thought. Witness these passages :

“* They are greatly deceived who having
underestimated or neglected these [religious] means which rise above nature,
think that they can induce men by the use
and discovery of the natural sciences, such
as those of biology, the science of heredity, and the like, to curb their carnal
desires. We do not say this in order to
belittle those natural means which are not
dishonest . . . for God is the Author of
nature as well as of grace, and He has
disposed the good things of both orders
for the beneficial use of men. The faithful, therefore, can and ought to be assisted
also by natural means. But they are mistaken who think that these means are able
to establish chastity in the nuptial union,
or that they are more effective than supernatural grace... .

** But everyone can see to how many
fallacies an avenue would be opened up
44 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

and how many errors would become
mixed with the truth, if it were left solely
to the light of reason of each to find it
out, or if it were to be discovered by the
private interpretation of the truth which
is revealed. .. .

**. .. it is necessary that a filial and
humble obedience towards the Church
should be combined with devotedness to
God and the desire of submitting to
Him. ...

** Wherefore, let the faithful also be on
their guard against the overrated independence of private judgment and that false
autonomy of human reason.’’

A CALL TO A CRUSADE

While we must admire the beauty and dignity of the language, the courage which
inspires it, we must sadly realize that there
can henceforth be no truce between ourselves, who seek our own salvation by our
own way, and the crusaders of Rome. For
this seems much more than a call to individual Catholics to revert to medievalism :
it is, if our reading is correct, a call to a
crusade against freedom of thought and
action in the modern State. Not only may
no Catholic procure or allow abortion, even
to save the woman’s life, but all Catholics
seem to be adjured to force that prohibition
on their governments; not only may no
Catholic seek dissolution of marriage, but
none, it appears, may support a government
which allows divorce ; not only is contraception declared unholy, but seemingly it must
henceforth be made illegal ; not only may no
Catholic be sterilized compulsorily, but no
free-thinker apparently shall seek the operation for himself.

That, at least, is our interpretation, for
the attitude seems to be implicit in many of
the passages already quoted, and to inspire
the tone of the whole Encyclical. See—

““ But especially, as we have pointed
out, Venerable Brethren, the daily increasing facility of divorce is an obstacle
to the restoration of marriage to that state
of perfection which the divine Redeemer
willed it should possess.

** The advocates of the neo-paganism of
to-day have learned nothing from the sad
state of affairs, but instead day by day,
more and more vehemently, they continue
by legislation to attack the indissolubility
of the marriage bond, proclaiming that
the lawfulness of divorce must be recognized, and that the antiquated laws should
give place to a new and more humane
legislation. . . . ;

** Opposed to all these reckless opinions, Venerable Brethren, stands the unalterable law of God, fully confirmed by
Christ, a law that can never be deprived
of its force by the decrees of men, the
ideas of a people or the will of any
legislator: ‘ What God hath joined together, let no man put asunder.’ ...

“* Moreover, these words refer to every
kind of marriage, even that which is
natural and legttimate only; for, as has
already been observed, that indissolubility by which the loosening of the bond
is once and for all removed from the whim
of the parties and from every secular
power is a property of every true
Marriage... .

** Now all those arguments that are
brought forward to prove the indissolubility of the marriage tie, arguments
which have already been touched upon,
can equally be applied to excluding not
only the necessity of divorce, but even the
power to grant it... .”

[The italics are ours. ]
And again, ‘‘ Just laws must be made

for the protection of chastity, for recip
rocal conjugal aid, and for similar purposes, and these must be faithfully
enforced. ...

** Hence we earnestly exhort in the
Lord all those who hold the reins of
power that they establish and maintain
firmly harmony and friendship with this
Church of Christ so that through the
united activity and energy of both powers
the tremendous evils, fruits of those wanton liberties which assail both marriage
and the family, and are a menace to both
Church and State, may be effectively
frustrated.
ON CATHOLICISM

‘* Governments can assist the Church
greatly in the execution of its important
office if, in laying down their ordinances,
they take account of what is prescribed by
divine and ecclesiastical law, and tf

enalties are fixed for offenders. . . .’’
rAgain, the italics are ours. ]

WHAT THE CHURCH DESIRES

As an illustration of what the Church
desires, the following quotation from the
Lateran Pact is given in the Encyclical :

‘* The Italian State, desirous of restoring to the institution of matrimony, which
is the basis of the family, that dignity
conformable to the traditions of its people,
assigns as civil effects of the Sacrament
of Matrimony all that is attributed to it
in Canon Law.”’

As the Catholic Times (January 16th,
1931) says, the Pope is here speaking to
‘the whole human race.’? He seems to
demand that the Catholic view of right and
wrong shall be legally enforced upon us who
do not share that faith. The public must
henceforth wonder whether all Catholic
attacks, however well argued, upon eugenics
and upon other things more old and dear to
our hearts, are not veiled efforts to resume
the world-supremacy of the Pope.

45

Such must be the thoughts of any free
citizen who reads this Encyclical with a
mind attentive; while if he be also a
eugenist, he will find yet further confirmation of his fears in the recent Vatican
decree. Issued since the writing of this
article, the text of the decree had not
reached us at the time of going to press.
But the newspaper extracts make it amply
clear that sex-education-—which inevitably
implies biology—of the young is condemned,
as are all “‘. . . eugenic theories tending
to improve the human race.’? We gather
from the Press that such improvement is
considered by the Vatican to be ‘‘ amply
provided for by Divine, ecclesiastical, and
human laws regarding marriage and the
rights of the individual.”’

One final query—Is this Encyclical the
fruit of the personal wisdom and experience
of His Holiness Pope Pius XI, and thus
liable to be set aside by a later Pope or a
General Council; or is it indeed the ex
cathedra pronouncement of the Vicar of
Christ ?

A copy of this REvirw is being sent to
the secretary of His Holiness, with a
request for a definite answer to this
question.

~~

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIII, No. 1.
