STERILIZATION BILL

HE following is the Bill which Major

| A. G. Church will shortly introduce
under the ten-minutes’ rule. It will

be noticed that it is described as an Act to
enable mental defectives to undergo sterilization upon application by themselves,

their spouses, parents or guardians; not as
an Act to enable doctors to perform sterilizing operations at their discretion upon
defectives. The voluntary nature of this
measure is clearly stressed in this wording.
C. P. BLACKER.

AN ACT

to enable mental defectives to undergo sterilizing operations or sterilizing treatment upon their own application or that of their spouses or parents or guardians.

THE STERILIZATION ACT, 193?

Arrangement of Sections

. Sterilization of Defectives.

. Sterilizing operations, etc.

. Order of Judicial Authority.

. Protection of Medical Practitioners.

. Judicial Authorities: Regulations as to
procedure.

in B&H DN H

Sterilization of Defectives.

1. (r) It shall be lawful for a registered
medical practitioner to perform a sterilizing
operation as defined by this Act upon a
defective provided the following persons and
bodies, namely :—

(a) The defective, if he is capable of expressing himself as willing or unwilling to undergo the operation ;

(b) The spouse (if any) of the defective ;
(c) If the defective is unmarried, his
parent or guardian (if any) ; and

(d) The Board of Control,

respectively consent to the operation being
performed and the operation has been sanctioned by an order of a judicial authority
for the purposes of this Act made upon the
application of the defective or his spouse (if
any) or his parent or guardian (if any).

(2) Notice of an application for such an

6. Notices, etc., to be dispensed with in
certain cases.

7. Interpretation and Adaptation.

8. Short title and extent.

order as aforesaid shall be given by the
person making the application to all other
persons authorised to make the application
except in cases where such notice is dispensed with under this Act.

Sterilizing Operations, etc.
2. For the purposes of this Act :—

(i) The expression “‘ sterilizing operation ’’ shall mean vasectomy salpingectomy and any other surgical operation
whereby the patient is rendered incapable
of procreation or child-bearing without
the capacity to exercise the sexual functions being otherwise impaired ;

(11) Any medical treatment which
attains the same result as a sterilizing
operation with the same limitation in its
effect as regards the sexual functions
shall be treated as a sterilizing operation
for all the purposes of this Act.

153
154

Order of Judicial Authority.

3. (1) In any case where an application is
made to a judicial authority under this Act
for an order sanctioning a sterilizing operation, the judicial authority, provided it is
satisfied by such medical certificates or
other evidence as it may deem sufficient and
after such visitation or inspection as it may
direct and after hearing and considering
any representations made by any person to
whom notice of the application is required to
be given by this Act :—

(i) That the person to whom the application relates is a defective ;

(ii) That there is no probability of the
health of such person being adversely
affected by the operation; and

(iii) That the several persons and
bodies whose consent to the operation
being performed is required by this Act
have respectively given such consent,

shall have power to make an order sanctioning the performance of a sterilizing operation as defined by this Act.
(2) Such an order of the judicial authority
shall be conclusive for all purposes as to :—
(i) The person to whom the order
relates being a defective ; and
(ii) The consents to the operation being

performed required by this Act having

been given.

Protection of Medical Practitioners.

4. (1) A registered medical practitioner
shall not in any case where he has with due
care performed a sterilizing operation under
the authority of this Act be liable to any
criminal or civil proceedings in respect of
such operation.

(2) Nothing in this Act shall render unlawful any surgical operation or medical
treatment which before the passing of this
Act could lawfully be performed or applied.

Judicial Authorities: Regulations as to
Procedure.

5. (1) Every judicial authority for the
purposes of the Mental Deficiency Acts shall

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

be a judicial authority for the purposes of
this Act with the like jurisdiction and
powers as under those Acts.

(2) The Secretary of State may make
regulations with respect to the procedure on
application for orders under this Act.

Notices, etc., Dispensed with in Certain Cases.

6. (1) In any case where the parent, guardian or spouse of a defective :—

(i) Cannot be found ; or

(ii) Is outside Great Britain ; or
(iii) Is a person of unsound mind lawfully detained under the Lunacy Acts
1890-1892, or a defective ; or
(iv) Is undergoing imprisonment (except
under civil process) or penal servitude,

the judicial authority shall have power to
dispense with any notice to or consent by
such parent, guardian or spouse which
would otherwise be required under this Act.

(2) For the purposes of this Act :—

(i) The expression ‘‘ guardian ” shall
include any person who undertakes or performs towards a defective the duty of a
parent or guardian or has charge of him;

(ii) The consent of or notice to any one
or more of a number of persons who with
reference to a particular defective come
within the designation of parent or guardian shall be sufficient consent of or notice
to a parent or guardian.

Interpretation and Adaptation.
7, In this Act :—

(i) The expression ‘‘ Mental Deficiency
Acts ’’ means the Mental Deficiency Acts,
1913 to 1927, as amended by any subsequent enactment :

(ii) The expression ‘‘ defective ’’ has
the same meaning as in the Mental Deficiency Acts.

Short Title and Extent.

8. (1) This Act may be cited as the
Sterilization Act, 193 ?.

(2) This Act shall not apply to Scotland
or Northern Ireland.
