The Reith Lectures I19f9

The Future of Man

The Reith Lectures 1959 were delivered by Professor P. B. Medawar, C.B.E., M.A., D.Sc.,
F.R.S., on the B.B.C.’s Home Service in November and December of that year. Although the text
of the Lectures appeared in the Listener, many will now welcome their appearance in book form,
with added notes.* Professor Medawar is a Fellow of the Eugenics Society and we are fortunate
in being able to print below comments on the Lectures by the Society’s Honorary Secretary, its
Honorary Librarian and by Professor P. E. Vernon, a member of its Council.

Dr. C. P. Blacker:

HESE LECTURES AREentitled The Future
of Man. What do we learn from them
about the future of man? Almost nothing
at all. But this is not Professor Medawar’s fault.
He tells us in a short Introduction that the title
was proposed to him. He would not, he tells us,
have been so arrogant as to choose such a title
for the lectures as a whole, or, presumably, for
the sixth and last lecture which is also called The
Future of Man. This sixth lecture is concerned
with the role of cultural tradition in man’s future.
After hearing these stimulating lectures on
Sunday evenings at the end of last year, I have
enjoyed the further pleasure of reading them.
The text consisting of the broadcast words is
enriched by twenty-three pages of notes from
which the reader will see how widely Professor
Medawar has probed and how diverse (and also
how up-to-date) are the sources from which he
draws.

If the future of man is not the essential theme,
what is? The lecturer tells us that he decided
that the lectures were to be about the process of
foretelling rather than about what is actually
foretold. A full title, the reader surmises, might
be “justifiable and unjustifiable methods of forecasting (or assessing) man’s future’’; or ‘‘analytical methods of forecasting’. But happily
Professor Medawar digresses now and then
from considerations of method. He advances
some general views on what the future has in
store. Man, for example, is likely to go on
evolving; his evolution has not come to an end;
advances in medicine and hygiene are not likely
to undermine the fitness of the human race; the

* Medawar, P.B. The Future of Man. London, 1960.
Methuen. Pp.128. Price 10s. 6d.

practice of birth control need not lead to the
extinction of humanity. Man, moreover, being
the possessor of a large brain, can transmit a
cultural tradition of which the author makes
much—some may think overmuch; he assigns to
it a more important role (despite such noteworthy
ancestral achievements as language and writing)
in the future than it has performed in the past.
Indeed, we are told that man is beginning to
evolve in an entirely novel way; “our newer
style of evolution is Lamarckian in nature’—
quite unlike the familiar older style. It will be
seen that these conclusions are reassuring. They
are even comforting and, the lecturer believes,
humane. What then of Professor Medawar’s
attitude to eugenics?

Some people begin a book by reading the last
paragraph. A member of our Society who read
first the last sentence of the last chapter might
feel encouraged.

... the bells which toll for mankind are—

most of them anyway—like the bells of Alpine

cattle: they are attached to our own necks, and

it must be our fault if they do not make a

cheerful and harmonious sound.

No one more ardently wants the bells to sound
cheerfully and harmoniously than does the
eugenist. |

Nowhere in the lectures is the eugenist castigated; but nowhere is he specially encouraged.
The nearest approach to encouragement accorded to those who feel that differential fertility
is important (and no one who thinks it unimportant should call himself a eugenist) is a tentative
conclusion reached in the fifth lecture entitled
Intelligence and Fertility:

Changes in the structure of taxation and in the

award of family allowances and educational

145

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, October 1960, 52, 3.
ER—C
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

grants may already have removed some of the
factors which have discouraged the more
intelligent from having larger families; and in
twenty-five years’ time we may be laughing at
our present misgivings. I do not, however,
think that there is very much to be amused at
just at present.

Eugenics, while not unsympathetically treated
by the Reith Lecturer, receives some passing
shots. The trouble, Professor Medawar seems to
feel, is largely one of method. The shots, which
seem to be aimed at certain exponents of eugenics
rather than at the subject itself, are fired in the
course of discussions of the following subjects:
the problem of adaptability, the meaning of
fitness, and what Professor Medawar calls
““geneticism”. How do these shots land? Of the
problem of adaptability, the lecturer says:

I feel . . . that people who study eugenics...

sometimes .. . have in the backs of their minds

the idea of some one excellently well-adapted
all-round kind of human being who could be
perpetuated according to the formula that

“like begets like’’; in other words by “breeding

true’.

This approach is related to:

the classical idea of the elementary text-books,

the idea of a uniform, a predominantly homo
zygous population of well-adapted individuals
whose offspring are almost always exactly like
themselves.

Many of us have indubitably used the homely
expression “‘like begets like’. But it is a matter of
immediate experience that the truth of this
simple formula is offset by the equally important
truth that like begets unlike, every. individual
being unique. Each formula is, in fact, a halftruth. Our attitude to eugenics can be influenced
by which of these two half-truths we most stress.
The behaviour of scientists during the wars and
in the course of ideological polemics shows them
to be influenced much like other people by
political, nationalist and religious preconceptions. In the sphere of eugenics we have splendid
demonstrations in the Nazi and Communist
promulgations. Between 1933 and 1945, German
scientists asserted that doctrines of race superiority were validated by science; in Russia the
opposite doctrines of Lysenko were till recently
proclaimed as equally well-grounded in science.

146

The trouble comes less from scientists disregaraing facts than from how they interpret facts.
What matters is to which facts or sets of facts
they assign major, minor or no importance. The
abler and the more erudite the scientist, the more
ingeniously and persuasively can he defend
untenable positions adopted through prejudice.
Witness the subtly procrustean treatment accorded in the past to facts by theologically inclined scientists whose bias of sentiment made
them feel, perhaps more strongly than the rest of
us, that they were the only ones who paid proper
respect to the really relevant facts. There are,
moreover, trends in scientific thought which have
nothing to do with ulterior sentiments. Here may
be involved institutional rivalries, departmental
loyalties, the possible effects on one’s career of
running (as in politics) against the prevailing
currents, and the fear of receiving a public
castigation at the hands of a formidable, politically prejudiced, and ill-tempered senior.

It is a merit of Professor Medawar’s lecture
that his are but minor prejudices. Indeed his
polite expression of difference from Professor
L. S. Penrose in a Note on p. 125 over the matter
of whether or not the population of Great
Britain is in a state of natural balance or genetic
equilibrium is a welcome example of independent
thinking, somewhat contrary to the prevailing
current. But it may not be far-fetched to suppose
that Professor Medawar has been sensitised to
the incautious and unqualified use of phrases
such as like begetting like by the nature of his
scientific work. To the author of papers such as
those assembled in his The Uniqueness of the
Individual (Methuen 1957), human variability
would claim a recognition which seem to be
overlooked by users of stock phrases which stress
only genetic conformity.

The elementary truth is that, in Nature,
variability and constancy, though antithetical, are
complementary to each other. Each is equally
necessary to the evolutionary process. Without
variability there would be fixity; without constancy the variant which enjoyed a biological
advantage would not transmit that advantage.
Patterns of conformity are in various degrees
generalised, being reflected in taxomonic systems. There is a broad conformity with a pattern
of archetypal features within the range of a
THE FUTURE OF MAN

phylum; the ranges shrink and the features
become less archetypal as we pass from classes,
orders, families and genera to species. When we
get down to individuals, we find that each,
though conforming with the patterns of each
grade of the taxonomic hierarchy from phylum
through to species, is unique. He is, in fact, an
idiosyncrasy—a private or particular mix-up
(syn-Krasis)—whose uniqueness extends to each
of his body cells.

A trend of change in the environment calling
for adaptation favours variability; environmental monotony permits, or may even impose,
constancy. When I studied zoology forty years
ago, the Brachiopods Lingula and Terebratula,
respectively unchanged since the Cambrian and
Devonian epochs, were object-lessons in immutability. To-day we think of a nearer relative, the
Coelacanth fish. Most students of human
anatomy must have marvelled at the constancy
with which the imposing array of anatomical
features of the corpses they dissect tally with the
descriptions in the textbooks; all students of
faces, voices and handwriting must have equally
marvelled at the diversity of traits, immediately
recognized as unique in their experience, of the
people they observe.

The balance between change and fixity,
between innovation and traditionalism, is a
cultural no less than a genetic problem. How
much that is customary and traditional should
be retained as a stabilizing counterpoise when the
winds of change are mounting to gale force? The
deeper and more heavily weighted a sail-boat’s
keel, the less is it liable to capsize. How much
keel should be retained? How much should the
helmsman yield to the wind? These questions are
no less fundamental for religious than for
political leaders. Their themes will certainly
resound among the carillons pealed by the
Alpine bells, and will be fretfully debated by
future students of campanology.

I revert, after the digression, to the use of the
formula “like begets like’ by exponents of the
‘classical’ idea of the elementary textbooks.
Admittedly the formula fits better a situation in
which all the offspring resemble their parents
than one in which (as happens to beneficiaries of
hybrid vigour) only half do. Nevertheless the
formula is not wholly inapplicable to the latter;

certainly not sufficiently inapplicable to invalidate the basic principles of eugenics. I don’t see
that we should be ashamed of using it provided
that we recognize that, as a description of what
happens in biological heredity, it is but a half
truth.

The second of Professor Medawar’s side shots,
provoked by his discussion of the meaning of fitness, may not have been specifically aimed at a
target. The cannonade may have been more
ceremonial than intentionally destructive. The
Meaning of Fitness is the title of the second
lecture. Some may think that A Meaning of
Fitness or Meanings of Fitness might have been
better; for the word is here used in a special
(some may think in an obfuscating) sense to mean
net reproductive advantage. The criterion of fitness is biological survival. The survival of the
fittest hence means no more than the survival of
the survivors. The values connoted by the
particle “‘eu”’ in eugenics are irrelevant to the
usage here paraded according to which an
alcoholic father of a dozen unwanted children
is a paragon of fitness; indeed his fitness
would become still more pre-eminent if as
many as possible of his children, grandchildren
and later descendants repeated his procreative
performance.

The argument about fitness is taken up in the
final chapter where it seems to be related to what
the lecturer holds to be a “humane solution of the
problems of eugenics, particularly of the problems of those who have been handicapped by one
or another manifestation of the ineptitude of
Nature.”’ The argument (which I may misunderstand) seems to be that if, through human arts
and the spread of humane feelings, victims of
inborn defects (persons victimized by the ineptitude of nature) survive and reproduce their
defects, they are, through their biological
“fitness”, worthy citizens of the future who
should not suffer from any sense of shortcoming.
Their defects, though transmitted to descendants,
should carry no stigma. Human ingenuities and
artefacts, by nullifying the ineptitudes of Nature,
by drawing her teeth and claws, will prepare for
us a benign springtime; a new style of compensatory nurture will iron out her blunders. What
we lose on the swings of a genetical system of
heredity, we will gain on the roundabouts of a

147
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

non-genetical or cultural system; on balance
there will be no incubus, no call for anathema
and no need for shame. There will be a “humane
solution of the problems of eugenics.”

But are there not here possibilities of misunderstanding? We can want posterity to be freed
from inborn defects for at least two reasons.
First, we might abhor the defects and therefore
dislike and despise their victims, thus making
them feel inferior and unhappy. That would
certainly be inhumane. But we might alternatively wish that posterity should be free from the
inconveniences of such defects, however effectively these were mitigated by arts and correctives.
Thus I have a minus five degree of myopia which
has caused me little trouble but which I would
sooner not have had. It is a source of regret to
me that I have transmitted a lesser degree to my
three children whom I would gladly have spared
the necessity of wearing spectacles and contact
lenses. Is my regret inhumane?

The third side-shot is specifically directed at
the protagonists of what is called geneticism.

Geneticism is the application to human affairs

(or indeed to livestock breeding or natural

selection or evolution) of a genetic knowledge

or understanding which is assumed to be very
much greater than it really is.

But this attack is obviously aimed at extremist
exponents of applied genetics rather than against
the subject of eugenics. The discharge is doubtless salutary.

These comments are intended not as criticisms
but as a contribution to a discussion. The
lectures will, I hope, be widely read.

Dr. C. O. Carter:

EUGENISTS WILL BE grateful to Professor
Medawar for taking up the challenge posed to
him by the B.B.C. when they suggested the title
The Future of Man for his Reith Lectures last
year. It is most valuable that the issues of eugenics
and the ways in which they may be studied
should be put before such a wide public. In
assessing the influence of these talks, the following points seem noteworthy: these are made from
the restricted viewpoint of eugenics education,
while Professor Medawar’s aims were wider.
A considerable proportion of the British
population will have been introduced to the

148

word “eugenics” for the first time, and others
will now have a more correct appreciation of
what is meant by eugenics. Many people still
find it difficult to think and talk about eugenics
without prejudice; Professor Medawar has
obviously had experience of this when he writes
in the Notes added to the published version of
the lectures “‘the illusion still persists that anyone
who entertains the idea that intelligence may be
declining is conniving at a Fascist plot to discredit the working classes”. The Reith Lectures,
being well reasoned and dispassionate, will help
others to think sensibly about eugenic issues.
Turning to more specific points, a personal
viewpoint is that the lectures will have left a more
correct impression of the eugenic aspects of
differential fertility with respect to intelligence,
than of the relationship between fertility and
health. The fifth lecture on Intelligence and
Fertility was an admirable analysis, and left the
listener with entirely the correct impressions:
that there may well be a decline at present in the
average “‘innate’’ intelligence of the population,
that a decline is to be deplored, that further investigation of the trend is needed, that it may be
a temporary phenomenon with the change from
unplanned child-bearing with a high mortality to
planned child-bearing with a low mortality.

The second lecture on Fitness, however, may
have left some listeners with the impression that
we need not be concerned with a rise in the
proportion of children born with genetic predisposition to disorders, which are treatable; also
that genetic predisposition to disease is specific,
so that deaths from malaria or tuberculosis, for
example, give selection only for genes contributing to resistance specifically to each of these
disorders. On the first point, effective treatment
is likely to increase, though often very slowly,
the frequency of the genes predisposing to
disease, except where this frequency is entirely
maintained by heterozygote advantage; the
apparent paradox with sickle-cell anaemia disappears when the anaemia becomes treatable. It is
true that, if medical science and the great pharmaceutical industries go from strength to
strength, there is no immediate danger of a
population dying out, even though an increasing
proportion of its members become dependent on
daily injections, special dietary regimes, or expert
THE FUTURE OF MAN

surgical intervention in childhood. But it is
perhaps not a purely professional viewpoint to
see this as at least as undesirable as a decline in
average intelligence. Professor Medawar, in his
Notes, quotes Professor J. M. Thoday’s saying
that “‘the fit are those who fit their environments
and whose descendants will fit future environments”. We may reasonably expect never to
return to primitive conditions, but we cannot
expect to control future environments completely
and to become over-dependent on the medical
and chemical professions is to lose adaptability.
The only “treatment” which carries no eugenic
risk is one that alters the gene itself and this is
not yet possible. On the specificity of genetically
determined resistance to disease, too little is
known for dogmatism. Specific resistances are
more readily detectable, but multi-factorial
genetic factors controlling generalised resistances, and behaving like those controlling
“innate” intelligence, may well be more important, particularly with common diseases.
Professor Medawar is perhaps correct in
regarding the issue of intelligence as more urgent
than that of health, since for intelligence there is
evidence, not only of a reduction of natural selection forces, but of a present artificial dysgenic
trend; but in both fields, in the long run there is
need for artificial selection to balance loss by
mutation. Fortunately, there is good reason to
hope that the advent of planned childbearing may
well result in eugenic trends through differential
fertility, not only for “innate’’ intelligence, but
for the relative absence of genetic predisposition
to mental or physical ill health. On the negative
side, the increasing use made of genetic counselling in the medical services will have just this
effect; but one may guess that the positive
aspect, that those who are capable, energetic and
healthy will tend to plan relatively large families,
will be more important, even though we know
little of the genetic basis of the these qualities.
In the third talk on the Limits of Improvement,
Professor Medawar effectively described how a
great deal of inequality and imperfections of men
may be an inevitable part of a genetic system in
which polymorphism is favoured by heterozygote advantage and other mechanisms. He did
not, perhaps, make it sufficiently clear that this
does not mean that evolutionary “advance”

cannot occur, slowly but progressively under the
influence of selection, by the raising of the population average, while the variability of the
population is retained. Over geological time, this
is what has happened in the course of the evolution, for example, of the volume of brain from
600-800 c.c. in the Australopithecines to 12501600 c.c. in man to-day.

A final point is that it is perhaps a pity from
the standpoint of eugenic education that Professor Medawar referred to the possible effects
of eugenic action by some sustained and consistent tyranny. This is just the concept that
many of his listeners will have already had in
their minds as the only means by which genetic
“advance” may be brought about. The last
lecture, in which Professor Medawar discussed
the origin of non-genetical cultural inheritance
in man, would have provided an opportunity for
discussing how cultural inheritance and genetical
inheritance may interact with each other. As
mankind learns more and more of genetics, one
may hope that individual parents, without any
tyrannical outside direction, will increasingly
feel a responsibility for the genes they transmit
to their children. If this leads to a rise inaverage
intelligence, the rise will in turn accelerate new
discoveries in human genetics and new applications of this knowledge. Though the dream
expressed at the recent Conference on Congenital
Malformations by an American biochemical
geneticist, Dr. Tatum, that man may, in time, be
able to synthesise “‘better” D.N.A. in vitro and
then incorporate it into its own germ plasm, is
visionary, it does not appear impossible, provided
that cultural inheritance and biological inheritance “advance’”’ together.

Professor P. E. Vernon:

I HAVE BEEN ASKED to comment on the psychological issues raised by The Future of Man.
In fact there are relatively few of these, and
therefore I have little to say. The first four
lectures are of considerable interest to the
psychologist, in priming him on up-to-date
genetic theory and methods. They warn him, for
example, against such easy generalizations as
that the human stock is at present degenerating,
and that we know how to breed a more perfectly
adapted species. If one criticism may be ventured

149
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

(albeit it probably reveals the writer’s ignorance
of genetics) it is that there may still be some
grounds for anxiety about the success of modern
medicine and of the comforts of civilization in
helping less healthy members of the population
to survive and breed. Professor Medawar demolishes this belief with gusto, but is apparently
interpreting “‘fitness” in the narrow sense of the
mean reproductive capacity of the population.
The social scientist might wish to think of fitness
as the range (not just the mean) of physical and
mental resources, and ask—does not our
artificially maintained population contain an
undue proportion of individuals who are less
capable of rising to emergencies, or of accomplishing outstanding feats of an intellectual or
physical nature, than did populations in the
past?

The fifth lecture Intelligence and Fertility, provides a lucid survey of the controversy over the
decline in national intelligence which would
seem quite acceptable to most contemporary
psychologists. They would agree with Professor

150

Medawar that it is naive to expect intelligence
tests to measure pure inborn ability, though at
the same time it is likely that much of their
variance is genetically determined. He deduces
from this that a slow decline is probably taking
place under present legislative and social conditions, though this is much less than would follow
from taking the observed negative correlation
between parental fertility and child intelligence
at its face value, and it may be largely offset by
improvements in health, education, etc.

The last lecture also draws considerably on
psychology, but appears rather commonplace.
I find that my stock lecture notes of twenty
years ago stated that, through the development
of symbolic thinking and language, man had
virtually achieved a Lamarckian type of evolution, and I daresay I picked this up from some
much earlier writer (Hobhouse?). Equally it
seems curious to have to labour the point that
competition and aggression, growth and decay,
are not inevitable features of human nature—
that societies can and do change.
