SWEDISH LAW ON ABORTION

Act relating to the Termination of Pregnancy, 17th June, 1938

1. Pregnancy may, in accordance with this
Act, be terminated :

(1) where, owing to the presence of disease,
physical defect or infirmity in the
woman, the birth of a child would entail serious danger to her life or health,

(2) where the woman became pregnant in
the circumstances mentioned in Chapter 15, Sections 12, I3, 15 or 154, or in
Chapter 18, Sections I, 2, 3, 8, 84 or 9,
and where pregnancy occurred in the
circumstances mentioned in Chapter
18, Section 6, of the Penal Code* and
involved gross violation of the woman’s
freedom,

(3) where it may reasonably be assumed
that the mother or father of the expected child will, owing to hereditary
disposition, transmit to their offspring,
insanity, mental deficiency, or serious
physical disease.

Pregnancy may not be terminated after
the twentieth week of pregnancy for any
reason other than the presence of disease
or physical defect in the mother.

2. If the mother has become pregnant in
the circumstances mentioned in Chapter 15,
Sections 12, 13, I5 or 15a, or in Chapter 18,
Sections 6 or 8a, of the Penal Code, pregnancy
may not be terminated unless, when possible,
legal proceedings have been instituted in
respect of the crime or the crime has been
reported for such proceedings to be instituted.

The pregnancy of a mother who, at the
time of pregnancy, had not completed her
fifteenth year, may not be terminated if the

* Chapter 15, Sections 12, 13, 15 and 15a, refer to
rape, attempted rape, intercourse brought about by
intimidation of any kind.

Chapter 18, Sections 1, 2, 3, 7, 8, 8a and 9 refer to
intercourse within forbidden degrees, with insane
women, with girls under the age of 15 years.

Section 6 refers to intercourse between teacher and
pupil, adoptive parents or foster parents with child ;
guardian with ward, warder, master, etc., with prisoner,
inmate of workhouse, etc.

person in charge of her has not given consent
to the measure, unless special circumstances
make the measure desirable.

Pregnancy may not be terminated on
grounds of hereditary disposition in the case
of a woman mentioned in Section I (3) unless
the woman is also sterilized, except when the
operation cannot be performed owing to the
woman lacking the power to give valid consent, or, for special reasons, it is found to be
undesirable.

3. Pregnancy may only be terminated at
the request of the woman unless, owing to
mental disturbances, she lacks the power to
give valid consent to the measure.

4. Pregnancy may not be terminated unless the doctor who performs the operation
and a second doctor, of an official rank to be
determined by the King, have stated in a
written report, for reasons specified therein,
that the conditions for the measure are
present. |

An enquiry by the Medical Board must be
made before pregnancy is terminated for the
reason given in Section I (3). The same
applies in cases where the woman, owing to
mental disturbance, lacks the power to give
valid consent to the measure.

5. Before enquiry is made whether pregnancy may be terminated, the following persons should be afforded an opportunity of
expressing their opinion, where there is
reason for so doing :

(a) the father of the expected child,

(6) the person in charge of the woman if

she is under the age of 21 years,

(c) the guardian of the woman if she has
been declared incapable of managing
her affairs,

(d) the husband of the woman if she is
married,

(e) the doctor and director of the institution if the woman is in a public institution.

10g
IIo

If the woman herself can give valid consent
to the termination of pregnancy no opinion
shall be taken without her consent.

6. Termination of pregnancy shall be
undertaken at a hospital or similar public
institution, or at a cottage hospital by a
doctor there employed. Notwithstanding
what has been laid down, the Medical Board
may, where it deems it necessary, grant a
particular doctor permission to undertake
this measure at an institution mentioned
above or at some other institution.

7. Where, in a case regarding the termination of pregnancy owing to the presence of
disease or physical defect in the woman, an
enquiry concerning the presence of the conditions necessary for undertaking the measure
as required in Section 4, or the performance
of the operation at an institution mentioned
in Section 6, would entail risk owing to delay
or any other difficulty which might arise,
pregnancy may be terminated by a qualified
doctor without compliance with the said
provisions.

8. A person who enquired into the conditions necessary for the termination of pregnancy or who performed the operation or
assisted at the enquiry or at the operation
may not, without due cause, reveal anything
that occurred in connection therewith.

g. No appeal is permitted against the decision of the Medical Board in a matter relating
to the termination of pregnancy.

ro. A person who has terminated or
attempted to terminate pregnancy after the
enquiry mentioned in Sections 4 or 7 shall
not be sentenced to a penalty under Chapter
14, Sections 26, 27 or 28 of the Penal Code, if
the measure was performed in accordance
with the provisions of Section 1 (2) and
Section 3. |

11. A person who, in a case mentioned in
Section Io, not being a qualified doctor, has
terminated or attempted to terminate pregnancy, shall be sentenced to a maximum of

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

one year’s imprisonment, or in the event of
particularly extenuating circumstances to a
fine.

12. A doctor who, knowingly, either declares in the report mentioned in Section 4
that the conditions for the termination of
pregnancy are present, or makes a false statement to the authority or to any other doctor
in matters relating to the termination of
pregnancy, shall be sentenced, if he is not
responsible for the expulsion of the foetus, toa
maximum period of one year’s imprisonment
or in the event of particularly extenuating
circumstances to a fine.

A doctor who, in enquiring into the matters
connected with the termination of pregnancy,
or by infringing or disregarding the provisions
of this Act, is guilty of carelessness, neglect,
ignorance or want of skill, shall be sentenced
to a fine or to a maximum of six months’
imprisonment if he is not indictable for
official breach of duty.

13. A person who, in any case other than
the case mentioned above, knowingly gives
false information to the authority or to a
doctor in matters regarding the termination
of pregnancy, shall be sentenced, if he is not
responsible for the expulsion of the foetus, to
a fine or to a maximum of six months’
imprisonment.

14. A person who, in any case other than
the case mentioned above, infringes the provisions of Section 8 shall be sentenced to a
fine.

15. Offences under Section 8 shall not be
dealt with by the Public Prosecutor unless an
action is brought by the plaintiff.

Fines imposed under this Act shall be
payable to the Crown.

16. The King shall issue any further regulations which may be necessary for the
execution of this Act.

This Act shall come into force on the Ist
January, 1939.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXXI, No. 2.
