THE HUMAN BLOOD-GROUPS

A Survey of their Nature and Inheritance

By C. I. B. VOGE, Ph.D., B.Sc., and ELDON MOORE

(From the Animal Breeding Research Department, Edinburgh)

RIME has its uses : it was responsible

for interesting the general public in

those remarkable biological phenomena, human finger-prints, and it is now
causing a growing interest in the human
blood-groups.

Scientific knowledge of these blood-groups
has by now been employed to a great extent
in various countries to determine whether or
not a given blood-stain—the mere word suggests Mr. Edgar Wallace—could have come
from a given individual, and the verdict of
the diagnosis has been accepted as legal
evidence. Several times the mode of their
inheritance has been raised in courts of law
in efforts to determine the paternity of children, but in most of these cases the scientific
evidence, being of a negative order—as will
later be explained—has been legally valueless. But a few months ago, in Hamburg,
the court decided, on the evidence of the
blood-groups, that the plaintiff could not
possibly be the father of the child alleged to
be his. This, we think, was the first occasion
when the fact of human biological inheritance was admitted as legal evidence. But, as
is hereafter shown, there appears to be a
possibility of such evidence not being
entirely free from error.

Yet, with this growing interest in a
subiect which may some day rank with the
finger-print system in importance, and
which is most favourable for the study of
human heredity, very few of even the educated public have any but the remotest idea
what the blood-groups are, nor even realize,
we think, that it is their existence which
renders necessary the utmost care in choosing ‘ donors’ of blood in blood-transfusion
cases. (The popular belief attributes this to
the necessity for choosing ‘ healthy ’ blood,

but, though this is an obvious necessity, the
factor of the groups is equally important.)
Perhaps this was almost inevitable, for the
blood-groups do not belong to that type of
biological phenomena, like the lives and
habits of animals, which can be explained in
ordinary language. ‘They lie in the realm
of the bio-chemist, who, investigating the
roots of life in chemistry and even physics,
has developed a vocabulary that would
stultify a Solon.

So, since the subject is one of increasing
importance in human biology, we, the
present writers, are attempting a collaboration. One of us (C. I. B. V.) is responsible
for the facts in this article: the other
(E. M.) has only contributed a little to the
genetics of the subject, and has been chiefly
concerned in translating—so far as that is
possible—those facts into English. Towards
the end, where C. I. B. V. advances a new
hypothesis, based upon some of his own
immunological observations correlated with
the results and interpretations of others,
E. M.’s contribution ceases for a space.

THE NATURE OF THE GROUPS

The blood-groups are groups which differ
from one another primarily in respect of
their power to affect each other when mixed,
each member of the four possessing peculiar
properties; and blood, for the purpose of
this article, can be divided into two components : (a) the serum, a clear, straw-coloured
fluid drained off from the rest, and (b) the
rest, especially including the erythrocytes,
which are more commonly known as red
blood corpuscles. The first indications of
blood-grouping occurred when Landsteiner,’
in a series of experiments to discover
whether and in what way the blood of one

197
198

individual differed from that of another,
' noticed that sometimes the addition of X’s
serum to the blood of Y caused the latter’s
erythrocytes to agglutinate—to gum up together in little clumps. This seemed surprising, since one would naturally expect
the blood of two individuals of the same
species to be mutually compatible, though
there would be nothing extraordinary, for
instance, in the blood of one of the carnivores causing such a chemical disturbance in
that of an ox (heterologous hemagglutination). Further research, by the systematic
testing of the serum of one man on the
erythrocytes of others, and vice versa, resulted in the classification of all human
beings into four groups. (We should say
here that we are disregarding two early and
mutually contradictory methods of symbolizing these groups, those of Jansky and
Moss, and are adopting a later and simpler
symbolism, suggested by Landsteiner and
now generally used.)

Table 1 (adapted from Landsteiner’) gives
the scheme of the groups and their effects on
one another, a + sign indicating that the
serum (horizontal lines) causes agglutination
of the erythrocytes (vertical columns), and a
— sign indicating that no agglutination
occurs.

TABLE 1.

Cells of Groups

 

 

 

 

Sera of Group

A B AB

O sn _ - + + +

A “ - = of af

B weit + = f
|

AB wf = ~ - 
 

In short, the blood-groups arrange themselves in a delightfully simple and orderly
manner, which may be concretely summarized by a resort to anthropomorphism.

At the top of the scale stands O, the universal murderer, because his blood, if transfused into the bodies of any of his neigh
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

bours, would cause agglutination and serious
disturbance, if not death. On the other
hand, his own motto is, ‘‘ All contributions
thankfully received,’’ since foreign sera do
not affect his erythrocytes.

Next come A and B, who will murder
both each other and AB, though AB cannot
hurt them, nor they O.

Lastly comes the defenceless, generous
AB, who is the ‘ universal donor ’ to all the
others and is liable to be murdered by any
of them.

In no case does agglutination occur on the
addition of the serum of one person to the
erythrocytes of another belonging to the
same group.

It is clear that the chemical factors involved are double—the agglutinogens, the
erythrocytal substances which are gummed
up by foreign sera, and the corresponding
serum agglutinins which cause the gumming up in foreign erythrocytes. Since O
does not possess either A or B agglutinogens, foreign sera cannot cause gumming
up in his erythrocytes. Logically, one would
also expect his serum to lack the corresponding agglutinins and consequently to be
innocuous to foreign erythrocytes. But he
is the “‘ universal murderer,’’ so it is evident that the corresponding factor to noagglutinogen is not no-agglutinin. The
point requires research.

AB, on the other hand, is liable to attack
from all quarters, since he possesses both
types of liable-to-be-gummed-up substances,
while apparently the duplex qualities of his
agglutinin cancel each other and render his
serum harmless to foreign erythrocytes.

It is unnecessary to stress the practical
importance of the discovery and classification of these groups to-day, when hospitals
are daily calling upon healthy ‘ donors’ to
give pints of blood to invigorate patients
weakened by illness or hemorrhage. The
grouping of both ‘ donor’ and patient must
be known, and the general rule now is only
to transfuse when both are of the same
group. AB’s, ‘ universal donors,’ can be
used, but their blood has been known, on
occasions, to cause mild disturbance in that
of other groups.
THE HUMAN BLOOD-GROUPS

IN CASES OF MATERNITY

Grouping is sometimes also of importance in the relations of mother to unborn
child. Normally, of course, the placental
barrier keeps completely separate the blood
systems of mother and foetus, which may be
of different groups—a fact which indicates
the molecular magnitude of the agglutinins
of the blood. But McQuarrie,” investigating
the toxzemias of pregnancy, has found in
over 70 per cent. the blood of the mother
inter-agglutinated with that of the fcetus,
while Gruhzit” states that in eclampsia the
maternal blood does actually agglutinate her
child’s. Ottenberg,’ though, calls attention
to the work of Dienst,“ who finds that
‘laking "—the rupture of the membrane of
the erythrocyte—may occur instead of
agglutination, but that in any case it is coexistent with the presence of an abnormal
connection between the maternal and fcetal
circulations.

If the placental membrane, in normal
cases, was no barrier to the blood, one would
naturally expect the child to be born with
the same grouping as its mother. In fact,
as Unger” noted, the agglutinins, the serum
substances which cause the ‘ gumming up,’
while found in the blood of 97 per cent. of
adults, only appear to be present in about
13 per cent. of children under one month
old: at that age most possess merely the
agglutinogens, the erythrocytal substances
which are ‘ gummed up.’ Thus a child at
first is only negatively grouped, and does
not usually join the positive category, by
developing its corresponding agglutinin,
until one to three years old. |
’ How a mother can bear a child of different
grouping to herself (as, indeed, any heterozygote or recessive can give birth to a different type from herself) had best be discussed
later, when we deal with the genetics of the
subject. But it is interesting—and perhaps
important—to note it here, with the corollary that transfusion, without previous tests,
from mother to child might be fatal to the
latter, even though it is the creature newly
delivered of her womb!

Whatever be their chemical composition,
it is evident that the agglutinins in the sera

199

and the agglutinogens in the erythrocytes of
the blood are of a very deep-seated and constitutional nature, for ‘ blood-grouping ’ can
also be demonstrated in sperm cells, seminal
fluid, saliva, milk, and organ tissues.

This fact leads to two intriguing hypotheses. The sperm of a heterozygous man
may (a) be of a different group from that of
the seminal fluid which carries it; or (b)
carry genes for a character incompatible
with itself. The suggestions open up a fruitful field of research, for herein may lie
causes of sterility or lethal factors.

THE RACIAL SIGNIFICANCE

Geneticists and anthropologists next took
an interest in the blood-groups, the first to
discover whether, and if so in what way,
they were inherited ; the latter to determine
their distribution among the races of mankind and to investigate its significance.
Table 2, from Landsteiner, summarizes the
racial distribution.

It will be noticed that the groups have a
geographical relation: the peoples of the
North and West have more A than B individuals, those of the South and East more
B than A, while the so-called ‘ primitive ’
races—American Indians, Filipinos, Eskimos, and Australian aborigines—have a
very high percentage, compared with other
peoples, of Group O.

This last fact led Hirschfeld, Bernstein,
and others to advance the theory that O was
the mark of the first human stock, from
which A and B had arisen by progressive
mutation—with the attractive corollary that
the civilizations of East and West were perhaps the products, respectively, of B blood
and A blood. Unfortunately for this hypothesis, similar marked percentage differences have been noted as distinguishing
different sections of the same races, while
Landsteiner and Miller found that chimpanzees possessed agglutinogen A, and
orang-utans both A and B—a rather subtle
and suggestive fact that the reader can
present to the next ‘ Fundamentalist’ he
meets. Blood-groups characterize at least
one other mammal, the sheep, in which
Kaczowski” has found three; and possibly
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

 

 

 
   
  
   

 

      
   

       

   

200

TABLE 2. PERCENTAGE OF THE BLOOD-GROUPS IN VARIOUS PEOPLES.

Race Observer O

English .. ...| Hirszfeld and Hirszfeld ... wf 46°4 "4 ‘2 3°0
Germans... ...| Hirszfeld and Hirszfeld ... | 40°0 43°90 12°00 5:0
German Jews ...| Schiff and Ziegler ... one woe] 4201 4I'I II°9 4°9
French ...| Hirszfeld and Hirszfeld ... wool 43°2 42°6 I1+2 3°0
North Americans ...| Snyder ane we] 45°0 42°0 10°0 3:0
Turks . wee Hirsefeld and Hirszfeld si .| 36°8 38-0 18-6 6°6
Hungarians ...| Verzar and Weszeczky ... wo] 31°0 38-0 18-8 I2'2
Japanese ...| Fukumachi os as | 26°8 40°9 18°4 13°9
Chinese (Shantung) ...| Liang es _ — sool 2I°I 31°6 36°8 10°5
Chinese (Peking) ...| Liu and Wang ae as wef 30°79 25:1 34°2 10
Chinese (Nganhai) ...| Liang ewe wl =47°9 21°7 21°7 8°97
Hindus ... >| Hirszfeld and Hirszfeld aaa wl 31°63 19:0 41°2 8°5
Gypsies ... ...| Verzar and Weszeczky ... wel 34°2 21-1 38°9 5°8
Negroes (Senegal) ..-| Hirszfeld and Hirszfeld ... wl 43°2 22:6 29°2 5°0
American Negroes = ...| Snyder a8 wee wo] 47°70 28:0 20°0 5°0
Australian Aboriginals ..| Cleland os vee wee 1 45°54 | 54°40 _
North American Indians ...| Snyder om wee wef Q1°3 77 I‘O _
Eskimos ... ‘ wee .| Heinbecker and Pauli wes .--.| 80°65 | 12°90 2°42 4°03

       
 

parents. (2) When one of these substances
is present in both parents it occurs in most
of the children. (3) When only one parent
has one of these particular substances some

further research among the primates would
reveal the existence of groups AB and O.

THE INHERITANCE OF GROUPING

The inheritance of the blood-groups has
been fairly extensively investigated by
several workers, though the exact genetics
have not yet been finally elucidated. But
the following, quoted from Ottenberg and
Beres,’ may be taken as established :

**(r) A or B never occurs in the red cells
of a child if not present in one of the

of the children inherit it. (4) When a particular substance is absent from both parents
no child has it.’’ Also, as they write, ‘‘ It
is clear that not the groups as such are
inherited, but the presence or absence of the
agglutinogens A and B.”’

Table 3 (from the same) summarizes the
matings observed.

TABLE 3. SUMMARY OF DATA ON INHERITANCE OF BLOOD-GROUPS.

 

Number | Number
Parents of of O
Families | Children
OxO 323 839 831 -0
OxA 587 1,550 620 8
OxB 222 591 261 -2
AXA vee 253 70o 129 ‘4
BxB ani 48 140 18 *9
AxB wee 227 588 97 °5
OxAB ... 112 342 , ai 6°1
AXAB ... 89 293 2 O'7
BXAB ... 41 122 5 4°I
AB XAB ... 6 16 — —
Totals 1,908 5,187 984

 
     
 

Groups of Children.

8 1-o — — —
g21 59°2 8 7 0°5
2 0°3 326 2 0°3
571 81°6 _ —_— —
_— _ 122 —
174 29°6 151 166 28°2
149 43°6 149 230 6°7
125 42°6 70 96 32°8
at 17°2 37 39 32°0
3 12°5 3 50°0
1,974 — 888 341 —

 
THE HUMAN BLOOD-GROUPS

The 1 per cent. of not-O children from
O parents can fairly be explained by illegitimacy or errors in technique; and from this
table, as from the pedigrees of Epstein and
Ottenberg,* it can be taken as certain that
O, the ‘ universal recipient,’ is also the
universal recessive, and for the same reason
—he lacks both agglutinogens, and hence
his blood cannot be agglutinated by foreign
sera, while his hereditary qualities, as
always occurs in inheritance of the presenceand-absence type, are dominated in breeding
by the groups possessing agglutinogens.

Advancing from this position, one might
consider A and B as two separate qualities
both dominant to O, and AB as a heterozygote of the two. Von Dungern and Hirschfeld’ have developed this on a two-factor
hypothesis, outlined in Table 4, where, as
usual, a capital letter represents the dominant or ‘ present ’ factor, and a small letter

the recessive allelomorph or ‘ absent’
factor.
TABLE 4.
GENETIC FORMUL2 OF THE Four GROUPS
Group

O A B AB
aabb AAbb aaBB AABB
Aabb aaBb AaBB
AABb
AaBb

Table 5 gives in condensed form the practical results of this theory; and it will be
seen that they fit the facts of Table 3, if
allowance is made for a small percentage of
illegitimacy and errors of technique in the
latter. It also explains how the legal value
of the present blood-tests can only be negative, and even then in but a few cases. Testing for grouping can determine not whether
a man is the father of a child, but only
whether he could be. If, for instance, wife
and husband are O, and the child belongs
to any of the other groups, its paternity
must clearly be sought elsewhere.

20I
TABLE 5.
Parents Children Children not
Possible Possible
Oxo Oo A, B, AB
OxA O, A B, AB
OxB . O, B A, AB
AXxA O, A B, AB
AxXB ... . O, A, B, AB —
AXAB... O, A, B, AB —
BxB ... O, B A, AB
BxAB... . O, A, B, AB —
AB x AB . O, A, B, AB —
OxAB... . O, A, B, AB —

Bernstein,’ Furahata,’ '° and others have
recently challenged this two-factor scheme—
hitherto generally accepted—and offered,
instead, variations on a triple allelomorph
hypothesis, making A and B separate
single-gene mutations from O, to which they
are dominant, and AB a simple heterozygous
compound of them both. Until further facts
are known, one must reserve judgment ; but
the new hypotheses, if proved, would not
make much difference to the practical legal
issues. ‘The main alteration would be the
impossibility of an Ox AB mating producing either O or AB children! It is true that
there are nineteen such cases on record, but
Furahata questions the accuracy of the
diagnosis. It is not possible here to go into
this any further, but it is worth recording
Hirschfeld’s observation. All of those
nineteen cases were of AB mothers by O
fathers: no AB children have been known
from the reverse mating, O mothers by AB
fathers. His suggestion is that the child
dies during pregnancy owing to the strong
incompatibility of its cells with the serum
of its mother. If this is a fact, it will, like
other lethal factors, complicate the mathematical ratio on which any genetical hypothesis rests.

CHANGING THE GROUPING

But, apart from these genetical difficulties,
too much value should not be attached, in
law, to the determination of relationship by
blood-tests, owing to the possibility of the
blood-groups being altered by certain diseases and chemical agencies. In at least two
202

recent cases before the courts there have
been doubts, and in one it was stated that
anti-syphilitic treatment might have caused
a change.* Popenoe’” thinks that such a
change may well occur in disease, since, he
says, it is apparently possible for a bloodgroup to change under the influence of
bacterial action. Eden,” too, deals with
changes that may be caused by such compounds as quinine—e.g., in anti-malaria]
treatment—calcium lactate, antipyrine,
liquor potassium arsenicosum, or by chloroform, ether anesthesia, and X-ray treatment. These changes, however, do not
appear to be permanent; and after a time,
which varies, there is a reversion to the
original grouping.

Up to this point this article has dealt only
with well-proven facts, except where we
have made it quite clear that doubt exists.
E. M. now drops out, so that C. I. B. V. can
develop some bio-chemical hypotheses, purposefully controversial, which seem to him
to follow from the facts.

THE MECHANISM INVOLVED

Landsteiner and Jagic,” and Hirschfeld”
have demonstrated that various inorganic
colloids may cause agglutination of thin suspensions of blood corpuscles, while Kraus
and Ludwig’ have shown that bacterial substances may also cause hemagglutination.
Of recent years it has been amply stressed
that erythrocytes as well as blood serum
conform to the laws of colloid chemistry ;
thus perhaps it does not appear strange that
the addition of substances such as silicic
acid, ricin, and the protamines should cause
agglutination or lysis, since an alteration in
the surface forces would occur. The effects
shown by the two former substances may be
of academic interest, but attention must be
turned to some substance whose presence in
the body is not abnormal, and yet which is
capable of combining in different ways in
such a manner that its agglutinating effect
may be altered according to the method of
combination. Such a suggestion postulates
a substance, protamine-like in nature,

eT
*In Berlin—briefly reported in the Scotsman,

Dec. 6th, 1928.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

present normally in minute quantities in the
blood serum, combined in such a manner
with the serum proteins that two different
forms of agglutinating effect can be produced, according to the method of combination.

The presence of such basic proteins, or
their degradation products, in the body
fluids is by no means an idle hypothesis,
since the latter take part in the synthesis
of the nucleic acids and the former are
present in large amount in spermatozoa.
The composition of these protamines varies,
but generally speaking they contain 80-90
per cent. of arginine, and, as has been
already pointed out, their power of altering
the agglutinating capacity of sols is remarkable, and they possess such effects in virtue
of the fact that arginine is dibasic
and possesses a high isoelectric point.
In a later communication Voge and
Gilroy” have discussed the value of Sakaguchi’s test for this substance, and the suggestion is advanced that sera belonging to
the various groups might be examined by
this reaction in order to ascertain whether a
difference in arginine content existed, and
whether this could be correlated with the
blood groups.

It is well known that sera have to undergo
a preliminary heating of thirty minutes
before being examined by the Wassermann
reaction, and for ninety minutes before
being submitted to the Sigma test. The
purpose of this preliminary inactivation is
to prevent a false diagnosis being obtained,
and Voge’ has shown, in connection with
the gum benzoin reaction, that a similar
heating must perforce be resorted to if false
positives are to be avoided. In a later communication the mechanism of such precipitation is discussed, and it is shown that the
reactions associated with syphilitic sera can
be simulated both in the Wassermann and
gum-benzoin reactions by the addition of
minute amounts of a protamine to normal
serum.” ‘The significance and connection
between these phenomena and those associated with blood-grouping may not be clear,
but it must be borne in mind that it has
been stated that in syphilis it is possible for
THE HUMAN BLOOD-GROUPS

the blood-grouping to change. The cause
was tentatively asserted to be due to the
anti-syphilitic treatment, but this point is
thought to be debatable. Again referring to
the paper of Eden,” it will be seen that
several at least of the substances dealt with
are capable of altering the colloidal equilibrium of the serum proteins; the effects of
ether and chloroform upon lipoids is well
known, and these substances play a large
part in the stability of colloids. Locke and
Hirsch” show that alteration in the lipoidserum combination results in a shifting of
the isoelectric point of the stroma in such a
manner that a marked change in the colloid
stability of the serum would result. Under
such conditions it might well be expected
that abnormal agglutination results might
occur. Quinine hydrochloride is capable of
altering the stability of serum proteins in
such a manner that precipitation may occur
if a sol be added, such as Bordet’s antigen
or gum benzoin, and this effect is similar to
that associated with the addition of a protamine to normal serum.

From these few examples it will at least
be seen that the changes that are reported
to have occurred in the blood-groups appear
to be associated with substances which are
capable of profoundly affecting the stability
of the blood serum. The examples given are
drawn from the study of precipitation and
agglutination phenomena, and it appears
feasible that knowledge gained in this direction might be applied to the study of the
phenomenon of blood-grouping. Kroeger
and Hektoen,’’ Rosenholz,” and Voge,” ™
investigating various immunological tests,
have indicated that the changes concerned
are associated with the euglobulin serum
fraction, and the latter author has demonstrated that the action of the protamines
upon blood serum affects this fraction almost
entirely. Gutmann” has shown that washed

human erythrocytes are agglutinated by all.

basic dyes except fuchsin, and that acid dyes
have no power of agglutination. —The mechanism of such agglutination is as follows.
Particles are kept in suspension in virtue of
the charge they possess ; this charge may be
either positive or negative. If the charge

203

upon the particles be lowered in any way so
that it falls below a certain critical value the
particles are no longer capable of repelling
each other and so remaining in suspension,
and they fall out of suspension. Such a
change may be brought about by the addition of positively charged particles to negatively charged ones. The addition of basic
proteins or basic dyes to the normal negatively charged serum proteins would undoubtedly so alter the charge that instability
would occur. Schroeder” has contributed
work which also appears to bear out this line
of thought. ‘This author shows that isohemagglutination is always accompanied by
a reduction in charge upon the erythrocytes,
and shows that the lowest charge is recorded
with agglutination by group O, while serum
group AB with cells belonging to group O
showed the highest charge. This worker
has also demonstrated that the isoagglutinin
is associated with the euglobulin fraction,
vide supra.

Landsteiner and Van. der Scheer,” discussing the chemical nature of the isoagglutinogens, state that these antigens probably
consist of proteins combined with other substances which determine, at least in part,
the specificity of the whole complex. A
protein-free material which reacts specifically in vitro, but has no antigenic activity
unless injected along with a protein has also
been obtained by some workers, and this
is confirmed by Landsteiner and Levine.”

THE POSSIBILITIES AHEAD

In conclusion we may glance at some possibilities, for to both the authors it seems
that the future of the blood-groups will be
greater than their past—indeed, that the
future of biology will more and more become
a matter of bio-chemistry and bio-physics.

For some time after the first discovery of
the blood-groups they seem to have been
regarded in much the same way as fingerprints—as a phenomenon of considerable, if
not great, scientific importance, but of little
practical significance except in cases of blood
transfusion. But of late years it has become
more and more apparent that a person who
is characterized by blood of this or that
204

chemical composition is for that reason
likely to differ from his fellows in other
matters of importance. The apparent freedom from cancer of the North-West American Indians,“ an almost pure O race, is a
fact of the greatest significance, if it can be
substantiated. But there appears to be a
considerable diversity of opinion upon this
point,” * which demands a systematic investigation of the blood-groups of the cancer
patients in European countries. Again,
according to Ottenberg and Beres,* there is
evidence indicating that one or more of the
groups are immune to diphtheria, while the
mere fact that exposure to certain diseases
or treatments can change the grouping, is
suggestive of fruitful possibilities.

The discoveries by Owen” that intermedi
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

ate blood-groups exist, and by Landsteiner
and Levine” of some entirely different
agglutinable factors in human blood—apparently inherited as simple dominant and recessive allelomorphs—open up a series of
new vistas; and we can dimly foresee the
time when a man will be as easily identified
from an analysis of the various factors in
one drop of his blood, as if he had signed his
name and recorded his finger-prints at
Scotland Yard. Further, as the knowledge
of genetics grows, that one spot of blood may
reveal not only the man himself, but the
past of his ancestors, the future of his
children.

But these are disturbing thoughts.

\ ey

LITERATURE CITED

1. Landsteiner. Centralblat. f. Bakteriol. 1900.
27- 357
2. Landsteiner—Jordan and Falk. Newer Knowledge of Bacteriology and Immunology, p. 892.
University of Chicago Press, 1928.

3. Ottenberg. Journ. Amer. Med. Assoc. 1923.
Ixxxi. 295.

4. Dienst. Zent. f. Gyndk. 1905. xxix. 353.

5. Ottenberg and Beres—Jordan and Falk,
ibid. p. QII.

6. Epstein and Ottenberg. Tr. New York Path.
Soc. 1908. viii. 117.

7. Von Dungern and Hirschfeld—Jordan and
Falk, ibid. p. 912.

8. Bernstein. Zeit f. induk. Abst. u. Vererbungs. 1925. XXXvii. 237.

g. Furahata and Kishi. Jap. Med. World. 1927.
vil, I.

10. Furahata and Kishi. Zeit f. induk. Abst. u.
Vererbungs. 1928. (Supp. I

11. Popenoe. Journal of Heredity.
(10).

12. Eden. Deut. Med. Woch. 1922. xviii. 85-7.

13. Landsteiner and Jagic. Wien. Klin. Woch.
1904 (3); Munich Med. Woch. 1924 (27).

14. Hirschfeld. Arch. f. Hyg. 1907. 1xiii. 237.

15. Kraus and Ludwig. Wien. Klin. Woch.
1902. lix.

16. Voge and Gilroy—for publication.

1928. xix.

17. Voge. 1928. Thesis, Edinburgh University.

18. Voge. Biochemical Journal. 1929. (In the
press.)

19. Kroeger and Hektoen. Proc. Soc. Exp.
Biol. Med. 1927. xxiv. 352.

20. Rosenholz. J. Exp. Biol. Med. 1928. x. 109.

21. Voge. Biochemical Journal. 1929. xxiii. (2).
185-7.

22. Gutmann. Cent. Bakt. Parasitenk. 1928. cvi.
68-73.

23. Schroeder. Arch. Ger. Physiol (Pfliger’s).
1926. CCXV. 32-42.

24. Landsteiner and Van der Scheer. J. Immunol, 1924. ix. 213.

25. Landsteiner and Levine. Proc. Soc. Exp.
Biol. Med. 1927. xxiv. 600, 941.

26 Hinaudi. Minerva Med. 1927. vii. 80-86;
Cancer Review. 1928. p. 216.
27. Locke and Hirsch. J. Infect. Diseases. 1925.

XXXVii. 449-464.

28. Buchanan and Highly. Brit. Journ. Exp.
Path. 1921. II, 247.

29. Kaczowski. Proc.
xlviii, 51. ro.

30. Owen. Edin. Med. Journ. 1928. xxxv. II.

Roy. Soc. Edin. 1928.

31. McQuarrie. John Hopkins Hosp. Bull. 1923.
XXXiv. 51.
32. Gruhzit, Am. J. Obst. and Gyn. 1923.

Ixxxi. 295.
33. Unger. J. Amer. Med. Assoc. 1921. Ixxvi. 9.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXI, No. 3.
