CORRESPONDENCE.

EUGENIC MARRIAGE BILLS IN THE SCANDINAVIAN COUNTRIES.

The Scandinavian countries (i.e. Denmark, Norway and Sweden) are
drifting slowly towards practical simplification of their everyday relations.
After establishing in the last century a uniform coinage and postage,
they commenced in the year 1909 efforts to establish a common code of
the essentials of civil law.! As the first result of many conferences of
delegates appointed by the Governments, there are to be introduced in
the three Scandinavian Parliaments Marriage and Divorce Bills prepared by a Royal Commission in each country.

In these Bills the betterment of the human stock has for the first
time in Scandinavian history been acknowledged as a leading principle
in civil law; in the preamble to the Danish Bill the Royal Commission
of Denmark states that “ Restrictions of the right to marry based on
considerations as to the health of the race are not without danger. The
diseased would not be prevented from having children without marriage.
But where it is claimed to be a necessity by the chief medical authorities,
measures will have to be taken accordingly, though with the greatest
caution. ... It is to be hoped that the authority of law and science will
make the measures effective, without doing too much harm in other
directions.”

The clauses dealing with preventive eugenics in the Danish Bill are
the following :—

Section 10. “ A lunatic or a person feeble-minded in a marked degree
must not marry.” (After the approval of the Board of Health a licence
may be granted.)

Section 11. “Sufferers from venereal disease in an infectious stage,
and epileptics are not to marry without the other party having been duly
informed. of the ailment, and both parties having had verbal information
by a physician on the perils incurred.”4

After the new Bill becomes law a marriage can only be contracted on
the following conditions :—

Section 22, 4. “If there is reason to suppose that either of the persons
going to be married are suffering from lunacy or feeble-mindedness in a
marked degree, they must produce either a certificate from an authorised
physician that the party concerned cannot be proved to suffer from
lunacy or feeble-mindedness in a marked degree, or a licence granted in
accordance with section 10.”5

Section 22, 5. “ Each party is to produce a written bona fide declaration that there is no hindrance to the marriage for the reasons quoted in
section 11.”

Section 45. “ A consort who was insane at the date of marriage and
had not got any licence according to section 10, or who was feebleminded in a marked degree, can sue for annulment of the marriage up to
six months after being cured from lunacy. If the other consort at the
date of the marriage was without knowledge of the lunacy or the feeblemindedness he can also sue for annulment of marriage within six months
of obtaining the knowledge, or of the cure of the lunacy.”

1 The beginning of the inter-Scandinavian legislation may be traced back to 1880 (Bill
of exchange). 1892 and 1896 two more bills were passed (Shipping Act and Sale of
Goods Act).

2 ** Udkast til Lov om Aigteskabs Indgaaelse og Opldsning,” p. 58.

3 ib., p. 7.

* ib., p. 7.

5 ib., p. 9.
CORRESPONDENCE. 239

The suit must in all cases be made at latest three years after the
marriage.

Section 46, 3. “Divorce. A marriage can be annulled on the suit of
one of the consorts, when the other consort at the date of the marriage
was suffering from venereal disease in an infectious stage, epilepsy with
frequent fits or leprosy or some incurable bodily defect disqualifying from
marriage.”?

Section 62. “ Divorce may be granted when one of the consorts,
knowing or even suspecting that he or she is suffering from infectious
venereal disease, has exposed by copulation the other consort to the risk of
infection, unless the other consort, being aware of the risk, incurred it
voluntarily. The suit must be claimed before six months have gone by
since the consort got the knowledge that he has been exposed to infection
and if the said consort has not been infected the suit cannot be claimed
after the disease has ceased to be infectious.”

VINCENT NAESER.
t ib., p. 47.

ALTERATION OF AUTUMN PROGRAMME.

Owing to the War the following alterations have been made by the
Council of the Eugenics Education Society in the Autumn Programme.

The Meetings of the Society announced for the first Thursdays
of the month at the Grafton Galleries will take place bi-monthly this
winter, starting on Thursday, October 8th, 5.15 p.m., with a paper on
“Eugenics and the War,” by Mr. T. Chambers.

The Lecture Course to Social Workers arranged for the Autumn
has been postponed.

A Special Committee has been appointed by the Council to organise
Maternity Assistance for women of the Professional Classes whose
husbands have either enlisted or lost their work owing to the War.
