THE VERY REVEREND W. R. MATTHEWS,
K.C.V.O., D.Lit., D.D., DEAN OF ST. PAUL’S,

Eugenics and the Family

The National Marriage Guidance Council’s Herbert Gray
Lecture, October 18th, 1961

HE WORD ‘‘EUGENICS’’ denotes con
cern with and study of the conditions
needed for the production of well-born
children. It is common knowledge that in recent
years the biological sciences have made such
great strides that now, for the first time in
human history, we are told it is theoretically
possible, within limits, to plan the biological
future of the human race and to direct, again
within limits, the course of human evolution.
In this lecture I shall attempt to outline some
of the problems which seem likely to arise in
connection with this new development of human
potentialities, with special reference to the
family. Perhaps we have hardly yet begun to
comprehend the radical change in outlook
which our children and grandchildren may be
confronted with as the results of the researches
on heredity and related subjects come to be
applied in practical life. We have been brought
up in the tradition of Christian civilization,
which in the main has believed that birth and
death, the qualities and character of children,
are in the hands of Providence, that ‘‘children
and the fruit of the womb are a gift that cometh
from the Lord”’ and that it is our part to accept
with thankfulness the children whom He
provides. Up to a short time ago, the theory of
evolution, though of course it had serious
bearings on the doctrine of providence, did not
greatly disturb this traditional attitude, because
the process of evolution was conceived by most
people as one which carried on in an impersonal
manner. To the majority of those who thought
about evolution at all, it seemed to resemble
a natural law, like gravity. The radical
change that we have to envisage is that very

soon man will be able to take a decisive part in
the evolution of the human race—to look
ahead and plan the generations that will come
after him. And further, we are presented with
the startling proposition that the evolution of
man may still be incomplete; a further stage in
evolution may lie ahead in which man, by his
intelligence and co-operation in planned birth
control, may raise himself to a higher type of
human being. The dream of the Superman may
be more than a dream after all. As we shall see,
there are eminent biologists who warn us that
we are now at a critical moment in the development of the human race, at a parting of the
ways, for they contend that, in present circumstances, the human race is slowly deteriorating
and must now take measures to reverse that
tendency. We cannot stand still; we shall
either degenerate at an increasing rate or set
out on a climb to a nobler and better-born
humanity.

Utopias and Utopians
Obviously all this claims the attention of
anyone who values the family and its stability,
for it is only too clear that almost any plans for
the improvement of the quality of children, and
certainly any directed evolution, must directly
affect the traditional family. As I have said, the
situation in which we find ourselves is unprecedented. There is no real analogy to it in
the past from which we might expect to get
guidance, and we shall encounter moral problems which have never before been considered.
[t would not be true, however, to say that
eugenics had made its appearance now for the
first time on the horizon of social thinkers. So

193

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, January 1962, 53, 4.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

far from that, it plays a major part in the most
important theoretical designs for the betterment
of human existence. The long: list of Utopias
would give us numerous examples of quite
fundamental proposals for the reform, or
abolition, of the family in the interests of human
welfare. The greatest of all, Plato’s Republic,
goes beyond anything that the most reckless
modern scientific eugenist would dream of
advocating. The utopian imagination aims at
providing an ideal of society—a perfect city or a
perfect state. Only the more superficial thinkers
delude themselves that a mere rearrangement, or
reorganization, of the political and economic
conditions can be enough. Sooner or later,
the utopianthinkercomes up against the obvious
truth that an ideal city demands ideal citizens.
The two go together and the problem is really to
produce the kind of persons who could create
and keep in existence a truly good city. Thus
Plato’s Republic, and many other utopias,
have been largely treatises on education—how
to train the citizens. But no one can think
seriously about education without coming to the
prior problem of the initial quality of the
children to be educated. Even the most skilled
and dedicated teachers can do little with poor
human material. Nurture and nature are both
elements in the situation and we need not only
citizens who are well educated, but those who
are well born. Nor is it a new idea that some
qualities are hereditary and that, on the whole,
the children of intelligent parents have a better
chance of being intelligent than the children
of the dull or half-witted. H. G. Wells’s Modern
Utopia, no less than Plato’s Republic, depends
upon a specially selected and bred élite—the
Samurai. _—

It is perhaps worthy of note that all the
important utopias are, in some sense, “‘aristocratic,” that is they are societies in which the
élite rule and the rest obey. I think it might be
almost impossible: to imagine a democratic
utopia, though whether this is a condemnation
of democracy or of utopias I will not venture to
decide. Plato develops his eugenic proposals
in connection with the “Guardians’—the governing and directing class. They alone in his
ideal city have no family, they do not know who
their parents are, nor do they know which

194

children are their offspring. The main reason for
this total proscription of the family is to remove
from the Guardians all family ties, all family
pride and loyalty and all family love. The
Guardians are to have no private or personal
attachments which might distract them from
their civic duties. They are to be wedded to the
city. The eugenic motive, however, plays an
important part in Plato’s scheme, in answer to
the question how to provide a steady succession
of Guardians. The argument begins with a
discussion of the breeding of hunting dogs and
game birds and proceeds to apply the same
principles to the breeding of men. “The best of
both sexes ought to be brought together as often
as possible, the worst as seldom as. possible; we
should rear the offspring of the first, but not
of the second, if our herd is to reach the highest
perfection. And all these arrangements must be
secret from all save the rulers if the herd of
Guardians is to be as free as possible from dissension.”” This is followed by plans for popular
deception by statesmanlike myths, for the
rigging of the lots for “marriage” and for the
ruthless slaughter of the children of inferior
parents.

Before we leave this historical introduction,
we may briefly notice H. G. Wells’s Modern
Utopia, which within limits might be called
Plato after Darwin, though it falls far short of
Plato’s inhumanity. Wells has his élite governing
class whom he names the Samurai, but he
extends his eugenic proposals to include the
whole population. He proposes severe penalties
on the begetters of biologically inferior children,
the segregation of all individuals who do not
conform to the rules laid down for the begetting
of children which have been made for the
biological improvement of the race. Though
Wells does not set out to abolish the family
(and in this respect differs significantly from
Plato) it is obvious that his Utopia envisages
a profound change in the conditions of family
life.

The Population Explosion and its Control

The eugenic problem has now emerged from
the pages of imaginary utopias in the form of a
menace to the future of the whole human race.
The one aspect of this which is almost universally
EUGENICS AND:THE FAMILY

recognized is the “Population Explosion,” a
striking name for a. formidable phenomenon.
The sudden increase in the world population
raises the question: what will happen if this
increase continues? The experts on this subject
have issued warnings about the future which are
not vague and conjectural but based upon
statistics and careful calculations. To take only
one: it is estimated that, if the present trend
continues,

Six hundred years from now the number of
human beings on earth will be such that there
will be only one square metre for each to live on.
It goes without saying that this can never take
place, something will happen to prevent it.?

The causes of this population explosion are
not at all obscure. They can be summed up by
saying that our civilization has weakened, or
even suspended, the effect of those forces which,
in a state of barbarism, kept the population on
the whole in equilibrium with the food supply.

Our civilization has two characteristics which
differentiate it from all others: it is scientific
and it is humanitarian. Our science has enabled
us to preserve the lives of multitudes who in
former times would have perished at birth, and
to prolong the lives of many who would have
died young. The “‘survival of the fittest’? has
ceased to work with its former cruel effectiveness. And our moral feelings and principles,
largely derived from Christianity, have led us to
view with horror the pagan procedures such as
the exposure of unwanted children and the
abandonment of the aged to uncared-for
dissolution. The inevitable consequences of
the rapid increase of the world population are
already apparent. Though the food supply has
been increased by the scientific improvements
in agriculture and, no doubt, is capable of considerable further increase, the prospect that it
can keep pace with the increase of population
seems most unlikely. Even now a large proportion of the world’s inhabitants is on the
verge of starvation. President Eisenhower was
not exaggerating when he said, “In vast stretches
of the earth men awoke to-day in hunger.
They will spend the day in unceasing toil. And
as the sun goes down they will still know
hunger. They will see suffering in the eyes of
their children.’? This state of affairs must have

an effect upon the family as an institution and
we may agree with Mr. Fagley that “‘the larger
crisis of our time is reflected in families throughout the whole wide earth.”

Control of this population explosion is not
impossible. The obvious means to that end is
family planning on a wide scale. As we all
know, this is already in operation to some
extent in most civilized countries and research
will probably discover new methods of birth
control which will facilitate it in less advanced
countries. So far, however, the effect on the rate
of increase of the world population has been
slight and there is reason to fear that its operation may on the whole have a dysgenic influence. The intelligent and self-controlled are
more apt to adopt family planning than the
ignorant and more instinctive types. After all,
it requires a certain development of reason and
public spirit for parents who by culture and
tradition regard large families as guarantees of
respect and security to limit their offspring in
the interest of the public good. There is, therefore, a danger that the reckless and unthinking
will breed with much greater fertility than the
wise and prudent. One suspects that many
parents who ought to have many children have
only one or two, while very many, whose contribution to the upgrading of the human race
is likely to be negative, have all too many.

The Importance of Quality

We are confronted with the question of
quality. Sir Julian Huxley puts the point succinctly:

I would say that the ultimate motivation for
family planning is to secure an improvement in
the quality of life—to realize more possibilities
of fulfilment for more people; while the immediate
motivation is the necessity to secure a reasonable
future for the human species before it is too late.‘
The phrase “quality of life” invites reflection.

It is, I suppose, almost self-evident that the
desire of all high-minded parents is to bring
into existence children who are capable of a high
quality of life and to provide the best possible
opportunities for them to develop it. Clearly
the quality of life will depend to no small degree
on the environment of the child—social as well
as physical. The earliest years in a loving and
harmonious family will begin the process in the

195
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

happiest way and the later education will, if
wisely adapted, continue the good work. We
must not allow eugenics to blind us to the
influence of the home on the child’s personality.
Psychology has taught us much on this; we
should heed it no less than biology. But the
original endowments of nature have an equally
fundamental importance and the effects of
education and environment are limited by the
inherent capacities which are due to heredity.
Nor can a high level of civilization be maintained by a population of sub-standard individuals.

Is human evolution now on the down-grade?
Can we detect a trend of degeneration which will
become a serious danger unless measures are
taken to halt it? Here we enter upon a controversial territory in which only the expert has a
right to speak. The question at issue, however, is
of universal concern and it behoves us to try
to form some opinion on it. I will briefly refer
to an important paper by an American biologist,
Dr. Hermann J. Muller, which bears the significant title, ““The Guidance of Human Evolution.”> Dr. Muller accepts the dogma held by
nearly all European biologists that acquired
characteristics are not inherited and, therefore,
everything depends on the genes which are
modified by mutations and not by any influence from the body in which they are situated.
Mutations are very numerous and of every
degree of importance. In a state of nature, a
certain equilibrium is maintained by the fact
that individuals who suffer from an unfavourable
mutation either manage to counteract its
effects or perish without offspring. Thus an
individual who was born with a defective thumb
might have difficulty in handling a bow and
arrow; and this might diminish his chances of
survival or of having children, so the unfavourable mutation would not be passed on. In Dr.
Muller’s opinion, the civilization which we
enjoy has the defect that, quite rightly, we care
for the handicapped individuals, alleviating
their disabilities and guiding their lives, with the
result that unfavourable mutations are not
eliminated but are built up. He does not claim
that the damage to the species is as yet obvious,
but he holds that over a long period it may
become a serious menace. Another authority,

196

who agrees with Dr. Muller, conjectures that
in 600 years the situation will be serious and in
10,000 years the human race may be in danger
of extinction. It is only fair to note that other
authorities do not agree with Dr. Muller’s
somewhat pessimistic conclusions. But let us
hear the end of his story of the possible future.
He thinks that the process of degeneration, if
unchecked, will lead to a state of things in which
human beings will be no longer able to sustain
civilized life and its complexities and then,
with the collapse of the civilized order, the state
of nature will come again and the human species
be saved from extinction by reverting to a condition of savagery. From all this, of course,
he deduces that, before it is too late, we should
plan births by various means to which I will
refer later.

The Control of Future Evolution

The prevention of degeneration, however, is
not the only end which we may have in view.
Why should not we aim at breeding better
types of humanity and hope that the future of
mankind will be adorned by beings who surpass
ourselves? Dr. Muller writes:

Why should we or anyone else who has become
aware of the marvellous advances that have been
made in biological evolution consider it sufficient
merely to keep things as good as they are, if we can
do much more than that? Certainly the majority
of mankind have come to set their objectives much
higher in the case of cultural evolution, now that
they have learned how astonishingly amenable
it can be to their own contrivings. It seems almost
inevitable, if civilization avoids its present opposite pitfalls of mutual extermination and overpopulation, men will want to utilize also, for their
own benefit, the vast, though more unwieldy,
possibilities of their own biological advancement.*
The most important of the means proposed to

achieve this “biological advancement” is artificial insemination of the kind technically
described as A.I.D. Dr. Muller is not blind
to the probable reactions of many to his startling
suggestions, though he dismisses feelings of
dismay as due to superstition and prejudice.
We too may experience revulsion, but that
should not prevent us from looking carefully
at what he has to present to us. The method of
raising the biological level of the species must
be by ensuring that parents of high mental
EUGENICS AND THE FAMILY

capacity have as many children as possible, and
that can be done effectively, and in a comparatively short time, by artificial insemination.
I need not go into details, but it is well known
that now it is technically possible for one man to
have an almost indefinite number of children
by many women and, moreover, the semen can
be preserved for some time so that a man may
have children after he is dead. Dr. Muller
envisages a time not far off when it will be a
normal and recognized thing for a family of
husband, wife and children to include sons and
daughters not begotten by the husband but by
A.I.D. He thinks, indeed, that, so far from disrupting the life of the family, this technique
would conduce to its harmony and happiness,
and that public-spirited and idealistic men and
women would feel joy and pride that they have
contributed to the great cause of biological
advancement. I must add that, in my opinion,
it is quite unjust to accuse Dr. Muller and other
geneticists who agree with him of treating
human beings as though they were cattle or
sheep. Though the techniques have been developed in connection with cows and sheep,
there is no suggestion that they are to be imposed on human beings. It is presupposed that
all these modifications of sexual behaviour and
family planning will be freely accepted and
practised by intelligent persons who believe
that they are furthering the general good. I
must also put on record the fact that the Eugenics
Society and its President Sir Julian Huxley do
not advocate the adoption of Dr. Miuller’s
measures as a practical policy. A reference to the
published literature is enough to convince
anyone that their proposals which would have
immediate effect are within the bounds of what
reasonable persons, who do not want to disturb
the normal family life, can regard as acceptable.

The Importance of the Family Unit

Before I pass on to some general observations
on the problem of eugenics and the family, I
will quote some words uttered by the chairman
of a conference on the subject in New York, at
which the theories of Dr. Muller and others were
discussed :

If the dignity of mankind is to be preserved, we
must proceed with ever increasing caution .. . the

spiritual, artistic and emotional qualities in man
will long seem far more important than disease
resistance. There is even a bare possibility that
disease susceptibility will conduce to these high
qualities. Our greatest human beings have not
always been perfect physical specimens. We
must never forget the divine spark that characterizes man at his highest if not always his
healthiest.” .

I will take this quotation as a kind of text for
what I have to say on the moral and religious
principles which are relevant to eugenics and the
family. And first a few words on the obvious
need for preserving the family. The family is
based on biological fact. As we know it in our
Christian tradition, it is the group consisting
of one man and one woman and their children.
The normal family, the paradigm family, is
bound together by the recognition that the
children have been brought into the world
through the mutual love of husband and wife.
As we know, there are many exceptions to the
rule: there are happy homes in which the
children are adopted, but would this continue
if the normal family was no longer of the
accepted pattern and test-tube babies were so
common as not to appear unusual? I find it
hard to believe. Nor do I think that any substitute for the family as we know it is likely to be
equally effective as a place of moral education.
In the life of the family, the virtues of lovingkindness, consideration for others, loyalty and
tolerance have their seed plot and it would be
courting disaster to undermine it. The environment is a factor in the development of human
beings and the family is the natural environment
of the young. It is possible to have genetic
excellence frustrated and warped by environmental squalor or resentments. We know by
experience that inherited intellectual gifts are
only too often wasted by lack of opportunity
or perverted by misdirection arising from
environment. Al Capone, I imagine, was not
biologically inferior.

But we must leave the discussion of details to
consider some wider questions. The growing
knowledge of heredity and genetics has really
opened to us a new moral horizon and confronted us with duties which were unknown to
previous generations. Formerly the birth of
children was regarded as almost entirely beyond

197
ER—C
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

human power to control or direct. As I have
already remarked the idea that by human
contrivance some influence could be exercised
on the kind of children that are born is revolutionary. And this is true whether we are concerned with the religious outlook or the purely
secular. To the Christian, children were gifts
of Providence, “‘an heritage and gift that cometh
of the Lord” and therefore “to be brought up
in the fear and nurture of the Lord.” To the
secularist they were products of evolution, but
evolution was thought of as a natural process
with which we could not interfere in any significant way. Now we are conscious that within
limits some direction of evolution is possible.
What shall we say as Christians to this? Does
it follow that the belief in Providence is outmodcd and man will, so to speak, step into
the place formerly assigned to God? Are children then in no sense an heritage and gift to be
accepted with gratitude? If that is the conclusion drawn by the majority, the progress of
genetics and eugenics will have a deplorable
effect on human thought by diminishing reverence for life and the feeling that birth is sacred.
But for my part I would draw no such conclusion. We do not have to give up the belief
in Providence, rather we have to enlarge our
conception of the working of Providence and
of our relation to it. The development of human
knowledge, with its consequences in the increase
of our power to influence the future, is itself a
providential event, for, if we believe in God, we
are bound to believe that His guidance was not
absent from the whole wonderful scientific leap
forward in the last 200 years. May it not be
that the method of Providence is to provide
new opportunities for the enhancement of life
which we may seize wisely and courageously,
or fail to recognize and so incur unnecessary
trouble? So I think we must regard it.

The Future of the Human Race

It follows then that “‘new occasions bring new
duties.” The new duty now is to care for the
future of the human race. This too raises an
interesting question, particularly from the
standpoint of Christian ethics. To love our
neighbours as ourselves has been acknowledged
as the supreme principle of conduct, full obedi
198

ence to which would constitute righteousness; as
St. Paul puts it, love is the fulfilling of the law.
But “who is my neighbour?” was the critical
question put to our Lord by the lawyer, to
which he replied by the parable of the Good
Samaritan, implying that my neighbour is
anyone who crosses my path who is in need of
my help. As time has gone on, the richness of
this maxim of conduct has revealed itself by
proving applicable beyond the neighbours in the
literal sense. We have enlarged the area of compassion and concern, so that the good man is
ready to respond to calls for aid from China or
Africa, as well as from his home town. Love
has learned to leap over the wall of space; the
question now is whether it can leap over the
wall of time and feel concern for those who shall
be born long after we are dead?

This question needs more reflection than it
has had. It does not resemble very closely the
question: “Ought I to be concerned for
persons in distant lands?’’ because we can form
a relatively clear idea of what distressed foreigners are like and of their needs, but we
cannot do the same with persons who may be
living say 200 years from now. As we well
know, we feel no difficulty in being concerned
for our children or our grandchildren, and we
may even cherish some of the same sentiment
for our great-grandchildren, but beyond that
our emotion and our imagination fail. It is
astonishingly hard to care very much about
remote generations who, after all, may never
come into existence. This failure of concern is
not wholly one of emotion and imagination—
it has a rational ground. We cannot foresee
the conditions of life even a century ahead,
we cannot tell, when the length of time is
increased to five centuries, what evolutionary
changes may have taken place in the human
race itself, so that we simply do not know what
to hope for them. This does not mean, of course,
that we should be indifferent to the eugenic
considerations which bear upon the probable
course of evolution, but it does mean, I think,
that we must preserve a sense of proportion.
Love your neighbour is the basic principle;
our primary duty is to those who are near us in
time and space and it is possible to become
like Mrs. Jellyby, whose children suffered
EUGENICS AND THE FAMILY

because of her interest in the natives of Borrioboola-Gha, by having our interest so concentrated on the world as it may be, centuries
hence, that we do not notice the troubles of the
world to-day.

This is not a merely theoretical discussion. In
my opinion, it has a direct bearing on how we
ought to judge some proposed eugenic schemes.
Some of the more drastic seem to run the risk
of sacrificing the present generation to the
supposed interests of those to come. I do not
accuse any of the writers known to me of
intending explicitly to do this. They are, as I
have tried to make clear, men of liberal and
humane views and are particularly careful to
avoid any encroachment on human dignity and
freedom. If they were in charge, we need have
little fear. But will they be in charge? Will
eugenic measures be always on a voluntary
basis? I doubt it. Hitler made some blundering
efforts to breed a master race. Totalitarian states
are still with us, and it is unlikely that in them
eugenic measures will be left to the voluntary
choice of individuals. The prospect of some
“Big Brother’ dictating to a conditioned
citizenry what kind of children should be born
causes dismay when we remember the lengths
which Plato went to in his ideal city and his
plans for a master progeny. There are prices too
high to pay for biological improvement under
the guidance of eugenics, and one of them is the
sacrifice of the finest fruits of culture and
Christian civilization: personal freedom and
moral self-determination.

The aim of eugenics is to encourage the birth
of better types of human beings. Expressed
in these general terms, it must have the sympathy
of all men of good will, but when we ask what
we mean by “better,” we run into some awkward
questions—and one fundamental one, what is
our conception of a really good man? That
perhaps is too large a subject for discussion
now, but what qualities do we recognize as
plainly desirable and as susceptible to treatment
by eugenic measures? I suggest that those which
are, to some extent, measurable will naturally
have prior claim, such as physical health and
intellectual ability. If by eugenics we can hope to
breed men who are immune to some of the more
serious diseases, and if we can, in the same

way, produce a large number who have high
I.Q.s, we may reasonably assume that we are
doing good. But even here there are doubts.
As the quotation which I have used as a text
suggests, it is possible that some highly valued
qualities of mind and spirit are connected with
weakness or malady of the body. It would be
easy to compile a list of persons, particularly in
the spheres of art and literature, who are among
the great geniuses of the world and were physically below normal. In some cases it is arguable
that their genius was connected with their ill
health. John Keats is a familiar example and it
is hard to say whether he would have been a
great poet if he had not suffered from tuberculosis. I prefer, however, to take another
example, that of a great personality who, in
his own fashion, was deeply concerned with the
creation of a new type of man—I mean St.
Paul. He was certainly not the kind of being
whom eugenics would have looked upon as a
success. His frame was evidently not impressive
or attractive and he suffered from some permanent disability which he calls “a thorn in the
flesh”’; some scholars have thought that he was
epileptic. In any view, however, he was a man
who played an outstanding part in history and
made a unique contribution to the cultural
tradition of the Western world, while in the
Christian view he was much more, he was a
vehicle of Divine revelation and the greatest of
the Apostles.

Spiritual Values

The mention of St. Paul introduces the last
point which I wish to make. As I have said, he
too was concerned with the making of improved
men, or rather he would say with making new
men. His own experience led him to this, for
he felt himself to have been transformed from
within, by a creative spiritual experience, and ‘he
believed that this same experience was possible
for all. This is not the occasion to dwell on the
significance of the conversion of St. Paul or on
conversion in general, but we are reminded by
him that there is another factor in the development of human beings, the factor which was
referred to in the quotation from the Chairman’s
address as “the Divine spark.” The fascinating
study of heredity and environment is certainly

199
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of the highest importance and it would be folly
to ignore the great benefits which may be
derived from the science of eugenics, but it is a
dangerous fallacy to suppose that we are completely determined by heredity and environment, or that we are and can be nothing but
what they make us. Our heredity is given and we
cannot alter it, nor for the most part can we
choose our environment, but we may make
something good and valuable out of the given
material or something worthless and mean.
Which we shall do depends on our spiritual
nature, on the “Divine spark’”’ within us.

We have been talking of eugenics and the
family and St. Paul has a word for us on this.
He believed that the spirit of man thrived in a
family, and he conceived of the Church into
which he recruited his converts as the great
family of God in which all the members were
bound together in love. The family, I suggest,
has a unique function in eugenics; it is the
natural environment in which children most
easily develop as free spiritual beings, so that
we may assert that the last thing a wise eugenist
would wish for is the decay of the family; on the
contrary, he would do all he could to preserve
it and to make it more like its ideal.

Conclusion

I fear that my lecture has wandered over many
fields and raised many questions without many
clear and definite conclusions. My excuse must
be that the subject is so vast and the data are
still being assembled, so that we must keep open
minds on many of the problems. I hope we
are all convinced that we have a duty to inform
ourselves on the subject and to consider candidly
the proposals of the more sober-minded
eugenists, represented by the Eugenics Society,
which are within the bounds of practical politics
and voluntary choice.

200

This lecture is under the auspices of the
Marriage Guidance Council and commemorates
Dr. Gray, who was a pioneer in this field of
voluntary social service. The relevance of
eugenics to marriage guidance is obvious.
The question whether or not responsible parenthood would justify the procreation of children
in cases where some transmissible defect is
present in the potential parents must often
present a serious moral problem. The heredity
of haemophilia and diabetes for example has
been studied and much is known about it. There
are other diseases of which less is known but
which may be passed on to children. Sometimes,
again, the fear that heredity will work against
the well-being of the children is unfounded and
should be dismissed. To make knowledge of
these matters available to those whom it concerns is a real service to them and to the community. Marriage Guidance Counsellors never
attempt to dictate, or impose, a solution to
problems, but always to help the persons concerned to work out their own. When genetic
fears are involved in the problem surely the same
policy is to be commended. The counsellor
will help by knowing the scientific established
facts, or by knowing where to look for them,
and thus be able to provide the data on which
a free and responsible decision can be reached.

REFERENCES

1. Plato’s Republic, v. 459.

2. United Nations. 1958, The Future Growth of World
Population. Quoted in R. M. Fagley, The Popuse Explosion and Christian Reponsibility, 1960,

18.
3. Address at Columbia Plan Conference. Quoted in
The Population Explosion, p.22.
4. Population and Quality of Life. The Sixth International
tala on Planned Parenthood. New Delhi,

5. Tax, S. (Editor) 1960. Evolution After Darwin, Vol. 2.
Papers presented at the Darwin Centennial Celebration, Chicago, 1959.

6. Op. cit. p. 18.

7. The Times, 21.7.61. ‘‘Genes and Environment.”
