BYROM STANLEY BRAMWELL

M.A. (Cantab), LL.B. (Edin.), F.R.S.E., T.D.
1877-1948.

HE Eugenics Society has suffered a
grievous loss by the death, on October
24th, 1948, of its chairman of Council,
Byrom Stanley Bramwell. In all the years
since 1921, when he first joined the Society,
Bramwell’s knowledge, experience and energies have been freely at our disposal. He
was elected a member of Council in 1922, and
in that capacity continued to serve until
1929 ; in that year, when the Society found
itself for the first time with considerable
funds to administer, he took over the onerous
duties of honorary treasurer; and in 1933
he relinquished this office for that of chairman of Council, a position he occupied with
outstanding success to the end of his life.
Byrom Stanley Bramwell was born on
November 16th, 1877, in Newcastle-onTyne, the second son of the eminent physician, the late Sir Byrom Bramwell, and
Martha Crighton. For generations the Bramwell family had been physicians in this area
and in North Shields, and it is understandable that with a father, grandfather and
great-grandfather all in the medical profession, Stanley Bramwell decided (or possibly
was persuaded by his father) that it was time
a member of the family elected upon some
other career. That he would have made a
fine physician is unquestionable. He had the
calm balanced judgment, the warm human
sympathies, the natural dignity and the
requisite scientific attainments. But after a
distinguished scholastic career at Cheltenham College, which remained an abiding
influence in his life, and at Trinity College,
Cambridge, where in 1899 he took a first in
the Natural Science Tripos, he proceeded to
Edinburgh, where he graduated LL.B. and
was called to the Scottish Bar in 1903. With
his lifelong genealogical interests it must
have been a source of deep satisfaction to
him that at Edinburgh University he gained
the medal in medical jurisprudence, just as
his father had done before him.

184

In 1907, after a brief period of practice at
the Bar, he accepted an invitation from two
of his Cambridge contemporaries to join.
them in an old family firm of printers,
Messrs. Barclay and Fry, of Southwark. For
one of Bramwell’s scholarly habit of mind the
decision to follow a business career cannot
have been made without much _heartsearching, but it is one that he never regretted. To the business he brought his
scientific bent, his trained intellect and warm
concern for his fellow man ; and, starting as
secretary to the company, within a very
short time he became its managing director,
helping to bring about the amalgamation,
referred to in one of the tributes published
below, which resulted in the formation of the
Metal Box Co.

So modest was Stanley Bramwell in disposition that it was possible to know him
for many years without learning anything
about some aspects of his varied life interests.
Thus, many who counted themselves among
his friends had no idea that he had been a
Volunteer and Territorial since 1901, and
had served with distinction in the first world
war as staff captain, R.A., in Gallipoli and
Mesopotamia. Even after he had been
invalided with paratyphoid fever he continued quietly to play his part in the war,
entering first the Directorate of Recruiting
and later the Ministry of Munitions.

Meanwhile, in 1914, he had married Evelyn
Margaret, daughter of the late Archdeacon
J. R. Hodgson of Lichfield; and of this
marriage there were two sons, John Byrom,
who has followed the family tradition by
becoming a physician, and Robert Stanley,
who followed his father in the firm Barclay
and Fry. The one breach in the armour of
Bramwell’s modesty was the pride he took in
his family and in the success of his sons in
their chosen careers.

It was shortly after the first world war that
Bramwell entered upon his long and fruitful
~ BYROM STANLEY BRAMWELL

association with the Eugenics Society. He
was always fascinated by genealogical
studies, and in pursuing them came to a clear
vision of their eugenic implications, Although
it was not until 1932 that he joined the
Society of Genealogists, a study of his
writings long before that date reveals his
preoccupation with such questions as the
reappearance—whether through heredity or
the force of example—of special interests and
traits through many generations of the same
family. Thus, as far back as 1922, he published in THE EUGENICS REVIEW a paper
under the title ‘‘ Army Examinations and
Heredity,”’ in which he examined the intellectual and family histories of boys who had
entered the Army from Cheltenham College.
It may be surmised that the collection of the
considerable data which formed the subject
of this paper proved a most congenial occupation, for it served to link up two of his closest
interests, the careers of Old Cheltonians and
the influence of family tradition on the
individual’s choice of occupation and his
subsequent development. It was a happy
fulfilment of these interests when, in 19309,
he became president of the Old Cheltonian
Society and, between 1936 and 1939, both
chairman of the executive committee of the
Society of Genealogists and joint honorary
editor of its magazine.

In THE EUGENICS REVIEW Byrom Stanley
Bramwell continued over the years to contribute a series of attractively written papers,
all marked by painstaking research, scholarship and clear thinking. Some of his papers
called for the application of difficult statistical techniques, and here his mathematical
abilities served him well. His methods were
not always orthodox, but experts agreed that
they were sound. The papers covered an
extraordinary diversity of subjects : ‘‘ Wealth
and Ability ” (1933) ; “‘ Falling Population
and Positive Eugenics’ (1937); “‘ The
Andersons of Peterhead ”’ (1938) ; ‘‘ A Note
on the Intellectual Differences Between the
Sexes ’’ (1941) ; “‘ The Span of Life ”’ (1943) ;
“The Order of Merit : the Holders and their
Kindred ”’ (1944) ; and ‘‘ Galton’s Hereditary
Genius and the Three Following Generations
Since 1869 ”’ (1948). This last paper forms

185

the basis of a remarkable study which brings
up to date the family histories recorded in
Galton’s classic. During Bramwell’s lifetime
arrangements were already in hand for the
publication of a new edition of Hereditary
Genius which would include this important
new material as a long appendix. These
arrangements are now complete, and it is
sad to reflect that a publication from which
Bramwell would have derived so much
pleasure will now have to be issued posthumously in his honour.

On his retirement from business in 1936
there began for Stanley Bramwell a period of
intense intellectual and administrative
activity in the organizations through which
he had canalized his many interests. He
became more assiduous than ever in his
attendance at committees of the Eugenics
Society, accepted high office in the Society of
Genealogists and became absorbed in the
affairs of the Old Cheltonian Society and the
Masonic Lodge connected with it.

Thus it was that the outbreak of war found
him at his prime, ready for any duties and
responsibilities that might come his way.
He immediately became the A.R.P. postwarden for his district, and one can readily
imagine how perfectly his tact and imperturbability qualified him for this position. Those
who knew him at the post say that he was
indefatigable ; yet somehow he was successful in combining the long nights on duty with
days spent in the service of the Eugenics
Society. It was a remarkable achievement for
which we must for ever be in his debt.

The tributes published below give some
idea of the man as he appeared to his colleagues and friends. Inevitably they leave
much unsaid, for they concern a man who
combined most diverse interests with an
exceptional reserve. Thus, they say nothing
of the quiet pleasure he took in his election
to the Fellowship of the Royal Society of
Edinburgh ; or of his happy family life ; or
of the wonderful family holidays spent
fishing in Scotland; or of his remarkable
gift, as an omnivorous reader, for remembering in detail what he had read. The
characteristics of Stanley Bramwell that
made the deepest impression on the writer
186

were his gentleness and courtesy. To discuss
a problem with him at the United University
Club was always an agreeable experience ;
his unhurried, deliberate manner was itself
the best assurance that he was completely at
one’s disposal, that nothing mattered except
the unravelment of the tangle one had come
to discuss. One invariably went away both
warmed and illuminated. Here, one felt, was
a man dedicated to the service of impersonal
ideals. He gave much to eugenics, but one
always had the impression that to eugenics
he owed much of the inspiration of his own
life. He believed intensely that man’s inborn
endowment could be improved and that its
improvement lay within our own power. It
is fair to say that much of his life was
devoted to the pursuit of studies that might
help to bring this end about. |

To Mrs. Bramwell and to his sons we offer
our deepest sympathy. In our own way we
have a share in their very great loss.

Lord Horder, president of the Eugenics
Society, writes :

It would be much too trite a thing to say
that the eugenics movement has lost a
staunch supporter by the death of Stanley
Bramwell. When we recall that he was
chairman of Council for twelve years, guiding
our Soczety through troublous times ; that he
was himself an authority on more than one
important aspect of heredity ; and that his
interest in the work of his colleagues, and his
willingness to help them, never seemed to
flag ; remembering all this it is not an overstatement to say that he is irreplaceable. As
president of the Soczety I owe Stanley Bramwell a debt that I shall never forget.

Dr. C. P. Blacker writes :

With the possible exception of Clinton
Chance, no one connected with the Soczety
has, in the last twenty years, been in closer
touch with Stanley Bramwell than I. He
was not a man one came to know quickly.
During the first three years that I was
secretary of the Soczety he was its treasurer ;
and our then president, Sir Bernard Mallet,
used to turn much to him for guidance in the
difficult decisions which confronted us when

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Mr. Twitchin’s bequest suddenly made us
rich. Shortly after Sir Bernard’s death in
1932, Bramwell became the Council’s chairman, and this important position he continuously held for the sixteen years which
ended in his death on October 24th, 1948.

My first impressions were of his caution,
his massive good sense, and his reluctance to
express an opinion unless he were sure of his
ground. He was obviously interested in
eugenics; yet he then seemed somewhat
aloof. It was when he became chairman that
began the close personal relationship which I
came increasingly to value as I discerned his
fine though unobtrusive qualities. It was
surprising to discover—though the fact may
well be characteristic—how little his close
friends knew of the diversity of his interests.
It was only two years ago that I learned how
close and continuous was his interest in his
old school, Cheltenham ; and it was at the
same moment that an almost life-long friend
and fellow Cheltonian, Major-General F. S. G.
Piggott, through whom I came to know of
Bramwell’s activities on behalf of his old
school, also learned for the first time of his
interest in eugenics. And it was only this
year that Sir Francis Fraser, a keen fellowfisherman who had known Stanley Bramwell
and his two distinguished brothers for years,
first became aware of his connections with
our Society. It was, I believe, because of his
characteristic diffidence that his numerous
friends failed to recognize how many-sided
he was : and it may have been this diffidence
which at first made him seem difficult to
approach.

But the better one knew him the more one
came to appreciate his remarkable selflessness, his indifference to recognition, credit,
prestige, honours, influence and power. He
rarely talked of himself or of his experiences.
At a time when most people were boring
their friends with accounts of air-raid experiences, he scarcely mentioned the fact that he
was an air-raid warden. And it was only
accidentally and by roundabout means that
I learned what a splendid example he was
setting to those who worked under him. He
had remarkable though unobtrusive abilities
and an authentic scientific bent which, but
BYROM STANLEY BRAMWELL

for his diffidence and the fact that he followed
a business career, would doubtless have made
him well known.

Bramwell’s solid judgment and good sense
were equally apparent if one discussed business matters, the personal issues which arise
in every society, or problems of policy. To
those who had the privilege of knowing him
well, other qualities became apparent—his
generosity, his kind-heartedness, his fairness,
his integrity, his gentleness. For at least
twenty years he was the central pillar of our
Society and no one in it has ever turned to
him in vain. Our debt to him must not be
forgotten in future years.

Mr. Geoffrey Eley writes :

Of how many people with whom one
works could one say, as I think we could
all say of Bramwell, that the first and
strongest impression that a mention of his
name arouses in our thoughts is one of
affection and respect ?

He was unfailingly available, wise and
painstaking whenever a call came from the
Eugenics Society, or from any of us who were
associated with it, and his advice was always
on the side of reason and equity, with a
strong underlying measure of charity.

It is true that in recent years, as his age
began to tell, his speech and thought moved
rather ponderously, and occasionally, it
seemed, tangentially to the issues under discussion, yet it was never wise to imagine that
one could neglect what he was going to say ;
and those with experience of him could feel
no boredom or exasperation while he was
developing his thoughts, for the process was
so essentially a part of the evident integrity
of his nature. One was aware that the
overall value of his contributions to our
problems was real and that it could be
distilled in no other way.

The Eugenics Society has indeed been exceptionally fortunate that its work should
have attracted the interest, ability and
devotion of such a man. He lent to its inner
councils, over a long period of time, a constant and unruffled balance and a steady
determination to take every opportunity of

187

advancing, by reasonable measures, its
objectives.

By his death we have lost an elder statesman, of high quality and a friend whom it is
pleasant and edifying to remember.

Major-General F. S. G. Piggott writes :

In every school there are always a certain
number of names that occur with recurring
frequency down the years ; their appearance
again and again in succeeding generations
makes them almost synonymous with the
school. Bramwell was such a name at
Cheltenham. The first of the family to enter
the oldest of the great Victorian public
schools was the late Sir Byrom Bramwell
(father of the subject of this memoir) in 1858 ;
he was followed by his six brothers, the
youngest leaving in 1882. Thus was the
Bramwell tradition started.

There was a gap of only four years before
the second generation began to arrive; and
in 1891 Stanley himself—like his father, his
uncles and his elder brother—entered Boyne
House. In much more recent times the third
generation has made its mark and continued
the long family loyalty to house and college.

One of Stanley Bramwell’s characteristics
was modesty ; proud though he was of his
family’s achievements in medicine, science,
law and business, he seldom referred to his
own career ; indeed the fact that he served
in the Royal Artillery in the first world war,
in Gallipoli and Mesopotamia, was unknown
to many of his friends. A good example of
this modesty occurred on July Ist, 1939, at
Cheltenham, when he was unanimously
elected president of the Cheltonian Society,
perhaps the honour he prized most in his
varied and active life. In accepting office he
said he meant to work hard to compensate
for the feeling of unworthiness he had of the
honour. When, two months later, the second
world war began, he had already written
several hundred letters to Old Cheltonians all
over the world to draw the attention of nonsubscribers to the Centenary Fund ; and he
did all that was humanly possible during the
following months to maintain the activities
of the Society, no easy matter under war
conditions, with the College itself absent for
188

two terms at Shrewsbury, and with the
departure overseas of large numbers of Old
Cheltonians in the Forces.

The termination of a president’s year of
office always occurs at the annual dinner
with time-honoured ceremony ; it is his own
special day, when he presides for the last time
over a gathering of Old Boys, and reviews
his stewardship. There was no such occasion
in 1940, for obvious reasons, and Stanley
Bramwell passed from his distinguished position without any outward sign of recognition
or gratitude. It was not until six years later,
in 1946, that the annual dinner was held
again ; and the president that year insisted
that Bramwell’s name should appear on the
toast list. So it was arranged that he should
respond for the Society, a task he carried out
in a sincere and moving manner, enlivened
by flashes of humour. One of the passages
in his speech is worth recording :

Old boys’ associations, and parents, are the
major evils of a headmaster’s life, major but
necessary evils. The headmaster and council
have a right to look to the Society for support
for endowment and embellishments unlikely to
come from any other source. The Society, on its
part, regards itself to some extent as the guardian
of tradition. Some traditions may have outlived
their usefulness, but on the other hand not all
innovations have a survival value.

Tradition was almost sacred to Bramwell,
and his rare displays of impatience were
caused by the overt and covert endeavours of
younger and less wise men to decry, and even
to destroy it. His faith may be summed up
in the text of a sermon preached by the Dean
of Hereford, Canon Waterfield (a former
headmaster of Cheltenham), in the college
chapel the morning after Bramwell’s election
as president : Remember the days of old, consider the years of many generations : ask thy
father, and he will shew thee ; thy elders and
they will tell thee (Deut. xxxii, 7). As a pastpresident his advice was always constitutionally at the disposal of the Society ; it
was utilized to the very end of his life.

Mr. Cecil Binney writes :

Stanley Bramwell, till recently chairman
of the Eugenics Society, was a model of what
a chairman should be. He was punctilious in

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

attendance, brief and apposite in his remarks, urbane, self-possessed and goodtempered in the midst of controversy, competent in transacting financial business, intelligent and well-informed on questions of
policy, never anxious to express his own
views, nor too keen on getting them accepted.

To those who served with him on the
Society’s Council or committees these facts
will be already known ; to a casual reader of
these notes they may not seem very interesting. And yet Bramwell was far from
being a colourless personality. He was a
most interesting companion, since he never
talked for effect; the facts he stated were
always accurate and his language moderate
and lucid. This was seen also on the rare
occasions when he put pen to paper. Not
long before the war he read at a members’
meeting of the Society a paper on “ Wealth
and Ability: Eugenics in the Professions
and Crafts,’’ which was published in this
Review.* It contained no complicated
tables or formule ; still less was it a mere
restatement of current thought. He set out
in clear language intelligible to all many facts
not generally known which he had been at
pains to ascertain ; he weighed them judicially and drew his conclusions from them. At
least one reader found himself wishing that
Bramwell had had the leisure to devote to
a careful investigation—he would not have
been content with less—from which he could
have compiled a volume on social conditions
in modern England.

He was an inheritor and a follower of a
great tradition. England has been famous for
its learned and progressive societies and
committees, and their importance has been
due to their consisting not of cranks or selfappointed experts wishing to advertise their
views, but of men genuinely desirous of
increasing learning and advancing progress
and willing to devote their leisure hours to
doing so. Many of them, like Bramwell, have
been Scotsmen, with the industry and accuracy which are national characteristics ; many
of them, like him, have been business men
who have seen no inconsistency between
engaging in commerce and taking an in
* 1933-4. 25, p. 23.
BYROM STANLEY BRAMWELL

telligent interest in the world in which they
were doing practical work. Few of them,
however, can have had such lovable personalities as Stanley Bramwell. He was one
of the kindest of men, so kind that one
had to know him for some time before one
could believe that he was in fact as kind as
he appeared to be. His interest in the
Eugenics Society was part of a general desire
to do everything he could for the improvement of the world and, enthusiastic as he
was, his moderation and consideration for
others prevented him ever being led into
unfairness to opponents or impatience with
over-zealous supporters.

The Hon. Mrs. Grant Duff writes :

All who knew Mr. Bramwell felt a real
affection for his kindly personality and a deep
respect for his unobtrusive ability and the
outstanding integrity of his character. He
gave himself unstintingly to the work in
hand, and while listening patiently to every
suggestion, carried on unswervingly in the
way he felt to be ght. His interest in all
-eugenic problems, especially from the genealogical point of view, was keen and penetrating. Even the routine of every-day
business appeared to interest him. But it is
for his unfailing gentleness and sympathy
that he will best be remembered by a large
circle of friends and admirers—and most
keenly missed by those who had the privilege
of working with him.

Dr. J. A. Fraser Roberts writes :

The first impression formed by everyone
who met Mr. Bramwell must surely have
been that of courtesy, and this impression
was always confirmed and deepened by time.
As chairman of Council and at members’
meetings, as on all other occasions, his kindliness and urbanity were evident to all;
without doubt they were firmly based on a
sure sense of values, breadth of outlook and
respect for the feelings and opinions of
others. His services to the Society were
immense, but the dominant feeling as long
as the present generation of Fellows and
Members lasts will be one of personal loss.

189

Mr. Bramwell devoted much time tothe
genealogical studies that fascinated him.
And to him belongs the credit for attempts to
introduce quantitative methods into these
researches. He was the first person to call
attention to the merits of Guppy’s remarkable book The Homes of Family Names, in
which the subject was treated, area by area,
in terms of actual frequencies. His own
notable contribution on the association in
the London area between occupation and
racial origin as indicated by family name
(‘‘ Observations on Racial Characteristics in
England ’’*) pointed the way to fruitful lines
of work whose promise is even yet not fully
appreciated. It is probable that future
research workers in this hitherto neglected
field will increasingly pay to Mr. Bramwell
the tribute due to a pioneer.

Mrs. Guendolyne Collyer writes :

I learned of Mr. Bramwell’s death with the
deepest regret, but feel that I can add little
to the tributes which have already been paid
to his memory by those who were associated
with him in the work of the Society. I came
to know him as far back as 1928, when I
joined the staff as business secretary, but it
was during his term of office as honorary
treasurer that I was more closely in contact
with him, and could more fully appreciate
his kindly nature and his ready sympathy in
any difficulty. During the war, in spite of
heavy duties as a post warden in his own
district, I knew that I could rely on him for
the support and help which he was always
willing to give. In any emergency, such as
the unavoidable failure of a chairman to
preside at a lecture, he would step into the
breach at short notice and fill the vacancy
with success, his wide and varied knowledge
enabling him to do so whatever the subject
under discussion. Personally, I have reason
to be grateful for his kindness and consideration on more than one occasion.

By his death the Soczety has lost one of its
most valued Fellows, and one who will be
greatly missed. 2

* EUGENICS REVIEW 1923-4. 15. Pp. 480 ff. and
556 ff.
190

_Lt.-Colonel W. Stewart Roddie, C.V.O.,
writes :

If, after half a century of friendship with
Byrom Stanley Bramwell, I was asked to
name the quality with which, in my mind, he
is most clearly identified, I should unhesitatingly say the majesty of calmness. That, I
think, more than any other of his admirable
qualities always impressed me strongly. I,
and so many others, in times of distress,
sorrow and uncertainty, sought that calmness
as storm-tossed mariners sought a haven.
His natural honesty, his integrity, his legal
training, his business training, combined to
produce in him a sense of unflinching
righteousness and a soundness of judgment
which were unmixed blessings to those who
sought—and never sought in vain—his
invaluable advice. There are many who will
miss “ B. S. B.,’’ but none more than myself,
who, since boyhood, have stretched out my
hand and taken a hold of his. And never
without sensing the peace, comfort and
encouragement that came so generously
from that majesty of calmness.

Mr. Aird Whyte writes :

Slow moving and unruffled, “ B.S. B.”
could ever be trusted to give practical help
and a useful direction to affairs. In all
business matters in which he interested
himself, his genial advice and smooth handling of the problem under consideration, made
it the easier to resolve such difficulties as
arose.

My experience of him was chiefly concerned with family investment trusts. Without a very wide earlier range of experience in
such matters, at the outset he rapidly
grasped what was needful. His firm grip of
the long-term essentials resulted in no mean
measure of success, soundly based and continuously achieved.

Mr. David Ducat writes :

B. S. Bramwell joined the firm of Barclay
and Fry Limited, printers and tin box makers,
in 1907. Apart from his war service in
1914-18 he was responsible, with his friends

and colleagues, John and Rex Fry, for the

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

management and direction of the business
until he retired in 1935.

In the period before the first world war he
was mainly concerned in the work of reorganization, which was necessary to bring
an old family business up to the standards
of efficiency required by more modern conditions. On returning from war service in 1918
he took a prominent part in the negotiations
with certain other tin box manufacturers,
which resulted in their amalgamation to
form the Metal Box Company Litd., an
organization which now enjoys a world-wide
reputation. He was one of the first directors
of the Metal Box Company Ltd., which office
he held until he retired.

He was always keenly interested in the
welfare of the staff and workpeople. In 1929
he introduced a pension scheme for all male
employees of the company, and also a
benevolent fund to relieve cases of hardship.
He was the first chairman of the trustees of
both these funds, and continued in that
office after his retirement up to the time of
his death, never missing a meeting. The
letters which have been received since his
death from the pensioners of the company
bear high testimony to the comfort which
he brought to many in their declining
years.

I first met B. S. Bramwell in 1926, when
he engaged me as a management trainee for
his firm on the introduction of the Cambridge
University Appointments Board. It was
certainly a fortunate day for me, for it would
have been difficult to find a better man to
serve under. He took infinite pains to see
that the training I was given was the fullest
in every sense of the word. To-day there is
perhaps a much wider recognition of the
importance of training for management than
there was twenty years ago, but Bramwell in
this was in advance of his time, and his kindly
advice and wisdom gave me a start in business for which I shall always be grateful.

In whatever he did he brought dignity to
his work. He was respected alike by his
customers, his competitors and his staff,
because with them all he was scrupulously
fair and honest. Equally he was also their
good friend, giving advice and help to many
THE EUGENICS OF THE UTOPIANS

and never taking advantage of a fault to
appear clever at the other man’s expense.
Some may have thought it strange that
Bramwell should have chosen a _ business
career. That he would have made a good

_ Igt

lawyer or a good teacher is without question ;
but we who worked with Bramwell will
always be thankful that he chose business
and that we had the great privilege of being
associated with him.

 

THE EUGENICS OF THE UTOPIANS:

The Utopia of the Eugenists*
By PAUL BLOOMFIELD.

MIEL wrote in his wonderful diary :
A: Improve man, make him more just,
more moral, more humble, more pure
—this is the only reform which has no
correlative drawback. Institutions are worth
no more than the value of the man who
uses them.” (‘‘ Les institutions ne valent
que ce que vaut homme qui les applique.’’)
Governments on the whole behave as if
people owed—and, still more, will in future
owe—their character and ‘ worth”’ to institutions, but without going as far as Amiel
most of the Utopian writers from Plato to
Bernard Shaw have believed that reform, or
what we call progress, requires us to pay
some attention to breeding. Since piety for
the past is a virtue somewhat wanting just
now, it may be fair as well as useful to recall
the suggestions, made by some of those remarkable prophets, for supplying society
with improved men instead of only supplying men with an improved society. It is true
that eugenic principles occasionally sound
out of tune with the precepts of the great
moralists. The discord is usually only
apparent, the impression we get being due to
the fact that moralists emphasize more the
individual’s relations to God, eugenists more
his ties to past and his responsibilities to
future generations of men. At any rate the
Utopian writers were moralists themselves,

* A paper read before the Eugenics Society on September 28th, 1948.

some of them in the small flight of the
world’s greatest.

Ancient Wisdom

The mysteries of kingship early in history
bore upon mankind the significance of
“blood.” Folklore and fairy tales attest to
it, and the Bible abounds with genealogies.
Plato must not be expected to have fallen
into traps which still catch prominent men
with less intelligence. He neither regarded
the human stock as stabilized, with the good,
the beautiful, the capable and the strong reproducing themselves in an invariable ratio
to the others, nor did he feel that any blind
process of selection could be depended on to
populate his ideal republic with an ideal race.
So he had recourse to eugenic measures. The
brave and the fair were to be encouraged to
mate—but not to bring children into the
world after the brave were fifty-five or the
fair forty. Plato’s persistent speculations as
to the right age for getting married showed a
scientific habit of mind which was soon to be
abandoned for hundreds of years; not,
indeed that other paragons of ancient wisdom or of medieval common sense failed to
notice for themselves, as Ecclesiastes had
put it, that “ to every thing there is a season,
and a time to every purpose under heaven.”
Though the Jewish sage specified “‘ a time to
embrace and a time to refrain from embracing,” his exact meaning is obscure.
