THE TREATMENT OF ANCESTRY IN
EARLIER BIOGRAPHIES

By W. T. J. GUN, FRHIST.S.

“The Treatment of Ancestry in Modern
Biographies” (EUGENICS REviEw, April
1934, page 29), I referred to a proposed
further study which would cover biographies
published in the period preceding the appearance of Galton’s Hereditary Genius. I have
now consulted thirty-two biographies which
came out between 1830 and 1870—the same
number as those consulted for recent times.
The subjects are the following: Thomas
Arnold, James Bruce, M. I. Brunel, Byron,
George Canning, Castlereagh, Cobden, S. J.
Coleridge, John Constable, Dundonald, 8th
Earl of Elgin, Elizabeth Fry, 1st Earl Grey,
Havelock, Edmund Kean, Keats, Charles
Lamb, Thomas Lawrence, Macaulay, James
Mill, Nelson, O’Connell, Palmerston, Peel,
Walter Scott, Shelley, George Stephenson,
Thackeray, J. M. W. Turner, Wellesley,
Wellington, William Wordsworth. A comparison between these and the later biographies certainly shows some progress in
the treatment of ancestry. This can best be
indicated in tabular form.

[: the last paragraph of my article on

REMOTER ANCESTRY IN MALE LINE

Earlier Later
Biographies Biographies

Full account 2 II

Mentioned Io 12

Ignored 20 9
The Paternal Grandfather

Full account 3 9

Mentioned II 13

Ignored 18 Io
The Paternal Grandmother

Full account — 5

Mentioned 5 7

Ignored 27 21

The Maternal Grandfather

Earlier Later
Biographies Biographies
Full account Z 7
Mentioned 9 . II
Ignored 21 14
The Maternal Grandmother
Full account — 3
Mentioned 3 5
Ignored 29 24
The Father
Good account 9 15
Fair account 14 12
Mentioned II 4
Ignored — I
The Mother
Good account a 9
Fair account 8 10
Mentioned 13 12
Ignored 4 I

It will be seen that in respect of every
relationship the earlier biographies, taken as
a whole, are weaker, the only exception being
the consideration of remoter ancestry other
than in the direct male line, some notice of
which occurs in eight out of the thirty-two
earlier biographies, exactly the same number
as in the later thirty-two.

It does not seem necessary in this supplementary note to attempt any detailed
examination of the earlier biographies. It
may, however, be stated that the figures
given above do not sufficiently convey the
general change of attitude, for these earlier
biographies, almost without exception, indicate an entire absence of interest in heredity
as such, though by no means an entire
absence of interest in genealogy. The most

205

Cc
206

notable exception is significant, occurring as
it does in Sir George Trevelyan’s Life of
Macaulay, which came out a short time after
the publication of Hereditary Genius, but is
included in the earlier list for purposes of
comparison. It appeared, of course, long
before the publication of any in the later
list. Sir George remarks: ‘‘ The most
devout believers in the doctrine of the transmission of family qualities will be content
with tracing back descent through four
generations, and all favourable influences,
both intellectual and moral, are assured by
a genealogy which derives from a Scottish
Manse.”

Almost the only other direct and favourable reference to heredity occurs in Thomas
Moore’s Life of Byron, wherein the author
states: “In reviewing thus cursorily the
ancestors, both near and remote, of Lord
Byron, it cannot fail to be remarked how
strikingly he combined in his own nature
some of the best and perhaps some of the
worst qualities that lie scattered through the
various characters of his predecessors.” It
may also be remarked that only the direct
male line was thus cursorily reviewed.

On the other hand, there are one or two
deprecatory remarks. The author of the

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Life of Thomas Lawrence proves to his own
satisfaction that genius and ancestry are not
connected (incidentally, he does mention
some quite interesting relatives of the
painter) ; while the author of the Life of
J. M. W. Turner exclaims: “ Pedigree and
genealogy, both are vanity, and I put them
behind me as dead and gone.”’ T. J. Hogg, in
his Life of Shelley, is less uncompromising,
but remarks: ‘‘ It would be foreign to the
true purpose of the present narrative to compose a genealogical history of an ancient and
honourable house.”’

In the great majority of these biographies,
however, heredity as such is simply ignored.
As will be seen from the tabular statement,
character sketches of the parents at least are
by no means altogether lacking, but they are
treated, as it were, in isolation and with little
or no appreciation of the effect on the subject of the biography.

It appears, therefore, that there has been a
distinct advance in the proper treatment of
ancestry since the publication of Hereditary
Genius, and it remains indubitable that
Galton has exercised a certain influence ;
even though, as remarked in the previous
article, such influence has seldom or never
been directly acknowledged.

 

New (3rd) edition completely revised and enlarged

PARENTHOOD:

DESIGN OR

ACCIDENT ?

A MANUAL OF BIRTH CONTROL
By MICHAEL FIELDING

BRITISH MEDICAL JOURNAL: Not only the most popular but the best presentation and exposition

of the subject,

LANCET: One of the most impartial and balanced discussions of the practical and technical aspects of

birth control.

MEDICAL TIMES: The very best treatise on the subject.

It has our unqualified approval.

INTERNATIONAL MEDICAL GROUP: The best practical handbook that has yet appeared.

Pp. 208 with 8 illustrations.

2s. paper 3s. Gd. cloth

WILLIAMS & NORGATE LTD., London, W.C.1

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVI, No. 3,
