RECORDING HUMAN CONSTITUTION*

By R. W. PARNELL, D.M., M.R.C.P.
The Institute of Social Medicine, Oxford

HAVE selected records of human

| exstttion as my subject for the
following reason. Five years ago, when
undertaking to make a long-term study of
the health, physique and performance of
undergraduates, I found that I had been
trained to record sickness but that my
understanding of how to make useful records
of people in good health was negligible. It
was not difficult to adjust the art of clinical
history-taking to include items of interest
and importance to undergraduates, but of
those items of physique which might mean
something in terms of personality, emotional
outlook or performance very little had been
mentioned in my training with the exception
of a few glib hints, such as the uncouth
mnemonic to think of gall-stones when a
“‘ female is fat, flatulent and forty !”’ The
initials N.A.D., which adorn so many case
notes to indicate that no abnormality has
been detected, usually stand equally well for
a notable absence of description, or worse,
no attempt at diagnosis, of the person as a
person, in place of a case displaying disappointing absence of abnormality. The
“* defect ’’ outlook or, if you will, this defective outlook, leads to a diagnosis of normality by the inverted process of excluding
abnormality. For the purpose of surveys it
yields hardly a dreg of correlatable data, for
there is no particular reason why one defect,
itself probably uncommon in healthy folks,
Should correlate with another defect sufficiently often to make study profitable.
Hallux valgus and a cauliflower ear might
be associated in some slight degree, but even

if there were it could hardly matter less. On |

the other hand, a simple discipline for
recording constitution would add greatly to
understanding of individual or group disposition. Such records would be valuable
in the practice of medicine, the study of

* A Paper read at a Members’ Meeting of the Eugenics
Society, January 22nd, 1952.

20

healthy people, care of orphans or children
in approved or ordinary schools, investigation of the benefits or otherwise of games
and physical training, study of fertility
or populations, personal relationships within
the family or in communities, nutritional
requirements, in surveys of crime, delinquency, and indeed almost every study of
mankind. In short there is hardly a topic
of social interest from murder to matrimony
on. which records of constitution do not
touch and cannot quicken interest.

Eugenics may proceed by the avoidance
of what is defective, but the procreation of
good stock depends on the definition of good
qualities, qualities not merely desired but
also attainable. This has been the subject
of much discussion, but how closely can the
practical possibilities be studied? The
poverty of records of physique is notable
evidence of neglect in studying the normal.
For the purpose in view simple and satisfactory methods of recording constitution
are required, methods embracing physical
and mental disposition. a

I propose to illustrate three such methods.
The first, the method of photographic
somatotyping introduced by W. H. Sheldon
in the United States, is probably familiar
to you. Therefore, after a very brief reminder of its major features, I shall use it to
illustrate the physical accompaniment of
current academic selection and] achievement as found in a sample of Oxford
undergraduates.

Sheldon’s Method of Somatotyping
Kretschmer (1921) described three types
of physique: asthenic, athletic and pyknic.
Sheldon’s most important contribution to
the study of physique has been to replace
this concept of three disparate types by a
continuous distributive classification in which,
each individual may be placed and described
quantitatively in terms of three components.
RECORDING HUMAN CONSTITUTION 21

 

Fig. 1

Fic. 1 (photo 700)

An endomorph, 6.3.1. Height + cube root of weight = 11°3. The highest rating is in the first component.
The second component rating of three indicates adequate supporting musculature. Being of marked pyknic
build he receives the low rating of one in ectomorphy or linearity.

Fic. 2 (photo 749)

A mesomorph, 3.6.13, who shows well-developed muscles and broad bones. Like fig. 1, he is of pyknic or thickset build, but subcutaneous fat is a secondary feature in this case. His head is cubical in contrast to the roundness
of the endomorph. (Height -~ cube root of weight = 12:6.)

Fic. 3 (photo 945)

An ectomorph, 2.23.6 (or 13.2.6}), of extremely linear build, his body ratio height ~ cube root of weight reaches
the high figure of 14°4. The rating in mesomorphy exceeds that in endomorphy by a small margin, and his
muscles are apparently adequate for his weight for he is an active person.

These components of body build he named
endomorphy (roundness associated with fat),
mesomorphy (muscle and bone width
development), and ectomorphy or linearity.
Keach person is given a rating on a sevenpoint scale, seven being maximum and one
minimum. This can be done scopically, that
is simply by looking at a standard photograph, but it can be checked metrically for
men aged 16 to 20 by taking 17 photographic

measurements and looking up Sheldon’s
tables. Metric somatotyping is probably the
only satisfactory way of training beginners,
though a trained observer may, especially
with the aid of an index file of known somatotypes, reduce the labour greatly by scopic
typing, and maintain high enough accuracy
for most practical purposes. At Oxford great
care has been taken to type 400 young
subjects metrically, as well as scopically, in
Fig. 2

einai cereus. scone

 
RECORDING HUMAN CONSTITUTION 23

order to be as sure as possible that the
standards adopted are the same as those
used by Sheldon.

Physical Characteristics accompanying
University Selection

When comparing the distribution of 4,000
somatotypes at American universities with
that of undergraduates at Oxford it is clear
that certain physical types do not reach
Oxford, although they enjoy university
education in the United States. Seen on
the map of somatotypes, they include those
in the more extreme half of the territory
inhabited by mesomorphs and mesomorphic
ectomorphs. In addition ectomorphic endomorphs, which are comparatively uncommon
in the United States universities, are actually
absent at Oxford with the exception of a few
centrally placed. The fringe of endomorphic
ectomorphs has. also gone. What is the
explanation ? It lies, I believe, in the present
severity of selection. About 0°75 per cent,
less than one per cent of the young men in
the United Kingdom, reach Oxford or Cambridge, and the sharpness of selection is
therefore great. When this notion is examined further in the case of scholars and
exhibitioners, and finally in men who attain
first-class honours in their finals, the only
departures from the central zone lie along
the ectomorphic and ectopenic axis (117_ 551), tailing off in the ectopenes towards
endomorphic dominance. Central types are
more frequent at Oxford, peripheral types
relatively more common in the States, and
thus selective influence may be likened to
pulling on a purse-string. Finally, when we
reach the few great men who combine a
first-class degree with high achievement in
the field of sport, the greatest number are
concentrated just to the fat and muscular
side of the midpoint of the distribution.
Here surely is the type of man whom Cecil
Rhodes had in mind when he looked to
encourage all-round ability. The results are
fascinating in that they provide explanation
and physical recognition of the all-round
character, with centrally balanced physique
and temperament. They also provide an
explanation for their own previous masking,

because men more muscular, more fat or
thinner than average are to be found in
each group.

You will have noticed that I referred just
now to balanced temperament in association
with balanced physique. That reference is
to Sheldon’s index of temperament, in which
a rating is given on a seven-point scale to
each of the three groups of temperamental
traits (out of some hundreds) which he found
to correlate most closely with his three
physical components endomorphy, mesomorphy and ectomorphy. The index is
expressed in three figures like the
somatotype.

Returning to the first-class honours group,
with physiques just “ north-west’ of the
centre, one would expect temperament indices of the same order. Actually there is
reversal of dominance and a cerebrotonic
pull is evident, cerebrotonia being the name
for the group of traits most closely associated ordinarily with ectomorphy or linear
build. This particular reversal of temperament in combination with the physique just
described appears to afford the best ahdanes
for academic success.

It has for so long been a habit of mind to
consider academic achievement as a function of intelligence, and intelligence almost
exclusively, that it may come as.a considerable shock to many people outside academic
circles, and perhaps to some within, to find
that physical features hold the power not
merely to handicap but also apparently to
control the highest levels of mental achievement, as far as these can be expressed in
examination results.

Men who obtain seconds are sometimes
described as the backbone of the undergraduate body. If this is true, then it is
hardly surprising to find that so large a
proportion of seconds are mesomorphs,
especially endomorphic mesomorphs. Such
are anything but spineless ; they play strenuous games and join in the activities of
societies. Reaching all but the élite level
of first-class distinction in examinations they
are probably successful, too, in later life.

Among those with third-class honours
24 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

there is a slightly heavier sprinkling ot more
peripheral physiques.

Heights and Weights

Certain aspects of stature and development may be considered next. Heights and
weights unfailingly fascinate all who have
looked into them, with the possible exception of publishers who are perhaps allergic
to tables. The mean heights and weights
of various groups in the population show a
socio-economic grading. Such a grading has
long been recognized and may be seen both
within the university and within the general
community. It is tempting to interpret this
grading in terms of nutrition. But before
doing so it is necessary to answer certain
questions. Why are university men from
the lower socio-economic level taller and
heavier than the highest level in the general
community? Are they selected from homes
where certain priorities in food supply have
operated throughout their lives? Without
in any way denying the influence of environment it seems that an overpowering genetic
influence may be at work accounting for
such large group differences in average height
(2-3 inches) and average weight (up to 20 Ib.).
Again, when the measurements of Oxford
men taken by Schuster in 1911 are compared
with those of recent years the difference
is found to be almost negligible. Perhaps
environment has not really changed to the
extent imagined between Ig1r and 1951.
Perhaps the increase in financial awards in
recent years has not really altered the social
cross-section of the university, and perhaps,
too, food supplies were not Teally so plentiful
in 1911. Here, however, is an even harder
question to answer. When the average
measurements of individual Sheldon somatotypes are compared for Oxford and the
United States, the Oxford men are almost
uniformly taller and heavier. Is food so
much better and more plentiful in England
than in America? On the other hand, if it
is accepted that the major differences encountered are the result of progressive selection
of men with higher genetic endowment the
evidence falls into line. After all, at the
other end of the scale mental defectives are

well known to be smaller than normal
children.

Size of Family by Somatotype

Before describing simpler methods of
recording constitution there are one or two
other points to make showing the diverse
usefulness of constitutional records. Size of
family is a subject of special interest in
eugenics. Recently there has been a Royal
Commission on Population. The possibility
that people of varying body build should
rear families of varying sizes and vigour was
not one of the many aspects dealt with in
the Family Limitation Report, chiefly because little work has been done in this
connection. Recent analysis of information
provided by undergraduates concerning the
number of their brothers and sisters has
shown, that size of family varies in association with the student’s somatotype. If it
can be assumed, or shown in the future,
that the parents of one physical type tend
to reproduce their type or a cross between
their respective types, then there is, or would
be, a strong suggestion that fat and thin
parents limit their families (or, alternatively,
their families are limited) to a greater extent
than the families of those who are physically
stronger. The possibility certainly appears
to be one worthy of further exploration.

Disturbance of Autonomic Balance

Psychosomatic and somatopsychic are
two adjectives, one perhaps more fashionable than the other, but both used to describe common groups of disorder. Whether
eggs or hens should have priority I do not
know. Evidence pointing first in one direction then in another leads to perennial
philosophic debate.. But both bird and egg
describe different phases or aspects of one
biological phenomenon, the chicken cycle.
So, too, it is more important first, before
arguing causes, to recognize the association
between physique and autonomic disorders. An important key to new understanding of disturbed autonomic balance
may be found in this way if only we take the
trouble to record constitution accurately.
This idea is not new, but the methods of
RECORDING HUMAN CONSTITUTION

recording are comparatively new. A preponderance of physiques on the mesomorphic
side of the ectomorphic-ectopenic axis
reveals the comforting buffer influence of
endomorphy against the chilling stresses of
the world.

Chart II illustrates the incidence of
appendicectomy. Hardly anyone on the
endomorphic side of the ectomorphic-ectopenic axis gave a history of this operation,
although the general distribution shows
many subjects in this region. :

Another interesting field of study exists
in the modifying influence of constitution on
pharmacological action. Addicts to cocaine,

wt SoM OR Phy

 

- eo
i samg(taee ° 3
wees
od ** esoh =
= .
re ro a eves sini = =: G
= : ‘. dat. ies g
= a oe 08 . z
= s s% et soe Te ° 2 re S
A] sy obne coe }
=
ae @ 3 ° \
. i
ae as Bo .
72 oz ny
wae 2 t
g | a a 0 z a |=
AS e : a .
By Pawn en ae é
ie
tes! se an

~<a
Sip
tO SC ee
OCHO RPE.

™ WS
SS eee 2 gr?

enon orr

General Distribution—Oxford

25

This must suffice here to illustrate the
possible application of photographic somatotyping. I agree with Dr. J. M. Tanner’s!
view that photographic somatotyping constitutes the greatest single advance yet made.
in the study of human physique.

Simpler Methods of Recording Physique

There would be little excuse for introducing yet more methods of physical classification, and less accurate ones, too, but for
two reasons. Initial expense for the camera,
running and photographic costs are not
negligible, and there is, too, the cost of labour

eistiilley,

oi %,
%

ne =) Me %,

Me
ssi 44
ail “4s
223

 

/ i ee
P 343 z é £ di
= oe) ; e
le”
# Fi = yi™ es
sj Re a nas
y oe t 5 :
32 33) 1 fs
ee on 8 § a ee,
saz } 733
|
» a Be .
Pe 24 423
4 2 | 326
Pay 7". on re ”
a en 316 ates
Nie Ea — gue ®
> corer ©

Cuart I.—The chart of somatotypes is based on the range of physique encountered among American undergraduates. The black dots illustrate the distribution at Oxford.

Cuarrt II illustrates the incidence of appendicectomy. Very few appear on the endomorphic side of the axis
from somatotype 117 to somatotype 551. In other words appendicectomy had seldom been performed in those
with proportionately more fat than muscle in their make-up.

for example, form clubs, while morphine
addicts seek solitude. The differences in
temperament are probably associated with
differences in physique, and this is certainly
true of more normal appetites such, for
example, as the demand for sweets. (A slide
was shown illustrating the greater demand
for sweets in fat people.) This fact has
more than academic interest, for witness the
recent confusion in sweets rationing to which
these facts may well be related.

in interpretation of photographs. It is
most unfortunate that such considerations
have already handicapped general application. Wherever possible the difficulties are
worth overcoming because the photographic
record is much more informative than
measurements alone. With these limitations
in mind, however, two simpler ways may
be described of using measurements, both
of which yield approximations to Sheldonian
dominance of physique.
26 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

The Standard Deviation Chart

The idea behind this method is not new.
Recently, however, it has been used to
interpret body proportions in the subjects
of the Grant Study,? and something similar
using direct measurements will be found in
Cureton’s® account of physical fitness
appraisal. Standard scales of measurements
are grouped in such a way that by linking the
measurements of one individual a profile of
his physique may be obtained at a glance, no
further calculation or interpretation of the
data being necessary.

The method is simple enough to be a
useful clinical instrument. Its power to
estimate the Sheldonian somatotype is considerable, but it falls short of the photogtaphic record. Its usefulness lies where
nothing better is available.

The ** Clock Method ’’ of typing, using skinfold measurements of subcutaneous fat
The third and last method to be described

provides a_ three-dimensional distributive

classification of physique of the simplest
possible kind and employs measurements
which occupy less than two minutes in the
taking, thus bringing the method within the
scope of ordinary clinical practice. The
measurements taken are height and weight,
often by a clinical assistant or receptionist,
and three skin-fold subcutaneous fat
measurements, on the back of the arm over
triceps, on the back of the thorax near the
angle of the scapular, and in the suprailiac
region of the abdomen, one to two inches
above the anterior superior iliac spine.
The sum of three fat measurements it was
hoped might indicate the general tendency
to obesity, but one of the first observations
made was that people tend to put on fat in
different places. Before going ahead, therefore, inter-correlation of fat measurements
was carried out, the results indicating that
something in the nature of a general fat
factor could be derived with remarkable

confidence. This agrees with Edwards’ (1950)

findings. 4
On the strength of this a scatter diagram

was made using the ponderal index height?

/weight as ordinate and the total of three

fat measurements as abscissa, both with
scales in standard score. New axes were
drawn at the point of intersection of the
means and four quadrants, A-D, thus
obtained.

A. Light build—thinner than average.

B. Light build—fatter than average.

C. Heavy build—thinner than average.

D. Heavy build—fatter than average.
Each quadrant was then divided by radii
at 30 deg. intervals. Thus a method of
classification is reached giving the direction
of deviation of the individual away from
the distribution centre. A sub-division in
classification indicates the distance by which
an individual deviates from the centre. This
is achieved by drawing circles of one, and
one and a half standard deviations radius.
In this way three physical categories of midrange, inner circle and outer circle or peripheral types are obtained. The whole
configuration soon becomes as familiar as a
clock face, and it is not difficult to remember
that asthenic persons fatter than average
appear from 1-3, fat persons from 4-6,
muscular ones from 7-9, and the thin and
wiry ones from Io to 12.

That is the clock. Some evidence of its usefulness is gathered from the following two
investigations. The first was undertaken to
see who and how many people take part in
sport of various kinds at Oxford, where
variety of choice is comparatively good and
participation voluntary. A very high proportion of those of muscular build at the university take part in strenuous field games or
rowing. In the opposite quadrant, very few
of those of asthenic and fat build participate.
This is obvious enough but it may still be
the case here and there, where, for example,
school games are compulsory, that insufficient
variety or alternative outlets are offered to
permit enjoyable recreation for all. There
is some value in being able to recognize by
simple physical measurements those whose
claims to be released from compulsory games
are probably founded reasonably enough on
insufficient strength to enjoy them.
My last illustration comes from a compara
tive study conducted last year by Dr.
Phyllis Epps and myself on the physique of
RECORDING HUMAN CONSTITUTION 27

women undergraduates and women delinquents. The two distributions overlap but
are strikingly different, students on the whole
being of lighter build. Thus it has been
possible broadly to confirm in women the
findings in somatotype studies of male delinquents reported by Sheldon® and by the
Gluecks* in America.

In ending, may I make a plea for wider
use of simple records of human constitution ?
Today infection and bacterial diseases are
falling back as constitutional causes take all
the leading places in the handicap stakes of
mortality. Preventive medicine, following
its magnificent achievements in environmental hygiene, is being forced more and
more against the wall of constitutional disposition. Who knows but that the door to
understanding of the ztiology and prevention of hypertensive disease may not be
found among records outlining the path of

“ROAD TO

a a ay

PCR a ea
LS aS Se SSeS a eee eee ee na a aaa na en

the author :

“*.. . Il y a la des chapitres fascinants. .

and merits serious attention. .
presented to the public.”

“unprejudiced minds.”

changes in human constitution? This is a
topic with which I hope to deal on another
occasion. In the meantime, let us dream
of the day when the Dictionary of National
Biography will contain, if not a standardized
three-view photograph, at least the height,
weight and subcutaneous fat measurement
for each decade in the life of its subjects !

REFERENCES

1Tanner, J. M. (1951). Lancet, i, 574. ‘‘ Current
advances in the study of physique.”’

2 Heath, C. W. (1945). What People Ave. Harvard
University Press. Cambridge, Massachusetts.

* Cureton, T. K. (1947). Physical fitness appraisal
and guidance. Henry Kimpton, London.

‘Edwards, D. A. W. (1950). Clinical Science, 9,

259.

5 Sheldon, W. H., Hartl, E. M., and McDermott,
E. (1949). Varteties of Dilenquent Youth.
Harper and Bros., New York.

* Glueck, S., and Glueck, E. (1950). Unravelling
Juvenile Delinquency. The Commonwealth
Fund, New York.

HAPPINESS ””

A NEW IDEOLOGY
By
C. WICKSTEED

Of this book, just published by Messrs. Watts & Co., London, M. Dachert, Founder of
the Jardins Ungemacht, the Eugenic Garden City of Strasbourg, says, in a letter to

ARMSTRONG

. Votre autre livre ‘

Y
Unfittest ” m’a toujours semblé un des livres les plus importants de notre temps.”

Of the latter work, Dr. Julian Huxley said :
. It is very important that such facts should be forcibly

‘I believe the underlying thesis is correct,

The Illustrated London News said: ‘* Most of his argument must, I think, be convincing to

The Lancet said: ‘‘ The author’s ideas emerge from a coherent system of social and
biological theory, which bespeaks original and vigorous thought.”’

|

: |
e Survival of the |

|

Price of ‘*ROAD TO HAPPINESS’”’ 17s. 6d. net.

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLIV, No. 1
