EUGENICS EDUCATION CONFERENCE. 43

enable us, who speak of religion as an indispensable necessity,
to work hand in hand with those whose principles may be
described as scientific, but who have a message full of truth and
hopefulness which they feel found to deliver, and which will
be for the permanent strengthening of what is a great and
promising cause. For it will be a weakening if we do not learn
to fight against this evil, and work, and grapple with all these
tremendous problems, hand in hand, perfectly free from
jealousy, and free from that narrowness which has done so
much to vitiate the hopeful movements of the past.

THE EUGENIC IDEAL AS A FACTOR IN THE FORMATION
OF CHARACTER.

By Miss TuKE
(Principal, Bedford College; University of London).

Mr. CHAIRMAN, ladies and gentlemen, I do not know whether
what I have to say has any very great relation with the title
on which I speak. And so before I begin upon my subject I
want to explain what I am meaning by ‘‘ the eugenic ideal.’’
I think it is a little different from the signification which some
speakers have attached to those words. By that term I mean the
ideal of a future race which is more fit in mind and body, and
has higher ideals than is the case with the present race, and
that this is an ideal which the present generation or generations can, to some extent at any rate, help to bring about.

I want to ask you to consider, for a moment, how extraordinarily different is our present attitude to the future race,
and to our responsibilities to the future race, from that which is
the eugenic ideal. It is one of the curious anomalies of our
very curious society that we leave the most important things
most to chance; at least, so it seems tome. And among these important things, I do not think many people here will disagree
that marriage is one which we leave very much to chance. I
shall give two illustrations of what I mean, and the illustrations
will, I think, have come into the experience of everybody. Very
often it happens that a young man is under discussion. It is
said that his character and conduct are very unsatisfactory, and
44 EUGENICS REVIEW.

he has been giving anxiety to his friends. Someone is sure to
say, ‘‘Oh, well, let us hope he will soon marry and settle
down!” Again not quite so commonly, but still commonly, you hear this: a girl is under discussion. She is
spoken of as being, by health, or character, or by education, or
all three, unfit to carry out any career that will be profitable
to her or to the State. And in this case also it will be said,
when she is under discussion, ‘‘ Oh, yes, let us hope she will
marry, and it will be all right.’” As a matter of fact, marriage
is looked upon as the sovereign remedy for the unsatisfactory
youth and the neurotic girl, Can anything be further from
the eugenic ideal of marriage? I think it may be supposed that
here I am treading on very dangerous ground, and that I am
going to suggest, if not State control, at least parental control
of marriages. But I am not going to suggest that at all. I
have a better remedy, I think, for this evil, for this indifference
with regard to the race of the future, for this looking upon
marriage as simply a question of personal gratification and
not as a great responsibility to the race which is to come.
My view is that by implanting the eugenic ideal in the minds
of our boys and girls, our young men and young women, that
ideal will bring about its own accomplishment. It is a platitude to say there is nothing so much as the ideal which moulds
the life and character of a man or a woman; but it is a
platitude which we are apt to forget, and which we may
do well to remind ourselves of in this particular. For
instance, you have, perhaps, three men, not very unequal in
mental attainment. One sets before himself the ideal of serving
his country; another sets before himself the ideal of growing
rich; the third sets as his ideal having a good time. Those
three men will, by the force of their ideal, not only shape the
courses of their lives differently, one from another, but they will
also, in the process, mould their characters differently. I will
now take another sort of illustration. We are very well acquainted with the heroines of Jane Austen, as well acquainted
with them, perhaps, as we are with some of our own friends.
What was the ideal of the heroines of Jane Austen? It was
EUGENICS EDUCATION CONFERENCE. 45

to get married somehow. I fancy no glimmering was implanted
in them that they had in getting married any duty to anyone
but themselves, or perhaps their families; they merely thought
of it as ‘‘ the thing to do.’’ They had no idea that in getting
married there was a duty to the race of the future. But let
us imagine those girls with this other ideal implanted in them,
with this ideal before them of a race better and more fit than
the present, which they, by fit marriage, might help to bring
about. Those girls would have been so different in their outlook
and the way in which they spent their life, and hence in the
choice of their husbands, that we should have had, perhaps,
only one or two heroines of Jane Austen’s left.

I want to illustrate my point another way. Two men go to
buy a work of art, say, a picture, or a statue. One of them
goes to the choice with a high esthetic ideal, which is his by
virtue of training and knowledge. Consequently he chooses
something which is beautiful and worth having. The other
goes to buy a picture or statue without training or zsthetic
ideal—haphazard, by chance. His choice, unless he happens
to be a genius in artistic appreciation, is not likely to be good.
And that seems to be the way in which our boys and girls are
brought up to choose their husbands and wives; they are
brought up like the man who goes to choose a work of art
without having had his taste and eye trained by knowledge and
by familiarity and contact with beautiful ideals. I do not mean
to say that the choice will consciously be governed by such considerations, but unconsciously governed ; the character and taste
will have been formed by the ideal implanted.

There are two points in particular in reference to the
eugenic ideal to which I want to draw your attention. An ideal,
if it is to mould a strong character and a noble character, must
concern itself with something that is objective and that is
distant. The difference between the ideal of a reformer and
that of a millionaire in the making will serve here to illustrate
what I mean. The ideal, the distant objective ideal of the
reformer will make a more noble and a stronger character than
will that of the millionaire in desire whose ideal is near and
46 EUGENICS REVIEW.

personal. And there is also another point in connection with
this ideal—for this eugenic ideal is a distant and impersonal
one—namely, that if an ideal is to be effective it must be a
positive ideal, not a negative one. And this I regard as a
point which is of peculiar importance in regard to this question
of eugenic education. It is not enough that principles of selfrestraint should be taught. In this sex respect, more perhaps
than in any other, it is necessary that the self-restraint should
have as a motive some ideal which is inspiring, which can fill
the boy or the girl with enthusiasm. I think this is even more
true of* boys than of girls, this need of an ideal which leads
to the desire to excel. Girls respond more readily to a negative
suggestion than they do. But to both it is of extreme importance that the ideals, if they are to be vivifying, should be
positive. And it is this positive nature of the eugenic ideal,
this ideal of the possibility of creating a better race to come,
by which this question of the education of youth in the principles of sex can be made illuminating and inspiring, and will
remove from it the danger of filling the minds of the young
with ideas which are not desirable.

The illustration which I gave of two men going to choose
a work of art touches upon the point which has been specially
dwelt upon to-day: it touches upon this very point of training.
It is not the point with which I am concerned, but I would say
in closing that I am fully alive to the fact that the ideal alone,
simply stated, is not enough. In order to fulfil its own end, in
order to bring about its own accomplishment, it must, like other
ideals, be fortified by knowledge and education. And it is
because the Eugenics Education Society is seeking to add to
our knowledge on this subject, as well as seeking to inspire
people with the ideal, that I feel so heartily in sympathy with
its aims and with its methods. Hence I wish it success
in this meeting and in what it has called this meeting together
to bring about, that is to say, further possibilities for the education of our boys and girls in these principles.
