EUGENICS ABROAD

IV.—IN AMERICA, by PAUL POPENOE

HE movement toward education for

parenthood continues to grow. Both

the Young Men’s and Young
Women’s Christian Associations have
adopted it as a major part of their programmes, and it is steadily gaining a foothold in the schools.

The nursery schools, which take children
before the ordinary kindergarten age, and
in some cases as early as eighteen months,
are ostensibly intended more for the education of the children’s parents, than for the
training of the infants themselves. Since
experience shows that a large part of failure
in marriage, or even of failure to marry, is
due to the individual’s faulty education and
home influence in early years, these schools
will indirectly help to promote wise mating
and successful marriage.

Systematic instruction is centring more.

and more in the high schools. A text-book
on Home Making, by Willie Melmoth
Bonar, is now out; another is under way
with the collaboration of Ernest R. Groves,
Professor of Sociology at the University of
North Carolina, an acknowledged leader in
the field of education for marriage and
parenthood. The progress of the last
decade was reviewed in a report of 136
pages, prepared under the direction of
Louise Stanley, for President MHoover’s
White House Conference.

The churches, too, are taking steps to
regain a part of their leadership in this
field. The Federal Council of the Churches
of Christ in America, an organization comprising a majority of the Nonconformist
churches, has made this a fundamental part
of its work. ‘The Presbyterian church has
had in the field for some time an active
committee, one of whose products has been
a volume entitled Twenty-four Views of
Marriage, edited by the secretary, the
Revd. Clarence A. Spaulding of California,

a former Rhodes Scholar at Oxford. ‘This
is a compilation of views from representatives of many schools of thought, and its
purpose is to give clergy and laity alike an
idea of what representative modern writers
are saying about family life.

The Roman Catholic Church has, of
course, not been behindhand® in this field,
in which it has always asserted a particular
authority. The first of a series of textbooks announced for college use is An Introductory Study of the Family, by Edgar A.
Schmiedeler, a Catholic sociologist. While
it tends to ascribe all social progress to the
Catholic Church, and of course takes the
official view of such conttoversial problems
as birth control and divorce, its emphasis
on wise mating is worthy of any eugenic
society. A detailed discussion of hereditary
traits which should be avoided in marriage
is one of the features.

The Family in the Present Social Order,
by Ruth Lindquist, is a thoughtful study
from the University of North Carolina.
From the same institution Ernest R. Groves
has issued Sex in Marriage, the best of the
recent ‘ sex books.’ A more detailed study
is One Thousand Marriages, by Robert
Latou Dickinson and Lura Beam of the
National Committee on Maternal Health—
a study of case records from Dr. Dickinson’s long practice as a gynecologist.
Isabella H. Smith has edited a collection
of addresses before a Philadelphia audience,
under the title, Are You Ready for
Marriage?

Recent legal decisions have opened the
door to the free circulation of several
familiar foreign books that have hitherto
been restricted here, such as Th. Van der
Velde’s Ideal Marriage, Marie Stopes’s
Married Love, and Helena Wright’s The
Sex Factor in Marriage.

Six hundred pages are occupied by a col
315
316

lection of excerpts which E. B. Reuter and
Jessie R. Runner have brought together and
entitled The Family: Source Materials for
the Study of Family and Personality. Dr.
Reuter is a sociologist with a bias against
eugenics, and has allowed this bias to interfere with his fairness in this case. Aside
from a casual kick en passant once in a
while, the only discussion of eugenics is a
few pages borrowed from W. S. Thompson,

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

another hostile sociologist, who naturally
makes it out to be a poor and mean thing
indeed. In a compendium of this sort, it
would seem that room might have been
found for a fair statement of the case from
someone who knew something about the
subject. The book is also criticized as
showing a bias against the family in
general, radical and pessimistic writers
having been given free rein.

9, ey”

THE INSUFFICIENCY OF EDUCATION

A summary of the paper by C. Wicksteed Armstrong in Section L of the Centenary
Meeting (1931) of the British Association,

practical results in the betterment of the

race from educational efforts alone, not,
at least, if we take the word education in
its narrow sense—since we have not only
first to convince the educational world that
eugenics is a fit and necessary subject in
which to instruct the rising generation, but,
even if knowledge could be immediately and
universally imparted, we should still, to a
certain extent, have to change human nature
itself before we could expect the instructed
people to act in the interests of posterity,
instead of, as heretofore, in those of self or
of class.

But if we can educate public opinion by
means of concrete example, rather than by
precept alone, in the meaning of far-sighted
charity (which is eugenics), we may perhaps
attain our ultimate goal more rapidly.

Such an attempt at education by practice
I have just visited at Strasbourg, where, last
week, I saw the Jardins Ungemach, whose
founder and administrator, Monsieur Alfred
Dachert, showed me, with justifiable pride,
his Garden City.* He has there succeeded

—.

| T would be a mistake to expect very great

* See Monsieur Dachert’s article in the REvirew of
last April and the further figures which here appear
in ‘‘ Notes and Memoranda.”’

in demonstrating, to a very large extent,
that the differential birth rate is not due to
any sinister and mysterious natural law,
but is, rather, simply a result of our manmade laws and conventions, and more especially of our false economic theories and
practice, which involve the progressive
penalizing of procreation among the more
energetic and useful sections of the population, for the benefit of parasites.

Now, the most important results to be
noticed at the Jardins Ungemach are to be
found in the birth rate and in the health and
beauty of the children there being raised,
results which, as years go by, must become
more and more pronounced. ‘The incidence
of disease was nil, and the anthropometric
statistics among the school children were incomparably superior to those of any other
school in Strasbourg, or even, I believe, in
France.

That Distress tends to press upon Relief
I believe to be an economic and psychological
law as regards the present, and a biological
law as regards the future. Its firm foundation in truth and its very grave significance
to Humanity I have been at pains to demonstrate in my book The Survival of the
Unfittest ; and once this law is recognized
