REVIEWS OF BOOKS

any more than they could have deduced the
facts and principles of neo-Mendelian genetics
from those of the molecular structure of DNA
and RNA.

As a result, Muller is the only contributor
who has anything important to say about
eugenics. While acknowledging fully the scientific importance of recent discoveries in molecular genetics, “‘genetic engineering” etc., he
stresses the present impossibility of applying
them to the genetic improvement of any higher
organism, and reiterates his view (which appears
to me to be completely unassailable) that negative
eugenics is merely tinkering, and that positive
eugenics could perfectly well be begun on the
basis of our present knowledge of genetics and
selection, through what he calls voluntary
germinal choice—artificial insemination with the
sperm of a donor chosen by the couple concerned
for his qualities—whether of strength, intelligence, physical good looks, or moral qualities.
With the establishment of “‘sperm banks” of
deep-frozen sperm (and doubtless in the not too
distant future of ova banks too) such eutelegenesis, as Brewer has called it, could reverse the
apparent dysgenic trend of to-day and gradually
but steadily raise the genetic potentialities of the
population.

This is the way that evolution has made a
man out of a fish and a fish out of a protozoa,
but multiple voluntary germinal choice could
enormously speed up the process, while ensuring
variety in the results.

To sum up, I would say that anyone who
wants to keep abreast of the exciting and indeed
revolutionary discoveries of recent molecular and
cellular biology should read Parts I and II, but
that anyone who wants to keep abreast of
eugenic possibilities should read Part ITI.

JULIAN HUXLEY

Dobzhansky, Theodosius. Heredity and the
Nature of Man. London, 1965. Allen and Unwin.
Pp. x+179. Price 25s.

THIS 1S A book which arose from the Holiday
Science Lectures, sponsored by the American
Association for the Advancement of Science.
The purpose of the lectures, the author tells us,
is “to broaden the scientific horizons of the

audience and to communicate to them some of
the excitement and inspiration of the scientific
endeavour’’. Judged within this context, the book
undoubtedly succeeds in that the material is
interestingly presented, up-to-date and accurate,
and aims to convey to the non-specialist reader
not only a synopsis of recent discovery, but a
discussion of its implications for the future of
mankind.

One of the major difficulties of presenting
genetics to a mixed audience is the varied amount
of basic knowledge they will have, and it is
inevitable that in such a book the better informed
readers will find themselves skipping some of
the descriptive material of the earlier chapters,
but Dobzhansky’s compromise in this situation
has been a good one, for three reasons: because
the material is throughout treated in its relationship to man; because the author has (not without
some trepidation, one feels) been bold enough
to omit a great deal of elementary instruction
on Mendelian genetics; and because so much
of this part of the book is written as an exciting
history from Leeuwenhoek’s discovery of
spermatozoa to the chemical structure of genes
and chromosomes. Dobzhansky’s knowledge
of this history—not only of the chief highroads
but also of some of the by-ways—is very
impressive.

From this we come to Race, and to questions
of human diversity, to genetic load and radiation
hazard, each chapter discussing biological,
political and moral implications as well as
scientific knowledge, and finally a chapter on
man’s future in relation to cultural and biological
evolution and the control of environment.

Dobzhansky presents anew the arguments for
chance or design in evolution and shows how
the factors of chance in genetic recombination
are counteracted by the constant operation of
the anti-chance agency of natural selection.

None of this is new and the seeker for advanced
knowledge must remember that the book was
not written for him. Neither is it an elementary
textbook for beginners, but it is an interesting
and worthwhile discussion of questions which
are always worth re-examination, and it will be
of interest to many members of the Eugenics
Society.

ROBERT PLATT

29
