BIRTH CONTROL IN GERMANY >
By VERA HOUGHTON

(Secretary, International Committee on Planned Parenthood)

(This survey has been compiled from information given by Professor Hans Harmsen, of
Hamburg University, and from the speeches made by Dr. Anne-Marie Durand-Wever and
Frau Ilse Lederer at the meeting of the International Committee in August 1951).

The Legal Position

LTHOUGH under the Nazi régime the
practice of birth control had become
increasingly difficultin Germany, there

was no legal restriction to it until 1941. On
January 21st, 1941, a Police Regulation
was issued prohibiting the manufacture,
advertisement, sale or distribution of articles
and preparations intended to _ prevent
pregnancy. By the same Regulation a doctor
or other person applying or using such
articles or preparations was liable to prosecution.

The 1941 Police Regulation was subsequently embodied in the German Penal Code,
when Sections 218 and 219 were revised in
March 1943. Previously, these two Sections
of the Penal Code had referred only to
abortion and abortifacients, but in the 1943
revision Section 219 was extended to apply
to contraceptives.

After the capitulation of Germany, when
the Penal Code was replaced by Control
Council Law, appeals were made for the
amendment of Section 219. But even where
it was revised and restored to its original
wording, as in the British Zone, the effect
was not to facilitate reasonable birth-control
practices for, in the view of the police, the
1941 Regulation was still enforceable. Only
in Berlin, and in the Russian Zone, was it
considered to be inapplicable. Elsewhere,
the Police Regulation remained in force
pending legal action for its repeal, and in
six provinces in Western Germany it is still
applicable.

So far, Hamburg has been the only
province to abolish entirely the 1941 Regulation. In four other provinces, in Bremen,
Niedersachsen, Schleswig-Holstein, and in
Wiirttemberg-Baden, it has been partially
revoked.

Because of the confusion caused by the
different interpretations of Section 219 of the
law and of the uncertainty, in some provinces,
as to the application of the old Police Regulation prohibiting contraceptives, the German
Federal Government intends to regulate,
by a law covering the whole of Western
Germany, the manufacture and use of
contraceptives.

In order to protect the public from
dangerous and unreliable contraceptives,
Hamburg passed a decree in July 1949
placing the manufacture of all such articles
and preparations under the supervision of
the Ministry of Health.

Other factors which have impeded the
promotion of family planning in Germany
since the end of the war have been the
attitude of the Churches towards birth
control; the ignorance amongst the public,
and in the medical profession, of modern
contraceptive techniques; and the widely
held belief that Germany must build up her
population against Eastern Europe.

In the difficult social and economic
conditions of divided Germany many women
have, in the absence of birth-control knowledge, resorted to abortion as a means of
limiting the size of the family. This has not
only endangered the life and health of the
woman, but has had distressing consequences. Last year, in Southern Germany,
information relating to cases of abortion,
which doctors are obliged to report to the
health authorities, was obtained by the
police. Several hundreds of women, mostly
in Garmisch-Partenkirschen and WeinheimBaden, were rounded-up and taken to the
police station for questioning. Subsequently,a
number of doctors were arrested and charged
with procuring criminal abortion. Although
there was a considerable outcry in the Press,

185
186

and from the medical associations, at the
breach of medical confidence, no interest
was aroused in why these women had
abortions in the first place, and nothing was
done to ensure that in future adequate birthcontrol advice was available.

Although abortion, at first, was permitted
in the Russian Zone, on medical, ethical,
and on social grounds, there was also
propaganda for birth control. An example
of this was found in the Leipzig Frauenklinik
where, in the waiting-room, a poster stated:
“Interruption of pregnancy does not prevent
further pregnancies; it injures women’s
health ; therefore, use birth control.’ It is
believed that as many as 20,000 copies of a
birth-control pamphlet written by Dr.
Anne - Marie Durand - Wever have been
distributed in the Russian Zone. Unfortunately, because of the blockade, it has
not appeared outside Eastern Germany, and
no publisher in the Western sector has so far
been willing to reprint it.

The social indication for abortion in the
Russian Zone was intended to apply only for
a limited period. By a new law issued in
Eastern Germany on September 27th, 1950,
for the ‘‘ Protection of Mother and Child and
the Rights of Women,” permission for abortion is withdrawn except where the health of
the mother is gravely endangered by pregnancy, or where one of the parents suffers
from a serious hereditary disease. Under this
new law, “‘ State help is granted to improve
the financial position of families with many
children and to further an increase in the
number of children.” It is not yet known
whether, as a result of this law, birth-control
facilities will be restricted in the Russian
Zone.

Attitudes of the Churches

Opposition to birth control from the
Protestant Church in Germany has now
largely disappeared. Some Church Councils
do not take as liberal a view as others, and
opinion amongst individual pastors varies.

The conclusion reached in 1950 by the
Social Hygiene Committee of the Evangelical
Council of the State Church of Hamburg was
the first important standpoint to be taken
on birth control by a religious body in

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Germany since the war. It was recognized
by this committee that circumstances might
exist in which it was desirable to defer
having children, or to limit the size of the
family. In considering the means by which
this should be done, the committee saw no
moral difference between the use of contraceptives and the use of “the safe period,”
that is, restricting intercourse to days when
conception is unlikely to occur. In conclusion, the committee stressed that birth
control must not be used for selfish reasons,
and that there must be consideration for the
spouse, and for society as a whole.

It is believed that the Roman Catholic
Church in Germany, as in other countries, is
no longer opposed to the principle of family
limitation, but where it differs from the
Protestant Church is in the methods to be
used. It is perhaps significant that the predominant faith of provinces wherein the 1941
Police Regulation prohibiting contraceptives
still applies is Roman Catholic.

Family Planning Facilities

In provinces where there are no actual
legal restrictions, or where they are rarely
applied, the practical possibilities of birth
control depend very much on the co-operation of the medical profession and on the
willingness of hospitals and social welfare
agencies to encourage husband and wife to
discuss this problem and to seek expert
advice.

The leading gynecologist of a big hospital
in the suburbs of Berlin advises every woman
patient who has had a pregnancy or a miscarriage, or who needs a period of recuperation, to return for contraceptive instruction.
Very few in fact do ; they say their husbands
object to contraception. Consideration is
now being given to the printing of a simple
explanatory leaflet about family planning
which each woman can take home and
discuss with her husband.

There is quite a strong body of opinion
in Germany which feels that family planning
should not be pursued as a separate aim, but
should be an integral part of marriage
guidance work. A resolution to this effect
was passed at a meeting of the Arbeitsgemetnschaft fur Jugend-und Eheberatung at
- BIRTH CONTROL IN GERMANY

Detmold in May 1951. The Arbeitsgemeinschaft was formed to bring together all who
are concerned with sex education, marriage,
and the family, for the working out of a
common basis of approach to the problems
thereof. Lectures and training are arranged
for those already working in the marriage
guidance field, or who are about to take up
this work. Public lectures on marriage and
sex are also organized.

Many of the big towns of Germany now
have marriage guidance clinics, at some of
which birth-control information is available
if asked for. Only in the Marriage Guidance
Clinic at Kassel (Hesse) are regular birthcontrol sessions held under medical direction.
These were started two years ago at the
instigation of Frau Ilse’Lederer, a prominent
social worker. The British Family Planning
Association invited Frau Lederer to England
in 1949 to study clinic organization and
methods. With the help of other enlightened
people, Frau Lederer established a voluntary
clinic in Kassel, known as the Family and
Marriage Guidance Clinic, along the lines of
clinics run by the Family Planning Association. At first there was criticism of this
direct approach to the problem of family
spacing, and valuable support and help
were withheld. Gradually, however, public
opinion locally is changing, and newspapers
and women’s journals are now willing to
publish accounts of the work of the Kassel
clinic.

In Berlin, where Dr. Anne-Marie DurandWever is working for family planning, few
of the marriage guidance clinics are known
to give actual birth-control advice. Apart
from these, the Social Insurance Company
of Berlin (Versicherungsanstalt), which covers
about go per cent of the population, has
established birth-control clinics in several
districts. At present there are five in West
Berlin, and there were four in the Eastern
sector. Each clinic is attended by a woman
doctor, and contraceptives are provided free
of charge in most cases.

Helping in the promotion of family
planning is the Bund fir Volksgesundheit
und Geburtenregelung. This society, which
has been built up out of the remnants of the

187

pre-1933 Reichsverband fur Geburtenregelung
und Sexualhygiene e.V., consists of two
branches, the Landesleitung Siiddeutschland,
in charge of the President, Franz Gampe,
and the Landesleitung Nordrhein-Westfalen,
in charge of Willy Karger. There are about
15 local groups in the two branches, comprising a membership of 2,000. Monthly
meetings are held, at which lectures are
given by doctors, and there are regular
discussion and consultation sessions. The
society arranges for the periodical testing of
chemical contraceptives, and refers patients
to doctors who fit pessaries. It also publishes
a monthly bulletin, Die Neue Famiulie.
Despite what is already being done in
Germany, there is still a great deal of
ignorance and prejudice about family planning, and many more doctors need to be
trained in modern contraceptive techniques.
Birth control is now an important part of the
social hygiene and gynecology lectures
in the training of doctors at Hamburg
University and special courses of lectures are
being held for doctors already in practice.

SONS AND

DAUGHTERS
BY ROGER PILKINGTON

This book presents the mechanism by
which the uniqueness of the individual is
brought into existence. Dr. Pilkington
describes, simply and with lively humour,
the intricate pattern of this brilliant
mechanism, and how, though superficially
paradoxical, the unpredicted birth of genius
is possible within it.

Contents:

The Road to Babyhood ;

Everything tn the right propor
tions; The basis of Heredity;

Equipment for the baby; The

oregin of difference; Genes

and the tndividual; Genes
and the future.

Profusely tilustrated. 18s. net

GEORGE ALLEN & UNWIN
40 MUSEUM ST., LONDON, W.C.1

 

Eugenies Review, Vol. XLIII, No. 4
