Harmonic and Unharmonic Crossings.

(Racetypes and Racecrossings in Northern Norway.)
Dr. Jon ALFRED MJoen.

When the Lapps are crossed with the Nordic (or alpine blood) we
are confronted with a long series of the most difficult problems: Does
the one race dominate over the other? Does the one race impose on
the other its somatic, mental and moral qualities? Will weaknesses
be strengthened by mixture with the other race? Will qualities be
blended or appear again as separate units? Are these qualities really
units or rather a scale of qualities with a maximum and minimum
limit. Shall we on the other hand in this mixture of qualities have
contrasted characters? Characters which in their original combinations (the purer race) appeared as harmonic and now in the hybrid
as disharmonic characters? "

In the Laplander (Same, Sabme) we find: low stature; round
skull; broad face, high cheek-bones; broad flat nose; yellow-grey skin;
uneven small beard; dark (oblique) eves; black straight hair; Mongoloid features.

In the Nordic race we find: high stature; long skull; cuneiform
face; narrow high nose; light complexion; strong beard; blue, or hight
brown eves; blonde or light brown hair;* Nordic features.

Examination of eye color among the Lapps in Finmarken showed:

Black-brown ...... 0c cece cece cee ee eee eee eee 4
Dark brown... cece eee eee ee ene eens 15
Greenish dark brown .......... 0c cece eee sees 5
Greenish light blue... .... eee eee ee ee eee 12
Oc TTTeT Tre 2
Blue (with brown flecks) 22... 0.0... ee eee eee . 7

Of 14 Lapps (in the Rores district, where they have kept themselves
less mixed with Norwegians) there were found proportionately fewer

blue eyes, namely:

*I feel that I may arouse controversy , when I say that light brown eyes and light
brown hair are features common to the Nordic race. But Iam inclined to believe
that there is a wider gap between light brown eyes and dark brown or black eyes,
than there is between blue and light brown eyes. It seems to be generally agreed
that the old vikings were of powerful staturef and had long skulls, strong beards
and blond or very often red hair. But the eyes? Were they always blue? and,
if so, did the blue eyes originate with the race or did they develop from darker ones?
In other words was the brown eye the original, and the blue eye slowly developed
from it, or is the light brown eye the result of mixture between two distinct races,
the one with blue, the other black eye-colour? Investigation in the animalkingdom points in a certain direction.

rr ne ners
+ The size of the grip of swords found from that time indicates that their hands
were not so large or broad as generally supposed.
86 EUGENICS REVIEW.

Color of eyes and hair in Roros distriet and around Faemundsjoen +

Eyes: black-brown .............0eceees 27.7%
dark brown ..........cceceeeece 27.7%
greenish light blue .............. 85.7%

Hair: black mongolian ................ 14.8%
black 1... .. cc ccc cece wwe enone 21.4%
dark Drown... cece cece cee ceee 35.7%
0) Co) 1c 7.2%

height of Lapps in Northern Norway:

Lowest. Highest.
Head index male 81,5 86
Head index female 80,0 84
Body height male 144. ,0cm 157 ,5 em.
Body height female 136 ,0cm. 150,5em.

When we compare the hybrid or bastard with one of the parent
races, we sec clearly that the appearance of the hybrid comes nearer
to the Nordic than to the Lapp race.

Not only the height and weight but the whole appearance of the
hybrid is more Nordic than Lapp.

It would however, be a superficial view to conclude from this that
the one race dominates cver the other. If we investigate more closely
we find that this is not the case. But to-day it is the mental qualities,
rather than the somatic which occupy our attention.

Already the first time I visited the Lapps in Northern Norway, as a
boy of 18, I made the acquaintance of a certain type of human beings
very little respected in the Lapp encampments. It was the hybrid
between Lapp and Norwegian. The main mental feature of this type
was an unbalanced mind. [here call it the M.B. type.

The difficulties or dangers in drawing conclusions from human
material are, among others, the following :—

(1) The number of descendents or colaterals is mostly not large
enough. (The number of individuals in the stock measured does
not necessarily need to be very large).

(2) The reports cannot always be relied upon.

(3) Not even the church register carries absolute proof. It is more
common than is generally believed that a baptized child has got a
different name entered in the register, than that of his father in the
biological sense. Many of the observations and conclusions
which have been built up on church registers must therefore be considered worthless.

Observations and measurements taken amongst the Lapps in
Northern Norway necessitate a distinction being made between
harmonious and disharmonious crossing. I found for example four
cases of crossings between the Nordic race and Lapps (in Ljusnedalen),
in which the half-breeds were superior as regards stature to both of the
HARMONIC AND UNHARMONIC CROSSINGS. 87

progenitors, and as regards mental powers to the Lapps with whom

they were living. But I also found nine cases of halfbreeds—Norwe
gian and Lapp) belonging to what I have called the M.B. type, the

main symptom of want of balance being stealing, lying, drinking.

in some of the latter cases the Norwegians certainly also had alpine
ood .

Ever since I as a boy got acquainted with a bastard , who drove me
in the mountains in a reindeer sledge, the M.B. problem has occupied
my attention. And many vears later I made experiments in my
Laboratory at Winderen in order to get an answer to the question:
Does crossing between two or more distant races of animals, for instance
oes give results that could throw some light on the human pro
lem 7
Table. The figures give the weight of the adult animal in

grammes.
Blue French French White
“‘Baver’’ x ‘“Weedder’® ‘‘Vedder’’ x ‘‘Smaalen’’ Average
8875 4370 4150 8410 4122.5 &
4280
F., gen. AGA5 x 4.160 44025

F., gen.8150 3190 3080 2800 2560 2610 3410 3850 8081] ,25

There was, as we see, a great decrease in size and weight of body in
F., generation, the percentages of mortality rose from 11% in the
original progenitors to 88%. These triple-crossed hybrids had 58%
female offspring. There was remarkable difficulty in bringing about
copulation. In many cases the attempt had to be given up altogether.
In six months, for example, there occurred only one single case of
fertilization amongst eight females and one male. A most striking
external sign of a disharmonic cross can hardly be imagined than is
exhibited by certain types with one upright and one pendant ear. Of
course rabbits are not necessarily any the worse for having one upright
and one lop ear, but this character is very useful as a symptom of
disharmony in general. Why should only the ears be affected? We
ought to be suspicious in regard to every organ, every chemical! reaction
in the cells of the whole organism of the hybrid, when we see this most
striking disharmony.

in fact, closer investigation shows that changes must have taken
place in regard to the harmony in the bony structure (the way or mode
of Jumping and holding the body indicates such changes) and the extinetion of the sexual instinct and the mortality of the young points to a
disharmony of a more deep-seated and radical nature. It seems in
fact to have affected the whole organism.

Although we may not invariably draw conclusions from animals to
human beings, nevertheless the results of these experiments reveal
certain analogies with human crosses which doubtless can be referred
back to the same principles, the same natural powers. The most
striking resemblance is that the hybrid in both cases is exceptionally
large in the F., generation—compare the above table where the weight
88 EUGENICS REVIEW.

of the hybrid exceeds the weight of the heaviest of the parent races with
the result that one of the human hybrid is 5} cm. larger (body-height)
than his Norwegian father* !

When some scientists} are inclined to think that many hybrids
represent a good human type, we must not forget that they consider the
large size of the hybrids as a symptom of health, strength and vigour.
I have tried to show that this symptom is treacherous.

In a paper read in Medecinerforeningen, Kristiania, fourteen years
ago} I expressed my doubts about the so-called ‘‘purifying effect of
blood mixture’? when foreign ‘‘fresh’’? blood entered a country.
And I drew attention to the fact of high mortality from tuberculosis
among the half breeds of Northern Norway.

My opinion is that not only tuberculosis but also many other
diseases and many social evils, for instance, the growing criminality
(from mentally disturbed race elements), is partly due to unharmonic racecrossing. Not only the crossing of one race with another
ought to be avoided, but of course also certain crossings within the
same race. Some crossings are in fact constantly removing undesirable
characters, and some crossings constantly creating new miseries for
mankind. To find out why is the most urgent work for race-hbiologists.
It is a fact that during the last decades the unfortunate mingling of
races has increased to an enormous degree as the result of philanthropic measures and of immigration. The migration of nations in
former times were, biologically regarded, harmless in comparison
with those cf the last eight or ten years. Over the German frontier
there have come in from the East 600,000 people representing by no
means the best racial elements, while the United States have had to
accept an immigration almost three times as large during the same
period.

It is now fourteen years since I wrote on obligatory biological
registration of all citizens (‘‘Race-biology, the hygiene of propagation,’’ Winderen Laboratory, 1998) as a means of preventing
undesirable elements (especially strange races) from entering Scandinavia. A biological obligatory registration should make all move
*Whether tall stature signifies health, vigour and intellectual or moral superiority is another question.

~ Here the writer referrs to such works as those of Fisher (Hottentots-Boers,
harmonious crossing)—Davenport (Mulattoes, disharmonious) Lundborg (Race
Crossings in Sweden, disharmonious with one exception: Walloons-Swedes) ;
Sapper (Central Americans, disharmonious) ; E.. v. Eickstedt (Dutchmen-.Javenese,
lineboys, Europeans, Polynesians , harmonious , Mestinoes-Cape-Malays, LevantinesEurasians, disharmonious), and parallel observations amongst planthybrids made
by Erwin Baur and Nilsson-Ehle; Lundborg found that the industrial centres in
Sweden stand comparatively well in regard to tuberculosis if there is no racemixture or very little.

fIt seems as if later investigation has verified my statements. In the little
pamphlet of 1908 we read: ‘‘Crossing between widely divergent races seems to
lower the level, somatic and mental, but our knowledge is very small. Race
biology is a new science. But I hardly doubt that we shall be able one day perhaps
by biological-chemical means (blooj-analysis) to ascertain what races may safely
be crossed and chemical laws will then be fundamental for moral. The woman of
the future will feel antipathy towards a man of strange (‘‘unharmonious’’) blood,
just as the woman of the present day feels antipathy towards one who is not of her
standard in life.’’
HARMONIC AND UNHARMONIC CROSSINGS. 89

‘ments easier and more advantageous all round, for those populations
willing to work while making and restricting the zone of operation for
all ‘‘saprophytes’’ unwilling to work. |

We have seen to-day that individuals from two good stocks can
produce one or more M.B. types if they belong to different races, or, in
other words, produce caricatures of human beings. We have also seen
that individuals from two good stocks but with comparatively insignicant endowments can rise to a physiological optimum if the stocks are
congenia! to each other. One crossing gives a fool, another a genius—
one mating gives sickness and another health, one a criminal, another a
useful citizen. Such combinations can give surprising results, harmonious
and disharmonicus. |

CONCTLUSION.

There are many analogies between the results of race-crosses as
observed in animals with those of human crosses :—

(1) In crossing two or three animal races, it has been shown that it isa
given character—-or character group—that dominates, and not the
one stock as a whole. Such single qualities or character units
persist. in succeeding generations in human race-crossings.

(2) There are many striking analogies between the results of racecrossings (delects) observed among human beings and the results
from racccrossings In animals.

(8) The ‘‘over-growth”’ in the F., generation, found in animals and
human beings (distant races) and which according to the opinions
now generally held indicated strength and health, has to be looked
upon as abnormal and consequently as a weakness.

(4) Crossings between widely different races can lower the physical
and mental level. Such disharmony that has, as described above,
been assumed to occur through a crossing between two races, may
become quite distinct in a crossing between three or mare races.

(5) We must not draw conclusions from one racecrossing to another.
Each race must be examined in its relation to another race.

(6) The figures for the incidence of tuberculosis are the lowest for that
part of Norway where the Nordic race is comparatively pure
(1,1—1,5) and highest in that part of the country (Finmarken)
where there is the largest race mixture (8,6—4,0).

(7) Until we have more definite knowledge in the effects of racecrossings it will certainly be best to avoid crossings between
widely different races. The bilingual movement operates naturally in the opposite direction by compelling, for instance, the
Lapps to learn Norwegian and Swedish. We are building a wide
conduit for a blood mirture between the two races, which we shall
deplore and regret when tt 1s too late.

(8) We cannot and we shall not persecute any race. No individual
is so physically, mentally or morally depraved that he does not
deserve our care,—so also with races. No individual must be
treated with contempt, not even the criminal. But we must
40 EUGENICS REVIEW.

learn now to distinguish hetween the right to live and the right of

~ other races to mir their blood with ours and—give life.

a ’ PT ES
(9) Our opponents generally say that we should wait before taking
. general eugenic measures or steps against racecrussings, until
we have more knowledge, and I admit that we need more knowledge; we are seeking much more knowledge! But, as our experience up to date points decidedly in one direction, it will be safer to
reverse the argument and say: Until we have acquired sufficient
knowledge be carefull
