THE BEUGENICS REVIEW.

THE EUGENICS POLICY OF THE
SOCIETY.

At the Annual Meeting of the Society, which was held by kind permission at the rooms of the Royal Society on June 9th, Major Darwin,
the President, spoke as follows :—

For a long time the need has been felt for some more definite pronouncement of the aims of our Society, and during the last few months
this question has occupied the close attention of your Council.

Personally I had always felt that any move in this direction was
not without its dangers; for I feared it might reveal some serious
differences within our ranks and therefore do more harm than good.
In presenting to you the results of our labours, though I am glad to
say that my dismal forebodings have been falsified, yet I do wish to
call your attention to the opening words of this document, namely,
those shown between brackets. If I may put the same thought in
more familiar language it is that every member of our Society is not
expected to toe the line with regard to every item of this statement of
our policy. In a new and progressive movement, I believe that great
and lasting harm would result from the promulgation of a programme
beyond which there was to be no advance and from which there could
be no retreat. In social matters the choice before us often lies between
advancing in a somewhat tentative manner and not advancing at all;
and, when faced with such a choice, we should remember that the
world will progress most rapidly if we decline to be checked by every
doubt which may arise in our minds, whilst remaining ready to own
that we have taken a false step. Those of you who, like myself, are
prepared to agree with every item in this statement of policy ought
not, therefore, to be surprised or even to regret to learn that a few of
our most honoured members are inclined to think we have gone too
far in certain directions, whilst others have no doubt that we have not
gone far enough. What we have tried to do is to state in general
terms and in broad outline the lines of advance which meet with the
approval of the great majority of the Council.

As you read through this programme several questions are likely
to present themselves to you for consideration. In certain respects
you may perhaps feel that we have gone into too great detail. On
that point I will only say that in any popular exposition of our policy
92 EUGENICS REVIEW.

it might be wise to cut out several items, whilst expressing the others
in more homely language. With regard to certain reforms, you will
probably enquire whether what is proposed docs really come within
the region of practical politics. On this subject I may perhaps call
your attention to the concluding words of the second paragraph, where
it is stated that to promote a change in public opinion must often be
a preliminary step before attempting actually to introduce the reform
in question.

Grave harm has often been done in the past by the endeavour to
force on a reform for which the eountry was not prepared; and for a
long time to come our efforts in certain directions will probably have
to be of an educational character.

Then again you may be inclined to ask what are the exact methods
by means of which it is proposed that some of the reforms suggested
should be effected, reforms here only indicated in outline. It would
of course be quite useless to propose for adoption any measure
which could not possibly be carried out even in the future; but this
we believe we have not done. All the proposals here made have been
studied sufficiently to make me feel sure that they are not only justifiable but they are or will in time become practicable, that is if our
future is to be one of racial advancement. There are, however, often
many ways of reaching a desired end, and it is probably wise in the
earlier stages of a controversy to endeavour to concentrate the attention of the pub.ic on the ends rather than on the exact means. When
once the object sought to be attained is acknowledged to be right and
desirable, then and not till then will it always be possible to discuss
the means of attaining it in a sane and temperate way.

The necessity of getting the publ ¢ to understand and appreciate
our aims before we attempt to make known the exact methods by
means of which we believe they can be attained may be illustrated by
reference to the paragraph headed, ‘‘Family Limitation of the Less
Fit,’’ this being probably the item in our programme which raises the
most difficult issues.

In passing I should like to emphasise the statement here made that,
abortion being ruled out, the choice of the method of limitation should
rest entirely with the individuals concerned. Contraceptive methods,
as compared with other unobjectionable methods of family limitation,
should be pressed on no one. The proposal to which I wish to call
especial attention is, however, that when the amount of public assistance given to a couple indicates the probability that further parenthood would be immediately injurious to the nation and ultimately
injurious to the race, the State should be regarded as having the right
to exercise a limited amount of pressure in order to promote family
limitation. Such pressure might be exercised in many ways, but
until the right of the State to exercise it is admitted, it is possible that
the discussion of these methods might only serve to confuse the issue.
Now it has been urged that if eugenics is founded on false assumptions,
by applying any such pressure the State might be inflicting a grave
injustice on millions of persons; and here, as in some other instances,
it may be wise in arguing this part of our case to assume that our
THE EUGENICS POLICY OF THE SOCIETY. 93

opponents are right in holding that natural inheritance is such an
uncertain factor that it should be altogether neglected when discussing
social problems. Making this entirely erroneous assumption, as it
seems to us, we can still ask our opponents whether they consider that
a married couple, who have already thrown a considerable burden for
the maintenance of their family on the State, or in other words on their
neighbours, really have the abstract right to increase that burden to
an indefinite extent by the production of more children. In considering this question may I remind our opponents that, if they are right in
holding that natural inheritance counts for nearly nothing in social
matters, it follows that the differences between any two families
must depend almost entirely on the effect of their early surroundings,
including all that may be described under the title of home traditions.
Now the home traditions acquired in a family long in the receipt of
much public assistance must as a general rule be inferior to those
acquired by social contact in the home, for example, of a highly skilled
mechanic fully determined to be beholden to no man for the maintenance of his family. Our opponents, if relying entirely on environmental influences, cannot deny that families issuing from homes in
any degree parasitic must on the average exhibit in consequence some
inferiority in that quality which we English admire so much, namely,
in the spirit of determined self help. Can there be an abstract right
to damage the nation of the future by increasing the number of those
in its ranks who exhibit any such average inferiority? Let it be
remembered also that the greater the faith placed in the effects of
environment, the more freely must it be admitted that any acquired
inferiority will be passed on to others by social contact all through
life. The members of a family subject to inferior home influences
become centres from which by social contagion some injurious effects
will continually emanate, whilst the opposite effect is produced with
equal certainty by persons brought up in an atmosphere of higher
ideals. Again let it be remembered that the burden of taxation thrown
on the public by the appearance of more dependent children will have
at all events some immediate effect in lessening the output of children
from better homes.

The whole tone of the nation must be lowered both by a diminution iu the production of children from independent homes and by
an increase in the issue from dependent homes; and, even if some
material inconvenience or restraint is necessary to prevent national
social deterioration of this kind, can such a proceeding be described
as unjust? Our proposals in this respect are, we believe, fully
justifiable even if natural inheritance is a figment of our imagination ;
whilst if eugenics is based on solid grounds it is my firm conviction
that it will only be by proceeding on the lines here broadly laid down
that the nation can be saved from racial deterioration.

No doubt this Society has often to discuss topics which make us
hable to be misrepresented; but this, I hold, should not prevent us
from boldly facing the truth. I have just been reading an interesting
book on Social Development, recently published by Prof. Hobhouse,
in which he criticises the position which he believes to be generally
94 EUGENICS REVIEW.

adopted by Eugenists. He writes that he does ‘‘not accept relative
poverty as a criterion of unfitness,’’ (p. 121)apparentlyin order to point
to what he regards as a common error of Eugenists. My difficulty in
dealing with this observation is to ascertain what is the exact scientific
meaning intended to be conveyed by the word ‘‘criterion,’’ and all
I can do is to state my own views in my own words. Wages and
earnings—I do not say wealth or poverty—are, I hold, in some degree
correlated with valuable inborn qualities, or will become so correlated
in the future;a belief rendered probable by a@ priort arguments and
refuted by no facts known to me. But I would, however, rather quote
Prof. Hobhouse’s opinions when I believe them to be in accord with
our own views. In one passage his words imply that °‘if the most
justly organised Society’’ is to result in the useful citizen being ‘‘more
likely than the unsocial and useless to perpetuate his stock,’’ certain
conditions must be fulfilled; one of these conditions being that Society
whould make ‘‘it difficult to live except by social service.’’ (p. 122)
Taken quite literally the words ‘‘make it difficult to live’’ seem to
point to measures far more drastic than any which we have dared to
propose. Parenthood implies life, and if I may substitute a more
mildly worded condition covering much the same ground, namely that
Society should give no encouragement or sanction to the production of
a family except by those who are rendering valuable social service to
the State, it appears to me that this is the exact condition which we in
our programme are endeavouring to enforce. If Prof. Hobhouse,
or anyone else, will discuss the best way of ensuring the fulfilment of
this condition, such discussions will be most helpful to us in our future
deliberations. |

The last paragraph of our programme is intended to make it clear
that as individuals we are most anxious to play our part in promoting
all such social reform as we hold to be calculated to benefit the present
generation; for in this respect we have often been misrepresented.
Here again I notice that Prof. Hobhouse writes that °‘ it is a fallacy to
infer that social progress or deterioration is reducible to racial progress or deterioration’? (pp. 112, 118), apparently implying that
this is a common Eugenic fallacy. Perhaps it has been so in the past,
but I have now been for fifteen years the President of the only Eugenic
Society in this country (a state of things, by the bye, which should no
longer be tolerated) and I am sure that no words of mine uttered
during this period can be fairly so interpreted. To be Eugenists does.
not prevent us from being human beings and as human beings we are
not blind to the social needs of our times or unready to play our part
in social development. I fear I may have appeared to be very pessimistic in some of my remarks to-day, for I certainly do hold that to
march along the downward path of racial decline as.I fear our nation is
doing at present, is very slowly but very surely to march towards grave
disasters of unknown kinds. Of the truth of this forecast I am quite
certain; but I will conclude by saying that, granted proper social
progress in this respect, I am equally certain that this disaster can
be avoided by the introduction of reforms somewhat on the lines
suggested in broad outline in our programme.
