THE FAMILIES OF TEACHERS
By JOHN D. NISBET, M.A., B.Ed., Ph.D.

to intelligence tests, most of the studies

of the relation between intelligence and
family size have used children’s scores as
an indication of the level of parents’ intelligence. There may therefore be some interest
in the results of an investigation in which
data on marriage and families of a group of
men and women in their early forties are
compared with the scores they themselves
made in an intelligence test some twenty
years previously. Comparable follow-up
studies have been made by Terman (1947)
on gifted children, Moberg (1950) on Swedish
students, and Hutton (1953) on English

Se adults are rarely willing to submit

public school boys; and there are several

on American graduates. The present investigation, unlike these, was confined to a
single profession, to university graduates
who had become teachers.

An intelligence test’ (the verbal Simplex
Group Test; in a _ shortened 45-minute
version) was applied in sessions 1930-34
by Professor Rex Knight of the University
of Aberdeen to 335 graduates who began
their training as teachers in Aberdeen
during these years. Some twenty years
later, in 1953, 266 (80 per cent) of those
tested were traced. Excluding twenty-eight
who had left the teaching profession, fourteen who had emigrated and two who had
died, the remaining 222 (92 men, 130 women)
appeared to be a fairly representative
group of graduate teachers: their mean
score in the intelligence test was 62-4
(standard deviation 10-6), compared with a
mean of 60-5 (standard deviation 12-1)
among 705 graduate teachers-in-training
tested in Aberdeen throughout the 1930s.
Much of the information gathered about
these 222 teachers was used in a validatory
check on predictive assessments made during
professional training (Nisbet, 1953).
Marriage Rate and Family Size

As the teachers who collaborated in this
inquiry are now in their early forties, the

115

marriage rate and size of families of the
group are now probably close to what they
will finally be. There may still be additions
to the families of the men, and even some
further marriages in the group, but the
families of the women are nearly completed.

Eight-five of the ninety-two men (92
per cent) have been married ; seventy-eight
of the 130 women (60 per cent) have been
married. The proportion of childless couples
among those married is 18 per cent among the
men teachers and 16 per cent among the
women teachers. As would be expected,
age at marriage is a factor in childlessness
among the women. The proportion of
childless marriages among women teachers
married before the age of thirty is only
5 per cent ; among those married at or after
age thirty, it is 29 per cent. Comparable

figures for the men teachers are: married

before thirty, 17 per cent childless ; married
at or after thirty, 18 per cent childless.

None of the group has more than four
children. The total number of children of
the ninety-two men (that is, of the seventy
with families) is 150: twenty-one have a_
single child, twenty-two have two, twentythree have three and four have four children.
The total number of children of the 130
women teachers (that is, of sixty-six with
families) is 142: sixteen have a single child,
twenty-eight have two, eighteen have three
and four have four. Thus the average size of
family among those who have families is.
2-1, Just above replacement; but the number
of children is not nearly adequate for
replacement of the group when the unmarried and, childless are included.

The median age at marriage is twentynine, the earliest age twenty-three, among
both men and women teachers. The cumulative percentage of men teachers married
at various ages corresponds closely to the
results reported by Moberg (1950) from study
of a comparable group of male Swedish
students born in IgIo.
116

Percentage Married at Various Ages

27 309 33 36 40
25 61 75 83 90

| Age 24
Scottish teachers (men). 2
Swedish matriculated persons

(men). 2 22 57 75 8 —

Age at marriage is related to the number
of children of the marriage. The mean
number of children of the men who were
married before the age of thirty is 1-89 ;
of the men married at or after thirty, 1-63.
The mean number of children of the women
married before thirty is 2:25 ; of the women
married at or after thirty, 1-26. The correlation between age at marriage and size of
family is, among the eighty-five men,
—oO-I5; among the seventy-eight women,
0's 3.

Intelligence Test Scores

Although the test used showed a fairly
wide distribution of raw scores, the scatter of
intelligence in this group is much smaller
than in an. unselected population. Selection
for intelligence had occurred throughout their
education, particularly at entry to secondary
school, at university entrance and at graduation. It is not surprising that correlations
involving intelligence are all much
attenuated. .

The correlation between intelligence test
score and number of children was -+0:06
among the eighty-five married men, —0-02
among the seventy-eight married women.
The correlation between age at marriage
and test score was —o-18 among the men,
—o-06 among the women. There was no
significant difference between the mean test
scores of the married and the unmarried
(mean scores : married men 65-7 ; unmarried
men 62-3 ; married women 60-7 ; unmarried
women 59°7). |

In 142 cases, the number of the teacher’s
own siblings was known, and in this group
the correlation between test score and
number of siblings was --o-11. The following
correlations were based on the 107 married
among these 142: between test and number
of sibs, +0-10 ; between test and number of
children, +0°:02 ; between number of sibs
and number of children, -++0-05. The parents

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of this group of 107 married teachers had had
a total of 382 children: the 107 themselves
have had only 198 children. The two generations, however, are not directly comparable,
the earlier being less selected and, by regression, being likely to show greater fertility.

Summary and Conclusions

Of 335 teachers originally tested between
1930-34, particulars as to marriage and
children were obtained of 222, now in their
forties. In this group of 222 teachers,
marriage tends to be late and family size
small. Two-fifths of the women have not
married at all, and almost a third of those
who were over thirty when they married
have no children.. The marriage rate of the
men is about average for the population,and the size of their families is less affected
by age at marriage. Though those with
families average just over two children per
family, the number of children of the group
is not adequate for replacement when the
unmarried (27 per cent of the total) and the
childless (17 per cent of those married)
are included. | |

Census figures show how differences between various social groups tend to create a
dysgenic situation in respect of intelligence.
Within this professional group, some of these
dysgenic trends are greatly reduced or.
disappear: for example, the relation of
intelligence with family size, with age at
marriage, with celibacy or with childlessness.
However, attenuation of correlation coefficients involving intelligence would be
expected in this selected group, and the
number of cases is too small to distinguish
whether the correlation has disappeared.
or is merely masked by sampling errors.

REFERENCES

Hutton, K. (1953), Intelligence quotients and differen‘tial fertility. Eugenics Review, 44, 205-215.
Moberg, S. (1950), Marital status and family size among
matriculated persons in Sweden. Population
Studies, 4, 115-127.
Nisbet, J. D. (1953), A twenty-year follow-up of
intelligence test scores. Paper read to Section J,
British Association, Liverpool. ;
Terman, L. M. (1947), Psychological. Approaches to the
Biography of Genius. Occasional Papers on
Eugenics, No. 4. Eugenics Society and Cassell.
EuGENICS REviEw.—Fertility of Graduate Women.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLVII, No. 2
