OTHER NOTICES

Adams, William Y. Shonto; A Study of the Role of the Trader ina Modern Navaho Community.
Smithsonian Institution, Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 188. 1963. Pp. xi + 329.
Price $2.00.

Howard, James H. The Ponca Tribe. Smithsonian Institution, Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 195, 1965. Pp. xii + 191. Price $2.25.

Johnston, Denis Foster. An Analysis of Sources of Information on the Population of the
Navaho. Smithsonian Institution, Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 197. 1966.
Pp. v + 220. Price $2.00.

THESE ARE THREE further volumes in the now famous B.A.E. series. Two are conccerned
with aspects of Navaho anthropology (a large group still bravely resisting final integration
into the American “‘way of life’). The other is a good general review of what is at present
known of the Ponca tribe (on the Missouri River). Of special reference value to those
interested in population biology is the work by Johnston. Aspects of Navaho demography
are well presented, and the literature exhaustively covered in this field (and going back to
about 1840).

Incidentally, this vast series is now being superseded by a new series called Smithsonian
Contributions to Anthropology.

D. R. B.

Bowman, Robert I. (Editor) The Galdpagos; Proceedings of the Galdpagos International
Scientific Project. Berkeley, Cal., 1966. University of California Press. (London, 1967.
Cambridge University Press). Pp. xvii + 318. Price $10.00; 80s.

SINCE DARWIN PUT the Galapagos Islands biologically ‘‘on the map”’ in the last century,
their natural history had continued steadily to arouse research interest. Exactly how much
information is now available is clear from the number and varied nature of the papers
presented in this volume. The work is nicely “introduced” by Sir Julian Huxley, who
considers “Charles Darwin: Galapagos and After’, which is followed by useful general
papers relevant to the study of animal variation in these islands. Botanical, geological,
oceanographic and climatological studies follow, as well as more specific papers on animal
groups. A final section on applied science reviews the problems of conservation and the
economic resources and possibilities of development. An invaluable reference work on these
islands.
D. R. B.

Drillien, Cecil M., Ingram, T. T. S. and Wilkinson, Elsie M. The Causes and Natural
History of Cleft Lip and Palate. Edinburgh, 1966. Livingstone. Pp. viii + 288. Price 47s. 6d.

THE AUTHORS DESCRIBE a very thorough survey of 160 patients with clefts of the lip
or palate who had been referred to Edinburgh surgeons and who were resident in SouthEast Scotland or Fife. The investigations included a family study, a partial cytogenetic
study, pregnancy histories, neonatal complications and feeding difficulties, health and
development, and a detailed study of speech and of the dental health of the children.
Most interesting and novel are the cytogenetic findings. Whereas none of thirteen
patients with cleft lip (+ cleft palate) were found to have any chromosomal anomaly, four

282
OTHER NOTICES

of twenty-four patients with midline cleft palate had such anomalies. These were one case
of trisomy 21, one case of trisomy of an autosome on the C group, one case of partial
monosomy of a C group chromosome, one case of trisomy of a C group chromosome and
monosomy for part of a B group chromosome. All these patients were severely mentally
subnormal.

There was one instance of dominant Van de Woude’s syndrome. Otherwise the family
findings were similar to those in the large-scale family studies available; for cleft lip (+ cleft
palate) 2-8 per cent of sibs were affected (usually with the same class of defect) and for cleft
palate alone, 3-2 per cent of sibs were affected.

The authors have made some interesting though somewhat inconclusive comparisons
between patients with and without an affected relative. The latter more often have associated
malformations, are of below normal intelligence and are born to mothers of relative infertility and have a history of abortion, stillbirth or early death in other pregnancies.

Cc. O. C.

Gunther, Hans F. K. Trs. Vivian Bird in collaboration with Roger Pearson. The Religious
Attitudes of the Indo-Europeans. London, 1967, Clair Press. Pp. 127. Price 21s.

THE UNSUSPECTING READER should not be misled by the scholarly appearance of this
book into supposing that it is worthy of his serious attention. It is a translation, apparently,
of the sixth edition of a work first published in Nazi Germany in the late thirties. References
to work done subsequently by other scholars are included rather than incorporated. The
author associates a set of manly virtues with a people whom he calls true Indo-Europeans
and the book is devoted to contrasting these virtues with the values of socialistic, industrial
society and mass culture. It is, in short, a tract. The author’s clarion call is given in his
Foreword to the sixth edition: “If, in our era... the remnants of the Western Indo-European
peoples are submerged due to the dearth of true-blooded Nordics, then nevertheless the
last few survivors will retain that same . . . conviction which supported and inspired ‘the
last Romans’. . . the proud belief in inflexible and unyielding courage before destiny which
will be portrayed in this work as characteristically Indo-European, and above all Nordic...”

We can perhaps turn our eyes away in embarrassment as an elderly scholar attempts
to palliate the tergiversation that history has forced upon him. What is stranger is that it
should have been thought worth while at this time to engage on the labour of translating a
work best forgotten. I should note in concluding that Professor George Dumézil, to whom
two slight references are made, is very far from being “unknown”’ as the author would lead
us to suppose. He is, on the contrary, one of the world’s leading scholars in this field. His
work Les Dieux des Indo-Européens is strongly recommended to anyone whose interest
may have been aroused by the title of the present work.

DAVID F. POCOCK

Parsons, P. A. The Genetic Analysis of Behaviour. London, 1967. Methuen. (New York,
Barnes and Noble.) Pp. vii + 174. Price 30s.

METHUEN’S MONOGRAPHS ON Biological Subjects have a well deserved reputation for
providing authoritative introductory texts on specialized subjects. Professor Parsons’s
monograph, in this series, on the genetic analysis of behaviour is undoubtedly such an
authoritative text. He is to be congratulated on this clear account of a very complex subject.
However, the reader must not start out with the idea that he is going to find the book easy
to understand, unless he has a good knowledge of genetics and also some acquaintance with
statistics. This is not the fault of the author, since it would require two more monographs

ER—U 283
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

to provide this necessary background knowledge. Incidentally, such monographs would be
very useful if Methuen cared to produce them.

Because the investigation of behaviour genetics is so difficult technically, there is very
little accepted fact available as yet, and the author has very wisely concentrated on explaining
the techniques used in the subject and the many pitfalls in the interpretation of results.

Throughout the book Professor Parsons’s enthusiasm for population and evolutionary
genetics breaks through in the form of apparent digressions from the main theme of the
book. The reviewer found this most refreshing, although it might perhaps irritate a purist.
The monograph is undoubtedly a first class contribution to the literature on the genetics
of behaviour and should be read by anybody interested in the subject. It will be particularly
helpful to undergraduates and research students.

P. M. SHEPPARD

MacArthur, Robert H. and Connell, Joseph H. The Biology of Populations. New York and
London, 1966. Wiley. Pp. xv + 200. Price 45s.

THE AUTHORS OF this work on population biology (along with those of its two companion
books on organism and cell biology) believe that a student entering a university should be
presented with biology as a discipline showing strong uniformities as against the method
that discourses on the endless variety in the living world. They try to focus on life in toto
rather than on “‘endless documentation’’. Another view they adopt is that the biological
world exists at various levels, each with its own characteristics. This book is concerned with
the top level, that of population studies. The presentation is based on the expectation that,
in the educational system of the USA, students from school will already have wide knowledge of biology. The reader may get the feeling that this way of teaching biology tries to
make it look as tidy as the physical sciences appear to be. The emphasis is on the principles
of population biology using broad brush strokes and the text draws sparingly on a wide
range of examples.

There are quick sketches of the rise and fall of the main fossil groups, world climate
and moisture, a number of large scale vegetation, marine and fresh water patterns, an
introduction to population density and a sketch of colonization of new land areas. The
section on evolution of populations is more coherent, exploring the mechanisms of natural
selection and genetic variaton in the face of environmental change. It goes into some detail
on the role of mutations in evolution. (A fair amount of mathematical reasoning is included
at this point.) The themes of genetics and environment are brought together in a discussion
on speciation. Population regulation and growth are discussed followed by population
interactions with special emphasis on the predator-prey relationship. A brief description
of some ecological communities ends the book.

The reaction of a traditionally trained biologist may well be that the treatment of the
subject is not well grounded in descriptive biology. Such a characteristic is bound to be
inherent when such a wide range of subjects is covered in less than 200 pages. The question
to be asked is whether the broad principles emerge in fact as well as intent. They do emerge
and in realizing this aim the book is successful.

K. W. WILKES

Timms, Noel. A Sociological Approach to Social Problems. London, 1967. Routledge and
Kegan Paul. Students Library of Sociology. Pp. viii + 109. Price 15s.

THE EXPANSION OF the number of courses in sociology at universities and training
colleges has led to an increased demand for introductory textbooks on all aspects of the

284
OTHER NOTICES

subject. As General Editor of this series, Professor Roy Emerson weighs the advantages
and disadvantages of the comprehensive introductory volume against those of a series
of selected monographs such as will appear in the Students Library of Sociology of which
Mr. Timms’s A Sociological Approach to Social Problems is the first to be published.

The series will cover an extensive range of topics—the dust cover lists ten “forthcoming
titles” —and each volume will provide “‘a thorough introductory treatment of any one topic”.

This book is divided into five sections, including Sociology and Crime; Sociology and
Mental IlIness; The Family and Sociology, and ends with a summary, a guide to further
reading, and a nine-page bibliography.

United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs. Proceedings of the World
Population Conference, Belgrade, 1965. Volume II. New York, 1967. United Nations.
Pp. xiii + 510. Price $7.50 cloth; $5.50 paper.

VOLUME I OF the Proceedings was noticed in our September number (59, 204) and a reference was then made to the Report of the Conference which had appeared in the March
1966 issue of the REVIEW.*
The Proceedings are to be published in four volumes and volume II has recently been
issued. It contains selected papers and summaries of the papers given at eight meetings:
A. 4. Future population trends and prospects; A. 1. Fertility; B. 1. Factors and patterns of
fertility in areas where fertility is relatively high; B. 2. Factors and patterns of fertility in
areas where fertility is relatively low; B. 13. Studies relevant to family planning; A. 2.
Mortality; B. 3. Mortality, morbidity and causes of death; B. 12. Population genetics.
They are printed in English, with a note, where applicable, of the language from which the
originals have been translated. |

As there are some 177 papers and summaries contained within the 510 pages of this
book, it is obviously impossible to review it fully and it would be invidious to draw attention
to a few of the writers, each an authority in his own field, who have contributed to this most
valuable record of an important Conference.

World Health Organization. Services for the Prevention and Treatment of Dependence on
Alcohol and other Drugs. 1967. Technical Report Series, No. 363, Pp. 45. Price 5s. Available
through HMSO.

IT IS INCREASINGLY being recognized that problems of alcoholism have much in
common with those of dependence on other drugs. This, the fourteenth report of the WHO
Expert Committee on Mental Health, notes that, despite differences in types of dependence,
there are many significant similarities in their causation and hence in the measures required
for their prevention and treatment. After considering the complex and changing patterns
of abuse, widespread drug dependence among adolescents, and the rapid development of
new drugs with potential for abuse, it recommends that dependence on alcohol and other
drugs be considered as different facets of one problem that should be of concern to all
public health authorities. This should lead to the establishment and operation of services
for the prevention of drug dependence and for the treatment and rehabilitation of dependent
persons. Services now in operation in different countries are reviewed in some detail, and
the need for educating the public in these problems is emphasized. The report discusses the
provision of personnel training programmes, attention being given to the subjects that should
be covered in professional training courses.

4 Th: 58, 7. The World Population Conference, Belgrade, 1965 by Peter R. Cox, John Peel and Clifford
. Thomas.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

After a discussion of the necessity for further research, and of the areas where it is
required, the report closes with a list of recommendations on approaches to the whole
problem.

World Health Organization. Standardization of Procedures for the Study of Glucose-6Phosphate Dehydrogenase. Report of a WHO Scientific Group. 1967. Technical Report
Series No. 366. Pp. 53. Price 5s. Available through HMSO.

GLUCOSE-6-PHOSPHATE DEHYDROGENASE, an enzyme that occupies a key position in
red cell metabolism, has in recent years attracted attention because its deficiency in human
beings may, in certain circumstances, cause various haemolytic disorders, and it has been
suggested that it mayconfer some resistance tothe most serious form of malaria. The number
of deficient individuals in the whole world is estimated as close on 100 million. G6PD has
been the subject of much research, both for its clinical manifestations and its use as a
genetic marker, and a large number of variants have been discovered. But research has
been hampered by the lack of a uniform nomenclature and of criteria for the identification
of mutants, and of standardized procedures for their analysis and characterization.

This report attempts to remedy these deficiencies. It deals with nomenclature,
recommending a consistent system for universal use. It examines the criteria for the identification of G6PD mutants. It urges the establishment of an international reference centre,
and of regional reference centres, which would establish the nature of newly discovered
variants, develop techniques for their characterization, and investigate methods of shipping
and storing samples of blood. Various other recommendations are made for research into
the enzyme and its variants. There are ten appendices to the report covering the effect
of drugs on G6PD-deficient cells; methods for G6PD assay of haemolysates; screening
methods for G6PD deficiency in hemizygous males; screening procedures; electrophoretic
characterization of G6PD variants; the partial purification of human red cell G6PD;
Michaelis constants; thermostability studies; the classification of variants by certainty of
distinctiveness; and the geographical distribution of G6PD deficiency.

286
