THE EUGENICS REVIEW

chapter. To include all the citations might
admittedly have required overmuch space; but
one would like to be able to identify more of
the major sources referred to.

P. E. VERNON

Vernon, M. D. The Psychology of Perception.
London, 1965. University of London Press.
Pp. 235. Price 25s. |

IT 1S PROBABLY less often that a paperback
is republished by a different publisher in the
ordinary form than the reverse. This book was
first published as a Penguin Book in 1962. It
has had a wide circulation and commended
itself to the London University Press. This is
justified. It is an interesting and readable book,
and presents a wide range of the psychological
facts and phenomena of perception in a way in
which ordinary readers as well as beginners in
psychology will find rewarding.

The author is mainly influenced by Gestalt
psychology. She is guarded aboutits physiological
aspects, although she makes some excursions into
neurology. She does not allow herself to become
involved in the many theories about perception
which have been discussed at length in some
American works recently. Another point about
the book is that she does not deal very fully
with the problems of sensation as contrasted
with perception—or perceiving, as Bartlett used
to persuade us to call it. This makes the book
more accessible to students who are not prim
38

arily interested in the sensations. It is perhaps
a danger to concede too much to them, especially
the social psychologists, many of whom appear
to think that the experimental psychology of the
sensations is a waste of time and energy. In a
book of this short length it would not be practicable to deal more efficiently with the sensory
basis of perceiving. In one place where Professor
Vernon does touch on this aspect, however, a
little more precise and up-to-date information
would have been a great improvement without
any increase in length, namely in the field of
colour vision and colour blindness. What she
says at points almost smacks of the 1890s, but
its status is safeguarded by a kind of generalization which can hardly become erroneous whatever changes in knowledge take place.

The great virtues of the book, however, lie in
the comprehensive reviews of all sorts of factual
data about perceiving, its development in
children, and its many aspects, in the perception
of movement, causality, space, colour, size,
shape, and its relationships to attention, motivation and personality, normal and otherwise.
The book is liberally illustrated with intriguing
diagrams, figures and examples of perceptual
material used in laboratory experiments. Its
greatest defect is that it hardly touches upon
perception in any sense modally except that of
vision—but in the field of vision it is good, and
each chapter is provided with an excellent series
of references for further reading. |

R. W. PICKFORD
