THE STABILITY OF MARRIAGE"
By A. JOSEPH BRAYSHAW, B.A.

NE of the elementary forms of guile

by which organizers achieve their

ends is to ask their victims, many
months in advance, to undertake something
that they would be far too cautious to
promise to do next week. Thus it was that,
last October, I blithely promised Dr. Blacker
that I would give a paper this evening. But
for all my foolhardiness some instinct of selfpreservation counselled caution when I was
asked for a title, and I sought for a form of
words that would be so wide and so general
that it would accommodate almost anything
that had occurred to me by the time that I
was called upon to redeem my promise.
“ The Stability of Marriage ’’ seemed a safe
enough formula with which to temporize.

It represents, I believe, the point at which
all responsible opinion finds common ground
on the subject of marriage. It is a commonplace that on this subject, even more than
most, we may start from different assumptions and reach different conclusions. We
may accept marriage as ordained by God; or
regard it as the product of social evolution.
We may view it as the private concern of a
husband and wife, or as a matter in which
society has so vital an interest that in some
circumstances it must override the wishes
of the couple. Whatever attitude we take,
however, we normally accept as self-evident
the proposition that it is in the interests alike
of individuals and of society that marriage
should be stable and enduring. Whatever
else we may believe, it is surely plain that
every marriage breakdown represents a
private tragedy and a public ill.

If proof were needed we have, indeed, only
to look to nature. It is in the higher forms of
life alone that parents care for their young,
and only in man that the young are helpless
and dependent for so long a span of years.
Moreover, a family is normally so spread over
the years that parents find that for most of
their youth and middle-age their children
are dependent upon them. The imperative

‘Society on Tuesday,

need to care for children over quite long
periods is a fundamental reason for stable
marriage. In recent years we have been very
much reminded of it by our recognition that
much delinquency and anti-social behaviour
springs from the want of a secure and happy
home. When, further, we consider that one
illegitimate child may cost the community
thousands of pounds before leaving school,
and that a delinquent child may cost far
more, we must acknowledge that even in the
most mundane terms the effects of instability
in marriage have an enormous impact on
society ; while in terms of human suffering
the cost is incalculable.

The Position of Marriage Today

Let us turn, then, to a consideration of the
position of marriage in this country. The
last year for which the Registrar-General has
provided full figures is 1949, and a consideration of them seems at first sight to show
a gloomy picture. In England and Wales the
number of dissolutions of marriage made
absolute in the peak year (1947) was some
60,000, which was about ten times the prewar annual average. By 1949 the total had
fallen to about 34,000, and I believe that in
1950 it will be found to be around 30,000.

The latest figures show that one marriage
breakdown came before the courts concurrently with every six new marriages that were
contracted. This statement must be treated
with some reserve. In the first place it does
not, of course, mean that one marriage in six
breaks down. This might be suggested from
the fact that the proportion has remained
similar over some years, but there are many
factors to take into account, especially the
fact that the same marriage breakdowns
often come before the Magistrates’ Court and
later before the Divorce Court. On the other

* A paper read at a members’ meeting of the Eugenics
March 18th, 1952.

+ Statistical Review of England and Wales for the year
1949. Tables. Part II. Civil. H.M.S.O. Price 4s.

85
86 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

hand there are, of course, many unsatisfactory
marriages that never come before the courts.

The 1949 figures show that, I think for the
first time, there were more divorced men and
women marrying than widowers and widows.
Moreover, if we consider only those marriages
where the wife is still of child-bearing age, we
find that more are broken by divorce than by
death. This arises, of course, in part from the
success of medical science in staving off
death longer. It is nevertheless of great
significance from the point of view of population policies, and from the viewpoint of
countless individual children.

For some years now the Registrar-General
has published figures showing the interval
between marriage and the birth of children.
Thus if we take the number of illegitimate
births and add to it the number of births
occurring within about eight months after
marriage, we find that about one child in
eight was conceived outside marriage. It also
becomes evident that nearly one in every six
brides was pregnant on her wedding day, the
proportion in the case of brides under the age

of 21 being more than one in four. When one .

considers how widespread is the knowledge
and use of contraception, it seems reasonable
to assume that the real extent of pre-marital
relations must be very much greater.
Compared with the records of our grandparents it certainly seems that marriage is
much less stable today. But while the extent
of marriage breakdown is alarming, it must
be noted that quantitatively there is much
more marriage today, so that some increase
in the casualties might be expected. In the
first place, people tend to marry younger, and
some 30 per cent of the married women in
England and Wales are married before they
are 21. In the second place, more of them
‘get married. It is very remarkable that since
IgII there has been an increase of about
20 per cent in the number of people married.
In 1931 52 per cent of all women aged 16 to
50 were married, whereas by 1945 the percentage was 62. Thirdly, we tend to live
longer—especially if we are married.* But
* The Registrar-General’s Statistical Review of England

and Wales, 1946 and 1947. Volume I, Medical. H.M.S.O.
Price 6s. 6d. :

when all these allowances have been made
it remains true that marriage breakdown has
greatly increased in our modern society,
especially since the war. :

Reasons for Marriage Breakdown

Naturally many reasons have _ been
advanced for the increasing breakdown of
marriage. Some say that it follows a decline
in religious observance in the country ;
others that the separation and loneliness of
the war years wrecked marriages that would
otherwise have prospered. Almost everyone
agrees that the shortage of houses plays a
tragic part. All these factors enter into the
matter, and many more besides, including
in-laws, selfishness, emotional immaturity,
marriages forced upon young people because
a child is on the way, the false values of the
films and the tendency ‘to regard sexual
harmony as the sole ‘criterion of marriage.

But the disruption of family ties has not
been only in this country. It can be seen in
almost every country of the world, although
they have different religions ; although some
of them escaped the war ; and although some
of them have enough houses. Behind the
obvious precipitating causes there seems to
be some underlying reason for a world-wide
change in attitudes towards marriage and
the family.

Equality of the Sexes

I shall probably court misunderstanding if
I state my thesis bluntly ; but in truth it is
the new equality of women with men that
has led inevitably to the disruption, for the
present, of stable marriage and family life.
Lest this sound as if I were some old buffer
in side-whiskers and drainpipe trousers
lamenting that things are not what they were
in Queen Victoria’s day, let me say that I
believe strongly in the essential equality of
the sexes. It has, however, far wider social
implications than have so far been generally
recognized.

This has been called the Century of the
Common Man. In all sorts of ways there has
been a trend to equality—equality between
Jack and his master, equality of rights for
different religions, races and colours. Most of
THE STABILITY OF MARRIAGE 87

all the first half of this twentieth century has
seen the equality of women with men. It has
come slowly enough not to excite much
comment, yet in terms of history it has come
like a flash. People over fifty can remember
women chaining themselves to the railings
outside the House of Commons as Suffragettes
in the movement for ‘‘ votes for women ”’ ;
but already in the world of 1952 it seems very
odd that there should have been a time when
women were denied the vote—so quickly has
the equality of women been accepted.

It was a brave, idealistic movement for the
equality of women in the early part of this
‘century. It was largely directed by intelligent women demanding that they should
have the same right as men to enter the
professions, vote and sit in Parliament.
They pressed the intellectual claims of
women and their right to compete equally
with men. They tended to say—to adapt
words that have since become famous—
“ Anything you can do, I can do better.”’

In the main, of course, they won their
battle. Women have entered all the professions except the Church. They have the
vote from the same age as men. They sit in
the House of Commons, though not yet in
the House of Lords. More and more women
are working in shops and offices and factories,
doing almost every job that men do except
those involving heavy manual work. In the
first world war women drove ambulances.
In the second, they did many jobs that the
soldiers had done before, sometimes in active
service alongside the men. All this made it
seem still more a matter of course that
women should be accepted as equals with
men.

Now in politics and the professions this
equality has had much less effect than
anyone thought it would have. The old
ladies who were Suffragettes must, in their
private hearts, be disappointed. There are
women M.P.s, doctors, lawyers, journalists,
and everyone accepts it as a very good thing ;
but it has not really altered the way in which
politics, medicine, law and so on are conducted. The ardent pioneers of ‘‘ votes for
women” thought that, with a majority of
women in the country, feminine voters would

lead us to a happier and more peaceful world.
It does not really seem to have made much
difference.

Equal Pay for Equal Work

The feminist plea of today is for equal pay
for equal work. What is more, most fairminded people accept the justice of this ;
but at this stage the schoolmaster (for
instance) comes along. “ Why should the
schoolmistress have equal pay ?”’ he asks.
“‘ She’s only got herself to keep, or else she’s
supplementing her husband’s income;
whereas I have a wife and three children.
Surely that’s not fair.’’ Once again, everyone
will agree with him.

There is only one way in which these
viewpoints can be reconciled. This is by
equal pay, supplemented by really substantial family allowances, so that the person
with dependants is not worse off. It is the
enormous Cost of this that has so far held up
“equal pay.”’ It would mean that somehow
the State would have to collect much more
money in taxes and pay out much more to
families. It is open to question whether it
would be a good thing to have such a degree
of intrusion by the State into the family ;
but it is the only just way of getting equal
pay for equal work. |

Grandfather’s Day ,
The equality of the sexes has had an even
greater effect in the home than in the workshop. My grandfather used to say what was
what; and my grandmother (dear little
woman that she was) used to take it all from
him. As for the children, they were, I am
told, seen and not heard. Papa simply
decided everything that mattered. Religious
observance, the upbringing of the children,
the spending of money—in all these things
he usually laid down the law. If grandmama
wanted a new dress, he would magnanimously
let her have it, after telling her the material
and colour that he thought appropriate, and
very likely the price per yard. She had to
accept what he said. She could not go out
and get a job herself. Her dependence upon
grandpapa was enforced by economic necessity and social custom alike. Her only way
88 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of getting what she wanted was by subtle
persuasion, about which she knew a good
deal.

How different is the family today!
Husband and wife, as equals, must somehow
agree upon scores of matters that were not
even open to discussion by their grandparents. For though of course there are many
strange households here and there, in the
main marriage has become a partnership of
equals. It could not be otherwise. If men
and women are equal, then husband and wife
will regard themselves as equal. In the home
they have got to reach joint decisions.
Obviously there is far more chance of disagreement when there are far more things to
be settled jointly.

Modern Marriage Partnership

The truth is that this modern marriage
partnership is a much richer and more
worthy concept, with much more scope for
husband and wife each to give of the best.
But it is much more difficult. In the home,
as in the State, dictatorship is clear-cut and
definite, whereas a democratic sharing of
responsibility is at once more worthwhile
and more difficult. It can only be achieved
by. the attainment of a certain level, of
education and responsibility.

Now all this is not just the experience of
our own country. It is world-wide. Wherever
you get the equality of women emerging in
law or in custom, there you get increased
breakdown of marriage. Women have
quickly achieved equality in some of the new
states like India and Israel, Indonesia and
Communist China. But the same result can
be seen wherever we look today—in the
U.S.A. or Japan or in Europe or Scandinavia.
Wherever you get the equality of the sexes
you get more divorce; and this tendency
applies among peoples who are white, black,
brown or yellow, and on both sides of the
Iron Curtain.

What is to be the result of this inexorable
drive for the equality of the sexes ? It cannot
be lightly dismissed with the comment of one
of my small sons who (having been told by
his mother to go and wash his neck) came
downstairs announcing his discovery that

“‘‘Women cause nothing but trouble!” No,
the equality of the sexes has come to stay.
To our modern way of thought it seems
intrinsically right, so that there can be no
question of putting the clock back. The
issue before us, now that we have got
substantial equality, is its effect upon
marriage, the home and the welfare of our
children. The only other time in the whole of
history when women enjoyed equality with
men was in the later days of Rome ; ‘and
there it may well have contributed to their
disasters. The rich ceased to have children,
and standards of loyalty and morality
decayed. The equality of the sexes may be a
means to good or ill; it is not an end in
itself.

Of course when we say that the equality
of women always causes more marriage
breakdown, we really mean that the old idea
of the patriarchal marriage breaks down. In
this sense there is indeed a bright side to the
picture of breakdown and change that we
were considering just now. The modern
“‘ democratic ” marriage of equal partners is
a fuller and finer relationship but, as I have
suggested, certainly more difficult. The early
feminists took us on a false trail in demanding
equality mainly in terms of competition with

. men along the same lines. We are instead

coming to realize now that while men and
women are of equal value they have essential
differences of aptitude, outlook and function.
Every modern marriage of thinking people
presents husband and wife with the problem
of reconciling equality with respect for
differences.

Clearly this is a conundrum that can only
be solved by mature men and women.
Marriage today involves a greater task of
tolerance and adjustment than ever before.
Moreover, people are necessarily affected by
the fact that almost everywhere divorce is
commoner and more accepted than it used
to be. If they are disappointed in their
marriage the thought of escape will occur
much more readily than it did to their grandparents. Increasingly people will not tolerate
the mediocre marriage that our grandparents
would have endured almost without comment. At the same time that marriage has
THE STABILITY OF MARRIAGE 89

become more difficult, therefore, there tends

to be ever more opportunity to abdicate

from its responsibilities.

Formation of Marriage Guidance Council

It was in these circumstances of increased
strain upon marriage that the Marriage
Guidance Council came to be formed in 1938
by a group of enlightened people under the
leadership of that great and good man, Dr.
Herbert Gray. It was at first no more than
a small group of doctors, clergy and ministers,
lawyers and social workers who were anxious
to do whatever might prove possible to
prevent marriage breakdown. I have deliberately put it in this rather negative way
because it must be owned that, at first, the
emphasis was more upon preventing marital
disasters than upon the positive fostering of
successful marriage that we now recognize
as a greater aim. It was assumed, too, that
ignorance—especially of sexual functions and
attitudes—was the great enemy that was to
be worsted by the spread of accurate knowledge, so that truth would be victorious and
all would be well.

After a setback at the start of the war the
Council was re-formed in 1942 with Dr.
David R. Mace as its first general secretary.
Its work went ahead throughout the country
in a way that was quite phenomenal. The
stress of war had made the public mind
acutely aware both of the value of family life
and of its precariousness in those unnatural
days. People turned with avidity to a
movement that offered them help in the
preservation of threatened marriages, without being either shocked or censorious. At
the end of the war, when people had more
time for such activities, Marriage Guidance
Councils tended to spring up in nearly all the
main towns of the country with such vigour
and rapidity that it was difficult to keep
track of them all. What was more, there was
a considerable danger of them working on
different principles and by different methods ;
and while some variety might be desirable, it
soon became clear that some standards must
be set.

Principles of Marriage Guidance Councils

Questions of principle were largely settled
by, the adoption of ‘ten points.”’ These
included our beliefs ‘‘ That the right basis
for personal and social life is that sexual
intercourse should not take place outside
marriage ’’; ‘‘ That parenthood normally
brings to marriage, not only the fulfilment
of its racial end, but also the achievement of
one of its deepest satisfactions ; and that
everything should therefore be done to
promote fertile unions”; and another
principle recognizing ‘‘ That scientific contraception, while serving a purpose in
assisting married couples to regulate the
spacing of their children, becomes a danger
when misused... .” From the first the
movement recognized spiritual values as
paramount, but never adopted any religious
test, demanding only adherence to the “ ten
principles’ that were in conformity with
Christian and Jewish ethics but did not
demand religious belief.

The difficult subject of divorce has never
caused us serious trouble. The movement
includes people of very different views on this
subject, but we are united in the belief that
the most important thing is to prevent, so far
as possible, the desire for divorce. If we do
this, we can agree to differ on divorce, which
is a confession of failure. As we tell the
Royal Commission on Marriage and Divorce
in a memorandum, to revise the law of
divorce without at the same time taking
every possible step to foster successful
marriage is like providing varied and comprehensive funeral arrangements without an
adequate medical service.

Other points of principle arose. Help
offered to couples in marriage difficulties
must of course be offered in strict confidence,
without which the public would not be
justified in trusting our efforts. This raises
knotty points of legal privilege, and while in
practice we have always been able to avoid
marriage counsellors being called to give
evidence, in divorce cases, about what they
have learned during attempted reconciliation, the position cannot be regarded as
adequately safeguarded, and it is much to
go | THE EUGENICS REVIEW

be hoped that the Royal Commission will
recommend legislation to deal with this
important point.

_ Again, every effort is made to avoid being
intrusive. People are not visited in their
homes, save occasionally when both parties
request it ; for there must be no suggestion
that the errant husband or wife is being
“cornered ’’ by some guardian of public
morality come to bludgeon them into being
good. A service is provided for those who
desire it, and who come asking for help.
This means that those who bring marriage
difficulties to a marriage counsellor are a
group that is weighted with people of some
initiative and sense of _ responsibility,

although of course many people come to.

Marriage Guidance Councils on referral from
other social workers. It is a matter of satisfaction to us that people of every class,
income and education do seek our help in
marriage difficulties, from the most unlettered
to people whose names are known to every
newspaper reader. .

It is also a matter of principle that in all
marriage difficulties both sides should be
urged to come for a confidential talk with a
marriage counsellor. The ordinary man or
woman is not going to regard it as just or
responsible for anyone to attempt to give
advice or treatment without first learning all
the relevant facts, which can only be done
from both husband and wife. It is, for
instance, highly material to know whether

acute jealousy is the result of some intoler
able position that would make any of us
jealous, or whether it is quite irrational.
This information can seldom be _ learnt
merely from the jealous person. I therefore
take issue with that school of thought which
does not always invite the other partner to
a similar confidential talk. Failure to do this
gives the impression of espousing the cause
of a complainant against the other party ;
and it seems to me grossly unscientific to
attempt a diagnosis without first securing all
the available data. Of course, the second
partner may not choose to come, and in this
case one cannot reconcile people who are not
even willing to discuss the possibility,
though often a good deal can be done to help

the first partner to come to terms with the
distressing circumstances. In the great
majority of instances, however, the second
partner proves willing to discuss the difficulty, although we neither have nor want
any powers of compulsion.

I have laboured this point a little because
it casts a light on the ethos and outlook of
our movement. Those who deny that it is
always necessary to give the second partner
the opportunity of a hearing, are really
thinking of the first partner as a patient
needing help in readjustment to society,
including husband or wife. The emphasis is
upon the individual. For our part, we regard
marriage not merely as one of the external
relationships that is giving trouble to a
patient, but as something of unique value.
While we are deeply concerned with the
individual, we are still more concerned with
the couple and the family. To attempt to
treat one partner without enlisting the aid of
the other comes near to imposing a solution
instead of guiding husband and wife to
help each other to find a solution to their
difficulties themselves.

Marriage Counsellors

I have drifted into a discussion of the
remedial side of our work because this came
first in our development, and is still the bestknown work of marriage guidance. We refer
to it as remedial work rather than reconciliation because our object is to provide help in
any kind of marriage difficulty. This of
course includes involuntary childlessness,
which affects something like one in every
dozen married couples. Here there is normally no question of reconciliation, but a
very real marriage problem that is, of course,
referred to medical aid.

The remedial side of our work is carried out
by “‘ marriage counsellors,” who are mature
men and women selected and trained for the
task. All of them are volunteers generously
giving one evening a week, or perhaps two
afternoons a week, to this work. Each of
some eighty-five Marriage Guidance Councils
has a panel of these counsellors, and each
counsellor is thus dealing with only a limited
number of cases at any one time. In our
THE STABILITY OF MARRIAGE QI

view this has several advantages. In the
first place it enables a Marriage Guidance
Council to provide a variety of service, so
that, according to the nature of the case, a
couple can be referred to the counsellor who,
from age and experience, is most likely to be
able to help them. Secondly, it means that
the counsellor can remember the details of
the comparatively few cases being helped at
any one time, and thus show a greater
personal interest and friendship for each one.
Thirdly, spreading the case-load in this way
reduces the undoubted strain imposed by
this work, which touches a good deal of the
seamy side of life and sometimes involves
very grave responsibilities, especially for the
welfare of the children.

We know that voluntary service is often
accepted by organizations that dare not
examine credentials too closely for fear of
losing valued help. In such delicate and
responsible work as marriage. counselling,
however, we have from the first’ imposed
rigorous selection and thorough training.
Candidates must first be sponsored by a
local Marriage Guidance Council, and then
attend a residential selection conference at
which they meet five selectors including a
psychiatrist. The object of the selection is
to choose for this work those who are really
suited by temperament. They must on the
one hand be sympathetic, tolerant, patient
and free from prejudices, while on the other
hand they must be analytical and objective,

avoiding taking sides and free from inhibi
tions. This is a formidable combination of
virtues, and the high proportion of about
two-thirds of the candidates who pass the
Selection Board springs largely from the
fact that they are all sponsored already by
local Councils that have considered them
suitable. After this a training course relates
to the spiritual, psychological, medical, legal
and social aspects of sex, marriage and the
family. This is followed by written work and
a probationary year’s counselling, concluding
with a careful assessment of the work done.
The result is that these marriage counsellors,
of which there are over 300 throughout the
country, form—so far as I know—by far the
most carefully selected and thoroughly

trained voluntary social workers in the land.
That men and women who give their time
freely should be prepared to go through such
selection and training—which is arranged by
the national body to maintain consistently
high standards throughout the country—
gives eloquent testimony to their sincerity
and selflessness, and their recognition of the
delicacy and responsibility of their task.

One of the main objects of the training is
to ensure that marriage counsellors recognize
the limits of their competence, and the point
at which difficulties should be passed on to
professionally qualified help. Each Marriage
Guidance Council, in addition to its rota of
voluntary counsellors, has panels of doctors,
psychologists, parsons and ministers, lawyers
and social workers to whom the more difficult cases may be referred. Special care is
taken to ensure that marriage counsellors do
not attempt to exceed the limits of lay
competence, which would be disastrous. On
the other hand, they can often deal with
straightforward marriage problems and spare
the doctor, in particular, from being needlessly worried in his surgery by some simple
matter that needs only a sympathetic
explanation.

In practice, therefore, the marriage counsellor gives, let us say, each Thursday
evening to this work. He is available at the
consulting rooms, or it may be at his home,
to see those who may seek his help in confidence. After seeing one party, he tries to
see the other. If the difficulty is a comparatively simple one, he will, over a period, see
each party several times, giving explanations
and interpreting the outlook of each to the
other, until it may be possible to see both
parties together and get them jointly to face
and overcome their difficulties. If, on the
other hand, there are symptoms that clearly
call for psychological treatment, or a situation with difficult legal implications, the
counsellor will, with the consent of the couple,
get them to see a psychiatrist or a lawyer
who serves as a consultant of the Marriage
Guidance Council.
92 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Conclusions from Remedial Work

The London Marriage Guidance Centre
alone has helped over 10,000 couples in the
past eight years, and throughout the country
over 8,000 cases a year are assisted by
marriage counsellors. From the remedial side
of the work two clear conclusions stand out.
First, that it is of the utmost importance to
tackle marriage problems prompily when they
arise. The natural reticence that people feel
about their intimate worries makes them
reluctant to seek help until a situation
becomes quite intolerable, and drives them
to drastic action. By this time there may be
a legacy of frustration and bitterness and
treachery—to say nothing of solid phalanxes
of relatives—so great that their difficulties
are beyond human help in our present state
of knowledge. Secondly, the crucial factor
is the will to succeed. Many warring couples,
bemused by childish ideas or over-simplified
psychology, come to Marriage Guidance
Councils with a pathetic belief that we can,
as it were, wave a magic wand over them and
send them away arm-in-arm. Such faith in
experts is touching, but it is not enough. In
almost every case there is need for slow,
patient effort in curbing tempers, admitting
mistakes, refusing to take offence, learning
afresh. While much skill and patience,
sympathy and objectivity are needed of any
reconciler, really determined effort is essential
from those who would themselves overcome
their difficulties.

Government Support

The Denning Committee on Procedure in
Matrimonial Causes* made its final Report
in February 1947, and among other things
recommended State grants towards marriage
guidance work. As a result the Home Office
set up a Departmental Committee on Grants
for the Development of Marriage Guidance
as a form of social service (the Harris Committee), which in November 1948 recommendedt some modest headquarters grants
— {5,000 a year to the National Marriage
Guidance Council, and {£1,500 each to the

* Cmd. 7024. H.M.S.O. Price od.
¢ Cmd. 7566. H.M.S.O. Price 6d.

Catholic Marriage Advisory Council and the
Family Welfare Association, for an experimental period of five years. In addition the
Home Secretary was recommended to set up
a Marriage Guidance Training Board to plan,
supervise and finance ‘the selection and
training of marriage counsellors, up to a
maximum cost of £5,000 a year, which was
later reduced to £4,000. These recommenda
_ tions were adopted, but not some others that

were needed to support the work of the local
Councils. The amounts were small, but as an
essentially voluntary body we have never
wished to be dependent upon Government
grants, and have chiefly valued them as a
token of official recognition of the value of
marriage guidance work, though the money
has been welcome to an organization much
hampered for lack of it. |

According to the estimates published in
the last few days it is proposed to halve all
these grants in the coming financial year, as
a measure of economy. It is difficult to
believe that this will be carried out, seeing
that the taxpayer pays perhaps fifty times
as much in subsidizing the divorces that
formed 80 per cent of the cases receiving
legal aid in the first year’s operation of the
Legal Aid and Advice Act, 1949.*

Education for Family Life

All this leads us to education for marriage
and family life, which is so much more
necessary now that marriage has become
‘“‘ democratized ”’ into an equal partnership.

It is true that the Churches have usually
felt some responsibility in preparing couples
for marriage, and done much that has been
of value. But—as I think, most unfortunately — fewer young people attend
Churches today. The Churches themselves
have not always seemed abreast of modern
thought, as for example in this basic matter

of the equality of women. Also the old taboo

on discussion of sex matters has largely disappeared, leaving the Churches embarrassed
and uneasy on the whole subject, and
incidentally placing at a great disadvantage
a celibate priesthood where this exists.

* Attorney-General: House of Commons, Official
Report, December 3rd, 1951.
THE STABILITY OF MARRIAGE 93

The problem is, then, to break in upon the
cycle of the generations ; to set young people
thinking about marriage and preparing
themselves for it with as much enthusiasm
and determination as they prepare for a job
or career ; and to help them lay the foundations of such wise and happy marriages that
serious difficulties never arise. This can
hardly be better put than in a striking passage
of the Final Report of the Denning Committee presented to Parliament in February
1947 
“‘ We have been much impressed by the
evidence of experienced workers in this
field that the basic causes of marriage
failure are to be found in false ideas and
unsound emotional attitudes developed
before marriage, in youth, and even in
childhood. The right time to correct those
ideas and attitudes is before marriage.
There is a need for a carefully graded
system of general education for marriage,
parenthood, and family living to be
available to all young people as they grow

up, through the enlightened co-operation
of their parents, teachers and pastors ; and
in addition specific marriage preparation
of engaged couples to give them instruction
and guidance to ensure the success of their
marriage. Valuable work is already being
done on these lines and its extension is
much to be desired.’’*

Our experience suggests that there are
three or four points of particular significance
at which education is possible for family life.
This education, like training for citizenship,
is concerned much more with infusing ideals
and imparting attitudes than with the mere
giving of information. Undoubtedly the
formation of attitudes and the moulding of
outlook begin in the nursery where the young
child gains his impressions of what is normal
and right. The greatest influences in education for family life are still the informal ones
of home and family itself. The example of
parents in love, in tolerance and in shared

* Page 5, Final Report of the Committee on Procedure in Matrimonial Causes, presented by the Lord
High Chancellor to Parliament by Command of His
Majesty, February 1947. Cmd. 7024. H.M.S.O. Price
gd.

ideals is a much more powerful and lasting
influence than any direct instruction.
Whether a person grows up selfish or unselfish—a vital matter to happiness in
marriage—depends largely upon the early
years, and upon the patience and understanding of the mother who encourages the child
and gives him a sense of satisfaction and
importance in participating in little family
tasks and errands.

The first step, then, in education for family
life rests with the parents, and one of the
forms of educational work that my own
organization hopes to develop still further is
the assistance of parents in meeting responsibilities that they often feel more willing than
able to fulfil. Many speakers have addressed
Parent-Teacher Associations, and many
Church groups are active in assisting young
parents in the crowded years when the
children are at once most noisy and troublesome and yet at their most impressionable.

Sex Education

The question of specific sex education is
one that I need only touch upon. Whether |
we like it or not, knowledge cannot be
restrained in a free society. Unless sound
and sensible information is given to children
about sex they will learn highly coloured,
garbled and often dangerous half-truths, in
undesirable ways. It is never wise to keep a
child in complete ignorance of sex. Secrecy
inevitably suggests that the grown-ups regard
it as a furtive and disgraceful subject. If a
child gains such an impression it is likely to
militate against his or her later married
happiness, and to do far more harm than
mere ignorance which may be dispersed by
knowledge. That sex teaching should be
given is certain. The question is rather how
children should be taught. There can be no
doubt that the parents are the best source of
information that should be given naturally
in answer to the children’s questions as they
arise and merely to that extent. After all, if

-a child feels that he cannot ask his own

parents a sensible question, the very basis of
trust and confidence is undermined. But I
repeat that attitudes are more important
here than factual information, and many
047 | THE EUGENICS REVIEW

parents are themselves too embarrassed or
inhibited to talk about sex to their children
or, more important, to present it as a natural,
right and noble aspect of life. Thus it may
often be necessary for teachers or others to
deal with sex education, though this can only
be a second-best. What matters is that, in
dealing with all the kinks and convolutions of
the tubes in our bodies, we should not fail to
impart to our children the emotional, moral
and spiritual significance of what is, after all,
one of God’s greatest wonders. To give
biological instruction without any hint of
moral standards may be a grave dis-service
to children. There have been cases in which
it has simply stimulated their natural
curiosity to make sexual experiments. They
can hardly be blamed for this if they have
never been taught that men and women,
‘having souls and minds, are not just so many
guinea-pigs. And it is more important that
they should really lay hold of this truth than

that they should know all about Fallopian |

tubes.

Adolescence

A second opportunity comes to influence
‘boys and girls around the ages of 15, 16 or
17. Intellectually they are almost adult but
emotionally they are adolescent. This is
often the main chance to influence them in
their attitude towards the choice of a
marriage partner. Once John and.Mary have
fallen in love and hope to get married, it is
useless to talk to them of the qualities that
go to make a loyal and loving wife or
husband. They will only listen with one ear,
and only take notice of anything that
happens to coincide with the attributes of
Mary or John. They are, in short, emotionally
committed and often unable to consider
marriage in long-term fashion, taking account
of courtship, companionship, children, middle-age and the later years when the children
have left home. It is before John and Mary
have fallen in love that they should be set
thinking about marriage itself, and what it
involves as a growing and evolving relatfonship that develops and changes as children
come and go. If they can but grasp this
elementary idea they are less likely to find,

later, that they have married someone with
whom they have little or nothing in common

‘when dancing days, or tennis days, are over.

It is true that when they fall in love later
they may be swept off their feet (and who
would have it otherwise ?) ; but it is at least
desirable that in their “ teen-age ”’ years they
should have developed some sort of framework of values against which they can
measure those whom they meet of the
opposite sex.

Boys and girls who have had a sensible sex
education ought, by this “ teen-age stage,”
to have it developed to give them some
understanding of the different ways in which
men and women tend to view sex and
marriage. It is well for young people to
understand how lightly and quickly strong
emotions may be aroused in a ‘young man ;
how much more mature and deliberate is a
young woman of the same age. Often disharmony arises later because husband or wife
is expecting the other to look at things in
exactly the same way.

If a married couple, for example, postpone
parenthood year after year, the husband may
well be happy enough, while the wife is
deprived and frustrated because conception,
gestation, birth and the nurturing of the
child is the completion and fulfilment of her
sex experience, as it can never be for the
husband.

The practical problem arises as to how one
may reach and influence adolescent boys and
girls. My own organization has experience of
providing speakers to many youth groups
and Church groups and this is certainly

valuable, especially if audiences can be

addressed who have not only met for that
subject but who gather regularly to discuss
many different things. The fact remains that
it is, on the whole, the more responsible boys
and girls who belong to Churches, clubs and
societies. It is the feckless and unattached
who most of all need encouragement to think
about marriage as a most important part of
the life that lies ahead.

We have not found the full answer to this
problem. Newspapers, cinema and the radio
are almost the only influences that reach
the less responsible youngsters. In the
THE STABILITY OF MARRIAGE : | 95

newspapers of the type they read, the activities of Aly Khan and Miss Rita Hayworth
tend to receive more prominence than anything that has to do with maturity and responsibility in marriage. Nevertheless, there
are great opportunities for influencing people
through popular newspaper articles and the
answering of readers’ queries in regular
newspaper features. One London evening
paper has printed such a feature (which is
syndicated throughout the provincial Press)
each week for seven years. It may be distasteful to some professional people to see
statistics or legal or medical knowledge
simplified into. popular, chatty, journalism ;
but it is almost the only way in which the
knowledge of the expert can be brought to
the ordinary man or woman.

Engaged Couples

Perhaps the greatest opportunity for
education for family life is with the engaged
couple. The choice of partner has been made
and now they know that when they marry
they are setting out on an adventure into
uncharted seas so that they need both a
knowledge of navigation and an idea of the
reefs and shoals to be avoided. The Marriage
Guidance Councils have almost all found
young people increasingly anxious to seek
help in preparation for marriage. In 1950
some 1,300 engaged couples asked and
received this help.

We are dealing here with those who have
pledged themselves to marry and who want
help on specific points, rather than generalities about marriage. Is it a good thing for a
wife to go out to work ? Ought they to wait
until they have a home of their own before
they start a family ? Is it important that
they should share religious beliefs ? How
often should sexual intercourse take place ?
How best can they use the family income ?
This is the sort of problem they present and
on which they seek help.

Where it is, possible, engaged couples are
seen by a marriage counsellor. The interview
may be in the consulting room of a Marriage

Guidance Council or round the fireside in

the counsellor’s home. Like the interviews
with those in marriage difficulties it is, of

course, entirely confidential. Alternatively,
in the larger towns, two or three counsellors
may, in turn, talk to a group of half a dozen
or a dozen couples. This method is more
satisfactory than it may sound, because it
often serves to show each couple that their
own anxieties and preoccupations are perfectly normal and shared by most other
couples; but it is important to provide
opportunities for private consultations afterwards for couples who may wish to raise
particular difficulties on their own.

It is true that a large proportion of those
coming for marriage preparation have come
mainly to discuss family planning and
spacing. It would be quite unreal to talk to
young couples before marriage without being
willing to discuss this issue. A thorough and
impartial investigation* conducted under
the Royal Commission on Population that
reported in June 1949, showed that at least
two-thirds of the married couples in the
country practise some sort of family planning, whether by appliance or non-appliance
methods. My own organization believes that
there are right, as there are certainly wrong,
uses for contraception, though it is for each
couple conscientiously to decide such matters
for themselves. The function of the marriage
counsellor where contraception is concerned
is merely to ensure that the couple have
correct information (and there are still some
who have the most bizarre misunderstandings) and that they recognize the subject as
a moral one that needs their conscientious
and united decision, if possible before
marriage. The majority regard contraception as a necessity in the early years of
marriage and they are referred to appropriate
doctors or the clinics of the Family Planning
Association.

But if couples come to Marriage Guidance
Councils largely to discuss family planning
—in the belief that they already know everything else about marriage !—our marriage
counsellors take the opportunity to broaden

* Papers of the Royal Commission on Population,
Volume 1. An investigation carried out by the Council
of the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists: Family Limitation and its Influence on Human
Fertility during the past Fifty Years. H.M.S.O. Price 4s.
96 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

discussions to a much wider basis. Most
eager young couples are thinking of the little
home they plan and concentrating almost
entirely on the immediate future. That
marriage is a growing, dynamic relationship,
enriched with the arrival of the children and
changing with their growth and departure
from the home, is a fundamental that they
may not realize. They may think that they
will marry and, automatically and effortlessly, live happily ever after, whereas
constant consideration and readjustments
are needed. Not only can the need for
tolerance and co-operation be underlined but
some of the particular hurdles can be pointed
out. When the first baby comes, for instance,
how often does the husband resent the fact
that he appears no longer in sole possession
of his wife’s affections ? These things are
commonplace to those who have seen them
many times. To each young husband it is
new and disturbing. The very fact that
marriage necessarily involves difficulties and
challenges may not have been recognized by
the idyllic couple, who may thus be plunged
into depression and resentment when the
first cloud appears.

Ideally we should certainly encourage all
young men and women to have medical
examinations before marriage. This is highly
desirable and considerate couples feel that
they owe it to each other. Since, however,
doctors are now so overworked we content
ourselves at present with the definite suggestion that medical advice should always be
sought by those who have any doubt about
general health, sex functions, or heredity.
We always encourage reference to the family
doctor and other procedure agreed with the
British Medical Association only comes into
effect if the patient is unwilling to go to his
or her family doctor or if.the family doctor
is unwilling to help.

It goes without saying that every couple

who are being married in a church are
encouraged to see the priest or minister who
will conduct the service. Without doubt all
the Churches have been taking this responsibility more seriously, and clergymen usually
regard it as a definite obligation to see the
couple beforehand. This is much to be
welcomed. Marriage Guidance Councils are
at pains not to compete with either the
clergyman or the doctor, but to co-operate
with both ; for neither of them would claim
to be competent to deal with every aspect of
the many-sided relationship of marriage.

Above all, in presuming to offer help to
young couples in preparation for marriage
we must be very sensitive to their ideals and
anxieties at a most precious and beautiful
stage of their lives. I have been talking in
general terms and statistics this afternoon as
I have imagined to be appropriate before a
learned society. But the subject of marriage
cannot be treated as an impersonal one.

In my office, which really has no other
advantages to recommend it, my window
looks out over a roof garden of a neighbouring
building. There in the summer time facetious
young men photograph hard-bitten young
women modelling the latest fashions and
leaning against the balustrading. As if this
were not sufficiently disturbing to the
dictation of correspondence, lunch time
brings young men and girls to hold hands
while they eat their sandwiches. Sometimes
then the years seem to slip away and I am
reminded of the lines of W. B. Yeats—

‘‘ Had I the Heaven’s embroidered cloths
Enwrought with gold and silver light

I would spread the cloths under your feet :

But I, being poor, have only my dreams ;

I have spread my dreams under your feet :

Tread softly because you tread on my
dreams.”

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLIV, No. 2
