SEX-RATIOS AND MARRIAGE

Their Relation to Population Growth and Decline
By G. H. L.-F. PITT-RIVERS, B.Sc.

Address delivered to the Society on January 23, 1929.

SHOULD like to make it clear to start
with that I am going to trespass as little
as possible into the domain of the bio
logist, but if the latter cares to come to my
assistance, I shall be glad. My subject is
primarily a demographic one, that is to say a
problem concerning the growth of population
in relation to the distribution of the two
sexes within it.

Of course the problem I am going to discuss may involve biological questions, as it
may also involve eugenic and social questions.

From time to time a great deal is said
about the surplus army of women in England, women for whom there are not enough
husbands because there happen to be some
2,000,000 more adult women than men.

Mr. Heape in a paper delivered to the
Royal Society in 1908° referred to a leading
article in The Times of a previous date in
which the writer, noting that in Germany
as in England there are too many single
women because the female population exceeds the male, could find no reason to
account for the excess of females over males.
In Germany as in England more male children are born year by year than female, yet
the population showed a rising excess of
females. In England the excess had risen
steadily since 1851. The usual reasons
given—the greater male mortality, emigration, and the absence of more men than
women from the country at sea or 1n the-services, the writer clearly saw could in no
way account for the increasing disproportion.

It was seen that there must be some
steady not a fluctuating cause. Up to now
that cause, or those causes, have remained

1 Transactions of the Royal Society, Vol. CC, ‘‘ Proportions of the Sexes produced by White and
Coloured Peoples in Cuba.”’

21

unexplained. In all the older settled countries of Europe where the population is
dense and increasing there appears to be an
excess of adult women over men. Yet in
England and these same countries more
boys are born than girls, and since there are
invariably more male still-births than female, an even greater number. of boys than
girls must be conceived.

The proportion of males to females in a
population is expressed by sex-ratios, and
apart from the ratio of total males to
females, we usually distinguish the primary sex-ratio, which is that obtained at
fertilization, i.e., the conception ratio, and
of this we can form no exact estimate as we
usually have no complete statistics of the
masculinity of foetal mortality. The male
sex-ratio of still-births in European countries lies between 124 and 142. The secondary sex-ratio is that obtained at birth or
hatching. And the tertiary sex-ratio is
that obtained among adults. The sex-ratio
is usually expressed by a single figure denoting the ratio of males to 100 females and
sometimes by a figure denoting males to
females per hundred of both sexes combined. In England we have a secondary
or birth sex-ratio of 104 :100 and an adult
sex-ratio between the ages of twenty and
forty of about 81:100. How do we account
for the fact that in man the secondary
(birth) male ratio is nearly always above a
100 and the adult ratio usually below a 100?

The reason for the high primary ratio is
bound up with the intricate question of sexdetermination and still presents many insoluble points, but the difference between
the excess of males at birth and the excess
of females at maturity is brought about by
a differential sex mortality. For instance,
at the beginning of the twentieth century in
such different countries as Australia, Den22 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

mark, England, France, Germany, Holland, India, Italy, Japan, Norway, Sweden,
Switzerland, and the United States the male
death rate is higher than the female death
rate. It is not accidental or due to the
fact that men and boys lead more dangerous
lives and get killed in accidents more often
than girls and women, for at each age category in each chief group of diseases, those
specifically affecting the reproductory and
secondary sex organs excepted, females
show a greater resistance and a lower mortality rate than males. Also, although general in those countries for which we have
statistics, there are reasons for supposing
that it is not universal.

INFERIOR MALE VITALITY |

Let us again be reminded of the facts
with which we are actually familiar. There
is in the first place a general tendency,
widely observed and with very few exceptions, in the human race for males to exceed
females at birth; the actual ratios differ
somewhat in different races, and also, a
point frequently ignored, the ratios may
fluctuate under changing conditions.

In the second place in most of the countries in which statistics are recorded male
mortality is so much greater than female
mortality that by the time maturity is
reached there are more women than men.

At this stage all I wish to suggest is that
this tendency for the ratio of females to
exceed males during maturity and reproduction, whatever are the actual causes, is part
of the laws of population growth. That is to
say, we must assume that certain sex-rattios
being more favourable to reproduction than
others, surviving and. increasing populations will necessarily tend to produce
favourable ratios. If this assumption is
true, we must expect to see reversed conditions amongst populations that are not surviving. In other words, in decreasing populations males appear to show a post-natal
survival rate superior to that of females,
reversing the more familiar tendency in
stable or increasing populations where the
male, as Dr. Crew reminds us, exhibits ‘‘ an
inherently inferior resistance to the stresses
of the act of living.”’

SOME EXAMPLES CONSIDERED

Let us consider some variations and fluctuations in the sex-ratios of populations.
The negro population of the United States
of America® started to increase after the
emancipation. While the rate of increase
became more rapid there was a change in
the sex-ratio. At first we have few reliable
statistics. Males exceeded females from
1820 to 1840; from 1840 to 1910 and up to
the present females have exceeded males.
In rg910 there were 4,885,881 males to
4,941,882 females, which is a sex-ratio of
989 males to 1,000 females. In the negro

population there is a slight excess of females

under one year of age, a marked excess from
fifteen to twenty-nine years of age, and a
deficiency up to eighty-five with the exception of a few odd years. The proportion of
females is greatest during the chief reproductive period. In the enumerated mulatto
population the sex-ratio tends to be still
lower ; and there is a marked tendency for
the mixed blood group to increase at a faster
rate. The registered increase of mulatto
to black from 1850 to 1910 was from 11.2
per cent. to 20.9 per cent. This is an in
adequate indication of the infusion of white

blood into the negro population.

The Indian population of the United
States has not increased like the negro
population, on the whole it shows more
signs of decreasing. In the same year,
1gIo, of the negro census, the Indian males
exceeded the Indian females by roughly
135,000 to 130,000. ‘The only almost pureblooded tribe of United States Indians
which shows any substantial tendency to increase are the Navaho, and they alone of the
full-blooded tribes show an excess of women
over men during reproductive periods, the
ratio being 98.2 males to 100 females. This
slight excess of adult women has some reflection in the fact that the Navaho alone
show any appreciable proportion of polygamous marriages, the enumerated 327 polygynous males in a population of 22,000 probably being short of the real number. It

* Negro Population of the United States, 1780-1915.
Census Bureau of the United States.
SEX-RATIOS AND MARRIAGE 23

has been remarked by those who know them
that the Navaho are monogamous when
questioned by census officers but polygamous at other times.

A further point of some eugenic interest
lies in the fact that the full-blooded polygynous marriages among the Indians show
a slightly higher fertility rate, the offspring
an appreciably higher survival rate, and a
lower sterility rate per wife than the fullblood monogynous marriages. Thus the
average number of children per mother in
polygynous marriages (1910) was 4.7, and
for full-blood monogynous marriages 4.5.
‘The survival rates being 75 per cent. for
the offspring of polygynous marriages
against 69 per cent. for the offspring of
monogynous marriages. ‘The sterility rate
for polygynous wives was 6.2 per cent., and
for monogynous wives I0.7 per cent.

I might be reminded that in our Colonies
and in newly colonized countries generally,
although the population increases rapidly,
there is generally a dearth of women and an
excess of men. When a new colony is
‘founded far more men than women immi
grate, though as time goes on an increasing |

though still smaller proportion of women
migrate too. In these rapidly increasing
countries.it will be found that the sex-ratio
of the native-born—that is to say of the offspring of immigrants born in the country—
consistently tends to produce an excess of
‘women over men which gradually overcomes
the excess of men caused by male immigration. Thus the masculinity of the total
white Australian population (excess of males
over females per 100 of both sexes) was
16.72 in 1860 and 1.74 in 1922.

In this matter of sex distribution the
States in which the normal condition of older

* The technical words used in the text carry meanings as follows : Polygynous=a man mated to more
than one woman at a time; monogynous=a man
mated to only one woman at a time; polyandrous=a
woman mated to more than one man at a time;
monandrous=a woman mated to only one man at a
time; polvgamv=plural marriage, i.e., either polygyny or polyandry or a combination of both; monogamy=single marriage. N.B.—the last two terms
popularly used should be avoided so far as possible
as being ambiguous.

countries is most nearly reproduced are also
the older and most densely populated
colonies, those of Victoria, South Australia, New South Wales, and Tasmania. In
the first mentioned of which the females
have for some years past, with the exception of 1913, exceeded the males.“ The
same thing, is observable in the United
States of America: the old and densely
populated State of Massachusetts shows the
lowest or one of the lowest sex-ratios. What
is conspicuous and significant is the very
much more rapid rate of increase of females
than males in regions where the population
is dense and settled. Thus in Victoria,
while the male population increased from

330,302 in 1860 to 788,626 in 1922, the

females during the same period increased
from 207,932 to 801,599."

THE RATIO AT MATING AGES

Here, I wish to call attention to a point
that has invariably been overlooked. ‘The
proportion of available marriageable women
to marriageable men may, practically, be
greater than the adult sex-ratio suggests,
if we take into consideration the earlier
maturity of women and the extent of male
postponement of the nuptial age. In communities where the men are polygynous and
often marry women half their own age, this
factor may greatly enhance the proportion
of wives to married men, but it will also
affect monogamous communities as I shall
illustrate.

In all countries and at all times there has
been a discrepancy in the marriage age of
men and women. ‘The tendency has always
been for the men to postpone marriage for a
longer period after true nubility or physical
maturity than the women. In England in
1919 the average age for bridegrooms was
29.81 and for brides 27.16. But in the
eighteenth, seventeenth, sixteenth centuries, and earlier the difference was considerably greater and girls married at a
much earlier age.

“Cf. Commonwealth Year Book of Australia, No.
14, p. 1130 (1920).
5 C.Y.B., No. 16, p. 910 (1923).
24

In patriarchal or gerontocratic’ communities and among primitive people the
power of the older men to add to the number
of their wives, whether for economic or for
other reasons, will tend to lengthen the average male nuptial age; that is to say, the
exercise of their privileges will result in
postponing the age at which the younger
men may expect to obtain wives of their
own. Since the extension of the polygyny
of the older men is necessarily limited by
the available supply of nubile women, not
already absorbed in marriage, they can
only take more wives (apart from the few
older women who become widowed) from the
generation of girls reaching the marriage
age, and this will deplete the supply of
wives available for the younger men, thus
postponing their chances of acquiring wives
nearer their own age.

Even in countries where the variation in
the male and female nuptial age is least conspicuous the difference between the sex-ratio
at the same adult year of life and the nuptial age sex-ratio is considerable. The sexratio at the respective nuptial ages or what
I have called the effective mating sex-ratio
provides the best and most convenient indication of the available supply of wives in a
population at the beginning of the average
age at which men marry.

I will give an example from a civilized

community in which there is only three to
four years difference in the average ages at
which the sexes marry.

In Australia in 1921 the average age for
bridegrooms was approximately 29% years
and of brides 26 years. The census of that
year showed 2,762,870 males and 2,672,864
females, an excess of 90,006 males. ‘This
represents a masculinity of 1.66 (excess
males over females per 100 both sexes).
If we compare the sex-ratio of adults of the
same age, say each sex at the age of 29, we
get 46,179 males and 46,949 females, an
excess of 770 females or a masculinity of
minus 0.88. Finally if we compare the sexratio at the average nuptial age for the
respective sexes, we get 46,179 males aged

 

 

"© Where leadership and authority is in the hands
of councils of old men.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

29 against 47,685 females aged 25, an excess
of 1,506 females or a masculinity of minus
1.60.

IN DECREASING POPULATIONS

What happens when the opposite phenomenon is observable and when the sex-ratio
of a population increases progressively—
when the surplusage of adult men over adult
women goes on increasing ?

The answer is based on observation, and
so far as I know, there are no exceptions.
The population will go on dwindling as the
sex-ratio increases.

I will give an example from the same
country, Australia. We have available but
two censuses of the aboriginal natives, those
of 1911 and 1921. New South Wales and
Victoria were the only two States in which
the whole full-blood aboriginal population
(who were living in a civilized or semicivilized condition) were enumerated. During the decade the native populations in the
two States declined from 2,012 to 1,501, and
from 196 to 111 respectively ; while the masculinity (excess of males over females per
100 of both sexes combined) increased from
14.51 to 17.12, and from 5.10 to 11.71.
There has been little infusion of white blood
in the Australian aboriginal populations,
owing principally, it is supposed, to the
general disinclination of the natives to rear
half-caste children. The race is therefore
fast disappearing where it is brought into
close contact with the white population. A
contrary tendency is now exhibited by the
native population of American Samoa,
which increased from 5,679 in 1900 to 8,056
in 1920. Here the Polynesian stock is
largely adulterated with white blood, the
actual extent of which it is impossible to
determine, though mixed bloods having one
white parent, usually a father, constitute
about 3 per cent. of the population. Here
masculinity has steadily diminished in
recent years, and, in 1920, females in the
20 to 34 years of age category exceeded the
males of the same age.

What we know of the nineteenth-century
decline and twentieth-century rise of the
Maori population appears to exemplify the
SEX-RATIOS AND MARRIAGE 25

same correlations between masculinity and
decrease. In New Zealand there was no
proper census of the native population
taken until 1906. Previous to that date
only more or less unreliable estimates are
obtainable. Governor Grey’s estimate in
the year 1849 gives a population of 120,000.
Subsequent estimates show dwindling
figures, until the figures of the Colonial
Government, in 1896, show a population of
39,854. Since rgo1 there has been an apparent slight but steady increase. From the
time that the population started to increase
—and so far as can be ascertained for a
certain period before that point—the masculinity of the population gradually diminished from being approximately 9 (excess
of male to female per 100 both sexes) in
1891 to 5.8 in 1921. During this period
the gradual and cumulative infusion of
white blood into the population was effecting an increase in the crude (mixed plus
full-blood) population and a diminution in
its masculinity. In 1891 the population of
half-castes was 4,865, and in 1916 6,750, but
these figures give little indication of the
extent of miscegenation nor of the decrease
in the proportion of full to mixed-bloods
having less than one-half white blood.
There are indications, however, that the
masculinity of full-bloods in 1921 was very
much higher (estimated at approximately
14.4) than that of the total population, and
that the masculinity of the mixed-blood
population (approximately 3.9) was lower
than that of the total population.

We observe that, throughout the Melanesian and Polynesian regions, where the depopulation tendency is marked, the males
are largely in excess of the females. A large
deficit of females is noticeable in New
Guinea, the Islands of the Bismarck Archipelago, and among the disappearing Australian blacks. This phenomenon is seen
among the Maoris, the Fijians, and many
other Polynesian and Melanesian groups;
it is, in fact, most conspicuous where the
population declines most rapidly. The
significance of this excessive masculinity
has generally been ignored by reason of a
widely held belief that it was no recent

phenomenon, but was always a characteristic
of these races. ‘Thus, in the report on the
Decrease of the Native Population (F1ji,
1896), the Commissioners state: ‘‘ As it is
certain that the females did not exceed the
males, and in view of the custom of female
infanticide, more than likely that the males
were then, as now, in excess, it stands to
reason that, if polygamy was practised at all
generally, a large number of males would
have had to go without wives altogether.’’
It can be shown, however, that there is
nothing less probable than that a surplusage
of adult males always existed. Its improbability is not shown merely by quoting
contrary authorities in support, though
these are not wanting. For instance, referring to the New Hebrides, Banks Islands,
and Tikopia, in particular, and Melanesia
generally, Rivers quotes Dillon and
Gaimard, who both stated that women were
formerly more numerous than men, ‘‘ Dillon
going so far as to estimate the number of
women as treble that of the men... as
elsewhere the evidence concerning polygamy
indicates a change in the proportion of the
sexes.’” Indeed numerous instances could
be given of the abandonment of polygyny
owing to changes in the proportion of the
sexes, and a recent growing deficit of
women. This fact is even referred to in
the Report on the Fijian decrease, where
‘“‘the growing disproportion of the sexes
owing to the increasing female mortality . . .”’ is cited by correspondents (p.
68). The principal indication that the
deficit of women is a recent phenomenon and
concomitant with a decline in the total population lies, however, in the fact that where
vital statistics are available, they show that
masculinity is progressive when the decline
is progressive, and that when the population
shows a tendency to rise, it accompanies a
tendency for the masculinity of the population to diminish.

I must here make a passing reference to
the Toda population where polyandry was
practised owing to the shortage of women.
The Todas were studied by the late Dr.
W.H.R. Rivers. Available records show
a diminution of the population from the
26 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

earliest censuses until 1881 ; since about that
date the population increased again. I cannot go into any details, which would take too
long ; it must suffice to note that the increase
in the population of approximately 8 per
cent., in ten years accompanies a decrease
in the ratio of masculinity by nearly 3 per
cent. (excess of males over females per 100
of both sexes). Professor Punnett, who
analysed the data in Rivers’ Genealogical
Records, showed that there was a marked
diminution in the excess of men over
women. The Toda population was divided
into two districts or divisions: in the one
Tartharol, for three succeeding generations
the number of males for every 100 females
‘was 159, 131, and 129; while for the other the
figures were 259, 202, and 171. The census
reports and the genealogical records agree
in showing a progressive diminution in the
excess of men over women.

I hope the significance of the facts I have
been reviewing is beginning to assume
shape. I have so far scrupulously avoided
reference to any theory of causality.

‘It amounts to this, when a human population thrives and increases it tends to produce an excess of mature women of reproductive capacity over men; when populations dwindle and die out the men tend to
increase over the women. Both these contrasted sex-ratios are determined by the
original birth (secondary) sex-ratios and the
subsequent differential sex-mortality. But
the birth sex-ratio is no indication of what
the adult sex-ratio is going to be. Both the
birth sex-ratio and the differential sex-mortality tend to be constitutional and differ
amongst races, although they sometimes
vary in one race. ‘The mating sex-ratio
tends to follow the adult sex-ratio modified
to some degree by postponement in, and
abstention from, mating. |

I will give a further example to illustrate
racial differences of tendency between racial
groups in the same country. Mr. Heape
studied the proportion of the sexes produced
by white and coloured people in Cuba.
Between 1900 and 1906, 58 per cent. (approximately) of the total population were
native whites, chiefly of Spanish descent,

exclusive of foreign whites and immigrants.
Between 1899 and 1906 there was a continuous increase in total population equalling a per cent. increase during the period
of 12.96. There has been a decrease in
masculinity, which was highest in 1841.
The sex-ratio was formerly highest amongst
whites. The proportion of coloured to white
population has diminished during the past
half century. The relation of the birth
(secondary) sex-ratio to adult sex-ratio is
contrasted as between.coloured and white.

In the months of highest fertility Heape
found a marked increase in the proportion
of females, and an increase of males during
the months of lowest fertility. This was
exhibited by both races, but the coloured
race showed the highest fertility and the
highest percentage of females born. But
when it came to differential sex-mortality
there was a remarkable reversal of tendency,
for while amongst the coloured people the
sexes are born in almost equal numbers
there is a net increase of ‘males; amongst
the whites, although a considerable excess
of males are born, the excess of male deaths
causes the net increase to be in favour of
females. |

GENERAL CONCLUSIONS

Scientific endeavour may be classified
according to three stages. Empirical observation of actual facts, analysis and diagnosis
explaining those facts, and application of
scientific knowledge obtained. These stages
answer the three questions that in some
form or other men of all ages have had some
interest in asking. What is happening?
Why is it happening? What should we da
to control what is happening or, if we can’t
control it, to make the best use of the consequences? Itis the last need which usually
prompts the first two. |

I was led to make some inquiries into
variations of the sex-ratio of populations
during some researches into certain native
populations of Oceania. No student of
these populations can fail to be struck by
the rapidity of the changes that are taking
place. Races that were flourishing a few
years ago no longer exist. The survivors
SEX-RATIOS AND MARRIAGE

lead lives as different from their ancestors
of a few generations ago as ours differ from
theirs to-day. Tribes that a short while
ago were healthy, warlike, and numerous,
‘are now dispirited, diseased, and weakly.
Races are mingling their blood and ethnic
distinctions are becoming blurred. Some
tribes have (or once had) an abundance of
women, in others men far outnumber the
women, while a careful study shows that the
proportions of the sexes change in the same
localities.

What relation do these problems bear to
one another, and to the two processes of
adaptation and elimination which together
spell evolution ?

Briefly stated, races decline and die out as
do all living things when changes in the
environment render them maladapted. For
maladaptation to show itself in decline in
population means, of course, that the death
rate gradually overtakes and exceeds the
birth rate, and the death rate, however categorized, represents the total factors of elimination. Increase in birth rate or death rate
considered apart is no indication of the
stability or adaptability of a population.
The increasing negro population of the
United States have a far higher death rate
(25.7 per 1,000—in 1910) than the dwindling
Red Indian stock (11). A race shows its
adaptability by breeding up to and beyond
its wastage. Human fecundity or possible
fertility is potentially so much greater than
the highest known death rate. The Pacific
populations that are dying out are doing so
‘because unadapted peoples will not breed up
to their wastage. They are being replaced
by new mixed populations that are better
adapted. We in England are still increas-Ing because our declining birth rate is more
than sufficient to exceed our wastage. But
there are indications that we are reaching
the peak of the curve; the birth rate is
likely to go on declining beyond the point at
which the death rate can no longer decline
at a greater rate. That in itself is not an
alarming prospect. On the contrary it
would be more reassuring if the process
could be accelerated before we suffer too
severely from the consequences of over
27

density, for we are grossly over-populated.

The problem of over-population is well
presented in the recent book of that eminent
Australian statistician Sir George Knibbs,
The Shadow of the World’s Future. One
of the most subtle indices of a change in
population tendency is variation in sex-ratio
—it is that aspect of the problem I am touching on here. It has been neglected and our
data are still very inadequate. What I wish
to call attention to is the variation in the
adult sex-ratio which must be brought about
either by a gradual heightening of the birth
sex-ratio, counteracting the differential sexmortality normally in favour of females, or
by a reversal of the differential sex-mortality
so that males show superior survival.

It is, of course, impossible in a short
article to go very fully into the greater part
of the evidence or all the arguments that
have to be dealt with in an intricate subject, so if my main propositions and conclusions appear insufficiently supported, I
can only plead that I have tried to go more
fully into the matter in the book.on which
this paper is based.

This is a summary of the ; main conclu
sions : |

1. Disturbances and fluctuations in the
sex-ratio of reproductive adults show some
correlation with the increase or decline in
population, according to whether sex-ratio
becomes higher or lower.

2. Progressive surplusage of males is an
macx of decline.

A stabilized or increasing population
exhibits a tendency to produce a surplus of
adult females of reproductive age over adult
males.

4. There exists a general and universal
tendency (common to all polygynous
species, including men) for polygynous communities to replace polyandrous communities, which tend to die out. Since very
few (if any) human populations or groups
produce an exact equality in the number of
the sexes at reproductive age, practically all
groups fall into one category or the other.
The facts show (what is biologically understandable) that the monogamous or monan28 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

drous woman outbreeds the polyandrous
woman—in other words, polyandry hinders
or is unsuitable to reproduction. In every
community there exists a tendency for the
men to become polygynous to the extent
that the ratio of women to men makes possible ; frequently, however, they are polygynous even when the ratio is unfavourable,
but in no community do we find any appreciable proportion of the adult males remaining permanently celibate. It follows, therefore, that if the men exceed the women,
the women become polyandrous, and if the
women exceed the men, a greater number
of the men become polygynous and a greater
number of the women remain monogamous or
monandrous. ‘Thus the polygyny not the
monogyny of the men becomes the real alternative to the polyandry of the women—in
other words, polygyny is the only insurance
of the general monogamy of the women.

5. The progress of miscegenation is correlated with variations in the balance of the
sexes.

6. The influence of miscegenation brings
about a change in the adaptability of a stock,
the hybridized stock being more adaptable to
changed conditions, but less adaptable to the
unaltered or constant conditions that suited
the more highly specialized stock. Crossbreeding will, therefore, only, promote
growth in population when a revolution in
living conditions renders the purer stock unadapted tothem. Variations in masculinity
as the results of miscegenation are conditioned by this fact.

As to 4, my study was made chiefly
among primitive peoples, who either were,
or had been to a great extent, polygynous in their marriages. I have
no doubt, myself, that where there is
an excess of adult women among these
people polygamy, which absorbs the surplusage of otherwise functionless women, is
the only form of marriage suitable to them.
To attempt to impose monogamy under

these conditions is bound to be productive
of much harm and great hardship. I confess that to maintain that morality is better
served by imposing monogamy is to me unintelligible, or at any rate sounds to me like
the statement that it is more moral to be
stupid. It may be so; that does not affect
the merits of the question. What I am suggesting is that monandry, not monogamy,
has survival value, and monandry where
there are surplus women is best maintained
where the men are to some extent polygynous. I know of no evidence that monogamy in the sense of a general monogynous
monandry has ever existed anywhere—not
excepting England or Europe.

Among relatively primitive people, and I
think the same applies relatively to all
people, the polyandrous woman tends to be
sterile. It may be expressed by the generalization that a woman is less fertile when
she is sexually overworked. Among natives
who tolerate a great deal of sexual licence
among their unmarried girls, they are almost
invariably temporarily sterile, without resorting to abortion, during their short period
of pre-nuptial and polyandrous intrigues.
After they are married they have a better
chance of raising their offspring when the
polygynous customs of their people impose
a strict segregation on pregnant and lactating women. I have already mentioned that
the wives of polygynous Indians were more
fertile than the wives of monogynous ones.
The breakdown of the polygynous customs
of the Fijians, for instance, led to the breakdown of the taboos imposed upon child-bearing women; over-gestation, short weaning,
and ill-nourishment of babies were the
results. The natives called the violation of
their sexual taboos dabe, and not illogically
attributed much of their decadence to this
cause.

Among ourselves these problems are
ignored, but I am not convinced that they
are unimportant.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXI, No. 1.
