REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS. 173

arouses the female’s sexual instincts, has much to recommend it, but he
throws no new light on the difficult problem of sexual dimorphism in
those insects in which experiment shows that the female readily accepts
any male. In our opinion, he attaches far more weight to the “ hormone ”
theory than it will bear, as is shown by the existence of gynandromorphs
in insects and birds; and the discussion of parthenogenesis is unsatisfactory. These defects arise, however, only where the author strays beyond
the proper subject of the book; when dealing with sexual behaviour itself, especially in the vertebrates, his account is excellent, and our only
criticism is that the style is marred by rather frequent carelessness of
expression, with occasional lapses into “journalese,” and that in the
later chapters some misprints in names have escaped correction.
L. DONCASTER.

Davenport, C. B. and Rosanoff, A. J. Reply to the Criticism of Recent
American Work by Dr. Heron, of the Galton Laboratory, by C. B.
Davenport and A. ]. Rosanoff. Eugenics Record Office, Bulletin
No. 11; pp. 43; price ten cents. Cold Spring Harbour; February,

1914.

THIS pamphlet is a reply to one by Dr. David Heron recently noticed in
this journal. It will be remembered that Dr. Heron accused the writers
of inaccuracy, incompetence and bias, and stigmatised their publications
as harmful to the cause of eugenics. The arrangement of the reply is
not very convenient, since it consists of two independent papers, one by
Dr. Davenport, the other by Dr. Rosanoff, which tend to overlap, and it is
somewhat difficult to summarise the case presented. So far as the question of bias is concerned, we think Dr. Heron’s charges are fully met,
although differences of opinion are possible as to the expediency of some
directions cited by Dr. Heron on page 13 of his pamphlet. With respect to
the charges of inaccuracy, Dr. Davenport is able to show that a considerable number of the alleged blunders are due to misinterpretation on the
part of his critic. We think that on this count of the indictment also,
Drs. Davenport and Rosanoff are entitled to acquittal at the hands of their
scientific colleagues, although some of Dr. Heron’s misunderstandings
would have been guarded against had a few notes been added to the
original papers.

Finally, as to the general charges of incompetence, we do not think
that Dr. Davenport and his co-workers were called upon for any defence,
and’ need make no further reference to that branch of the discussion.
There are, however, two points as to which we find Drs. Davenport and
Rosanoff’s reply unsatisfactory. They energetically repudiate the charge
that they were unacquainted with the proper statistical method of allowing
for the difficulty introduced into the computation of Mendelian ratios
when all the fraternities contain at least one affected member, and we
willingly accept their statement. We think, however, they would have
been well advised to adopt the method of correction employed by Lundborg (on Weinberg’s authority) in a memoir actually cited by Dr. Davenport on page 23 of his reply.

The second point is that Dr. Davenport’s explanation (pp. 20-21) of
his use of the phrase that “strength may be mated with weakness,” does
not seem to us adequate and we retain our original opinion that it was
injudicious.

Passing from the specific points dealt with, we must observe that one
of the evils to be anticipated from Dr. Heron’s methods of controversy
finds expression in Drs. Davenport and Rosanoff’s reply. The language in
which Dr. Heron’s criticism was expressed has naturally irritated Drs.
Davenport and Rosanoff and their irritation has betrayed them into
making general charges which, although more courteously phrased, are
nearly as foolish as those of Dr. Heron. To argue that because the
analysis of massed data by statistical methods cannot solve all the
174 EUGENICS REVIEW.

problems of inheritance therefore such work is nugatory is, we think,
merely foolish. It would be as sensible to say that because a horse can
travel neither so fast nor so far as an automobile, that therefore the horse
is useless for locomotion; there are in truth many paths for which a horse
would be invaluable and a motor car mere useless lumber. This is the
state of affairs with respect to many problems of human inheritance, and
nothing whatever is gained by these mutual recriminations of workers each
using valuable tools. We are sure that further reflection will convince
Drs. Davenport and Rosanoff of the truth of these remarks and that they
will in time come to regard the energetic workers of the Galton Laboratory with feelings of unmixed gratitude. Gratitude both for their contributions to our stock of scientific methods of analysis, and for the entertainment afforded by their onslaughts upon others. Dr. Davenport should
remember the Queen of Hearts. “‘ What fun,’ said the Gryphon, half to
itself, half to Alice. ‘ What zs the fun?’ said Alice. ‘Why, she,’ said
the Gryphon. ‘It’s all her fancy, that: they never executes nobody, you

know.’ ”
M. GREENWOOD, JNR.

Pitt, St. GEORGE LANE Fox. The Purpose of Education. London. Cambridge University Press; 1913; price 2s. 6d.; pp. 83.
IT is worth while to search laboriously through a ton of cotton-wool if
there is one diamond in the middle of it, or to wade through 83 pages
of this book to find in it such a sentence as “ That narrow outlook on life
engendered by strong feelings associated with an inadequate, intellectual
and moral equipment, leads to what is known as ‘cock-sureness —a
distressing form of conceit impenetrable to pure reason.” The rest of the
book will appeal to the average reader as confused, unconvincing, and
occasionally unjust. This may be the fault of the author, or it may be
due to the reader’s (or reviewer’s) inadequate intellectual and moral
equipment, leading to what is known as “cock-sureness ”—a distressing

form of conceit impenetrable to pure reason.
W. HOPpgE-JONES.

Mark, H. THISELTON, D. Lit. The Unfolding of Personality as the Chief
Aim in Education. London. T. Fisher Unwin; price 1s. net;
pp. 224. |

IT is necessary for everyone for some extent, and for eugenists in par
ticular, to have as clear ideas as possible as to the boundaries between

“what I am because I was born so” and “what I am as the result of

circumstances.” The trouble is that so many psychological works which

touch this difficult problem complicate it beyond even its own natural
complexity, as well as being dull infinitely beyond endurance. It is
greatly to Dr. Mark’s credit that he has produced a book which really
helps rather than hinders analysis, not by the short cut of pig-headed
dogmatism but by genuine reason, presented in as readable a form as one

has any right to expect, and with the very minimum (which is rather a

large quantity) of technical language.

This analysis is by no means the main theme of the book; but many
will find it the most interesting and valuable part of it, with the possible
exception of the discussion of “the cosmic memory.” The whole book is
evidently written with the greatest care, and is singularly free from loose
and hasty mis-statements. W. HOPE-JONES.
