THOUGHTS ON EUGENICS

By THE AUTHOR OF ‘‘EsSsAYs IN BUFF”

“JT sHoULD much like to hear that the Royal Society had appointed a
Committee, or had requested the Government to form a Commission, in
which physiologists and physicians, breeders, magistrates, administrators,
military and naval officers, trainers, educational experts, and working men
and women in earnest for the elevation of their class, might confer together
as to the means which might even now be taken to promote by selection the
improvement of the race.’”!

Tout vient a qui satt atiendre. When I wrote the paragraph
just cited, in the spring of 1902, I hardly anticipated that my
wish would be in great measure fulfilled by the formation of the
Eugenics Education Society; I know no reason why it should
not be entirely fulfilled, why the Society should not enlist the
support and ascertain the views, founded on experience, of all the
classes which I have enumerated, and I earnestly hope that it
will systematically endeavour to do so.

Nor is it to be regretted that the work should be undertaken,
in the first instance, by a voluntary society. Whatever part the
State may ultimately be called upon to play in the matter, it is
certain that it can dispense neither with individual initiative nor
with popular support. And there is the further advantage that
since in the present state of our knowledge and practice, all progress in this respect must be tentative, provisional, experimental,
a voluntary association may enjoy a freedom of discussion and
action, a liberty to risk and correct mistakes, which would be
neither possible nor de-irable in a responsible government.

In ‘The Arlington Community ’” it was my endeavour to
think ont the problem of the moral possibility of a Eugenic
association,’ and I reached the conclusion that it would be pos
1 Essays in Buf (1993). Prolegomena, pp. 19-20.

2 Essays in Buff, pp. 66-127.
5 The so-called ‘‘ human stud."
234 Author of ‘‘ Essays in Buff”’:

sible in a community constituted ad hoc, and animated by the
spirit which I tried to describe—an enthusiasm directed to the
most fundamental realities of our life. It should, I conceive, be
the aim and function of the Eugenics Education Society to generate and spread abroad just such an enthusiasm as this. But we
have to work ina very different community, ‘‘ under existing conditions of law and sentiment.”’ Yet these are not unchangeable;
it is the avowed object of our society ‘to modify public opinion”’
and we may even hope that its influence may affect legislation.
If it should merely succeed in bringing about the segregation of
the feeble-minded, under conditions securing such a measure of
health and happiness as is possible to them, it would havearrested
some of those tributary streams which most deeply pollute the
life of man. But the movement cannot be stopped at this
point.

Eight years have elapsed since the publication of my little
volume, and when I read it over again, I find but one page on
which I should be disposed to make analteration. I was perhaps
too particular in assigning precise limits to the period of intercourse and procreation in the several classes of male parents,}
and if the opportunity of a second edition were afforded me, I
should write in more general terms:

We look upon the intercourse of the sexes as a function relative to a
certain end, and proper to a certain period of life. You must either exercise
that function with reference to the end which it subserves; or else renounce
it. You must either suffer natural selection to have free play; or else you
must practise artificial selection. There is no third course.

That, I take it, is the truth, the biological and social truth,
for which we stand, and which it must be our endeavour not
only to propagate but to apply. Some of us should breed, and
some should not; the sound and not the unsound, the strong
rather than the weak, and the young rather than the old. That
is all; but when you have applied it, you will have revolutionised
human life, you will have achieved an adaptation more important
and more beneficial than if you had enabled men to fly, as
necessary and as urgent as the abolition of war.

Some of us should breed; then the first aim of the Eugenic

1 Op.cit., p. rrr: ‘‘ Whena young man . . ._ beyond that limit.”
THOUGHTS ON EUGENICS 235

movement should be the encouragement of marriage and parentage on the part of those best fitted for them. I think it should
be laid down that (1) The normal subject should be expected to marry
on the attainment of manhood—say, from five to eight and twenty
years of age. In the upper and middle classes there are powerful
forces which operate to prevent marriage in early life. I have been
much struck by three cases within my knowledge. I have known A
since we were both about twenty,a man of conspicuously fine physique, fond of ladies’ society, and devoted to children; at fifty he
is still unmarried. B is somewhat younger; when I first made
his acquaintance he was about five and twenty, and remarkable
for his personal beauty. At forty he is unmarried still. I am
perfectly assured that both these men have always led chaste
lives; probably they are not men of strong passions ; the most
noticeable characteristic of A is his reserve, of B, his gentleness,
but I cannot but feel that whatever causes have deterred these
men from marriage have operated against theinterests of the community. Let me now take my third case. C is a younger man,
of beautiful physique and of amiable, but, I should judge, of weak
and impulsive temperament, who was universally blamed for an
improvident marriage at five and twenty, when he had a parent
dependent on his support. I think that some of his contemporaries blamed him not so much for getting married, as because the
marriage was followed in due course by the birth of children, one
after another, a circumstance which Mr. Galsworthy, for example,
would regard as vteux jeu. C may have mismanaged his affairs
or mistaken his profession, but looking at the matter from the
standpoint of the interests of the race, I ask myself whether, in
marrying when he did, and begetting children, he was not doing
precisely what he ought to do at the time of life when he ought
to do it. I can indeed conceive a society in which the continence
inculcated by the moralist, and the counsels of worldly prudence, and the supercilious indifference with which the professedly
advanced thinker is apt to regard the natural instincts and the
domestic affections, should combine to produce a state of mind
in which no one would ever think it worth while to get married
at all, the community would attain Nirvana by the extinction of

Desire, and, the chain of Births being effectually broken, its last
4
236 Author of ‘‘ Essays in Buff”:

state would be that of the flame of a candle after it is blown out.
And if at the latest moment of its existence, there should survive
but one moral idealist, one man of the world, and one superior
person, I make no doubt they would still be right in their own
eyes, and wise in their own conceit.

The mere numerical increase of the population, except in
new countries where, as we say, ‘‘ hands are wanted,” or in so
far as it may be an index of vigour and prosperity, is not an
object which I am concerned to advocate. Nor am I prepared
to affirm that to marry and beget children is, exactly speaking,
‘*a duty which a man owes to society.”” But it should, I think,
be recognised as the deepest need and the highest satisfaction of
the normal subject to fulfil at the proper age his proper function
as an organ of the race; and it is necessary to the race that he
should do so.

And what is true of the man is assuredly not less true of the
woman. Mrs. Humphry Ward, in her novel Daphne, quotes,
professedly from an American Quarterly, an article on “ The
Future for Women,” containing this remarkable dictum :

** Womanhood is the great fact of woman’s life.
Wifehood and motherhood are but incidental relations.”’

This is equivalent to saying that Sex is essential, but its
functions accidental. Perhaps the writer meant to say that
Personality is essential and Sex accidental. If there is any truth
in such a view, it will fall to be considered in connection with
negative eugenics. The fallacy lies in the habit, which indeed is
very common, and perhaps especially congenial to the self-reliant
American, of regarding the individual as a self-determined entity,
independent of all relations, the personal life as a closed and
isolated ring, whereas in truth it is a link on a chain, though it
may be, in some cases, the last. Some people do not see the
race whence they sprang. A mind disciplined by the study of
Biology could not have committed this mistake.

A further advance may be effected by the proposition that
(2) The training of the young (so far at least as the normal subject
is concerned) should be (and be regarded as) @ preparation for
marriage. And by “the training of the young” I intend the
THOUGHTS ON EUGENICS 237

whole of the influences brought to bear upon their development
from infancy to manhood or womanhood, in the home and the
school, the workshop and the gymnasium, the drill-ground and
the playing-fields, the church or chapel, the institute or the
lecture-room. In politics nothing really matters but what sort
of men and women you turn out. That is the end by which, in
the long run, all institutions and reforms must be tested; that
is the condition upon which the stability of institutions and
the efficacy of reforms must, ultimately, alike depend. The
Eugenic movement is not strengthened but weakened when
‘‘nature” is arbitrarily opposed to ‘‘ nurture.’’ We have to
make the best of such natures as actually exist among us;
and the finest still stands in need of nurture. It is essential to
our aim to secure for all an adequate training, physical and
technical, moral and intellectual; this training, if it is to be
efficacious, must be continued to maturity; and its best result
should be the young man and woman fitted to become parents.

A third proposition may now be laid down. (3) The period of
adolescence should be conceived and represented to the young as a
period of self-discipline, having marriage for its proper aim and
veward.' In no other way is it just to demand or reasonable to
expect pre-nuptial chastity from the adolescent male. Let us
clear our minds of cant.

My fourth proposition follows closely upon the third.
(4) The young need care, protection, and restraint, in proportion to
their immaturity. I should not think it unreasonable that young
men under twenty should be subjected to so much supervision
as might serve to check fornication; and I can conceive that,
with a clear and sane opinion on these matters prevailing in the
community and affecting the mass of young men themselves,
this supervision might be extended to a later age.? I note with
great satisfaction Mr. Lane’s remark® that ‘‘ the career of prostitution is embarked upon for the most part at a very early age,”
for that shews the possibility of preventing it. The same writer
says justly, but with insufficient emphasis, ‘‘Some salutary

1 It is the merit of H. Wegener's little book, which I have read in the French
translation called Nous les Jeunes, to bring this conception into clear relief.

2 Cf. Eua. Rev. I., pp. 260-1 (citation from Col. Melville).

® Ib, 264.
238 | Author of “‘ Essays in Buff”’:

measures should be taken to restrain the youthful prostitute, who
is equally irresponsible and ignorant, from leading such a life
until she shall have arrived at what may be considered years of
discretion.” I must however differ warmly, though respectfully,
from him when he expresses his fear that we must ‘‘ resign ourselves’ to the conclusion that prostitution will always exist.
We must do nothing of the sort ; it is the counsel of despair. I
commend tothe Society the task of investigating what measures
can be taken to prevent young girls from embarking on sucha
career. It is not a question of crime and punishment, but of the
discipline and control which, where parental authority proves
inadequate or is abused, may be exercised on behalf of the community but in the interests of the young. (5) No woman under
five and twenty years of age should be permitted to adopt the profession of
a prostitute. If it be thought legitimate that young men should
be subjected to conscription for the needs of national defence, it
must be equally legitimate, as it is at least equally necessary, that
young people of both sexes should be subjected to so much social
discipline as may serve to prevent the degradation of women and
the propagation of disease. The Eugenic movement, by its
very nature, must aim at nothing less than the prevention of
prostitution.

An all-round training of the young, with a view, in the case
of the normal subject, to marriage at maturity ;—that appears, in
my judgment, the indispensable condition of national Eugenics.
It is not a question of what anyone thinks desirable, but of the
objective conditions of physical and moral well-being; and to
satisfy these you must improve and extend our social organisation, so far as that is concerned with, broadly speaking, the
education of the young. I have not touched upon the economic
aspects of the problem, because I conceive, firstly, that an ablebodied young man is in general capable of maintaining wife and
children in a well-ordered society; secondly, that no other
object is of equal importance either to the individual or the
community; and thirdly, that State expenditure on such objects,
if properly directed, will be abundantly repaid in the energy and
efficiency of the People.
