THE GERMAN STERILIZATION LAW"
By “REGIERUNGSRAT ”

ITH the German Law that came

into force on January Ist, 1934—

concerned with the prevention of
hereditary diseases in future generations—a
great struggle came to an end. For many
decades the admissibility of sterilization, and
the demarcation of the sphere within which
it should be allowed, have been fiercely
contested. Long before the Great War the
interest and attention of the public had been
roused on these questions. The increase in
knowledge and the results of recent research
in heredity, with particular reference to the
biological quality of heredity and its importance for the future of the individual and
the nation, pushed eugenics into the foreground of interest.

THE PROBLEMS STATED

In post-war Germany this question of
sterilization became urgent when people in
general became aware that biological inferiority—both as regards quality and quantity of hereditary characters—was on the
increase. It was considered an intolerable
burden that the cost of supporting mentally
affected, inferior, and anti-social persons had
reached a figure that was out of proportion
to the means available for the upbringing of
the biologically valuable future generation.
The birth-rate of mentally and psychically inferior people, unlike that of those with sound
heredity, remained such that their rate of
increase hardly fluctuated. The burden on
the biologically valuable proportion of the
population thus grew overwhelmingly. The
psychically and mentally fit realized that
they must strictly limit the number of their
descendants. The army of inferior people, on
the other hand, paid no heed to economic
depressions; it delegated the care of its

* This article is by a German official who has
been able to observe at first hand the operation of the
new sterilization law.

biologically inferior descendants to the State.

Hence eugenics and psychiatry demanded
the regeneration of the German hereditary
characters by elimination and selection.
This demand was reinforced by the urgent
advice of legal authorities to stamp out.
hereditarily diseased criminals and thus to
develop preventive measures in favour of
the criminal law. Great alarm was also
caused by the fact that while some millions
of biologically sound and skilled manual and
brain-workers were condemned to live and to
maintain themselves for an indefinite time
without work or subsidy, and some hundreds
of thousands of healthy people of all ages
were living the lives of tramps, the inmates
of the imbecile and lunatic asylums were
increasing to such an extent that an intolerable burden of cost devolved on the everdiminishing section of the working and taxpaying population.

The sterilization of habitual criminals, the
insane and the mentally deficient had already
been demanded in 1900 in the Archiv fir
Kriminalanthropologie. Then, in 1922, the
Deutsche Gesellschaft fir Rassenhygiene published several theses advocating the legal
regulation of sterilization. In July 1932,
after lengthy preparations and reports from
Muckermann, Lange and Kohlrausch, a bill
on sterilization was submitted to the
‘“ Preussische Landesgesundheitsrat.”’

During the discussions on the legalization
of sterilization it became clear how many
intricate problems arose from this question. |
It was obvious that legal, religious, medical,
and ‘‘ weltanschauliche ’’ ideas and convictions referring to the question of sterilization had to be taken in consideration. It was
generally admitted that the hereditary dispositions in danger were to be protected
against further degeneration and decay.
There was a great struggle as to which
maxims of life and law would prevail. On
one hand it had to be considered how to

137
138

protect the State, on the other hand how to
guarantee the psychical integrity and the
sexual self-determination of the individual,
both having their roots in natural law.
Furthermore, there had to be considered the
obligation of conscience, by which the
Christian—particularly the Roman Catholic
—was bound. On New Year’s Eve, 1930,
a papal encyclical on matrimony pointed to
the irrevocable maxims of the divine moral
law which bound Roman Catholics, and
stated that only the divine Creator should
have the control of life and its origin.
According to Catholic dogma, the only
justification for depriving human beings of
their natural functions was when it was intended as punishment for crimes committed.

PURPOSES OF THE LAW

The Bill brought in in 1932 endeavoured to
unite these discordant demands as far as
possible. Sterilization was to be carried out
on medical and strictly eugenic grounds with
ample security for the prevention of abuses.
Moral compulsion was eliminated as the Bill
was based on the principle of free will.
Henceforth, the authorities, even those who
considered the question from a religious
point of view, no longer objected.*

It is not a coincidence that the Government of the new German Reich, a few months
after its coming into power, undertook the
legal regulation of sterilizing hereditarily
diseased persons. The German national
revolution brought about the realization of
the ‘“‘ Organische Staatslehre’’ (political
economic science), the biological interpretation of the conception of ‘ Volk’ and
“Staat ’’ (Nation and State). According
to the national-socialist point of view ‘ the
nation is the highest biological unit to which
the human being is subject ’—‘‘ the nation
is a unit bound together by blood and race
with innate identical characteristics.’’ This
new movement of regeneration had necessarily to create biological laws for the political
purposes of the Reich, and thus to achieve a
fundamental change in the conception of the
“ State.”

* Muckermann :
Essen, 1933.

Volkstum, Staat und Nation.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Professor Reiter, the president of the
Reichsgesundheitsamt, pointed out in a
lecture delivered to the Aerztebund in
Nuernberg, the consequences of the nationalsocialist revolution for medical science and
the politics of race hygiene. A new interpretation of the conception “health” was
essential for the altered point of view and the
new national aims. Health should mean the
best relation of the individual to Volk and
Staat. Thus the health of the individual
should be removed from the sphere of a personal condition and raised to a position of
being a part of the sum total of national
health. The introduction of the biological
idea into the conception of State should
foster the view that the nation must not be
considered as an inorganic mass of human
beings, but as individuals as well as groups
having a biological and organic connection
with the past and future. Thus the obligations resulting from this view do not find
their limits in the present, but look to the
future. No politics of hygiene according to
the new conception of State should include
future generations. The biological view
should teach the extent to which the fate
of human beings is determined by hereditary
characters. *

These sayings of Reiter, based upon
national-socialist ideas on biology and race,
show the way which the Voelkische Staat
(national State) is bound to go. It seems to
be a natural consequence that, if the State
is determined to stamp out the biologically
inferior hereditary dispositions in the succeeding generations, it is compelled to sanction sterilization. Thus the State considers
the sterilization of persons hereditarily
diseased as a far-sighted provision for future
generations. No economic reasons are in the
foreground. Moreover, it seems from this
new biologically directed standpoint essential only that the Government of the
new State should carry through this law
under certain conditions, even against the
will of those to be sterilized and even in contradiction to the scruples of a large popula
| tion unfavourable to the idea.

* Deutsches Aerzteblatt, 1933, Vol. 11.
THE GERMAN STERILIZATION LAW

THE LEGAL PROCEDURE

Of principle importance in any individual
case of sterilization are the two legal suppositions: (1) Sterilization is only permitted if
the disease is diagnosed by a doctor as being
hereditary, and (2) if the Erbgesundhettsgericht (Court of hereditary health) comes to
the conclusion that the descendants of the
person to be sterilized will most probably be
hereditarily diseased. The groups of persons
hereditarily diseased are distinctly stated,*
and the legislator is restricted to cases in
which the hereditary taint seems to him to
be scientifically proved.

Sterilization takes place on application.
Those entitled to apply for it are, in the first
place, the persons who are to be sterilized.
The law proceeds from the standpoint that in
many cases the herditarily diseased person
will himself see the necessity of applying for
the operation voluntarily. The provisions
concerning the co-operation of the legal
representative and of the Court for the
protection of wards (Court of Chancery) are
in most respects similar to the existing provisions of the German civil law. As many
people do not fully realize the importance
and the effects of sterilization, the operation
can be performed only after the person concerned has been given full medical instruction as to its consequences.

Proceeding from the point of view that the
public is interested in preventing a hereditarily diseased future generation, the district
medical officer or the superintendent of a
“closed ’’ asylum is entitled to apply on behalf of the inmates. Should the latter not be
a doctor himself, his application needs the
approval of the chief medical officer of the
asylum.

A provision of far-reaching importance is
the doctor’s obligation to pass on to the
district medical officer information of any
patient suffering from one of the hereditary
diseases mentioned in the Act or from acute
alcoholism. The same obligation is laid upon
persons concerned with examination and

treatment of patients. Regarding inmates of : ;
* defensive act against offences dangerous to

* The text of the German Act was published in full

n Eucenics Review, Vol, XXV, Oct. 1933, p. 157.

i

139

an asylum, the obligation of giving information is laid upon the chief medical officer.
The clauses relating to sterilization do not
apply if the hereditarily diseased person is
not capable of propagation because of advanced age or for other reasons; or if the
district medical officer considers that the
operation is likely to endanger the life of
the person concerned ; or if the said person

—being dangerous—is kept in a “closed”
asylum.
The Evrbgesundhettsgerichte (Courts of

hereditary health), being a part of the
Amtsgerichte (lower courts) in the first instance, are competent to give decisions. They
consist of a presiding judge, a medical officer,
and a specialist, the latter being an authority
on human genetics. The legal proceedings
bear no resemblance to those of criminal
courts, and, having regard to the fact that
private affairs should be kept secret, cases
are tried im camera. Appeals against decisions come up before the Evrbgesundhettsobergericht (Court of appeal for hereditary
health). This court is part of the Oberlandesgericht (Supreme court of a Province).
The decision of this court is final.

The surgical operation may only be performed in hospitals and by surgeons appointed by the supreme public authorities of
the Province ; and its cost is to be borne by
the sick fund, if the person concerned
comes under health insurance, or, if the
patient is a pauper, by the public welfare
fund.

EUGENIC INDICATIONS ONLY

The law concerning the prevention of a
hereditarily diseased future generation is
also on the side of national eugenics. Sterilization means the elimination of persons
tainted with certain hereditary diseases.
Surgical skill is placed at the service of the
biological regeneration of the future generation. On the other hand the law against the
habitual criminal (which came into force at
the same time) provides for castration—a

society by habitual sexual offenders. Originally it was intended to cover the sterilization
140

of hereditarily diseased persons and the
castration of certain habitual sexual offenders
in one law. But the objections of the Reich
Ministry of Justice against this plan brought
about a specific law against the habitual
criminal. This law is concerned with the
castration ordered by the criminal courts,
with keeping antisocial persons in “ protective’’ asylums, as well as with other
regulations for the protection of society. At
present there is no tradition, as this law only
came into force on January Ist, 1934. The
cases in which castration has been ordered by
the criminal courts up to the present have

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

been those of habitual sexual offenders
dangerous to society.

According to the German law sterilization
for social reasons still remains punishable.
In the records of the new reforms of criminal
law the reasons for forbidding such sterilization are clearly stated: “‘ The national
socialist conception of the State demands
that the protection of the lives and the
hereditary qualities of the German nation
shall never yield to economic forces, especially since the removal of national distress
has already been taken in hand by the whole
nation.”’

SDN Ne
= JOURNAL OF THE INSTITUTE OF SOCIOLOGY =
= Editorial Board : =
= A. M. CARR-SAUNDERS, ALEXANDER FARQUHARSON and MORRIS GINSBERG =
= Vol. XXVI. JULY, 1934 No. 3 =
= CONTENTS =
= Economic Science and Contemporary Economic Policy. G. C. Allen =
= Migration and Cheap Land. Herbert Heaton =
= The Psychological Analysis of War. H. Goldhamer —
= The Sociological Interpretation of Political Ideas. Werner Falk =
= Divorce in England and Wales David V. Glass =
= Book Reviews. =
= Annual Subscription £1 1s. 0d., post free. 5s. 3d. per copy, post free. =
= The Le Play House Press, =
= 35 GORDON SQUARE, LONDON, W.C.1 =
SUMMA EER TT TUNES

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVI, No. 2.
