A NOTE ON JEWISH-CHRISTIAN
-INTERMARRIAGE
By ELIOT SLATER, M.D., E.R.C.P.

Introduction

LASS hatreds have played a promi
nent part in human history, and

probably havea very primitive instinctive basis. . Their rudiments can be seen in
the behaviour of social animals, and are then
commonly accepted as evidence of a “‘ herd
instinct.”” They have probably played a
useful part in the development and preservation of human societies, and have aided in the
evolution of man from the anthropoids.
Most people would, however, agree that they
have now outlived their usefulness and
represent the greatest of all dangers to world
unity and peace: Differences between peoples
in respect of colour and anthropometric
characters, in temperament, in language and
culture, are important sources of the lack of
understanding which is the basis of hostility.

While it is obvious that in human societies
class hatreds are fostered by social traditions,
it is important to recognize that they also

arise spontaneously. Children, especially.

those approaching adolescence, are more
susceptible than adults to hostilities of this
kind; and everyone will remember from
school years instances of children persecuting
unfortunate individuals who have failed to
conform to some arbitrary standard. Among
adults, it is probably true to say that the
emotional is more susceptible than the
rational thinker; and that the tendency,
generally, is associated with emotional immaturity. If this is a fair presentation, one
would expect that the more highly developed
the state of a society the more class tolerance
would be found, and that in a civilized
society the reappearance of an old class
hatred would be a symptom of a tendency to
relapse into barbarism. One might expect
also, however, that class hatreds would
continue to reappear among all conditions of
men from time to time.

17

At the present time numerous examples of
class hatreds can be found in any Western
culture. It will be instructive to list a few
which are commonly observed in a middleclass English milieu. They could be classified
as’:

1. Geographical, e.g. biases against the
Welsh, the Irish, the Scotch ; 2. Lingutstic, e.g. against the ‘‘ Cockney”’ or the
“ Oxford’ accent; 3. Religious, e.g.
against Roman Catholics; 4. Economic,
e.g. against “capitalists”; 5. Cultural,
e.g. against ‘“‘ Bohemians” or “ highbrows’; 6. Soczal, e.g. against “‘ the old
school tie”; 7. Racial, e.g. against
“ niggers’; 8. Polttical, e.g. against Communists ; 9. Biological, e.g. against homosexuals. |
Characteristic qualities of class hatreds are

that they depend on real differences, that
these differences are irrelevant to any
rational estimate of the value of the man or
the ‘class, that irrational, emotionally determined values are nevertheless involved, and
that the individual is confused with his class
and allowed to possess only those faults and
merits which are attributed to the class to
which he belongs. As a matter of practice,
class hatreds are expressed by a majority
against a minority, and not vice versa;
within the minority, however, a reciprocal
hostility obtains, but as a rule only finds
expression within a circle of other members
of the same group.

It is a reasonable hypothesis that psychological causes of the same type are to be
found for anti-Semitism as for class hatreds in
general. But there are peculiar features about
anti-Semitism which have prevented any close
examination of this hypothesis. Some of
these are its ancient history, its international
distribution, and its immense political significance. Most authors who have come to
the subject have approached it ex parte. On
18 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the one side there have been those who have
been inclined to believe that there must be
some cause in the Jew to bring about this
hostility in peoples of all kinds. On the other
side there have been those who have rejected
this hypothesis and have preferred to it the
no more convincing one that this hostility is
the result of Christian education, of political
propaganda, etc., in short that it is a cultural
artefact. ; |
Anti-Semitism, however, has features of its
own which are quite sufficient to explain
anomalies in its epidemiology, without any

need for far-fetched hypotheses of the two

kinds just cited. If we compare it with the
middle-class biases listed above, we see that
it contains elements of more than one of them.
Many Jews in this country have either
immigrated themselves or have come of
immigrant parents. They are distinguished
from non-Jews not only by religion, but by
foreign-sounding names, different cultural
backgrounds, family affiliations, dietetic
habits, holiday observances, etc. They have
a strange tongue peculiar to themselves, and
may speak English with a foreign accent.
Their economic grouping is not that of the
country at large. Not infrequently they have
physical traits, such as shape of nose, which
allow an easy guess at their race. AntiSemitism becomes a common field where
people susceptible to antipathies of very
many different kinds can find themselves in
agreement ; and every difference between
Jews and non-Jews may easily become a
focus around which the feeling of- herd
hostility for the stranger can crystallize.

Circumstances as they affect the Jews are
admittedly different in this country from
what they are in other parts of the world.
But in countries, such as Poland, where
Jews have lived for generations, the ground
has been if anything even more favourable
for the development of anti-Semitism. The
spirit of the ghetto, surviving beyond its
time, for long confined Jews, for the most
part, to small communities of their own, and
prevented any free mixing with the general
population.

Circumstances were very different in
Germany before the war. But it is clear that

the official anti-Semitism which was fostered
during the years of the Nazirégime was not the
spontaneous anti-Semitism of an untutored
people. Before the Nazi persecution of the
Jews began, there had been perhaps the
largest measure of intermarriage between
Jews and non-Jews yet seen in any European
country. While this certainly did not save
the German Jew from persecution, it can
hardly have acted as a stimulus to the antiSemitic movement and it made many administrative and other difficulties for the
persecutors. When the attempt was made
to prosecute similar measures in Italy, even
greater difficulties were encountered and the
attempt was relatively a failure. There is
extremely little natural anti-Semitism among
Italians, a fact which may perhaps be
brought into relation with their greater similarity to Jews in temperament and physical
characters. |

With due allowance made for such artificial
movements, the ancient history and international spread of anti-Semitism need no
better explanation than the long history of
Jewish wanderings. There are Jews in almost
every country of the world, and in every
country they are in-a minority. It is not
surprising that anti-Semitism can, therefore,
spread across national frontiers in a way in
which, for instance, British prejudice against
the Irish cannot. But the international distribution of Jews and of hostility to Jews has
given to “ the Jewish problem ”’ a very large
part of its historical and political significance.
The very persecution to which the Jew has
been subjected has tended to keep in being
a vicious circle. It has encouraged emigration from one country to another, and in each
new land the Jew has appeared as a stranger.
While numbers are extremely small, feelings
of hostility are so localized that no general
attitude on the part of the public is possible.
It seems to be only when the proportion of
persons who are felt to be strangers has
reached a given threshold, and their existence
creates a general impression, that hostility
spreads and may take an epidemic form. It
is customary in this country to feel superior
to the United States in our freedom from the
colour bar ; matters might be very different
A NOTE ON JEWISH-CHRISTIAN INTERMARRIAGE 19

if we had as high a proportion of coloured
people.

It finally must not be forgotten that the
difference of the Jew from the countrymen of

the land in which he lives has been actively ©

maintained by the Jews themselves. Religious conversion of the Gentile to Judaism and
the intermarriage of Jew and non-Jew have
not been encouraged.

Can we expect, then, that anti-Semitism
will always be with us? If we provisionally
accept the hypothesis stated earlier, the
answer is not necessarily yes. If antiSemitism depends for its life on the existence
of real, though irrelevant, differences between
Jew. and non-Jew, anti-Semitism will cease
to exist when and if these differences
disappear. The only difference between
Jews and non-Jews which it would seem
worth while to seek to maintain is the
religious difference. This by itself would
cause but little hostility in an age of religious
tolerance which almost amounts to religious
apathy. A large factor in dissipating differences of other kinds would be the complete
cessation of any sort of persecution or discrimination against the Jew. If Jewish
families remained rooted in one land for
generations, living and mixing freely with
their countrymen, many differences of a
cultural kind, such as those of language,
would disappear rapidly. Other differences,
also cultural, but with a religious sanction,
would be longer maintained. They would,
however, be subject to the liberal and
modernist tendencies now flourishing in the
Jewish Church. Differences of a more
important kind are involved in the physical
and psychological traits which have a
hereditary basis. The principal means by
which they would be dissipated would be by
intermarriage. It is therefore a matter of
some interest to obtain data on the frequency
of Jewish-Christian intermarriage in this
country, and on the extent to which Jews
are tending at the present time to shed those
outward characteristics which single them
out from their compatriots.

Perhaps one further comment should be
made. It is sometimes debated whether it
is, or is not, desirable for intermarriage

The Enquiry

between various races to occur. It is, of
course, true that much further knowledge
is required on the results of mixed breeding
before any final judgment can be made.
Nevertheless, if racial intermarriage never
occurred at all, the races of mankind would
inevitably evolve in the course of time into
separate species with interspecific sterility,
and the foundations be laid of a more
disastrous disunity of mankind even than
that which obtains to-day.

=n

Fifty Jews serving as soldiers in the British
Army were asked for details of their families.
The men were all patients admitted to the
neurosis wards of Sutton Emergency Hospital
during the years 1944-5. They were, therefore, a restricted and a biased selection of
British Jews; but there is no reason to
think that, for instance, neurotic tendencies
among these men would have any relation
with the facts into which enquiry was made, |
or that in respect of these particulars they
would be unrepresentative of British Jews as
a whole. While percentage figures cannot be
given, most of them were not themselves
immigrants, but came of fathers or grandfathers who had immigrated into this country
from Europe one or two generations ago.

Surnames

The surnames of these fifty men were:
Allen, Balcombe, Barnett, Bartick, Berizanski, Brookner, Cohen (4), Denistein,
Donn, Egerton, Ehrlich, Falber, Friedman,
Frost, Glen, Gochin, Henderson, Isbitski,
Kluman, Kolitz, Krish, Ksienski, Kushner,
Landsman, Liberman, Linden, Lubin,
Margolis, Mehlman, Milich, Morris, Myers,
Newman, Packer, Rich, Rosengarten, Rosenthal, Saunders, Selcow, Shokett, Sunderland,
Tartarsky, Vorzanger, Weiss, Werth, Wohl,
Woolf.

It may be noted that sixteen, more or less,
of these names are English ones, and not
immediately recognizable as Jewish patronymics. Those with a foreign ring mostly —
suggest a German or Polish origin.
20 - THE EUGENICS REVIEW

First Names

The first names of propositi and sibs were
not recorded at the beginning of the enquiry.
Those elicited in its later stages were:
Alexander, Alfred, Allan, Ann (3), Barney,
Ben (2), Boris, Coleman, Daphne, David,
Denis, Doris, Esther, Fanny, Frances, Goldy,
Harold, Harry (4), Howard, Ian, Irene,
Izzy (stc), Jack (2), Jean, Jeannette, John (3),
Joseph, Judah, Kitty, Leah, Lewis, Lilian,
Lily, Lottie, Louis, Mark, Maureen, Max,
Morris, Murrie, Nathan, Nathaniel, Olive,
Pearl, Philip (2), Polly, Priscilla, Ralph,
Raymond, Rita, Roxana, Sadie (2), Sam (2),
Samuel, Sarah, Sidney, Stanley, Theodore.
It is surprising how very few of these names
would strike the average Englishman as
specifically Jewish, and how some familiar
Jewish names have failed to appear.

Upbringing —

At the beginning of the enquiry, questions
were asked about the religious upbringing of
the patients’ parents, of himself and hi&
sibs, and of the next generation. As, however, they occasionally caused an atmosphere
of awkwardness, they were abandoned in the
latter third of the enquiry. Dealing in
families rather than in persons, we have the

following numbers :
Generation of

Religious Upbringing Parents Patient Children
Very strict ~ ws 24 - 4 3
Strict we 22 14 16
Moderate or liberal 17 20 20
Lax .. “ous —— 3 12
Non-Jewish or nonreligious we «OCCT — 18
Totals 64 50 69

Classification of type of upbringing was made
by the subjects themselves. We have to

make allowance for the fact that information’

about the upbringing of the parents was
hearsay.
secular change in the direction of increasing
liberalism is very noticeable.

Physical Characters

As the enquiry progressed it was noticed
that the patients as a group did not conform

But even when this is done, the

at all closely to popular conceptions of the
typical Jewish appearance. For the last
twenty-four patients seen, relevant observa
. tions were made. The popular picture of a

Jew is a man of swarthy complexion, with
dark brown eyes, black wavy hair, and a
Jewish nose. The following particulars were
observed :

Skin: often quite fair; 2 of the 24 were
subject to sunburn in summer.

Eyes: blue 5, hazel 3, grey 9, light brown
3, dark brown 4.

Nose: retroussé 3, straight 7, Jewish : ? 2,
Jewish 8, Roman 1, unclassifiable but nonJewish 3.

Har: straight 4, wavy 14, curly 6; light
brown 5, chestnut 1, dark brown 16, black 2.

On this very small sample, British Jews
would seem to have on the whole rather
darker eyes than non-Jews. A _ parallel
series of selected patients in the military
neurotic wards of Sutton Hospital showed the
following incidence of eye-colours : blue 162,
hazel III, grey 111, light brown 58, dark
brown 18. But taking the Jews as a whole,
they show a considerable proportion of men
who would not be recognizable as Jews on
anthropometric characteristics alone. It
seems probable that this sample included men
of mixed blood, and that British Jews, in
general, would be found to have a sizable
proportion of non-Jewish ancestors, if the
matter were capable of investigation.

Intermarriage
The following numbers were obtained of
the marriages in the parental and the filial

generations :

Consorts of Jewish Non-Jewish
Fathers . 49 I
Mothers wes w+» 50 —
Patients nes .. 28 4
Brothers... we 52 12
Sisters _—_..... we 52 12

Totals . 231 29

Intermarriage with non-Jews was rare in
the parental generation. Of the four Christian
wives whom the patients had married, two
came from the Church of England, one was a
A NOTE ON JEWISH-CHRISTIAN INTERMARRIAGE 21

Roman Catholic, and one was a Primitive
Methodist. The patients could not, asa rule,
give the denomination of Christian consorts
of the brothers and sisters. Of the 16
marriages with non-Jews made by the
patients and their brothers 11 had produced
children, and in 9 of these the children were
not being brought up in the Jewish faith. Of
the patients’ sisters 63 had married, one of
them twice. Children were born to 10 of the
mixed marriages, and were being brought up
as Christians in 6 families, as Jews in 4.

Of the 160 marriages in the present generation, therefore, 28 were to non-Jews, an
incidence of approximately 17 per cent. The
marriages with Christians were, however, not
‘evenly distributed. Of the 46 families where
a marriage had occurred in this generation,
30 showed no marriage outside the faith, 12
one such marriage, 2 two, I three, and I no
fewer than nine. This last family were clearly
in the process of becoming a non-Jewish one.
If it were omitted from the general total, the
incidence of Christian marriage would be 19
in 150 or approximately one in every eight
marriages. Even this is a high rate of
exogamy, and certainly a higher one than has
obtained in earlier generations. If it is a
general phenomenon, and not one confined
to the very restricted sample reported here,
it would lead to a rapid mixing of the
Christian and Jewish populations.

It is interesting to record that 23 of the
propositi stated that they would have no
objection on religious principle to marrying
a Gentile, 10 said they would have some but
not an insuperable objection, and 17 said
they would have the-strongest objections.

Comparative material is not easy to come
by. It is, however, worth noting that
Burgess and Wallin in a study of 941
engaged couples in the U.S.A., had among
their engaged pairs 177 Jews and 185
Jewesses, but only 17 per cent. of these men
and women had betrothed themselves to coreligionists. A corresponding rate of intermarriage would lead to the practical disappearance of the Jews as an endogamous
group within two generations.

Conclusions

The sample of British Jews reported on
here is a very small one and possibly not
representative. Any. conclusion, therefore,
must be tentative in the extreme. Nevertheless the suggestion arises that the social and
psychological forces which are tending to
undermine belief in religious dogma are’
having this effect on Jewish as well as
Christian adherents. Social differences between Jews and non-Jews are also being
dropped. Furthermore, it seems likely that
the frequency of marriage with non-Jews has
increased among Jews in recent years, and is
now of the order of one in eight marriages.
Such a rate of intermarriage would, if
maintained for a number of generations,
assimilate the Jewish and non-Jewish populations. As this point was approached, the
differences between Jews and non-Jews
which, it is suggested, provide the potentiality for anti-Semitism would disappear.

: REFERENCE
BurcEss, E. W., and WALLIN, P. (1943) ‘‘ Homogamy in Social Characteristics,’’ Am. J. Sociol., 49,
109. .

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXXIX, No. 1
