MALTHUS IN PERSPECTIVE
By JOHN BLACKER

1834) published the first edition of his
famous “Essay on the Principle of

,

‘HOMAS ROBERT MALTHUS (1766
Population ”’ in 1798, at the age of thirtytwo. Ever since, his theory has been the
subject of a controversy of fluctuating
intensity. Many of the arguments that have
been used against it have been valid, but
more often they have been based on
misconceptions and misrepresentations of
what he had in fact written. This is true, not
only of the time at which Malthus wrote, but
also of today, and now that the increasing
gravity of the world’s population problems
has once again brought the subject to the
fore, two recently published books are

all the more welcome in so far as they put the |

subject into perspective and discuss it
dispassionately.

“To know what Malthus actually wrote is
clearly the minimum to be urged,” writes
Professor Glass in his preface, and the
Introduction to Malthus * which he edits
contains two reprints of Malthus’s writings,
together with introductory essays by H. L.
Beales, D. V. Glass and A. T. Peacock, and a
bibliography of British population literature
from 1793 to 1880, compiled by J. A. Banks
and Professor Glass. The reprints of Malthus
‘consist of “‘ A Summary View of the Principle
of Population ” published in 1830, and “‘ A
Letter to Samuel Whitbread, Esq., M.P.”
written in 1801. In many ways these may be
regarded as the most valuable part of the
book. The “Summary View ’’ published
four years before Malthus’s death contains
the pith of his argument, as presented in his
great work. The letter to Samuel Whitbread,
however, deals with the more limited subject
of the latter’s proposals for the amendment
of the poor law. On the whole Malthus wrote
simply and readably, and these works may
well stimulate the reader to look at the
elaborations of this theory in the larger work.

*D. V. Glass (Editor). Introduction to Malthus.
London, 1953. Watts. Pp. x x 205. Price ros. 6d.

169

Dr. Beales’ introductory chapter on “‘ The
Historical Context. of the ‘Essay’ on
Population ’’ describes its impact on
contemporary society and the storm of
controversy which it aroused. He then goes
on to discuss the influence of Malthus on the
Poor Law Amendment Act, of 1834, and
on the stream of transatlantic migration,
recalling the evidence Malthus gave before
the Committee on Emigration of 1826-28.

Now while the effect which his ideas may
have had on the volume of migration to the
New World is clearly very small, the question
of Malthus’s influence on the re-shaping of
the Poor Laws is a complex one, and it
cannot but be felt that Dr. Beales’s treatment
of it is somewhat madequate. “‘ If Chadwick
and Senior were its architects,’ he writes,
“the spirit behind the Poor Law Amendment Act (1834) was that of Malthus.” This
view though only partially true, is so
generally held that there has come to be
heaped on Malthus the obloquy for all the
horrors of the workhouse system as it
developed after 1834. The Hammonds!
have described how these horrors were
finally brought to light in 1845 through
the scandal of the Andover Workhouse,
where the half-starved inmates fought for
the gristle and marrow of some putrid bones
which they had been given to crush.

‘“ Poverty,” says Dr. Beales, “was a
crime.’’ But Malthus did not regard poverty
as a crime, even if many of his self-styled
followers did. What he regarded as criminal
was that pauper boys and girls should marry
and beget large numbers of children whom
they had no prospect whatever of being able
to support and who could only become an
added burden on the ratepayer. He insisted,
reasonably enough, that the proportion of
the population dependent on poor relief
should be reduced to the minimum, and he
therefore believed that the poor law should
be administered in such a way as best to
discourage such improvident marriages.
170

_ Eventually, he thought, the gradual and
total abolition of the poor laws would be
best suited to this end. In particular he was
strongly opposed to such measures as that
put forward by Whitbread in 1807 for the
provision of cottages for paupers out of the
poor rates, which, he thought, could only be
a stimulus to marriage.

_ How far, it may be asked, was Malthus’s
diagnosis of the social problems of this time,
and the treatment which he recommended
for them, correct ? This question, however,
Dr. Beales scarcely answers. He emphasises
that the workhouse system proposed by the
1834 Act was inapplicable to the problems
of the industrial towns in the North. But
the abuses of the Speenhamland system,
and the total inadequacy of the old method
of poor relief clearly made a revision of the
poor laws imperative. According to Halevy?
the ‘average annual expenditure on poor
relief had increased from some {2 million
before the French War to some £8 million in
1818. Dr. Beales attributes this rise to “‘ the
steep climb of prices to unprecedented
heights, the sharp embarrassment of a
series of bad harvests, the strains and
stresses of war finance, the very amateurishness of the justices of the peace.’”’ He does
not mention the growth of the population
which was fundamental to all the social
problems which faced the ministries of
Liverpool and his successors. Furthermore
it is well known that the Justices of the
Peace, who at that time were responsible for
the disposal of the poor rates, had the
example of the French Revolution
immediately before their eyes, and were
terrified lest a similar jacquerie should arise
in this country. Thus in their efforts to
appease the working classes they started
to disburse increasingly large sums of money
in poor relief. The requisite statistics are not
available, but it is conceivable that these
disbursements resulted, not so much in'‘a

‘permanent amelioration in the conditions of .

the mass of the working classes, but rather
in their rapid increase in numbers and a
further rise in the price of food. Thus the
Malthusian protagonists of Poor Law reform
may have had at least a basis of truth to their

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

arguments. Dr. Beales says that Nassau
Senior (the Professor of Political Economy
at Oxford and the leading economist of
the day) “repudiated the . Malthusian
orthodoxy,’ but on this issue at any rate
Malthus had his support, for in 1829 Senior
wrote to him saying: ‘“‘ We have the poor
laws to increase our numbers... .”’

There is no doubt that had Malthus’s
scheme for the total abolition of the poor
laws been put into effect, it would have
brought starvation to innumerable temporarily unemployed workers in the towns.
But it is arguable that in his opposition to
the provision of cottages out of the poor
rates, he may have been right. Mr. Kenneth
Connell, in his book on the population of
Ireland before the famine,® puts forward the
view that it was the possibility of obtaining
a holding—facilitated by the spread of the
potato, and by the changeover from pasture
to arable farming by the Irish landowners—
which occasioned the violent expansion of
the Irish population after 1770, through the
medium of early marriage.

Professor Glass’s chapter on “ Malthusand the Limitation of Population Growth ”
is perhaps the most interesting of the three.
Malthus maintained that the postponement
of marriage was the only legitimate and
moral method of controlling fertility, and
Professor Glass shows that the demographic .
evolution of Ireland after the great famine
in 1845 came closest to this ideal. If the
original expansion of the Irish population:
had been due to earlier marriage through
the fragmentation of holdings, the decline in
fertility after 1845 was due to a return to the
old custom of passing on estates intact from
one generation to another and thus to the
postponement of marriage. The comparatively small amount of extra-marital sexual
relations, reflected in the low illegitimacy
rate, and the small decline in fertility after
marriage has taken place, likewise shows that
Ireland approached more nearly to Malthus’s
requirements than other Western European
countries. :

Professor Glass also discusses the influence
of Malthus on the legislation against early
marriage in certain German states where the
MALTHUS IN

population problem had again become acute
through the fragmentation of holdings. His
chapter ends with a brief discussion of the
spread of birth control in western society.
“The development of the birth control
movement in nineteenth-century England,”
he writes, “‘ represented an explicit acceptance of the Malthusian theory and a complete
abandonment of Malthus’s rules of conduct.”
“Whatever the value of the Malthusian
theory,’ he ends, “ Malthus’s precepts of
conduct have lost their relevance as a means
of preventing a conflict between population
and resources.”’ As regards Malthus’s
condemnation of birth control, this may
certainly be true, though people are inclined
to forget that for a clergyman of the Church
of England living at that time, it would have
been unthinkable for him to have adopted
any other attitude. His advocacy of the
postponement of marriage, on the other
hand, still has a very real bearing on the
world’s population problems, particularly
in India, where the prevalence of early
matriage is a major cause of the high
fertility among the Hindus. Thus the
possibilities of the postponement of marriage
was one of the subjects under discussion at
the Bombay Conference on Planned
Parenthood last November.

Dr. Beales is an economic historian,
Professor Glass a sociologist, and Mr. A. T.
Peacock an economist. Possibly for this
reason alone the latter’s brief chapter on the
vast subject of “‘ Malthus in the Twentieth
Century ’” is somewhat disappointing, for
so many of the problems which may be
raised under this heading are really those of
the anthropologist rather than the economist.
“The reader who has any knowledge of the
economic problems of under-developed
countries,’ he writes in a note, “‘ will realize
how summarily I have dealt with them.”

Malthus was preoccupied with the pressure
of the population against the means of
subsistence which he saw about him in
almost every European country. Since his
time this pressure has been relieved, first,
by large-scale emigration to the New World ;
second, by the enormous increase in production of both industry and agriculture ;

PERSPECTIVE

17I

third, by the decline in fertility due to the
spread of contraception. How far are these
three methods applicable to those countries
today where the Malthusian pressure of
population against the means of subsistence
is assuming ever more serious proportions ?
From the remedy of emigration there is
clearly little to be hoped and Mr. Peacock
dismisses it briefly. “‘ Relatively speaking,’
he writes, “ migration is not an important
factor in determining the level of population,
and it is unlikely, given the present world
political situation, that emigration of Asiatic
peoples to other areas would be at all
practicable, quite apart from any economic
incentives which might promote population
movement.”’

The question of the development of
industry and agriculture he discusses in
rather more detail, and examines the
relevance of the law of diminishing returns
to under-developed countries : ‘ It does not
appear likely,” he writes, ‘‘ that much can be
done to raise the level of per capita income
quick enough to _ offset increases in
population.’”’ The problems of the utilization
of foreign aid are discussed and, somewhat
reluctantly, it would seem, he comes to
admit the truth of the Neo-Malthusian
argument, if only for a temporary crucial
phase. “I go further,’ he writes, “ and
contend that this crucial phase is now about
to be experienced in Asian countries, and
may well be a formidable barrier to improvements in living conditions, even if foreign
aid to these countries is forthcoming, for the
gap between the birth-rate and the mortality
rate is likely to be considerable for some time
to come.” .

The vast and all-important question of the
spread of birth control, however, he hardly
touches upon, regarding it as being outside
his sphere as an economist. “‘ Here we must
assume that the spread of knowledge of
birth control, already apparent in India,
will be a major factor in years to come,
and that the practices implied will not be
opposed by the sanction of moral and
religious codes. But this is an assumption
and it does not behove the economist to
decide whether it is a reasonable one or not.”’
172

The bibliography of British population
literature from 1793 to 1880, compiled by
J. A. Banks and D. V. Glass, contains a
wealth of valuable material for those who
wish to follow up the subject, and one’s only
regret is that it could not have been brought
closer to the present day.

Dr. G. F. McCleary’s book The Malthusian
Population Theory* is both comprehensive

and readably written, and, like the majority |

of Faber’s publications, beautifully produced.
It is.at the same time a biography of Malthus
and a critical exposition of his theory. There
are eleven chapters, the first six of which
describe in detail the different sections of the
essay and how they came to be written.
There then follow two chapters entitled
“Malthus and  Contraception”’ and
“Mistakes about Malthus,’ in which the
common misconceptions of the Malthusian
theory are analyzed and disproved. So far
the theory has been fully and_lucidly
explained, but without any attempt at
critical assessment. This then follows in two
chapters entitled ‘“ Was Malthus right about
Population ?’’ The first of these analyses
the main points of the theory—the geometrical ratio of population growth, and the
arithmetical ratio of increase of the means of
subsistence. Of the first he writes: “It
seems we may Safely conclude that when
Malthus said an unchecked population would
double itself every twenty-five years, thus
increasing in a geometrical ratio, he was
right.”” On the other hand, on the subject of
the arithmetical ratio he says: ~“ The
arithmetical ratio is the most vulnerable
point in the Malthusian theory of population,
the point most easy to attack, and most
difficult to defend.”’ This chapter also
contains the famous correspondence between
Malthus and Nassau Senior, and is followed
by an evaluation of the differences between
them, intimating that in the light of the
decline in fertility of the West, Senior may
have shown more insight than Malthus.

The second of the two chapters entitled
“Was Malthus right about Population ? ”’
discusses the developments since Malthus’s

* G. F. McCleary. The Malthusian Population Theory.
‘London, 1953. Faber. Pp. 191. Price 15s.

'. THE EUGENICS REVIEW

time in the light of his theory, and a vivid
picture is drawn of its application to areas
such as India, and other countries of high
fertility. He ends the chapter by summarizing the fundamental points of the
Malthusian theory fully and succinctly:
“ Malthus held that since it is easier for man
to produce children than to produce subsistence, population constantly tends to outrun subsistence but is restrained by a
variety of checks, all of which may be
divided into (1) positive, which tend to raise
the death-rate, and (2) preventive, which
tend to reduce the birth-rate. He also held
that the positive checks became less
prevalent with the advance of Western
civilization ; that an unchecked population.
would double itself every twenty-five years ;
that it is necessary that population increase
should be restrained ; and that the positive
checks should as far as possible be eliminated,
and the ‘ requisite population of any country’
be reared ‘from the smallest number of
births.’ On these basic propositions there
seems to be agreement among the most
instructed critics that he was right.”’ |

The final chapter of the book entitled
““Malthus as Professor,’’ describes the later
events of Malthus’s life, and indicates the
features of his other works on “ political
economy.” :

On the.whole the two chief impressions
received from Dr. McCleary’s book are, first,
the picture of Malthus himself, who appears
as a man who was kindly, likeable, and wise,

and second, the great breadth and
comprehensiveness of his theory’ on
population.

There is but one addition which might be
made to the book, which should come under
the chapter on ‘“‘ Mistakes about Malthus.”
It is one which Dr. McCleary indicates, but
does not explicitly state. It is commonly.
maintained that the Malthusian theory holds.
that any attempts to increase the means of
subsistence or to better the conditions of the lower classes are useless and futile, as these
ameliorations will merely be offset by their
increase in numbers. Even Mr. Peacock is ©
guilty of this misrepresentation: ‘‘ The first

¢¢

proposition of the theory,” he writes, is.
MALTHUS IN PERSPECTIVE

that the level of population in a given
society tends to gravitate to that which just
permits subsistence standard of living for the

great majority of its inhabitants. If for any ~

reasons the standard of living rises above the
subsistence level, then better living
conditions will promote earlier marriages and
a fall in mortality rates, so that the growth in
population cancels out any increase in the
means of subsistence.’’ Against this it is
argued that it is only after an initial improvement in their modes of living that people
can be induced to limit their fertility.
Malthus, however, fully acknowledged this.
“It does not by any means follow from these
principles,’’ he wrote to Senior in 1829,
“that we should not use our utmost
endeavours to make two ears of wheat grow
where one grew before, or to improve our
commercial code by freeing it from restraints.

173

An increase of population is in itself a very
decided advantage, if it be not accompanied
by an increased proportion of vice and
misery. And the period during which the
pressure of population is lightened, though

-it may not be of long duration, is a period of

comparative ease—and ought by. no means
to be thrown out of our considerations. It is
further to be observed that the experience
of such a period may sometimes operate in
giving to the labouring classes a taste for
such a mode of living as will tend to increase
their prudential habits. But it is obvious,
that without this latter effect, the pressure of
poverty cannot be permanently lessened.”’

REFERENCES
1. Hammond, J. L. and Barbara.
Penguin Books. p. 105.
2. Halevy, Elie. England in 1815. Benn. (2nd Ed.).
p. 381. 3. Connell, K. H. The Population of Iveland 1750-1845.
0.U.P

The Bleak A ge.

~ Bugenics Review, Vol. XLV, No. 8
