LEGAL AND SOCIAL IMPLICATIONS OF

ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION*
By CECIL BINNEY, W.A.

Barrister-at-Law, Inner Temple

artificial insemination, and though it is

improbable that it will often come before
the law courts it might easily give rise to
litigation of an important and a sensational
character. There has as yet been no Act of
Parliament which in any way deals with the
subject nor any reported case upon it in
England, but the existing law can be applied
by analogy to this new process as it has been
to other new discoveries, whether biological,
chemical or mechanical in-character. This I
shall attempt to do in the present paper, but
I shall not confine myself merely to a statement of the law, but shall consider also social
implications. The paper is in fact an expansion of one dealing with the purely legal
aspect of the subject which I was this summer
asked to read to the gynzcological section of
the British Medical Association at their
annual meeting.

I was greatly gratified by this privilege,
which is seldom conferred on anyone who is
not a medical man, and the doctors gave me
the courteous hearing which was to be
expected of them, but I could not help
observing from the subsequent discussion
that they took little interest in the subject of
artificial insemination. And I felt they were
quite right. Artificial insemination raises
some interesting problems for the academic
lawyer, but to medical men _ habitually
engaged on difficult obstetrical problems in
which life or death depend on success or
failure there can be little interest in an operation which presents no technical difficulty to
the practitioner, and is unlikely ever to be
anything but rare.

This last statement I expect to be challenged, for I have seen it stated that in
America artificial insemination has already

|: is plain that the law cannot ignore

* A paper read before the Eugenics Society on October
26th, 1948.

become common and, in particular, wellknown cinema actresses have had children
by this means. I hope I shall not be considered cynical in expressing incredulity.
Not long ago I noticed a news item about
some persons in the United States who had
won a prize of some three or four thousand
dollars, and desired to be excused from
receiving it in view of the avalanche of
begging letters and demands for money
which was descending on them. And this,
be it observed, was in respect of a sum worth
only about £1,500 in our money. One can
therefore well understand a successful filmstar or her business manager announcing
that the baby which she happens to have had
was artificially produced—that it was, so to
speak, brought by the doctor in a black bag—
in order to avoid claims by indigent noblemen, cabin stewards and film extras alleging”
that they may have been the father of the
child. Other ladies less highly placed may
still have adequate reasons for making a.
similar pretence. Even if there were none of
the legal difficulties to which I refer, I do
not believe artificial insemination would ever
become widespread. It is at best a complicated way of effecting something which
can be done quite easily.

I remember a most interesting paper being
read to the Eugenics Society by the late Mr.
Gunn regarding the royal families of Europe,
in which he pointed out that the Spanish
Bourbons had only been saved from utter
degeneracy or extinction by one queen
prudently having children by someone other
than the reigning monarch. The same is true
of the Romanovs, and the subject has been
exploited by Swift im Gulliver's Travels.
Though the motives of these royal ladies
may have been mixed, they would certainly
justify themselves, if we were able to communicate with them, by saying that it was

199
200

their wish to provide an adequate heir to the
throne notwithstanding the impotence or
feebleness of their.royal husbands, that they
had taken every step available to conceal the
paternity of the children, and they had thus
with the lesser facilities available before the
invention of artificial insemination achieved
every result expected of it.

Before coming to the real subject of this
paper—the artificial insemination of a
woman by some man to whom she is not
married—I ought to deal with the artificial
insemination of a woman from her husband,
which may be resorted to by married couples
who cannot have children in the ordinary
way. This is not likely to give rise to any
legal questions. The child is in fact the child
of the lawful husband, and from the point of
the lawyer—though not, I understand, from
that of some theologians—-it is merely an
improved medical technique for enabling
married persons to have children who might
otherwise be unable to do so. It may, however, be worth calling attention to one point
which might not occur to those unfamiliar
with proceedings in the Divorce Division.

The law of nullity of marriage is untouched
by artificial insemination. A decree of
nullity of marriage is granted on proof of the
incapacity of the other party to consummate
the marriage ; ability to have a child is not
material. Sterility on the part of a person
who is capable of sexual connexion is no
ground for the annulment of a marriage ; on
the other hand, a decree of nullity has in one
case, at least, been granted to a man on the
ground of his wife’s incapacity to consummate the marriage, notwithstanding the fact
that she had had a child by him. Accordingly, a woman who was liable to have her
marriage annulled on the ground of her
incapacity, or a man liable to have a decree
of nullity given against him on the same
grounds, could not affect the result of the
case by proof that it was possible for the wife
to have a child by artificial insemination
from the husband: indeed, even the fact
that she had had such a child would be no
answer in itself to the suit, assuming that the
facts could be proved.

That a decree of nullity would be granted

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

in a case where a child had been so born I do
not affirm. It has always been a principle of
the ecclesiastical law which still governs
these cases for nullity that no decree is to be
granted to a petitioner guilty of what is
styled ‘‘ want of sincerity.’’ The exact limits
of this doctrine have never been laid down,
and there is naturally no case at all similar to
that suggested, but in practice a decree would
probably be refused in a case in which a child
had been born by means of artificial insemination to the husband and wife.*

To return, however, to the more ordinary
case of artificial insemination from some man
to whom the woman is not married, and
whose identity is not revealed to her, it is
clear that, however common such operations
might become, there are few types of legal
proceedings in which it is likely to come
under consideration. Indeed, if we disregard
such melodramatic but improbable characters
as the Machiavellian doctor who artificially
inseminates a woman against her will and the
unscrupulous adventuress who has herself
artificially inseminated in order to bring
false charges against some man, and confine
our attention to situations which are reasonably likely to occur in practice, there are only
two branches of law in which artificial insemination is likely to be of importance—the
law of divorce and the law of inheritance.

I should perhaps refer in passing to the
criminal law. Since the Eugenics Society has
spent much time and money in trying to find
a satisfactory answer to the question whether
sterilization on eugenic grounds is a breach
of the criminal law, it might occur to some of
its members to ask whether the equally new
process of artificial insemination was illegal.
There is in my opinion no ground for any
such fear. Since a married man who seduces
the wife of another man, takes no precautions
to avoid making her pregnant, and in fact
causes her to have a child, is not guilty of
any crime by English law however reprehensible his conduct may be morally, it cannot be that to make a woman pregnant by
artificial means (assuming, of course, that

* Since this paper was written such a case has come
before the Court : on the particular facts of that case a
decree of nullity was granted.
LEGAL AND SOCIAL IMPLICATIONS OF ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION zor

she consents) can constitute a crime by any
person participating in the operation. The
report of the Commission appointed by the
Archbishop of Canterbury advocates a
statute making artificial insemination a
criminal offence: but such a law is not
likely to be passed since its tendency must
obviously be to encourage perjury, adultery
and blackmail.

The importance of artificial insemination
in divorce is obvious. In spite of the reforms
introduced in 1937 by Sir Alan Herbert’s
famous Act, a large proportion of divorce
suits are still concerned with sexual matters :
and, indeed, there would be something badly
wrong with a divorce court which disregarded
artificial insemination. It has been suggested
that for a woman to be artificially inseminated and thus made pregnant by some man
other than her husband would constitute an
act of adultery on her part. Although this
opinion has recently received the formidable
support of Mr. Justice Vaisey and Mr. H. U.
Willink, K.C., I am certain that it is erroneous. A married woman who commits
adultery may be said to aggravate the wrong
done to her husband if as a resul€ she gives
birth to an illegitimate child ; yet the birth
of a child is not necessary in order to constitute adultery. It is no less adultery when
committed by a woman who is beyond the
age of child-bearing, or who is already
pregnant by her husband, or who by taking
contraceptive measures avoids having a
child. The law goes further, and will regard
as adultery any sexual act, notwithstanding
that by its nature it cannot result in the
conception of a child. Hence arise the
occasional findings of adultery against women
cited in divorce suits who have conclusive
medical evidence that they are virgins.
Though such decisions may cause surprise
to newspaper readers they are eminently just
and logical. Assuming that adultery is a
matrimonial offence, it would be intolerable
that a man or woman guilty of it should
escape legal liability by establishing that,
either in order to provide a technical legal
defence, or for some equally discreditable
reason, they had done something other than
the normal sexual act of connexion. .

Now, if adultery consists in law of any
sexual act between two persons of the
opposite sex, one at least of whom is married
to someone else, irrespective of whether it
does or could result in the conception of a
child, it seems to me to follow that adultery
cannot be constituted by the conception of a
child without any sexual act in the ordinary
meaning of the words. To put the same
argument in the language of moral theology,
on which our divorce law is originally based,
adultery seems to me to involve some element of concupiscence or carnal desire which
is lacking in artificial insemination. Moreover, those who maintain that the woman
who is artificially inseminated is guilty of
adultery have never specified with what
man and at what point of time she commits
it, questions to which it is impossible to find
answers that do not have nonsensical
implications.

Had artificial insemination become available before 1937 it may be that some provision would have had to be made by law for
this, but the passing of the new Matrimonial Causes Act in that year obviated any
difficulty, for one cannot doubt that the
court would hold that any woman so unfeeling as to get herself artificially . inseminated from some other source without
her husband’s consent was guilty of cruelty
to him, which under the 1937 Act is a ground
for divorce.

The branch of law, however, into which
artificial insemination will introduce most
problems is that concerned with the inheritance of property. It seems to me plain
that the child of a married woman not conceived by her husband, but as the result of
artificial insemination from some _ other
source, is not in law any more than it is in
fact, the child of her husband, even though
circumstances may make it impossible for
him to disprove that it is his. Strictly
speaking, the mother should register it like
any other child conceived by someone other
than a man to whom she is married, under
her own name alone as an illegitimate child.
To do otherwise would be a breach of the
law ; but there is no likelihood of any proceedings being brought, for in practice a
202

married man is permitted to accept as his
own any child born to his wife during marriage ; and (subject to the recent and illconsidered Inheritance (Family Provision)
Act, 1938) he can by will make what financial
provision he likes for such a child. Serious
difficulties may however arise where the
children of the marriage are entitled to inherit
money under some settlement by which, if
the husband and wife have no children, the
fund will go to a collateral relation. The supposed parents can of course pass off as their
own the child produced by the wife by
artificial insemination, but such conduct is
not honest ; it is a fraud on the next heir no
different from passing off as legitimate an
illegitimate child of the wife, or a suppositious child obtained from some other woman.

Although an examination of authorities is
seldom of interest except to a lawyer, it may
be relevant briefly to refer to some cases of
this kind which are to be found in the reports.
Thus, in the Slingsby baby case,* the younger
brothers, who in the event of their elder
brother dying childless were entitled to the
family estates, alleged that a child born
while the elder brother and his wife were in
California and registered as theirs was suppositious, being born of a different parentage
altogether. In the case of Rideout’s trustst
in 1870 there were five undoubtedly legitimate children of the marriage, but a share in
the settlement funds was claimed by a sixth
child. The husband and wife had separated
in Paris, and from then until she gave birth
to this child nearly two years later the wife
remained there: the husband, on the other
hand, returned to England immediately after
the separation, never again lived with her
and never went to France at any material
time before the child’s birth, except for one
occasion when he went with his solicitor to
Paris to get evidence against his wife, and
did not see her. Accordingly, he alleged that
the child was illegitimate. Similarly in the
case of Yearwood’s trusts{ not many years
later it appeared that the lady on whose
marriage funds had been settled had, after

* (1912) 2 Ch. 21.
ft (L.R. 10 Eq. 41.)
5 Ch.D. 545.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

having one legitimate child by her husband,.
left him to live at and manage a public
house, and there had had three more
children by another man. The question, of
course, was whether the first child could
establish that the three others were illegitimate and thus get the whole and not only a
quarter of the fund. In the Aylesford Peerage
case* in 1885 the question was whether the
title was to devolve on the younger brother
of the late Earl or on a son born to his wife
some years after she had left him to live in
Paris under an assumed name with another
nobleman.

There have no doubt been other cases of
the same kind which it has not been found
necessary to report, and it is easy to imagine
the protracted family quarrels which must
have taken place. Similar quarrels and
similar litigation would ensue if a child conceived as a result of artificial insemination
were put forward as entitled to the. settled
funds or lands, particularly if it had been
known in the family that the husband was
for some reason incapable of having children.
Such litigation would incidentally raise in
the acutest form the question of professional
confidence. Apart from medical evidence it
would be much harder to prove the conception of a child by artificial means than its
conception as a result of an adulterous
association by its mother, which would
probably be known to her friends and relations ; whereas the case would be simple if
medical men could be compelled to give
evidence of the artificial insemination of the
mother or merely that her husband was incapable of producing children.

If, on the other hand, the artificially
produced child is to forgo as he logically
should, any claim to the settled funds, this
renders nugatory his registration and acceptance as the lawful child of the marriage. It
will be difficult to conceal from the world at
large, almost impossible to conceal from the
other persons interested under the settlement, and quite impossible to conceal from
the child when he reaches the age for taking
legal advice, the reason why he is debarred
from a share in the funds to which he

*rr1 A.C. 1.
LEGAL AND SOCIAL IMPLICATIONS OF ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION 203

appears, as the child of his supposed father,
to be entitled. .

I can see no solution for this impasse
except the reform which I myself have consistently advocated on other grounds—
namely the abolition of all settled funds. If
a testator had to decide once and for all to
which existing persons he wished to leave his
money, he could before doing so make what
inquiries he liked as to his beneficiaries,
including inquiries as to their parentage, but
the persons named in his will would take the
money left to them irrespective of their
antecedents and no one would be concerned
to ascertain who was their father. Unfortunately, I see no chance of this reform
being adopted, and so long as settled funds
exist they provide an insuperable barrier to
artificial insemination as a practical measure
among the limited class interested in them.
I must resist the temptation to digress into
a discussion of this subject, and will consider
rather the objection which has been made to
artificial insemination, that it might lead to
incest between persons unaware of their
relationship.

This is a social rather than a legal objection. If a man formed an association with a
woman who as a result of artificial insemination in the previous generation was in fact
his half-sister, there is no possibility of either
of them being prosecuted for incest for ex
hypothesi neither would have had knowledge
of the relationship which must be established
for a prosecution to succeed. Socially the
result would be no less deplorable. We must
admit that artificial insemination does lead
to an increased risk of incest being unwittingly committed, but in so large a community as Great Britain the risk is very
small. After all, this risk is always present.
Every man who has not complete confidence
in the chastity of his mother-in-law runs
some risk that the true father of his bride
may have been one of his own near relations.
The risk is infinitesimal in the social circles
in which most of us move, but it must be far
otherwise in village communities which live
an isolated life and in which the standard of
chastity is not high, and the same might be
true where the bride and bridegroom were

children of parents who had been members
of a very small English community living in
a distant country.

So far I have been dealing principally with
the law as it concerns the woman in question
and her husband: it may however be interesting to consider its application to medical men. As I have already stated, criminal
proceedings could not be successfully brought
in respect of the operation of artificial insemination performed under any conditions
which can be reasonably anticipated. It is
even more obvious that a woman cannot take
civil proceedings for damages against a
doctor for carrying out an operation which
she has herself authorized him to perform. It
is arguable whether a doctor who artificially
inseminated a woman without her husband’s
consent would be liable in damages to him.
I can see this forming the subject matter of a
most interesting legal debate in which the
most fundamental principles of law might be
discussed. On the whole I think the answer
is that the doctor may be liable, not on the
ground on which a co-respondent is liable,
since artificial insemination is not adultery,
and the divorce court can only grant damages
for adultery, but on the ground that making
the wife pregnant has interfered with the
husband’s right to her services and marital
duties—on the same basis, that is, on which
the outraged father is entitled to claim
damages against a man who has seduced his
daughter and thus caused her to have a
child. It may be objected that I am now
dealing with an unreal situation since any
medical man would be careful to obtain the
husband’s consent first, but those who have
experience of actions brought against medical
men may agree that such precautions are not
always sufficient to prevent actions being
brought.

As in the case of any other medical operation or treatment, a claim for damages
against a medical man could be made by the
woman if he carried out artificial insemination unskilfully or negligently. This immediately raises the question whether such an
action could be based on proof that as a
result of artificial insemination the plaintiff
has found herself with a child far other than
204

. what she had desired. Such a claim might
perhaps succeed if owing to the doctor’s negligence the unfortunate woman found herself
with a baby suffering from some hereditary
disease or abnormality : if her objection was
merely to the baby’s general character or
physical appearance a court would probably
refuse to entertain the action, but that would
not make the social problem underlying it
any the less difficult. To take the most
obviously controversial example, what are
the rights as between the blonde Nordic
lady who feels miserable and humiliated at
having a child of unmistakable Jewish
paternity and the liberal-minded doctor who
thinks it his duty to do everything to eliminate racial differences and to discourage racial
prejudice ? To say that no doctor would be
guilty of such an appalling lack of sensibility
as is implied by the example I have given is
merely to restate the problem in a less
dramatic form: it still remains true that

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

whereas artificial insemination is put forward
as a means by which a childless wife can have
a child without embarking on a love affair
which may destroy her relationship with her
husband, it involves her abandoning the
right to choose the father of her child and in
the end may have even more disastrous consequences to the marriage. Although I may
seem to have reached this conclusion by a
somewhat indirect route, this seems the real
objection to artificial insemination and one
which to most people will seem insurmountable, namely that all but a very few women
wish to select the fathers of their children,
which becomes impossible if artificial insemination is practised under the conditions
of secrecy which are ordinarily advocated.
If, on the other hand, the wife is to be
allowed to know and to select the father of
the artificially produced child, the operation
will to the vast majority of persons seem
pointless.

SOCIETY OF COMPARATIVE LEGISLATION

‘* For the promotion of knowledge of the course of legislation in different countries, more particularly in the several
parts of His Majesty’s Dominions, and In the United States.”
President: The Rt. Hon. Lord MACMILLAN, G.C.V.O.
Chairman of the Executive Committee: The Rt. Hon. Lord DU PARCQ
Editors: Sir ARNOLD McNAIR, K.C. = Sir CECIL CARR, K.C.B., K.C.,
assisted by
Professor H. C. GUTTERIDGE, K.C., and F. H. LAWSON, Esq., D.C.L.
Honorary Secretary: C. E. A. BEDWELL, Esq.
Annual Subscription - - ~ ONE GUINEA

Address : THE ROYAL EMPIRE SOCIETY, NORTHUMBERLAND AVENUE, LONDON, W.C.2

Eugenics Review, Vol. XL, No. 4
