DISCUSSION

ENDOWMENT OF MOTHERHOOD

SIR,

In the January number of the EUGENIcs REVIEW there
is some inaccuracy which even at this late date I ask leave to
correct. Dr. Murray Leslie writes (p. 291) :

‘* Tt is a noteworthy fact that in Finland and Australia—the
two countries which enjoy women’s franchise—the birth-rate is
almost the lowest in the civilised world. I had recently a conversation with a Melbourne physician who said that the medical
faculty there consider the steadily diminishing birth-rate to be
by far the greatest social and national problem in Australia.”

The birth-rate of Finland (31°3) is almost the same as that
of Germany (32°3), a country which Dr. Leslie singles out for
eulogy in this matter. As for Australia, its birth-rate is at any
rate greater than that of Great Britain, a country which does not
‘* enjoy women’s franchise.” ‘These are crudebirth-rates. Until
the census results appear we cannot get an exact index of
fertility, but it is worth remembering that the masculinity of the
Australian population is 111, and of Great Britain 93. The
difference of 18 means that the Australian rate should be
increased by g per cent. to get a fair comparison with that of Great
Britain.

And in Australia the birth-rate is not ‘‘ steadily diminishing.”
It has fallen from the high figures, which always characterise
the settling of new and fertile countries, but the fall was checked
about eight years ago, and for that period there has been a slow
recovery. If Dr. Leshe will turn up the last Commonwealth Year
Book and look at the Graphs on pages 230-232, he will see that
this is so both for Australia and the individual States except
Victoria and West Australia. The birth-rate of Victoria is
practically stationary; in West Australia, it is still declining
from the figure of its still recent ‘‘ boom” days. Let me add to
this that the natural increase of Australia (16°I per 1,000 for
-Ig10) isalmost the greatest of any country, civilised or uncivilised,
in the world The birth-rate problem is serious enough, but we
do not start last in the race.

Let me suggest that Dr. Leslie should verify his figures.
The conversation of an unnamed Melbourne physician is no substitute for statistics. In Australia we have grown accustomed
to the romances of Mr. Roosevelt and the London halfpenny
papers; but one hardly expects them to greet one again from the
pages of the Eucenics REvIEw.

I am, Sir, etc., L. F. GIBLIN.
Seven Mile Beach, Tasmania.

July 7th, 1911.
266 DISCUSSION

NATIVE CUSTOMS

AN interesting letter reaches us from Mr. Mather Smith of the
Transvaal, of which we think the following extract is of eugenic
interest :

‘““The destruction of the ‘unfit’ is an old established
custom of the Zulus of S. Africa and their kindred tribes, and I
have often thought that we who send our missionaries to teach
them the better way, might ourselves learn a great deal from
them.

‘“‘ As far as I can learn the Matebele, No’zengele, and IJ think
the Shangaans, all offshoots of the Zulus, destroy all deformed
children, albinos, and the weaker of twins at birth. From
enquiries I have made the Zulus do not now destroy the weaker
twin, but I feel certain that they must have done so at one time
as all their kindred tribes still do, and I have heard that the
Matebele destroy both twins.

*“‘ The Swazis, also akin tothe Zulus, do not appear to destroy
albinos, as there are quite a number of albino Swazis in this
district.

‘‘These customs are still adhered to. A weaker twin was
destroyed on a farm within five miles of this mine less than a
year ago, and yet children mean wealth in all of these tribes.

*‘T have never, in Zululand or on the mines, seen a deformed
Zulu, Shangaan, Swazi, or No’zengele and if a man of one of
these tribes gets disabled on the mines he will not, if he can help
it, go back to his own country.”

Barberton, Transvaal.
july 14th, 1911.

LECTURES

Ir will be of interest to our members to learn that the following Course will
be given at University College by:

Dr. Heron: An Introductory Course on Statistics for those intending
to take up social, medical, or eugenic problems. The lectures will deal with
graphical representation and treatment and with simple problems in variation
and linear correlation.

Lectures: Wednesday, 4-5. Practical Class: Monday, 4-5. Fee:
cession, £6 6s.; Term, £2 12s. 6d.

Also a Course of Public Lectures on (i.) Alcohol (two lectures) ; (ii.)
Tuberculosis (two lectures); (iii.) Infant Mortality and Employment of
Women (two lectures), will be given in the second term. Full particulars
will be announced later.
