382 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

general tends to tame the spirits and to make
the play of the faculties less secure and
active ? Can it be denied, that to be heavily

overshadowed, to be profoundly insignificant,
has on the whole a depressing and benumbing
effect on the character ? ”’

~ EUGENICS SOCIETY
Annual Meeting and Election of Officers and Council

HE ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING

was held at the Rooms of the Royal

Society, Burlington House, Piccadilly,
W.1, on Tuesday, May 23rd, 1944, at 4.30
p.m., with the President, Lord Horder, in
the Chair. The Honorary Secretary read
the notice convening the Meeting.

MinuTES. The Minutes of the Annual
General Meeting, held on July 13th, 1943,
which were-contained in the Annual Report,
copies of which had. been circulated to
Fellows and Members before the Meeting,
were taken as read and signed as correct.

ANNUAL REPORT. The Chairman presented
the Annual Report, and moved its adoption.
This was carried unanimously.

STATEMENT OF ACCOUNTS AND BALANCE
SHEET. These were presented by the
Honorary Treasurer.

Mr. J. P. Brander raised the question of
the legality, under Section 3 (9) of the
Soctety’s Memorandum, of the Grant of £250,
made in 1943, to the Family Endowment
Society; and he further proposed the
following Resolution: THAT in view of the
doubt felt by certain Fellows and Members
as to whether the policy of the Family Endowment Society in promoting the granting
by the State of universal children’s allowances is eugenic, it is recommended that no
future grants be made to the Family Endowment Society.

The matter was discussed at some length,
and the Resolution was put to the meeting ;
but no seconder being forthcoming, a vote
was not taken. The President undertook
that the legality of the grant already made
would be examined.

The adoption of the Accounts and Balance
Sheet, proposed by Mr. Chance and seconded
by Mr. Martin, was carried unanimously.

HONORARY OFFICERS AND COUNCIL FOR
THE YEAR 1944-5. The Honorary Secretary
reported that no replies had been received to
the notice inserted in the October-January
issue of the EucENics REVIEW, inviting
additional names for nomination to the
Council. :

Presidency. The Honorary Secretary said
that he regretted to inform the Fellows and
Members that Lord Horder’s tenure of office :
as President had, under Article 27, now
expired, and he paid a cordial tribute to the
invaluable services to the Society of the
retiring President. He was glad to say, however, that Lord Horder had consented to
become an Honorary President of the Society. |
A new President had not yet been appointed.

Retirements. Under Article 28, the following
were due to retire: Vice-presidents: Dr.
Julian Huxley and Lord Keynes. Council :
Under Article 30, the following were due to
retire : Lady Denman, Mr. Graham Hutton,
Mr. Lloyd and Mrs. Potton.

Honorary Officers.and Council for the year
1944-5 were appointed as follows :

President : Post not yet filled.

Chairman of Council: B. S. Bramwell,
M.A., LL.B., F.R.S.E. !

Hon. Treasurer: C. F. Chance, M.A.

Hon. Librarian: Miss E. Corry. | ce

Hon. Secretary: C. P. Blacker, M.A.,
M.D.

Vice-Presidents :
K.B.E., M.C.,

Sir Charles. Darwin,
M.A., Sc.D., F.RS.,
THE ANNUAL MEETING ot 59

- *Eardley Holland, M.D., F.R.C.S., F.R.C.P.,
P.R.C.0.G., Mrs. E. M. Hubback, M.A.,
Aubrey J. Lewis, M.D., F.R.C.P., Prof.
R. Ruggles Gates, M.A., Ph.D., D.Sc., LL.D.,
F.R.S.

Members of Council: Cecil Binney, B.A.,
L. J. Cadbury, O.B.E., A. M. CarrSaunders, M.A., Dr. Stella Churchill,
M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P., D.P.H., *D. V. Glass,
B.Sc., Ph.D., Hon. Mrs. Grant Duff, W. T. J.
Gun, F.R.Hist.S., F.S.G., Julian Huxley,
M.A., D.Sc., F.R.S., The Lord Keynes, C.B.,
-M.A., R. Langdon-Down, M.B., R. Martin,
*Mrs. Montagu-Pollock, *Captain Richard
Pilkington, M.C., M.P., *Surg.-Cmdr. J. A.
Fraser Roberts, M.D., D.Sc., M.R.C.P.,
F.R.S.E., *Eliot Slater, M.D., M.R.C.P.,
Hon. John Strutt, R. M. Titmuss.

ELECTION OF AUDITORS FOR THE YEAR

1944-5. It was proposed by Mr. Martin,
seconded by Mr. Chance and carried unanimously, that Messrs. West & Drake be reelected for the year 1944-5.
_ At the close of the formal proceedings,
Mr. Bramwell, on behalf of the Society, presented to Lord Horder and to Miss E. Corry
silver mementoes as tokens of the Soctety’s
appreciation of the valued services which
each had rendered to the Society, asking
them to accept the gifts with the good wishes
of all. He was happy to think that Lord
Horder would still be associated with the
Society as an Honorary President, and that
although an assistant librarian had been
appointed, Miss Corry would still remain the
Honorary Librarian, a post which she had
filled so efficiently for over twenty years.
The meeting closed with hearty votes of
thanks to both recipients.

The New Council

We welcome Mr. Eardley Holland, President of the Royal College of Obstetricians

* New Members.

and Gynecologists, as a Vice-president of the
Society. Obstetrics and gynecology, often
regarded as comprising little beyond midwifery and the causes, manifestations and
treatment of gynzcological disorders, may,
in a wider sense, be held, as it is by Mr.
Holland, to include all aspects, qualitative
and quantitative, of the reproductive processes of the nation. On this view, these
subjects have much ground in common with
eugenics and demography. We may feel sure —
that Mr. Eardley Holland’s appointment
will open up new fields of activity for the
Soctety.

Dr. Aubrey Lewis, who also becomes a
Vice-president, is well known to Fellows and
Members for his numerous contributions to
the Review. Likewise known is Dr. Eliot
Slater, who joins the Council for the first.
time. Both Dr. Lewis and Dr. Eliot Slater
have given special attention to the genetic
aspect of psychiatry, and the Soczety is fortunate to have the guidance of two such
distinguished exponents of this speciality.
Surgeon-Commander J. A. Fraser Roberts,
who is now consultant in Medical Statistics
to the Navy, rejoins the Council. Neither he,
nor Dr. D. V. Glass, who before the war was
research secretary of the Population Investigation Committee, needs any introduction to
readers of the Review. Dr. Glass is now one
of the country’s leading authorities on
demography.

Captain Richard Pilkington has been a
Member of the House of Commons since 1935,
and is now Civil Lord of the Admiralty. He
has always shown an interest in problems of
population and took a notable part in the
pre-war debates on the subject in the House
of Commons. ‘ Family Allowances ”’ has
always been one of his special concerns.

We are fortunate in retaining, as Members
of the Council, Dr. Julian Huxley and Lord
Keynes, whose periods of vice-presidency
came to an end this year.

 

 
