PETER R. COX, JOHN PEEL and CLIFFORD J. THOMAS

The World Population Conference
Belgrade, 1966

DURING THE ELEVEN YEARS that have elapsed
since the first World Conference held in Rome
in 1954, several gatherings have taken place so
that demographic questions could be discussed.
The International Union for the Scientific Study
of Population has held meetings in several
countries, and regional conferences have been
conducted under the auspices of the United
Nations. Nevertheless, the need was felt for a
new global assembly, and indeed further
colloquia of this kind are contemplated at
decennial intervals in the future.

Such world conferences are not without their
attendant difficulties. The organization tends to
be cumbersome. The pace may be slow for the
more sophisticated delegates and yet too fast for
the representatives of some emergent countries.
The language problem is intensified. Yet they
offer unrivalled opportunities for an exchange
of views on the widest possible scale, and carry
an authority that no lesser gathering can have.
The beneficial influence of the Rome Congress
was felt in Belgrade, and the general feeling
seemed to be that both were well worth while.

The background to the recent discussions is
of course the rapidly expanding world population and the plight of the developing countries.
The idea had been expressed that the Conference
should be held in one such country in order that
delegates could see at first hand what the conditions were like. It was indeed fortunate that
Yugoslavia was good enough to offer the necessary facilities, which were very good in all
respects. While, however, the hosts modestly
proclaimed that their own problems were typical
of the world population situation as a whole,
in their progressive land—and especially in the
pleasant parks and streets of its capital—one
was spared the painful sights that are to be found
in the shanty areas of Africa, America or
Asia.

The arrangement of subjects was rather similar
to that of 1954; they were grouped into “‘plenary”’

meetings and “discussion-group”’ meetings as

follows:
PLENARY

‘Al Fertility

A2 Mortality

A3 Internal migration

A4 Future population
trends and prospects

DISCUSSION-GROUP

B1 Factors and patterns of
fertility in areas where
fertilityis relatively high.

B2 Factors and patterns of
fertility in areas where
fertility is relatively low.

B3 Mortality, morbidity
and causes of death.

B9 International migration
as related to economic
and demographic problems of developing
countries.

B4 Projections of population size and sex-age
structure.

BS Projections of urban
and rural population,
economically active
population, households
and families.

AS Demographic aspects B11 Definition and meas
of labour supply and
employment

urement of economically active population,

employment, unemployment and under‘employment.

A6 Demographic aspects B8 Problems in the pro
of education

motion of demographic
research and training in
developing countries.

A7 Demographic aspects B10 Population and natural

of agricultural development and food supply

A8 Demographic aspects
of urban development
and housing

A9 Demographic aspects
of savings, investment,
technological development and industrialization

A10 Demographic aspects
of economic growth

resources.

B7 New developments in
the measurement and
analysis of population
growth and structure.

B6 Methods of obtaining
basic demographic measures where census and
vital statistics registration systems are lacking
or defective.

B12 Population genetics.

B13 Studies relevant to
family planning.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, March 1966, 58, 1.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

In order to avoid the problems of unrepresentative sets of papers, and of unco-ordinated
discussions, that can be experienced in large
conferences where such matters are not controlled, the Organizing Committee, under the
chairmanship of Dr. Bernard Benjamin of the
United Kingdom, arranged that for each meeting
a well-known demographer should be deputed
to commission papers on specific subjects; a
general background thesis was also prepared to
set the scene so that all the discussants could be
reasonably well-informed. The meetings each
began with a statement by a “‘moderator’—
another demographer who had been deputed to
summarize the contents of the papers. Finally
the usual arrangements for “rapporteurs”’ were
made, and two of the final meetings consisted
of their summary verbal statements of the discussions as a whole.

This system of organization worked quite well,
if not perfectly, and in particular the background
papers, taken as a set, provide a useful textbook
and list of current sources of reference. If the
moderators spoke, in some instances, for too
long and the rapporteurs tended to attribute to
the discussions a form and purpose they had
really lacked, these were minor defects. A more
serious criticism was that the meetings failed to
produce much of the spontaneity and free exchange of views that had been noted in Rome,
and some delegates felt that on a future occasion
an attempt should be made to restore these
features.

Fertility

As may be seen from the list, the main discussions on fertility were divided into a general
session and two technical meetings, one devoted
to the areas of “‘high”’ rates and the other to the
areas of “low” rates. In this connection it is of
interest to note that human fertility was said by
one speaker to be the lowest of any animal on
earth; he evidently thought it paradoxical that
in these circumstances man should have the
biggest population problem of all the creatures!
In a brilliant summing-up, Professor Freedman
listed the many factors with which reproduction
is associated. He included among these “‘social
norms”’—the traditional behaviour pattern—
and socio-economic structure. The latter is

8

highly important, because international studies
tend to show that declines in fertility begin to
occur as economic development reaches a
threshold level. They start at the older ages—
indicating an economic cause related to accumulated family size, and in the cities where they are
associated with a higher degree of literacy, better
educational levels and an increase in the proportion of women at work. Family limitation is
achieved primarily by abortion (still the most
common method in the world to-day), only to a
lesser extent through contraception, and to a
smaller extent still by a rise in the age of marriage.

Professor Freedman advanced the hypothesis
that the criterion for a fall in fertility as a
country develops is the shift that occurs from a
predominantly local to a predominantly national
influence on affairs—in other words, when an
increase in literacy has improved the powers of
communication and the sense of a state, rather
than a village, is acquired. It is really the social
aspects rather than the economic aspects of such
changes that influence fertility; many speakers
agreed about this. The idea was advanced by
the Russian demographers, in one form or
another, that as development would of itself
bring about a fall in fertility there was no need
to take any special action to limit births. But
this line was opposed by many speakers, who
pointed out that such action could help to speed
social and economic development. It would
definitely add to the benefits of the trend that
might be expected to occur naturally. Thus
family planning was a direct aid to general
progress of all kinds. :

An attempt by a Czech demographer to
associate differences in race with disparities in
‘self-control’ and hence with fertility was
quickly dismissed by the meeting—one of a
number of occasions on which some of the odder
notions that were advanced from time to time
were suppressed by the weight of learning.

A religious viewpoint was advanced by Father
Madigan, who strongly objected to the idea—
perhaps crudely expressed by another speaker—
that money could be saved by replacing economic
aid by the grant of family planning material and
instruction to developing countries. He was
quietly and authoritatively answered by an
Indian speaker who explained how these
THE WORLD POPULATION CONFERENCE

countries—or at least some of them—were quite
aware of their needs and capable of formulating
them for themselves. The amount of help of
each kind that they wanted was sought by them
and not in any way thrust upon them by the
Western powers. Reference was also made to
the Biblical dictum “be wise and multiply and
replenish the earth” and its real meaning in a
historical context. One speaker proposed a
modern, amended version “‘be wise, establish
equilibrium and conserve the earth” which, if
not so impressive in its literary form, at least
represented good sense.

Summarizing the more technical papers on
the development of fertility in Western countries,
Colombo stressed the importance of avoiding
easy but misleading generalizations. If there
were “rules” there were also exceptions. If class
differences in fertility had declined, there were
still disparities between religious and ethnic
groups; moreover, there was a discrepancy
between the trend in time and the position at a
given moment. Both he and Sauvy drew attention to our lack of knowledge of causes and
effects, and this insufficiency, it became evident,
is of two kinds: (a) research that has not yet .
been carried out or which, perhaps, cannot be
done; and (5) an insufficiently detailed appreciation of the mass of information already available.

Two countries to which demographers are
prone to refer frequently—namely Eire and
Israel—were instanced in relation to (6) by
speakers from those countries. They complained
respectively that the true facts relating to the
Irish, and the Jews, were often distorted; for
example, there is no_ specifically “Jewish”
fertility, it was argued, but Jews behave with a
wide range of differences in the various countries
in which they live.

Nevertheless, it is well established that there
are international differences in desired family
size, and it was suggested that these should be
worth further study. Again, why did actual
family size tend to be above the desired level in
developing countries but below it in developed
areas? Why did the disparity between the two
vary according to educational status and religion? The answers to such questions may become
more apparent as the result of a new line of
study now proposed in the United States of

America. Adopting a hypothesis that fertility
differences are attributable not so much to
class, religion or psychology as to degree of
local knowledge and the influence of neighbours,
demographers there are planning a study of
census tracts, i.e. small enumeration regions
corresponding broadly to the residential areas
in which such local influences might be expected
to operate.

Reference was made to the sharp fall in
fertility in a few countries resulting from the
widespread use of oral contraceptives, and it
was noticed that their effects had been felt far
more in countries of low fertility than in countries
of high fertility. Some speakers even raised the
old cry “shall we, in future, reproduce ourselves?”
which was heard so often in Britain in the
1930s. This is, for the moment, more a
philosophical question than a real fear, except,
perhaps, for the Japanese, whose net reproduction rate has fallen to unity or below. British
speakers pointed, however, to the fallibility of
the net reproduction rate not only as a predictive
factor but also as even a measure of the true
current state of affairs; experience in this country
over the past thirty years has taught much wisdom
in this respect.

Mortality

The discussions on mortality were divided
into a general session and a meeting devoted to
causes of death and morbidity. On the whole, the
papers descriptive of conditions in the various
areas did not seem to offer much that was new,
whereas the contributions on method were far
more interesting. Thus the idea already mooted
in connection with fertility, of studying mortality
by “census tracts’, viz. small enumeration areas,
may offer some promise of fruitful development
in due course. Considerable emphasis was also
placed on the importance of accurate measurement in relation to illnesses and causes of death.
The subject of disability does not yet appear to
have been properly assimilated into demography
but some speakers made an attempt to bring it
closer—for instance one proposed that a statistical analysis should be made of illnesses present
at death but not reckoned by the doctor to have
contributed to the decease.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Close attention to method resulted in the
issue of a number of warnings that some of the
types of approach adopted had their limitations.
Thus some drew attention to the dangers of
extrapolation of mortality trends, especially in
developing countries; it was felt that the improvements so far achieved had been the easier
ones to attain and that further progress might
be much more troublesome. In particular the
difficulties associated with migration to the
towns might even lead to a worsening in urban
health and mortality. An attempt by Kusukawa
to determine how much of past improvements
had been due to economic conditions and how
much to social conditions proved interesting but
inconclusive.

On the subject of the effect on the economy,
and on society, of improvements in mortality,
a paper was contributed by Myers on the likely
increase in the cost of social security, especially
pensions in retirement—unless pension ages are
raised as a consequence.

Migration

If a decline in fertility helps economic and
social advance, it may equally be said that low
fertility—and mortality too—are a prerequisite
for the general development of a country. High
rural fertility causes a movement away from the
land and into towns that are not yet ready to
receive large increases in their size. This internal
migration is now occurring all over the world,
and its identification was a major highlight of
the conference. The failure of cities to absorb
immigration of this kind attracted much attention, and one speaker felt that the answer must
lie in providing such basic necessities as roads,
water and sewage for the shanty areas even if
the full range of services, including subsidized
housing, transport and lighting, cannot be laid
on immediately. Others felt that a more fundamental solution must reside in a policy of
industrializing the backward regions of a
country. Evidence showed that the trend from
the country to the town was not irreversible. A
further solution, emanating from a religious
source, was national development armies—a
call-up for social and economic work of the
State, which would also have the good effect of

10

postponing the marriage age. Some speakers
felt, however, that this solution was hardly
practicable for many countries.

Projections

Although controversy was not sharp, it became
evident that not all demographers would make
population projections in the same way in a
given set of circumstances. There were indeed
many alternative approaches not only of method
but also of presentation and interpretation.
Many speakers emphasized the need to widen
the range of choice of projections and indeed to
canvass as wide a variety of expert opinions as
possible on the future prospects before any
projections were made.

The growth of public attention to population
questions, and the need for forward planning of
all kinds, has provided an increasing amount of
work for demographers, and hardly any regarded
this as a cause for regret. Indeed, many speakers
welcomed this trend. They felt that the demand
should be met by the best possible efforts of the
most skilful demographers. The expert would be
ill-advised to refuse to act because it would only
follow that the task would be allocated to lessskilled practitioners. Nevertheless, when asked
to make a “forecast”, the demographer often
did, and always should, feel a sense of unworthiness, because, as Mrs. Taeuber said, forecasting
is impossible. The view was frequently expressed
that our prime needs are for better and more
precise data, more careful research and more
deep thinking on important issues. As Mr.
Sauvy said, we now realize our limitations better
than we used to. All the same, we should not be
frightened off the subject of projections because
of past failures.

The discussion brought out that in France
and Germany recent projections have been too
pessimistic in respect of fertility: births turned
out to be higher than expected and consequently
the population was above the projected quantity.
On the other hand, in the United States of
America and in Russia recent falls in fertility
affected projections or plans for projections. In
respect of India it was felt that the work done
just after the close of the decade was more
promising than anything achieved before. But
THE WORLD POPULATION CONFERENCE

misreporting at censuses had caused considerable difficulties in many countries, particularly
in respect of projections made for the developing
areas; there was, however, no typical pattern of
misreporting. In some places population was
over-enumerated; in others it was _ underenumerated.

The lessons to be drawn from the experience
with projection work in the 1950s could perhaps
be generalized as follows:

1. Projections cannot have much value if
they are based on inadequate or inaccurate
data or inappropriate models. In this respect the
position appears to be improving gradually.

2. Rates of decline in mortality have often
been under-estimated, and as a result some projected populations have been under-stated. Here
again, the prospects seem to be improving.

3. Unrepresentative projections of fertility
have been made in some instances and this has
been regarded as the biggest single cause of
error in many projections for different countries.
The lesson demographers have learnt from this
is to consider past experience over a longer
period and over a wider area than before, and
by more sophisticated methods, as a better guide
to the future.

4. The most refined statistical methods cannot
be as useful as might be desired because so
many social and economic changes are hard to
foresee; in consequence, opinion surveys on
fertility expectations are being used in some
countries as a basis for projections. First indications are that these will be of real assistance, but
it is rather too early to make a firm judgement.

5. It does not seem very clear to what extent
the projections, although generally unsuccessful
in the narrow arithmetical sense, have been
valuable in the wider sense of offering a reasonable basis for decision-making. It would appear
that difficulties of presentation and comprehension have been experienced and that room for
improvement remains.

Training

On the subject of the training of demographers,
the question was raised whether the study of
population is a separate science or whether it
remains merely an appendage to general social

studies or other disciplines. Some speakers
claimed that demography can now stand on its
own feet, but not all appeared to agree. At least
it was widely recognized that population will
always need to be studied as a subsidiary subject
by many who will specialize in other fields.

The training problem is essentially one of
demand and supply, with the number of available teachers continuing to be inadequate in
relation to the numbers of would-be students.
The establishment, under the auspices of the
United Nations, of special centres in Africa,
America and Asia, was a matter of much interest
and attracted a good deal of attention. These
centres, situated respectively in Cairo, Santiago
and Chembur (near Bombay), have the added
difficulties of an uncertain status, doubtful permanence, inadequate money resources and
language multiplicity. Perhaps the most serious
problem is that the centres—catering as they do
for a standard of education below university
level—are not attractive to the best types of
teacher.

Genetics

The discussions on population genetics were
largely concerned with the relationship of the
subject to demography and with the data demographers could collect for the benefit of human
geneticists during the course of their investigations. This subject was dealt with by Newcombe
in the September 1965 issue of the REVIEW (57,
109) and therefore need not be enlarged upon
here.

Sutter made an interesting point regarding
the number of consanguineous marriages in
French villages in the late nineteenth century.
It is now realized that these were abnormally
frequent, as compared with other periods and
other countries. The reason was the adoption of
birth control, which had so reduced the number
of available spouses that a greater degree of
consanguinity became essential if the demand
for marriage partners was to be justified.

Economic aspects

On the subject of the relationship between
population and economic factors such as food
supplies, power and other human needs, the

11
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

meetings refused to be overcome by the problems and on the whole a pessimistic view was
agreed not to be essential. Thus one speaker
felt that world food supplies could be increased
up to twenty times if necessary, and another
referred to the stimulus to agricultural production
that population pressure supplied. Economic
progress did not depend solely on population,
however. Yet another regarded the problems of
Africa to-day as attributable to under-population
rather than over-population. According to one
view, it is wrong to think of a battle between
two separate factors of population and resources;
the two can be considered together under the
heading of the Dynamics of Human Societies.
“The future is uncertain only because it is in
our own hands,” someone said.

Many speakers from the developing countries
were, however, less sanguine. One felt that, far
from falling with economic advance, dependency
ratios could well rise. Another drew attention to
the bad effects of the terms of trade on the socioeconomic structure of the under-developed
countries and said that a world solution is
needed. While on the whole there was optimism
regarding energy and mineral resources, there
were naturally doubts regarding the necessary
increase in production of the basic necessities
and of most things which contribute to a betterment of the standard of living. Some participants
expressed great anxieties in regard to food, the
supply of which is usually considered to be inelastic, since agricultural land, an essential for
food production, is a natural resource and
therefore fixed in supply. Moreover, as there
was much poverty and undernourishment in
many parts of the world, there was a considerable backlog of production to be overcome
before an adequate minimum standard of living
could be attained. For there to be economic
progress an increase in the level of income per
head had to be achieved.

The production of material goods involves,
it was said, the input of natural resources,
capital and labour. At any given time the stock
of capital was the result of past co-operation
between the factors of production; it was a
process which had involved an abstention by
previous generations from current consumption.
In like manner, for output to grow in future

12

there would have to be increases in production,
including the substitution of the more plentiful
for the scarcer factors of production as occasion
arises. Capital expenditure could enable natural
resources previously regarded as uneconomic
to be exploited, and, in a sense, could create
these resources—as when the supply of agricultural land was increased by irrigation and
by land reclamation projects.

The problem of economic growth was thus
described as being largely one of increasing the
availability of capital. Some of the projects
necessarily had to be carried out on a large
scale; but much of the capital accumulation
could be achieved by an increase in productivity,
by using labour at present unemployed or underemployed, in conjunction with naturally available
resources, to produce capital equipment which
would greatly increase the effectiveness of labour,
and also increase the supply of agricultural produce. Outmoded methods of land tenure were
often a serious hindrance to improvement of
agricultural methods, so that changes in institutional forms were desirable to encourage production for a market, rather than a domestic,
economy, with a fuller realization of the benefits
of division of labour at both the national and
the international level.

No serious shortage of mineral resources
seemed to be envisaged. There were vast known
but untapped reserves of the various metallic
and non-metallic minerals, including the elements used for fertilizer manufacture, so necessary for increasing agricultural output, and
of the fossil fuels required for generating the
motive energy for so many manufacturing processes and for transportation. There were,
furthermore, vast areas of the earth’s surface
which have not been adequately surveyed for
reserves. And in those spheres where shortages
of materials traditionally regarded as essential
might arise, new synthetic products seemed
certain to be developed as a result of scientific
advances. Non-traditional food supplies produced by chemical syntheses from mineral raw
materials could become of great significance in
the future. Atomic energy promised to be the
means of relieving the energy shortages which
have bedevilled so many countries in the past.
An effective programme of economic growth,
THE WORLD POPULATION CONFERENCE

however, required an awareness of the shortcomings of the existing methods of production
to develop, and there must be a willingness to
undertake the necessary reforms. Educational
advance was essential, for industrialization
almost invariably involves machinery which
could be operated only by skilled personnel for
whom minimum levels of educational attainment
are necessary, and thus there would have to be
a heavy investment in education.

The importance of aid from the developed
countries to the less developed countries was
emphasized; it could make large contributions
to economic growth in these latter areas; but
such aid was a mere stimulant. The capital
needs of the less developed countries were so
gigantic that aid, on however generous a scale,
would be quite inadequate, and these countries
would have to make the major contributions
themselves. When the aid programmes of the
developed countries involved the provision,
including the operation and supervision, of
capital projects for the less developed countries,
the recipients must ultimately have personnel of
a sufficient degree of skill and level of education
to take over the projects. Population growth,
furthermore, was a stimulant, albeit a harsh
one, to economic growth since an inevitable
reaction to population pressure was greater
effort, particularly as media of communication
improve and ideas from the more developed
countries permeate the less developed, creating
aspirations in them for the standard of life of
those wealthier countries. Educational advances
seemed likely to have a similar effect. Indeed,
there was an interaction between educational
advance, industrial progress and population
pressure, since industrialization usually promotes
urbanization, with less leisure in the transitional
stage, at any rate, for the migrant workers, but
producing a higher standard of living, the
enjoyment of which would tend to engender a
desire for smaller families. A more widespread
adoption of methods of family limitation could
be the result of private decisions by married
couples, but in some countries, as public opinion
became more attuned to the idea, it would not
seem inconceivable that some of the developing
countries might decide that resources which were
devoted to the retardation of population growth

might have a more beneficial effect on the
standard of living than when devoted to accelerating the growth of production.

Studies Relevant to Family Planning

The inclusion, in the conference programme,
of this particular session was itself something
of a breakthrough in the attitude of international
organizations to population problems. At the
Rome Conference discussion on methods of
fertility control was excluded because of the
pressure, within the United Nations, of representatives of Catholic countries. In Belgrade this
particular session attracted more attention, in
the form of contributed papers and requests to
participate in the discussions, than any other.

Indeed the need for increasing attention to
methods of fertility control was implicit in the
discussion of amost every other major topic.
Internal migration was recognized both as a
consequence of population growth and as an
aggravating factor, high rural fertility producing
an exodus from the land into towns where widespread poverty produced low motivation to
family limitation. On labour supply and employment it was repeatedly stressed that a high
rate of population growth produced an adverse
dependency ratio and a consequent drain of
resources from industrial uses to the social
services. Educational advance, particularly in
underdeveloped countries, was for similar reasons
seen to be incompatible with high fertility. No
hope was offered that increased food supplies
could possibly match the growth of world
population during the next decade whilst housing
development and economic growth were clearly
seen to be dependent upon a policy of planned
population growth. |

Against this background, the discussions on
fertility control were both urgent and optimistic.
A succession of reports from places as far apart
as Taiwan and Mexico described action research
projects designed to bring about population
control within limited areas and, at the same
time, provide research data on the use-effectiveness of different birth control techniques. An
increasing number of national governments
were reported to be devoting financial assistance
to family planning programmes and to the

13
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

support of demographic research, though there
was a recurrent plea that more should be
attempted.

On the techniques of population control there
was the traditional division between those who
saw the problem as a technological one (of
devising better techniques) and the sociologists
who regarded the problem as one of motivation.
It was apparent, however, that both factors are
important, and seldom distinguishable, in most
populations but that with the development of
new and more effective techniques the problem
of motivation will have to be studied more
closely.

If the international concern voiced at this
Conference results in the greater availability of
funds for research in population sociology and
fertility control (WHO has already begun to
finance such projects) there will be an opportunity to utilize the findings of the sort of project
which the Eugenics Society has pioneered in
this country in devising action projects in
radically different cultural contexts.

Conclusion

What can be said by way of summary of the
meetings as a whole? Dr. Sen, Director-General
of the United Nations Food and Agriculture
Organization, suggested that from the first to
the second World Population Conference there
had been a change in the nature of the underlying sentiment. In Rome much emphasis had
been placed on the collection and co-ordination
of demographic statistics, but in Belgrade the
highlight was focussed on the critical importance
of the population question itself, viz. the growth
of numbers and pressure on resources. This
seems a fair comment, for the kinds of voices
that had been raised against population control
ten years ago were relatively muted in 1965 and
the nature of the argument against special restrictions on births, where it was raised, was
different in character and on the whole weaker.
As Dr. Sen said, everyone is a person—not just
a demographic unit—and the aim should be the
greatest possible realization of human faculties
and the development in the highest degree of
all latent potentialities. A generous view should

14

be taken of human needs and wishes in regard
to such factors as family size, women going to
work and age at marriage. What had to be
decided was whether the right of future generations to live should take precedence over the
right of the present generation to maintain and
increase its living standards. This is a difficult
ethical question, but he for one seemed to be
of the opinion that such a precedence ought not
to be accorded.

It is to be hoped that the next World Conference, whenever and wherever it is held, will
show the sentiment of 1965 to have been reflected
in effective practical action. At least it can be
said that the plans laid in 1954 have now borne
fruit: training activities have produced more
demographers, and these in their turn have
produced more statistics. As a result, the attendance in Belgrade was double that in Rome, and
the growth in participation from the economically emergent countries was even more marked.
More papers had been written and their improved quality demonstrated the benefits that
can flow when more facts, and data of better
quality, can be adduced. A higher proportion
of the work done was truly scientific in character
and fewer of the arguments advanced reflected
preconceived opinions of doubtful validity. At
the same time there appeared to be still room
for improvement in two respects: first, some of
the analyses presented betrayed a certain immaturity of scientific thought; the comments,
friendly but critical, of the more experienced
demographers should have done much to expose
such weaknesses to their authors. Secondly,
there has on the whole been only a rather limited
advance in basic demographic science. This is a
matter that presents greater difficulties and is
indeed incapable of control. All that can be said
is that the potentialities for progress must
become greater as the number of experienced
demographers grows. The marriage of new ideas
with the new tools of computation now available
seems to offer more than one avenue for possible
development. Yet it is in the sphere of practical
politics that one must hope for the greatest
advances in human welfare during the coming
decades.
