THE STUDY OF PRIMITIVE RACES
WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO
FORMS OF MARRIAGE.

By E. N. FALLAIze,

(Honorary Secretary of the Roya] Anthropological Institute).

All wars of any magnitude have been followed by periods of more
or less prolonged social and economic disturbance. The dislocation
which we have experienced during the last few years differs from that
which has followed on other wars only in the fact that its effects have
been more far-reaching. They have been felt by all civilized nations
alike, and they have extended to many among the more primitive
peoples, as well as to races who, though not coming within the category
of primitive, belong to cultures other than European. In Africa, in
China, in India, and in the Pacific, the problems of administration and
the difficulties which arise from the contact of different races and
civilizations, have been augmented by the introduction of new ideas,
and by the altered conceptions of socia] and economic relations which
have been introduced by the troops returning from war service, as well
as by political agitators, the source of much of the present unrest in
South Africa (for a notable example). Further, increased prosperity
during and after the war has directed the aspirations of many among
these races towards social and intellectual, as well as material development. These aspirations it will fall upon the white races, and particularly upon ourselves, to guide into right channels in accordance with
the ideals of tutelage which it is now generally recognised should inspire
the administration of the affairs of backward races. This is a duty
incumbent upon us, both in our own dependencies and in those territories which have been entrusted to our rule as a mandatory power.
The formation of a Committee for Education in Tropical Africa marks
an epoch in the government of backward peoples. The memorandum
recently published by the Committee is an admirable exposition of the
principles which should inform any system of education devised for
races of non-European culture. But in advocating the suppression of
what is harmful and the preservation of what isgood in primitive social
organisation, custom and belief, a great responsibility is laid on those
who are to decide which elements are to be eradicated and which
retained. For if there is one thing which has been demonstrated by
thestudy of anthropology , it is the difficulty of determining beforehand ,
even with the most intimate knowledge, what will be the effect of
tampering with the constituent elements in the social complex of any
given society. The late Dr. Rivers showed* that the suppression of one

*Essays on the Depopulation of Melanesia. Ed. W. H. R. Rivers,
London. 1922. 78 EUGENICS REVIEW.

element in custom which seemed harmful and was repugnant to our
ideas—head-hunting being the case in point—might lead to a mental
reaction, a lack of interest in life, such as would endanger the continuance of the race.

Obviously the administrative official carries a great burden of
responsibility. It is unlikely that anyone else will be in a position to
have a more intimate knowledge of the people of his district, and of
their customs and beliefs, than he should possess. Further, for a
majority of such races, civilisation through education must for some
time to come be regarded as an ideal. It will necessarily, therefore,
fall to him to adapt the policy of the higher authority to native
requirements,and to guide the developmentof the people of his district,
along lines in harmony, or at least not violently averse from, their own
primitive conceptions and ideals. In these circumstances it is hardly
necessary to emphasise the need, upon which anthropologists have long
insisted, for the administrative official to be trained in anthropological
method in order that he may have in the fullest possible sense a sympathetic understanding of the people with whom he has to deal. The
trend of events appears to point to a still greater need of such training
in the near future.

It is at this point that the opportunity arises for co-operation
between the student of eugenics and the anthropologist. For while the
anthropologist studies, and has studied, the form of institutions,
customs, and beliefs, and the mentality which underlies them, the
extent and direction of any modification at once raises inter alia a
number of biological and social problems which come within the purview of the eugenist. For the solution of these, unfortunately ,the data
are at present all too few. Such questions as miscegenation, the
relative proportion of the sexes, and the effect of its variation in affecting progress or regression, the racial effect of monogamous and polygamous marriages and the like, urgently call for intensive study with a
view to the practical application of the results in determining the way
in which problems of administration should be attacked and the lines
on which they should be solved.

Happily since the war there has been a greater tendency, yet still,
perhaps, not too strongly marked, to attack the problems of the social.
organism in a scientific spirit and on scientific lines. It may not yet
have extended very far beyond a certain section of society, but it is
growing slowly.

One of the most important questions which will confront the
administrator, as primitive races are brought more closely into touch
with civilised ideals, is that of polygamy. At present the chief force
tending to the modification of polygamous marriage among primitive
people is the spread of Chrisitanity ; and the attitude of the Christian
Church towards this question is undoubtedly one, though not the only,
determining factor in bringing African natives under either Mahommedan or Christian influence. As a purely scientific question, however,
and from the eugenic point of view, this problem can only be regarded
as one to be considered solely with reference to what is racially beneficial at any given stage of development.

Before passing to a brief survey of the factors which influence the
THE STUDY OF PRIMITIVE RACES. 79

form of marriage among primitive peoples, it may be worth while to
allude to certain dysgenic tendencies in ourown community, which it
might not be unprofitable for both eugenist and anthropologist to study
from a common point of view. |

The problems to which I refer are already too familiar to readers of
the daily press and to those who follow criminal statistics. The latter
afford ample proof that the prominence now given to crime and misdemeanour as items of news are by no means to be attributed entirely
to a desire to fill the columns of a sensational press with matter to suit
the tastes of a public avid of sensation. It is, moreoever, not without
significance that a considerable proportionof the cases inthe courts arise
more or less directly from conditions pointing in one way or another to
a subversion of the institution which has been regarded as fundamental
in our civilisation, namely, the institution of monogamous marriage as
forming the basis of family life. I do not refer solely to the loosening
of the ties of morality leading to embarrassments both pre- and postnuptial. It has long been a matter of common observation that
economic and political forces were tending to the elimination of certain
classes of society of, or at any rate the reduction in their standard of
living. Since the war, and particularly in the last year or two, the
increasing frequency of cases of fraud and embezzlement among persons
holding positions of responsibility, indicates that pressure of economic
conditions is making married life and the upbringing of a family
increasingly difficult among what is, from the point of view of society
as a whole, one of the more valuable classes of its members. The
significance of this from the eugenist’s point of view requires no emphasis, while from the anthropological point of view, in a community
of mixed races such as ours, its interest lies in the question of its effect
on the proportion of the different ethnical elements and any consequent
possibility of change in outlook and point of view in the nation as a
whole. Nor does it require any very profound acquaintance with the
facts of life, which only appear in the press when they have led to some
more or less tragic happening, to realise that the consequences of the
prevalent laxity of morals are equally deleterious, and might indeed be
worse if a strict interpretation of the monogamous rule had not been
mitigated by a relaxation of the attitude towards illegitimacy
which prevailed in the last century, by care for the unmarried mother
and her child, by increased facilities for divorce and by other alleviatory measures of recent years. Notwithstanding their humanitarian
character, it must be recognised that these changes represent a departure
from the strict rule of monogamy and the attendant code of morality
which probably nowhere have been so sternly enforced as they were in
Puritan England and in particular in the Puritan England of the last
century.

To the anthropologist this change in attitude to matters of sexual
morality presents features of peculiar interest. It is possible to regard
it simply as the result of a process of development which had already
begun before the war and has merely been accentuated and probably
accelerated by that great upheaval. It may, however, have a deeper
significance, a significance pointing toa shifting in the relations of the
various elements which ge to make up the population. It is perhaps
80 EUGENICS REVIEW.

worth noting that this development has been even more marked in the
United States of America, where facilities for divorce are both notoriously vreater and more readily utilised and where, if writers on sociological subjects are to be believed, among certain classes avoidance of
marriage and its responsibilities with a resulting dysgenic tendency in
reduction of average fertility, is accompanied by freedom in sexual
matters. In the United States, however, the problems arising from
the change in the proportions of the racial elements due to immigration,
are forthe moment, at any rate, largely questions of economics and
hygiene both physical and mental, notwithstanding the attempt, not
altogether well founded, to argue in favour of the superiority of the
Nordic type, and to establish an anthropological criterion as a basis
of discrimination in regulating the admission of immigrants into the
country.

Unfortunately the data for drawing with certainty conclusions in
regard to any change in the relative proportions of racial types in Great
Britain are not available. This is a further argument in favour of a
more intensive study of the anthropology of this country on the lines,
but on a more extended scale, of the investigations which have already
been instituted by the Eugenics Education Society on the suggestion
put forward by Mr. Peake. The point to which I would wish to call
attention is this. The population of this country, as is well known, is
essentially mixed. The dominant ruling type has been the Nordic,
and what may be regarded as Nordic ideas and ideals have been, in the
main, the source of the prevalent social and moral code. There has,
however, always existed a substratum of an earlier, Mediterranean,
population, possibly with even more primitive elements surviving
sporadically. The popular idea of a clean sweep by the Saxons of the
earlier population which was driven to the west and survived only in
Wales and Cornwall, does not represent the facts. It continued to
exist in some parts of the country and in some restricted areas formed a
high proportion of the population. Proceeding from the east coast to
the west, the anthropological data available show aprogressive increase
in the frequency of the characters denoting a Mediterranean element.
In addition to the short, dark, long headed Mediterranean, there was
also the broadheaded type, the Alpine, while it is suggested the trading
element in the community may possibly have been drawn from an
Armenoid type. Now it might be argued that the history of this country
is the history of reversal in the relative importance of these elements
in the population. After the Wars of the Roses for instance, and under
the Tudors the development of society was marked by a great increase
in the prominence of commercial families and the inclusion of the more
important and wealthy of them in the ranks of the nobility At an
early stage in the recent war it was pointed out how many of the sole
representatives of old county families had been killed Since its close
the extinction of these families has been carried further by economic
conditions. The extension of the franchise, with the increased promulgation of all the conceptions for which it stands, has also helped to bring
about a further weakening in the social tradition of the dominant type,
and to enhance the importance of the ideals of the operative and industrial as opposed to the landed and professional classes. Now ProTHE STUDY OF PRIMITIVE RACES. 81

fessor Fleure and other observers have shown that the Mediterranean
type tends to flock to the large towns, and especially the large manufacturing towns, thus supplying a greater proportion of the operative
class, while the Nordic type belongs to the agricultural and open air
life. It might therefore be expected that if it were possible to discern
any ethnological significance in the tendency of current sccial and
political theory, it would be such as would be characteristic of the
Mediterranean type. Unfortunately our knowledge of racial mental
differences is far too scanty to allow us to speak with any certainty on a
point such as this; but it is remarkable that certain peculiarities may
be noted which are not perhaps without significance in this connection.
In the first place it will be remembered that Caesar, when speaking of
the customs of the inhabitants of these islands, made some remarkable
statements about themarriage customs, and although his exact meaning
is by no means clear, it is beyond question that the British tribes with
whom he came into contact practised some form of polygamy which was
either polyandry or a form of group marriage. Further, in the older of
the stories included in Mabinogion, the marriage of the hero to the
heroine is of a temporary character. It is also matrilocal, and quite
possibly may be a case of polyandry. I am informed that in the North
of England something of the same nature—a species of temporary
marriage—used to take place in the case of workers moving from place to
place according as work was available. Incidental remarks in the
Elizabethan dramatists indicate that in their day the Welsh had a
different standard of sexual morality from the English. Observations
made in recent years point to the persistence of this characteristic and
to the possibility that it is a racial survival and not to be interpreted
merely as a case of loose behaviour. Further, this interpretation might
be placed upon much of the so-called immorality in English villages.
Such conduct should be regarded as based upon a code which differs
from that which has hitherto been officially recognised as the standard
code of society. In this connection reference may be made to the
curious custom of ‘‘bundling up’’ which was, until comparatively
recent times, not uncommon in the North of England. This custom
which is a species of, nominally clandestine, cohabitation in the future
bride’s home, has been interpreted as a survival of a matriarchal or
matrilocal system. It will be remembered that among the Picts, it was
stated by the early chroniclers, descent was traced through the mother.
‘There are other customs and suggestions of practises in the folklore of
this country which it is unnecessary to mention in detail, all possibly
pointing to the fact that a system other than the patriarchal monogamous family may at one time have prevailed in these islands and
may have survived as unorthodox moral behaviour under a regime in
which the prevailing moral code belonged to another order. Were it
possible to carry further the study of mental racial differences in this
country, correlating psychic and physical character, it might then be
‘possible to argue that the change in attitude towards certain problems
in the social organism, as well as the problems themselves, might arise
from a shifting in the relative proportion of the ethnica] elements,
‘without reference to the respective superiority of one over the other.
Their respective survival value for the race is another and further
question.
82 EUGENICS REVIEW.

It may be asked to what practical conclusions do these considerations lead. Have such investigations as these which would help to
disentangle the ethnological elements, if any, in social problems anything more than an interest from a purely academic point of view? In
reply it may be said that they are of utmost importance both to the
sociologist and the eugenist. It is clear that any departure from the
conventional code of sexual morality which is made the subject of a
moral condemnation must entail consequences which are necessarily
serious for the individual and progressively harmful to the race. It is
true that the stigma which attached to illegitimacy in the last
century no longer stands. It is recognised that the prejudice against
the half breed may possibly be due to a confusion in assigning
certain reprehensible qualities to a mixture of race when these
qualities are really due to adverse social conditions. But recognition
of differences in standard and codes of behaviour between the racial
elements within the social unit—a people, or a nation—will bring
about a sympathetic understanding essential to social justice without
necessarily entailing an undue loosening of the ties which bind that
society together.

The variability of the moral standard, especially in sexual matters,
is a commonplace to the anthropologist. How imperfect is the general
recognition of this fact is indicated by the reluctance of the law to
extend its authorisation to any change in or aberration from the
narrowest interpretation of the conventional code. The Deceased
Wife’s Sister Act is a case in point in which it required a struggle
extending over many years to secure legal recognition of what was
known to be the practice and an obvious convenience, in fact almost a
necessity, in certain grades of society. The existence of a conventional
code which is generally observed is a necessity to the existence of a
society; each society has that code which its stage of development
demands, or approximately. Any violent and sudden change endangers
the existence of that society ; but it is necessary that the code should
be recognised as a convention, however binding, which is lable to
change with changing conditions. It is for this reason that comparative study of the types of marriage which are to be found among different
races and peoples serves as a useful corrective to a too close adherence to
a fixed code, while emphasising the fact that within certain limits of
variability to allow free play to development, its observance is a social
necessity.

When we turn to peoples of a simpler culture, we are at once confronted by some difficulty in deciding in what the primitive form of
marriage consists. Some anthropologists have gone so far as to say
that in most of the early stages of primitive society marriage does
not exist, that is, if by marriage is understood an institution involving
a more or less permanent union of male and female. It has been held
that in the early stages of human evolution, sexual relations were
entirely promiscuous. The argument for a primitive promiscuity has
been based upon evidence derived fromavariety of customs, such as the
promiscuous intercourse which takes place on certain ceremonial
occasions, practices which are regarded as an assertion of tribal or
group right at the time of marriage, the drovt du seigneur, and the like.
THE STUDY OF PRIMITIVE RACES. 88

Further, it has been maintained that sexual jealousy and the desire
for exclusive possession which are important factors in the marriage
relations are not at all times and in all cases equally operative. This
no doubt is true to some extent, and may be largely a matter of custom.
But it is to be noted that promiscuity as an institution, as opposed to
laxness, has not been observed among any existing people, however
primitive, while the practices and customs upon which the argument
has been based can be explained in other ways. Even among the most
primitive type of peoples, such as the Yahgans of Fuegia, the group
family, if you can call it such, constitutes a more or less permanent
association of aman and one or more women. In this connection it is
natural to seek an analogy among animals, and particularly the higher
mammalia. The evidence is not perhaps entirely conclusive, but it
has been pointed out that in many cases such asthe quadrumana and
particularly the anthropoid apes, association is in pairs or groups which
are of sufficiently enduring nature to make it impossible to regard them
as promiscuous in their relations. Both the chimpanzee and the
gorilla are found in groups of no great size which seem to form more or
less permanent associations, and there is even some evidence for
association in pairs. It has been suggested that our sub-human or
earliest human ancestors lived in similar groups consisting of one male
and several females with their offspring, the younger males being
driven out by the head of the group as they attained maturity. The
determining factor in regulating the permanence of a primitive union,
is no doubt to a large extent the care ofthe young. In the case of man
the children are almost entirely dependent upon their parents for some
years. In cases where there is any considerable disparity in the numbers of the sexes, the females exceeding the males, the permanence of
the union would be likely to be strengthened, owing to the greater
length of time during which the group would continue to include
infants requiring parental care. In any case the group would be small
owing to the difficulty of obtaining food for any but a restricted number
at this stage when sustenance was derived entirely from what could be
gathered in the shape of wild fruits and roots and at most small game.

In examining the forms of marriage which have been recorded
among primitive peoples, the first thing which strikes us is that there
does not appear to be any orderly system of development such as
appeals to the schematist. We are all prone to regard any feature in
our civilisation as representing the highest development of that
character, whether it be physical type, social organisation, family
group, or the like. Consequently it is usual to regard monogamous
marriage as the type of marriage par excellence, as the highest that has
yet been developed, and to regard other forms which are polygamous as
inferior or representing an earlier stage of development, leading up to
the monogamous form. The schematist therefore looks for signs of
upward progress. Now while it is generally true that polygamy
is the form of marriage found in the more primitive societies it is by no
means universally true. Not only does monogamy exist at all stages of
development, but it is the characteristic form among many peoples who
are regarded as belonging to a very primitive type. If the primitive
races are grouped roughly into hunters, pastorals, and agriculturists
84 EUGENICS REVIEW.

(this order representing the degree in culture to which they have
advanced), it will be found that monogamy is perhaps on the whole more
common among the most primitive of the hunters. As an instance I
would mention the wild tribes of the Malay peninsula,, the Semangs,
Sakai and Jakun, among whom monogamy appears to be the rule, with
a doubtful exception in the case of some of the Sakai group. In this instance, however, it is difficult to say whether they represent pure blood,
as among some of these jungle tribes there has been a very considerable
degree of admixture with the Malays who are Mahommedans and polygamous. Monogamous marriage is also found among the tribes of
Sumatra, among the Kubus, who live in very similar conditions to the
jungle tribes of Malaya, among the Punans, the nomadic hunters of
Borneo, and among the Veddas. On the other hand among the Australians there is a tendency to polygamy, but in most cases monogamy
is recorded as the regular or prevailing system. Among the Congo
pygmies polygamy is stated to be occasional only. Now in all these
cases, and in most of thecases where monogamy occurs among a people of
the very primitive stage, the people belong to the group of nomadic
hunters ; they are usually found to be people upon whom the geographical and climatic conditions have imposed considerable difficulties in
obtaining a livelihood. While there may be no actual scarcity of
food—and indeed it may be obtained in a sufficiency though with a good
deal of trouble, the man has no desire, possibly has learned by hard experience that it is not expedient to shoulder a responsibility such as
would be involved in a plurality of wives, each with her own family of
children for whom he must make provision. The factor which here
determines the monogamous character of the marriage is purely
economic, and depends upon what in a higher civilisation would be
called the ‘‘earning capacity’’ of the individual.

If the tables which have been drawn up by Messrs.
Hobhouse, Wheeler, and Ginsberg, in their ‘‘Material Culture
and Social Institutions of the Simpler Peoples’’ be examined, it
appears that up to a certain point in development there is a
gradual increase in the prevalence of polygamy as culture advances
towards the higher stages. This advance is accompanied pari
passu by a more assured provision of the amenities of life. The authors
divide their simpler peoples into Lower Hunters, Higher Hunters,
Dependent Hunters, Agricultural I., Pastoral I., Agricultural IT.,
Pastoral II., and Agricultural III., in the order named, each representing on the whole a stage in advance from lower to higher. In
these groups there is an increase in the number of cases in which polygamy is regular or occasional, and a corresponding decrease in the number of cases in which monogamy is the rule as the stages of culture
asecnd until the first agricultural stage is reached, when monogamy
increases and polygamy is largely occasional. There is an increase in
polygamy in the second pastoral group, followed by a decrease in the
second agricultural group and a further increase in the second pastoral
and the third agricultural group, though less marked in the latter.
On the other hand, excepting in the case of the Higher Hunters,
divorce, which really represents a relaxation of the monogamous rule,
is more frequent among the agricultural peoples. It is therefore, not
THE STUDY OF PRIMITIVE RACES. 85

unreaonable to conclude that the economic factor holds a position of
very considerable importance among the conditions which determine
the prevalence of polygamy.

It must not be assumed, however, that it is the only one. A
precedent condition must generally be the number of females of
marriageable age who are available. Statistical information on the
question of the numerical ratio of the sexes is inadequate, although it
is generally stated that among polygamous peoples the females are in
excess of the males. Westermarck* quotes a number of cases in which
the males were in excess of the females, acondition which may arise from
a high mortality among girls due to neglect on account of their small
value, or to female infanticide. In one of the New Hebrides in 1876
there were 446 males to 267 females. In 1912 in the Gazelle Peninsula
in New Britain there were found to be 1266 males and 1510 females,
while among the Maori in 1881 there were 1235, and in 1886 1169 males
to 1000 females. These people were monogamous, but occasionally such
disparity in numbers may give rise to polyandry, as occurs in Tibet and
among the Todas, where in 1871 there were 140.6 men for every 100
women.

Among the people of Africa polygamy is almost universal, and
here the excess of females over the males is general. Although it is
probable that there is no great disparity among the sexes at birth,
greater mortality among the males both before and after maturity due
to natural causes as well as to war or the hazards of their mode of life,
causes a very considerable excess of females. For the figures relating to
part of Africa, so far as available, reference may be made to a paper by
Mr. L. W. G. Malcolm, and an appended note by Mr. Parkes which
appeared recently in the Mittheilung of the Viennese Anthropological
Societyf. In certain cases it is recorded that the number of women
had been considerably increased by the importation of women from
outside the country. In Uganda, the Rev. J. Roscoe says that in the
old days a large number of women were brought in as captives, while of
Ashanti it was stated the the surrounding country was drained of all its
women.

The physiological factor must also be taken into accouunt. It is
of course well known that among primitive people the married state is
subject to a number of tabus. Contact at certain times is prohibited
and violation of the tabu would as a rule entail the death of the culprit by
the influence of the outraged spirits or powers. These periods of separation or isolation of the females fall not only at the usual periods of
menstruation, but during pregnancy and after childbirth, while they
may be continued for the whole time during which the infant is suckled.
This is usually not less than one, and may even be extended to six,
years. Incidentally I may perhaps mention that the question of child
birth has no small importance in connection with the settlement of
white races in the tropical or sub-tropical countries. These tabus prevailing among the natives afford the woman a period of rest to enable

aes

 

*The History of Human Marriage. Ed.5. London, 1921. Vol. II. pp.55
fol., 161 fol.

tL. W. G. Malcolm Mitt. Anthrop, Ges.Wein. Bd. LV. 1925.
86 EUGENICS REVIEW.

her to recover from the strain of child-bearing which is lacking in the
monogamous marriage of the whites. Another factor to which no little
importance must be attached is the age of marriage among primitive
people, which is usually early. As among most of such peoples the
women age rapidly after attaining maturity, it is usual for the man who
may then be at the height of his vigour to take a younger and more
beautiful wife. Among African people it is no uncommon thing for an
elderly man to have wives ranging in age from his own years down to
quite young girls. Such cases are stated to be frequent, for instance,
among the Bushongo.

A motive, however, which to my mind appears to weigh most with
primitive poeples, especially in Africa, is the importance and consideration which attaches to a plurality of wives. Among the African
agricultual peoples, including under this term for the moment also
those peoples who, while keeping herds of cattle, depend to a great
extent for their food supply on their gardens, agriculture is in the hands
of their women. Agriculture for the man istabu. Payment of a bride
price is general, and as a man’s consideration depends upon his wealth,
the number of his wives is an indication of the amount he has been able
to amass in order to indulge in this luxury. On the other hand his
substance is increased by their labour, this adding still further to his
reputation and raising his standing in the community. Needless
to say the larger family he expects to have by the increase in the number
of his wives also plays no inconsiderable part in determining his matrimonial affairs.

The question of the number and sex of the children in polygamous
marriages, both polygynous and polyandrous, is a subject of considerable importance for the discussion of which it is to be regretted that
adequate data are not available. Figures recorded among the Zulus a
great many years ago gave as many as seven as an average for each of a
family of eight wives, but this I think is exceptional. None of the
figures quoted by Mr. Malcolm approachthis. One case is that of a chief
with 50 wives who had had 100 children, of whom only three survived.
Mr. Malcolm’s conclusion is that on the whole the tendency of the
polygamous marriage is not to produce large families.

Apart, however, from the question of the fertility rate, in considering the question of polygamous marriage in relation to social and
economic development, it must be remembered that there is among such
peoples as are under consideration a high rate of infantile mortality
which probably will be rapidly affected by progress in sanitation and
other remedial measures which it may be expected will be undertaken
as the influence of civilised administration increases.

It may be pointed out, though perhaps it is hardly necessary, that
the study of the polygamous forms of marriage is one which has an
intensely practical bearing, particularly for us as members of the
British Empire. Among a large proportion of our subject populations
polygamous marriage is the normal form; it is the basis of the family,
and the constituent unit of the social organism. From what has been
said it is evident that it is not merely, as is the popular idea, a regularised means of excessive sexual gratification. Indeed, owing to various
causes this element might, without exaggeration, almost be regarded
THE STUDY OF PRIMITIVE RACES. 87

as subordinate. It is a vital social and economic factor; and from
the practical point of view the economic and social element must be
given full weight.

In polygamous communities belonging to a higher grade of civilisation plural marriage becomes almost entirely a matter of financial
means. There can be no doubt that however much the custom may
seem at variance with the standards of a monogamous people such as
ourselves, tthe efforts which have been made to discourage polygamy,
have at times proved to have been ill-judged. The customs and
relations which go as a whole to the making up of a primitive social
organism are in peculiarly delicate relation one to another, and any
interference which has not been preceded by close study of the conditions and of all possible consequences have proved disastrous. At one
time an effort was made to suppress the custom of the bride-price among
the South African Bantu, with the result that all the marriages during
that period of suppression were regarded by the natives as illegal, and
the system of inheritance was utterly disorganised. This was especially
unfortunate, to say the least, as among some of these peoples the
bride-price of the inheriting chief’s mother, upon which her status as
chief wife had depended, had been taken from the paternal family
property and zpso facto determined the passing of the chieftainship.
Again in Uganda the drop in the number of polygamous marriages has
resulted in much of the land going out of cultivation, owing to the fact
that each married woman was responsible for keeping a garden. It has
also led to an increase of prostitution with its attendant evils and a
consequent great increase in disease. The lapse or suppression of the
custom of a man marrying his father’s widows which prevails among a
number of the African tribes, would have the same effect, while at best
laying the responsibility for the provision for their old age upon the
tribal community, if, indeed as is more probable, they were not put out
of the way, as was, for instance, the custom in India. So far as we are
able to judge from our present knowledge of the social organisation of
African peoples, polygamy represents the form of marriage institution
most favourable to their welfare at their present level of culture. If
and when they progress upon an upward line of development, the
tendency towards monogamy already noted may be encouraged, but any
sudden or drastic change is to be deprecated.

I would venture to suggest that the Eugenics Education Society
might perform a useful function by impressing upon the public mind
that a comparative study of the marriage customs of various races and
peoples and especially of an institution such as polygamy teaches us the
lesson that we should not be hasty either in condemning or in enforcing
upon our subject primitive populations a change in practices which
may be at variance with our views, but are nevertheless fundamental
among the conditions which are essential to the well-being of the
individual, the stability of the community, and the perpetuation of the
race; and secondly, that a moral convention being by no means immutable, variation from that convention should be studied in a scientific spirit in all its bearings upon the progress of the community and of
the race; and in relation to its conformity with the higher morality
which that implies.
