FUGENIC MEASURES IN THE THIRD REICH"
By FELIX TIETZE, oD.

an English audience I want first to
apologize for my boldness to do so as a
foreigner. Further I owe you an explanation
as to how my humble person might be a kind
of mediator between English and German
eugenics, and why therefore I seem to be
entitled to give here in England a lecture on
the subject “‘ Eugenic Measures in the Third
Reich.’’ You all or most of you know the
little but important and masterful book What
ts Eugenics? by our honorary president,
Major Leonard Darwin. This book I had
the privilege to translate into German ; the
translation was published in 1931 under the
title Was ist Eugentk ? and proved a great
success. I translated also other eugenic books
and articles from the English into the German
language, and was a delegate of an Austrian
Eugenic Organization to the International
Federation of Eugenic Organizations. It is
this association with eugenics that emboldens
me to crave your indulgence on this occasion.
Before entering into the details of recent
German legislation, I want to explain what to
me seems to be the fundamental difference
between the German and the English conception of eugenics. You know Galton’s
definition, that “‘ Eugenics is the science
which deals with all influences which improve
the inborn qualities of a race, also those that
develop them to the utmost advantage.”
Before the Third Reich it was also clear in
Germany that ‘“ race’ here was not used in
the anthropological sense. Thus, Fritz Lenz,
a pioneer of eugenics in Germany (and now
professor of Eugenics at the Berlin University), said: ‘‘ To influence in a favourable
sense the hereditary character of a population: is the task of racial hygiene in- the
stricter sense, being a hygiene of the hereditary characters ’’ (1931). Still clearer is the
formulation by Grotjahn: ‘‘ Eugenics is an

| F I venture to read a paper in English to

* Substance of a paper read at a meeting of the
Eugenics Society on Tuesday, January 17th.

105

objective science, i.e. applicable to each
group of individuals connected with each
other by procreation, without any dependence on race in the anthropological sense of
the word to which this group belongs”
(1926). Now, let me quote Adolf Hitler:
“ The national state has to put race into the
centre of life and to care for its purity.” *
And: ‘“ The state is only the means to an
end, this end being the preservation of the
racial existence of men.” ¢ And: “ The
quality of a state cannot be valued according
to the civilisatory height or the power of
this state within the rest of the world, but
only according to how its organization works
in favour for its own nation.” { And:
“Who speaks of a mission of the German
nation on the earth must know that it can
only consist in the formation of a state which
sees its highest task in the preservation and
the promotion of the most noble portions of
our nation, even of the whole of mankind,
which are still intact.” §

When this bible of present day Germany
speaks so, the sense of race and the sense of
eugenics therefore are totally altered. Race
is the Nordic race in the anthropological
sense, or at least the ‘‘ German race,”
although such a thing does not exist ; and
eugenics—or as it is exclusively called in the
Third Reich, “racial hygiene ’’—is only the
science concerned with the promotion of the
German nation or the Nordic race. By this
restriction the German ‘ Rassenhygiene ”
excludes itself totally from what is called,
internationally, eugenics.

Among the legal measures introduced by
the Third Reich in connection with eugenics
the first, and one of the most conspicuous,
was the Law for the Prevention of Hereditary
Disease of July 14th, 1933. AS you know—
for a translation of this law was published in

* Mein Kampf, 16th ed., 1932, p. 446.
f Ibid, p. 433. f Ibid, p.435. § Ibid, p. 439.
106

the EUGENICS REVIEW *—the essential items
are the following: Anyone who is hereditarily ailing may be made barren (sterilized)
by surgical operation, if in the experience of
medical science it is with great probability
to be expected that his progeny will suffer
from severe bodily or mental hereditary
disorders. Hereditarily ailing in the sense of
this law is anyone who suffers from one of
the following diseases : (1) congenital feeblemindedness, (2) schizophrenia, (3) periodic
(manic-depressive) insanity, (4) inherited
epilepsy, (5) inherited St. Vitus’s dance
(Huntington’s chorea), (6) inherited blindness, (7) inherited deafness, (8) severe
inherited physical malformation. Further,
anyone suffering from severe alcoholism
may be sterilized. Competent to make the
proposal is the person who is to be sterilized,
but in the case of irresponsibility or incapacity of this person the proposer is the
legal representative, further the medical
officer of health, and for the inmates of a
hospital, institution or prison, its director.

So the sterilization is a compulsory, not a
voluntary measure. Before the Third Reich
all the experts were agreed about the fact
that the experiences of science were still not
sufficient to grant such a measure; it was
the political issue which made them change
their mind.

Another step which to the German legislation seems to be a eugenic measure, which,
indeed, is such a one from the standpoint
which I explained in the beginning of my
paper but would not be considered so in this
country, was the Law for the Protection of
German Blood and German Honour of
September 15th, 1935, forbidding marriage
and sexual intercourse between Jews and
citizens of German or related blood and containing the famous regulation that Jews are
forbidden to employ in their households
female citizens of German or related blood
under the age of 45 years. Every German
author on eugenics considers this a eugenic
law.

Very important is the Law for the Protection
of the Hereditary Health of the German

* 1933, 25, 179.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Nation (Marnage Health Law) of October 18th,
1935.*. It states that a marriage must not be
contracted if either of the partners (a) is
suffering from a transmissible disease, or
(0) has been declared incapable of managing
his or her affairs and placed under the provisional care of a guardian, or (c) is suffering
from a mental trouble which makes the
marriage undesirable in the interests of the
community, or (d@) is suffering from a
“‘ hereditary disease ’’ in the sense in which
the term is used in the Law for the Prevention of Hereditary Disease. Before a marriage
is contracted the engaged persons have to
produce a certificate from the health office
to the effect that they are not subject to any
of these disabilities. Such a pre-nuptial
health certificate was always a demand of
many eugenists and seems to be a very
important measure in the interests of
eugenics, if applied in the right sense.
Rightly, a semi-official article in the Vélkische
Beobachter (the official party paper) stated :
““ Before the enactment of this law persons
who on account of their weakmindedness,
prodigality or alcoholism had been declared
incapable of managing their affairs were
allowed to marry with the consent of their
legal guardian. However, it is against the
interests of the national community that
such persons should marry. Further there
are persons who suffer from mental troubles
but who for some reason or other have not
yet been declared incapable of managing
their own affairs, and others who in consequence of pathological heredity have
become criminals. It is obvious that the
state must not leave to.them the responsibility for the foundation of a family. The
present law is a necessary complement to
the previous law for the prevention of
hereditary disease. The purpose of marriage
being the production of healthy children, it
is morally unjust to bind a healthy, reproductive individual to a sterilized one. On
the other hand, there is no objection against
two barren individuals entering into a lifecommunity.”’

* An English translation by myself was published in
Marriage Hygiene in 1936 (p. 372).
EUGENIC MEASURES IN THE THIRD REICH

But as the certificate to be produced
before the marriage is contracted is granted
by the health office (advisory office for
hereditary and racial problems) there is a
certain danger as to the proper use of the
law. Again here the fundamental difference
between eugenics and “racial hygiene ”’
might produce the denial of such a certificate
in cases in which from the genuine eugenical
standpoint no objection could be raised.

The two laws for the prevention of hereditary disease and for the protection of the
hereditary health of the German nation are
the most important measures of negative
eugenics in the Third Reich, i.e., such
measures as should prevent the production
of undesirable descendants. The most important measure to increase the number of
children of parents whose constitutional
health seems to guarantee healthy descendants is the Law for the Promotion of Marriages
(Section V of the Law for the diminution of
unemployment of June Ist, 1933, altered by
the Law of March 28th, 1934).

According to this law the national government granted marriage loans up to 1,000
marks to young people who wanted to
marry, but would have been unable to marry
without this help. From August Ist, 1933,
to the end of February, 1934, about 200,000
such loans were granted of an average
amount of 620 marks. The purpose of the
law was not only to promote marriages and
the production of descendants—the official
motivation of the law estimated an increase
of marriages of 200,000 a year—but also a
decrease of unemployment by those increased marriages. One of the conditions for
the granting of a marriage loan was that the
prospective bride had to give up the paid
job in which she was employed up to the
time of marriage. (This condition was
dropped on October Ist, 1937.) 
Moreover, furniture, utensils, linen and
the other requirements of the newly married
couple and their prospective children were
intended to decrease unemployment by the
increase in work necessary to supply these

107

requirements. The loans are to be refunded
in amounts equivalent to I per cent. per
month without interest ; e.g. for a loan of
1,000 marks, 10 marks are to be refunded
every month to the Government. An
additional decree of September 15th, 1935,
altered by the decree of August 31st, 1937,
introduced the granting of child premiums
for families who had to bring up children
after the fourth child. Such child premiums
are either paid once up to 100 marks for each
child after the fourth, or they are regular
payments of 10 marks per month for each
child after the fourth.

After having explained the importance of
these three measures—the Law for the
Prevention of Hereditary Disease, the Law
for the Protection of the Hereditary Health of
the German Nation, and the Law for the
Promotion of Marriages, to give you an idea
of the German conception of racial hygiene
and to justify my argument at the beginning
of this paper, I want to quote from an
article written by two of the most prominent
German eugenists, Alfred Ploetz and Ernst
Riidin, on what seem to them to be some of
the eugenic consequences attained in Germany since the Fiihrer took power on

January 30th, 1933.*

They summarize these as follows :

Education of Germany’s young people.

Repression of the Jewish portion of the population.

Decrease of unemployment.

Safeguarding of the nation in its racial climbingup by withdrawal from the League of Nations,
declaring null and void the treaties of Versailles
and St. Germain,

by occupation of the Rhine District,

by the German-Japanese-Italian agreement
against communism,

by the creation of the German-Italian axis,

by the re-union of Austria with Germany, and
so creating Greater Germany.

I leave it entirely to you to decide how far
these measures may justly be called eugenic.

* Archiv fir
1938, 82, 185.

Rassen- und Geselischafts-Biologie,

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXXI, No. 2.
