IDENTICAL TWINS

The Differences Between Those Reared Apart

By PROFESSOR H. H. NEWMAN, Ph.D.

(Professor of Zoology, University of Chicago.)

twins as material for the study of the

relative potencies of heredity and environment, in determining the differences in
physical and mental traits of mankind.
_ Since Galton’s time it has been generally
assumed that identical twins are derived
from a single zygote and therefore have
identical genes, while fraternal twins are
derived from two zygotes and are as different
genetically as ordinary sibs. When, therefore, identical twins exhibit certain physical
and mental differences, these differences are
commonly assumed to be due to differences
in environment, pre-natal or post-natal.

Another factor, not strictly genetic and
yet not environmental, is undoubtedly responsible for a considerable share of actually
observed differences between identical twins.
This fact is the asymmetry mechanism,
which has doubtless a cytoplasmic basis and
is probably traceable to a cytoplasmic asymmetry of the undivided zygote. This is the
same factor which makes a single individual
different in the two antimeric halves of the
body, with respect to all sorts of particulars
which need hardly be enumerated here.

The point of the matter in hand is just
this, that when the single embryo divides to
form two twin primordia, one of these
primordia is not entirely equivalent to the
other, and hence the twins cannot be said
to have arisen from identical materials.

This being the case, to what extent does
the asymmetry factor disturb the two factors,
heredity and environment, and how can we
distinguish between differences due to the
environment and those due to the asymmetry
mechanism? ‘The immediate answer is that

| ONG ago Galton discovered the value of

this cannot be done. Hence twins can no
longer be of any great value in the study of
heredity and environment.

This was the conclusion at which we
arrived when we first came to understand the
workings of the asymmetry mechanism in
the process of twinning. Later, however, a
method was evolved by means of which the
effects of the environment could be separated
from those attributable to the asymmetry
mechanism. This consists of a comparison of
identical twins reared together with identical twins reared apart. Here we have an
ideal scientific set-up. The control material
consists of identical twins reared together

‘and the experimental material of cases of

identical twins reared apart. Here each pair
of twins, control and experimental, is genetically alike. In each pair the asymmetry
mechanism has operated to produce some
differences, but no more in the experimental
pairs than in the controls. Hence we may
conclude that the greater extent of difference
found in identical twins reared apart as compared with the average differences of identical twins reared together must be attributed
solely to differences in environment.

MATERIAL AND METHODS

As an indispensable pre-requisite for this
study it was necessary to accumulate a large
mass of data on a group of identical twins
and a group of same-sexed fraternal twins,
both groups sufficiently large to be statistically adequate. Calculations indicated that
data for 50 pairs of fraternal twins and 50
pairs of identicals would yield a satisfactory
base line to which we could then refer the
cases of identical twins reared apart. The

29
30

number of strictly mental tests given these.

100 pairs of twins was necessarily limited for
lack of time, and consisted of the StanfordBinet Test, and the Otis Self-Administering
Test. One temperamental-emotional test
was used, but it was found difficult to give it
a satisfactory quantitative rating. The
fact that, when quantitative ratings were
used, the average differences between fraternal twins and those between identical twins
were so nearly the same, indicates that such
tests are useless as quantitative indicators of
the characters they are designed to measure.

Intelligence tests such as the StanfordBinet and the Otis Self-Administering Test,
while not perfect measures of innate mental
ability, are as good as any available. This is
not the place to criticize intelligence tests,
nor are we in a position to offer criticism, but
we are aware that the best of them fail to
distinguish fully between innate and acquired mental powers. ‘Taking the results
as they stand, however, we find that we can
obtain certain more or less reliable data.

Average differences between 50 pairs of
identical twins reared together, and between
50 pairs of same-sexed fraternal twins reared
together are as follows for the two tests
used :

Stanford-Binet Test: In this test both
mental age average differences and I.Q.
average differences were obtained. The average mental age differences between identicals
was 8.4 months,
months. The average | T. re ‘difference befraternals 9.9 points.

Otis Self-Administering Test.—In this
only. I.Q. differences were obtained. The
average I.Q. difference between identicals
was 4.5 points, between fraternals 9.2 points.

In general it will be seen that the average
difference between fraternals was about twice
that between identicals in both tests. This
is apparently not a very striking difference,
but is quite consistent.

Let us now proceed to examine our three
pairs of identical twins reared apart, assuming that we have ample grounds for our decision that we are dealing in each case with
true identical twins.

between fraternals 15.9.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

CASE I.—TWINS “A” “AND “0”

These are twin girls, born in London,
England, and left orphan at eighteen months
of age. One twin, “‘ A,’’ was adopted by
foster parents living in Chelsea and the
other twin was taken out to Canada and
brought up in a small but prosperous Ontario town. Both twins had essentially the
same amount of training and both were
trained for clerical work. After being separated for eighteen years the London twin,
‘* A,’’ moved to Canada and has lived since
with her twin sister, ‘‘ O,’’ both employed
in the same offices. At the time we made
our study of these twins they had been a
year together, so that the English twin had
had an opportunity to become adjusted to the
changed environment. At the time the test
was given ‘‘ O,’’ the Canadian twin, was in
considerably better physical condition,
weighing 102 pounds as compared with 92
pounds for “A.’? Ten pounds make a
great difference in such small persons. But
there was less difference earlier in life. Even
in the last month ‘‘ A ”’ varied four or five
pounds. In stature there is but an eighth of
an inch difference in favour of ‘‘ O,’’ less
than an individual varies in the course of a
day. In circumference of parts of the body
and limbs there are slight differences everywhere, the greatest being in the thigh, in
which that of ‘‘O”’’ is one and one-half
inches greater. ‘There is always less difference in parts that are less covered with
flesh, such as ankle and wrist. ‘‘ O’s ’’ head
length is 4 mm. greater than ‘‘ A’s,’’ and
her head width is 2 mm. greater. This is
interesting in view of the fact that the larger
head occurs in the right-handed individual
and is associated in this case with higher
mental capacity. The cephalic index is .777
for ‘‘ A” and .771 for ‘‘ O,’’ which is as
close as is usually found in identical twins.

As a child ‘‘A’’ was naturally lefthanded, but has been largely trained out of
it. There is then, in handedness, a distinct
reversal of asymmetry between the twins, a
situation very common in monozygotic
twins, and especially characteristic of the
less strikingly similar pairs.
IDENTICAL TWINS

In facial expression there is a marked
difference, that of ‘‘ A ’’ being a little harder
and more sophisticated. The mouth is somewhat more set, the jaw a little firmer, and the
eyes are kept a little more closed. Whether
this difference is due to different experiences
in life or is merely the same in kind and
origin as are differences in the two sides of
the face of a single individual (which are
commonly quite considerable*), it is impossible to say. But it seems more probable,
owing to the fact that monozygotic twins
reared together sometimes show equally
great differences in expression, that in the
present case the difference is the result of an
internal asymmetry mechanism.

Stanford-Binet Test: ‘‘A’’ showed a
mental age of 13 years 7 months; ‘‘O”’ of
15 years 6 months, a difference of 23 months.
This difference is not only more than two
and a half times as great as the average of
identical twins reared together, but exceeds
by over 7 months the average of fraternal
twins reared together.

The difference in I.Q. between ‘‘ A ”’ and
**O”’ was 12 points in favour of ‘‘ O,”’ a
difference over twice as great as that for the
average of so pairs of identical twins reared
together and 2.1 points greater than the
average of 50 pairs of fraternal twins reared
together.

Otis Self-Administering Test: ‘A’
showed an I.Q. of 93 and ‘‘O”? of 111, a
difference of 18 points, four times as great
as the average of 50 pairs of identical twins
reared together, and nearly twice as great as
the average of 50 pairs of fraternal twins
reared together.

There can be little, if any, doubt that
these twins have been derived from a single
zygote and are therefore genetically identical. The question arises as to what are the
factors responsible for the rather marked
differences between them. Lest it be thought
‘that the mental differences, great though
they be, are unparalleled among identical
twins, it should be stated that there are

* Notice particularly, in any full-face photograph,
the entirely different characters displayed by the
right and left sides of the face of Mr. George Bernard
Shaw.—ED.

31

among our 50 pairs of identical twins reared
together, five cases, or 10 per cent. of the
whole group, that show an equally great
or slightly greater difference in I.Q. (as
based on the Stanford-Binet Test), than do
“A” and *O”. “A” and ‘ O ” showed
a difference of 12 in I.Q.; while the five
pairs of identical twins reared together showing greater differences run as follows: 12.6,
12.9, 13.0, 13.9, and 16.0. It might also be
said that five pairs of our 50 showed o.o
difference in I.Q. as based on the StanfordBinet Test.

Since, then, differences in intelligence as
great or greater than that shown between
“A” and ‘‘O” do occur in some cases of
identical twins reared together, it might be
concluded that these differences are of no
great significance as criteria of the effectiveness of different environment and training.
It should be emphasized, however, that in all
of the five cases of twins, just referred to, in
which there was an unusually wide discrepancy in I1.Q. as tested by the StanfordBinet Test, there was much closer correspondence in all other mental tests given. In
contrast with this is the fact that our twins
““A” and ‘‘Q”? are consistently far apart
in all the scores derived from pure intelligence tests, and “‘O”’ is always distinctly
superior.

In contrast to the very pronounced differences in mentality proper, stands the fact
that “‘A’’ and ‘‘O”’ appeared to be remarkably similar temperamentally and emotionally. All of the several tests given
emphasized the similarity of temperament
and tended to minimize the differences.

CASE II.—TWINS “E” AND “G”

These twin girls were separated at a year
and a half of age and did not meet again
until they were 21 years of age. Neither
knew of the other’s existence until a former
acquaintance of ‘‘E’’ met ‘‘G”’ and mistook her for ‘‘E’’. When they met and
compared their papers they found they were
twins. ‘The environmental differences were
again rather great. ‘‘ E’’ was adopted by
people in moderate circumstances but rather
32

elderly. ‘‘ E”’ went to school only till she
had finished fifth grade and then stayed at
home in order to help her elderly foster
mother, who was in poor health. At eighteen
years ‘‘E”’ started to work as a dentist’s
assistant and has continued ever since at this
job. ‘‘G’”’ was adopted by rather young
foster parents. After three years the foster
mother died and ‘‘ G’’ was sent, at the age
of six, to a parochial school where she
finished seventh grade. From there she
went to a Roman Catholic Academy for girls
where she continued till she was graduated.
After that she took a two years’ normal
course for teachers, and taught school for
two years. She also studied and taught
piano. When ‘‘E”’ and “G”’ met it was
decided that they would live together. So
‘“G” obtained a position in a physician’s
office in the same building where “E”’
works, and has continued there up to the
present. Both of them, now in similar occupations, consider they are doing the kind of
work to which they are best adapted.

It is remarkable that the twins now occupy
essentially the same sort of positions, one
in a dentist’s and the other in a doctor’s
office, and both consider their work almost
ideal.

There was little difference between the
social environments of ‘‘E” and “G’”’,
The foster parents in both cases were uneducated, or slightly educated, working
people. The home environments offer no
tangible contrasts. The striking difference
in the two histories is, of course, in the
amount of education received, ‘‘ E ’’ having
nothing beyond the fifth grade, and ‘‘G”’
seven additional years, through normal
school. There seems to have been very little
difference between these twins in the matter
of informal education.

It should be emphasized here that this
pair of twins would be classed among those
monozygotic twins in which the separation
of embryonic primordia in twinning occurred
very early and before the establishment of
asymmetry between the right and left sides
of the original single embryo. They are
therefore derived not only from genetically
equivalent primordia, but from materials

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

still undifferentiated by the asymmetry
mechanism. Therefore, whatever differences
appear in their physical and mental makeup must be very largely attributable to the
differences of environment or training, and
since the environment in general seems to
have been very similar for both, the differences in training must be the modifying
factor. ‘This is in contrast with the pair
“A” and “‘ O,”’ whose education was practically the same, but whose social environment was very different. Also, there is a
contrast with respect to the effects of the
asymmetry mechanism, in that the twins
““A” and ‘‘O”’ must have separated embryonically relatively late, for ‘‘ A ’’ is lefthanded and shows other evidence of having
been derived from the inferior side of the
original embryo.

Stanford-Binet Test: ‘‘ E ’’ shows a mental age of 10 years 6 months, ‘‘G”’ of 12
years 5 months, a difference of 23 months,
strangely enough the same as that shown
between twins ‘‘ A ’’ and ‘“‘O’’. Also there
is the same difference in I.Q., 12 points, as
in ‘‘ A”? and ‘‘O.’’ In this case ‘‘ G,’’ the
more highly educated twin, is superior.

Otis Self-Administering Test: ‘‘ EK ’’ has
an I.Q. of 60, ‘‘ G ”’ of 84, a difference of 15
points, 3.3 times as great as the average
difference between 50 pairs of identical twins
reared together, and even 5.8 points greater
than the average difference between 50 pairs
of fraternal twins reared together.

These twins, remarkably similar after
being separated at eighteen months of age
and unknown to each other for nineteen
years, have been profoundly modified by the
very different educational careers. In every
test of mental capacity, whether of so-called
native ability or of achievement, ‘‘ G,”’ the
more highly educated twin, has distinctly
the superior mind. Obviously mental training improves the ability of an individual to
score well on any sort of test, even such an
one as the International Test in which no
language is used and only degrees of brightness or mental alertness are supposed to be
tested. In this test ‘‘ G’’ was as superior
over ‘‘ FE ’’ as in most of those tests involving achievement. In the Stanford AchieveIDENTICAL TWINS

ment Test and in the somewhat advanced
Otis Test, as might be expected, the scores
of the twins were most different and in
favour of the more highly educated twin.

In contrast with the great difference in
mental power stands the fact that in all the
tests of emotional traits and of temperament
the twins give the impression of being remarkably and unusually similar. These
tests are, in their very nature, open to wide
fluctuations of performance. ‘The same person on different days or at different times
of the same day would produce different
scores, and these differences would not infrequently be as great as are those of ‘‘ EK ”’
and “‘G’’. In a word, then, these twins
show a very much greater similarity temperamentally than they do intellectually.

Temperamentally, as shown by all tests,
these twin girls are even more strikingly
similar than are twins ‘‘A’’ and ‘‘O”’.
Also they are more similar physically, in
that they are in equally good physical condition. They represent nearly identical
personalities.

CASE IIIl.—TWINS “C” AND “0”

These twin boys were separated at two
months of age and met again for the first
time when they were about 24 years of age.
Neither had known of the other’s existence
until ‘‘C’’ found a reference to his twin
brother in some old papers that came into
his possession. They met on a public holiday when “ C ”’ paid a visit to ‘‘O ”’ at the
latter’s home.

“CC” is in nearly every respect, height,
head size, and in many other parts, a shade
the larger of the twins. Although both
twins claim to be purely right-handed, ‘‘O”’
shows by tapping tests, especially in wrist
tapping, that he is probably a native lefthander. ‘That he is one, trained to be righthanded, is borne out by the fact that his left
biceps and left ankle are both larger than the
right. The fact that he has also the smaller
head and is the less vital and forceful of the
pair accords with the general rule for identical twins, that the twin derived from the inferior side of the embryo has the smaller

33

head and usually shows signs of asymmetry
reversal.

The two had essentially the same amount
of education. The home life of ‘‘ C ’”’ was
more favourable in several ways. ‘The chief
environmental difference consists of the fact
that ‘‘C’s”’ life has been spent largely in
medium-sized cities and ‘‘ O’s’”’ has been
spent largely in the country and in small
towns or villages. ‘The main difference now
is one of personality. ‘‘ C’’ is more urban
and sophisticated, ‘‘O’’ more countrified
and naive. The difference of expression,
carriage, etc., is marked. ‘‘ C ”’ is considerably better in physical condition.

Stanford-Binet Test: ‘‘ C ’’? shows a mental age of 15 years 11 months, ‘‘O” 16
years 2 months, a difference of 3 months,
very much less than the average of identical
twins reared together. ‘‘ C’s’’ I.Q. is 99,
“Q’s”” ror, a difference of only 3 points,
considerably less than the average of identical twins reared together.

Otis Self-Administering Test: ‘‘C”
shows an I.Q. of ro, ‘‘ O”’ of 100, a difference of 10, over twice that of identical twins
reared together and even slightly greater
than the average of fraternal twins reared
together.

There is not much contrast either in educational careers or in home environments in
these twins. ‘‘C”’ has had about a year
more of formal education than ‘‘O”’ and
possibly in larger and more efficient schools
for the most part. £' —© ”” was an only child,
‘O.”” one of three. . ©” has live Saack
more in cities of medium size; ‘“O” has
seen little of city life and appears much less
sophisticated. The whole environmental
complex of these twins 1s in general similar
rather than different. This circumstance
does not detract seriously from their value
as objects of study, especially as they may
be used as a check on those cases in which
the environment of the twins shows stronger
contrasts.

In general, twins ‘‘C”’ and ‘‘O” are
more nearly similar intellectually than are
the other two pairs of twins. The resemblance, however, is not so great as it appears
at first sight, for it is shown in only one of
34

the tests given, the Stanford-Binet Test. In
the Thurston Psychological Examination,
the difference was 18 points; in the International Group Test there was a difference
of 10 points; and in the Stanford Achievement Test there was a difference of 16
months in mental age, a difference two and a
half times as great as the average of 50 pairs
of identical twins reared together and considerably greater than the average of 50
pairs of fraternal twins reared together. In
each case, the advantage was with the citybred twin, ‘‘ C.’’

It now appears that each case of identical
twins reared apart offers a distinct and peculiar situation that must be studied as a problem in itself. This is especially true of the
present case, which emphasizes more sharply
than the others that it is quite impossible to
generalize about the effects of environment
and training upon the hereditary make-up of
twins reared apart.

In this case the environment and training of the twins were closely similar in
general, at least in so far as we were able
to ascertain the facts. Yet the ‘ personalities ’’ of the boys are utterly different. So
opposite is the impression made by them
upon all the observers that we were forcibly
struck by it from the beginning. Yet the
only test that adequately expresses this
obvious difference is the Pressy X—O Test.

The one outstanding difference is in
their general personalities. The feminine
observers of these twins feel more strongly
attracted by ‘‘C”’ than by ‘‘O”’. This
may afford a clue to some unrecorded environmental agencies that have had to do
with moulding these two very different
personalities.

DISCUSSION OF RESULTS

When work was begun on identical twins
reared apart we decided to refrain from generalizations until an adequate number of
pairs had been studied and reported as

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

separate cases. These three cases came to
light all within a few months. ‘Two other
pairs were reported to us, one pair of which
on investigation proved to be fraternal twins,
and the second pair, although surely identical twins of just the kind most desired,
proved refractory and would not consent to
be studied. It now appears unlikely that we

shall have any further cases to report.

Hence we may be justified in discussing the
material actually in hand as a more or less
definitive body of data.

One other case has been studied, that of
Muller, published about two years before our
studies began. ‘This case is not comparable
with ours as none of the same tests were
given. Hence it seems best to omit it from
present discussion.*

The most striking features of our results
will already have been noted. Certainly in
Cases I and II, and in all but one test in
Case III, not only are the differences between the twins at least twice as great as the
average differences between identical twins
reared together, but they are at least on the
average equal to those of fraternal twins
reared together. From this it appears that
difference in environment and training may
cause as great a divergence in mental capacity between twins with ideutical heredity as
exists between twins with different heredity,
fraternal twins, reared under the same environment. In other words, the effects of
different environment on like heredity are
essentially equal to the effects of like environment on different heredity.

Some may see in this statement justification for the conclusion that heredity and environment have equal effects in producing
differences in mental characteristics of
human beings. Personally, we should prefer for the present to let the facts speak for
themselves and not to attempt a generalization based on three cases.

 

 

 

* Briefly, in Muller’s twins there was remarkable
mental resemblance and more than ordinary temperamental difference.—Ep.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXII, No. 1.
