THE VALUE OF MEDICAL EXAMINATION
BEFORE MARRIAGE*

By COL. MALCOLM STODDART-SCOTT, MP.

In the following article, Colonel Stoddart-Scott
writes about the widely discussed Private Member’s
Bill, which he seeks to introduce in the House of
Commons, dealing with the controversial subject
of compulsory exchange of certificates of medical

examination between engaged couples.
Prost amongst Members of Parliament

for the privilege of introducing into Parliament a Private Member’s Bill. There are
over 600 starters in the Parliamentary sweepstake, but only twenty ever get placed. A
Member is always considered very fortunate
if his name appears amongst this lucky
twenty. Many Members pass through their

Parliamentary life without ever having this
privilege and opportunity.

VERY year in November there is a

The chance of getting a Private Member’s
Bill passed through both Houses of Parliament and becoming the law of the.land is
indeed remote. If the Bill is non-controversial, if it has the support of the
Government and if one’s name is drawn
amongst the first six, then there is a chance,
a possibility, that it may get through. A
good Bill, non-controversial, with Government backing, can be lost if too much time

is taken up by the Private Member’s Bills ©

which precede it as a very limited amount
of Parliamentary time is available.

The chance of my little Bill ever getting
on the Statute Book is almost non-existing.
I have drawn, nineteenth place. From the
reaction of some of the national Press, I can
hardly consider my Bill non-controversial,
and I do not expect the Government to
adopt it and to gain the additional time and
facilities to get my Bill through. I have,
therefore, to go through all the actions of
preparing the Bill, get it printed and
published, without knowing for certain

- *Reprinted from Wharfedale and Airedale Observer,
Friday, November 27th, 1953.

that it will ever be discussed on the floor
of the House of Commons.

Twofold Objective

What does my little Bill hope to do?
Its objective is twofold. (1) To make for
happier marriages. (2) To provide for
healthier generations to come. The title is
“to make it compulsory for the exchanges
of certificates of medical examination before
marriage.’’ You will see from the title the
purpose is to do one thing only—that persons
about to be married should exchange
certificates stating that they have been
medically examined within a given period
prior to the marriage. It does not propose
that details of examination or medical
histories should be included on the certificate.

The value of this action would be to give
greater mutual assurance to those about to
undertake the important and changed
responsibilities of the marriage partnership.
It would give an opportunity of discussing
with the family doctor the intimate problems
which may and do perplex those about to
be married. In those instances—and they
would be a very small minority only—
where disease was detected or the medical
history made it’ prudent, treatment or
advice could be given.
’ In no case would the exchange of such
certificates prevent anyone from getting
married. A doctor might advise that a
course of treatment might remove an

infection or procure a cure, and therefore

40

it might be prudent to postpone marriage
for a brief period. A medical examination
will in some cases give cause for reflection.
If such advice were given and followed, it
would perhaps prevent unhappiness after
marriage, and may possibly prevent the
breakdown of marriages. It could help
further to reduce infant mortality.
THE VALUE OF MEDICAL EXAMINATION BEFORE MARRIAGE. s 4r

The infant mortality rate is held by many
to be the most delicate index of the Social
Services of a nation. In this country the
infantile mortality rate (that is the number
of infants who do not survive the first. year
of birth) has been falling steadily over the
past thirty years and last year it was the
lowest on record. If we can add to this
great advances in social progress by medical
examination before marriage, is it not worth
doing ? Medical examination before marriage
is not a new idea. It has been talked about
for many years. In some countries it has
already operated for some time including
Norway, Sweden, Denmark and Turkey.
In many of the States in the U.S.A. a blood
test has to be made three days prior to
marriage.

Medical examination in itself is not
strange to most of us. We have become
increasingly used to such examinations for
a variety of purposes. At school we have
compulsory medical examinations, prior
to doing two years National Service we have
to undergo compulsory medical examination.
Why not then before we undertake marriage
and become the parents of the next
generation ?

Medical Co-operation

‘The co-operation of the medical profession
would be needed, of course, and would I
believe be readily forthcoming. In some
instances, and again I stress the minority,
the doctor might refer individuals to the
Marriage Guidance clinics. In certain
diseases with heredity traits such as Haemophilia and mental conditions, a doctor’s
advice would be invaluable. Any instance
of V.D. (which is fortunately rapidly becoming a receding disease) could be referred for
treatment.

Tuberculosis—the White Man’s Scourge—
has now become a curable disease. One
factor which has helped to bring this about
is early diagnosis. There may be only one
case in a thousand of undiscovered tuberculosis who would present themselves for
medical examination before marriage, but
isn’t it worth while to discover and treat:
such a case with the quick prospect of
recovery that early diagnosis implies ?

I do not believe in compulsion any more
than most people, but we already willingly
and properly accept certain social gbligations. The number of men and women who
voluntarily present themselves for a premarriage medical examination is a growing
one. But these are almost always the
healthy people, who prize physical fitness.
If my Bill was to become law many more
would have the satisfaction of knowing
they too were amongst the fit, and many
doubts and unfounded fears would be
removed. .

My Bill is so far down the list that it
may never be heard of again, but a public
interest in it has been aroused which in my
view, and in the view of so many who have
written to me, is a good thing. If the result
is to encourage and increase the number of
people who voluntarily undertake medical
examination before marriage, then we can
add our little to the health and happiness
of the people of this country.

This Bill places emphasis in the right
direction—the ‘‘ preventative medicine ”’
which is always the most valuable aspect
of medicine—for it removes diseases and
prevents sickness.

In this age of the atom, of the increasing
world population, of intensive world competition, the prize of survival will probably
go to the healthiest people. It is therefore
the duty of every thinking man and woman
to plan for healthy Britons of the future.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLVI, No. 1
