THE SOCIAL PROBLEM GROUP

As Illustrated by a Series of East London Pedigrees

(The Galton Lecture, 1932)

By E. J. LIDBETTER

HE term ‘the social problem
- group ’’ first appeared in the report
of the Departmental Committee on

Mental Deficiency, published in 1929, in
the following paragraph :

‘* Let us assume that we could segregate as a separate community all the
families in this country containing
mental defectives of the primary amentia
type. We should find that we had collected among them a most interesting
social group. It would include, as everyone who has extensive practical experience of social service would readily admit,
a much larger proportion of insane
persons, epileptics, paupers, criminals
(especially recidivists), unemployables,
habitual slum-dwellers, prostitutes, inebriates and other social inefficients than
would a group of families not containing
mental defectives. The overwhelming
majority of the families thus collected
will belong to that section of the community, which we propose to term the
‘social problem ’ or ‘ subnormal’ group.
This group comprises approximately the
lowest 10 per cent. in the social scale of
most communities. Though the large
majority of its members are ‘not so low
grade mentally that they can be actually
certified as mentally defective, it is
possible that a not inconsiderable number
of them might prove, if examined by
expert and experienced medical practitioners, to be certifiable and subject to

Nore: Mr. Lidbetter has kindly expressed his
willingness to deliver this lecture, illustrated with
numerous pedigree charts, to any group or organization which would care to hear it. Communications
on this subject should be addressed to the General
Secretary of the Society.

be placed under care and control.’’ (Part

III, para. 91.)

The idea contained in this paragraph is
not new—at least to members of this
Society—for as long ago as November 1910
there appeared in the EuGcenics REVIEW a
number of articles from which the idea so
clearly emerged that the following comment was made upon it in a leading article
in The Times of November 7th, 1910:

“The general effect of these reports
is to show the existence among us of a
definite race of chronic paupers, a race
parasitic upon the community, breeding
in and through successive generations,
and only to a small extent recruited
either from the ranks of unskilled labour
or from the sufferers by the ordinary
fluctuations of industry or employment.*
The existence of families of habitual
criminals, preying upon the public in a
somewhat similar manner, has long been
known ... but the analogous facts in
relation to pauperism have perhaps never
before received the full recognition to
which they appear to be entitled.’’

THE METHODS OF APPROACH

The reports referred to and this comment
were made upon research which had then
been commenced and is still continuing,
and the data which I propose to submit are
taken from the results of that investigation.
Two points should be mentioned at the outset: firstly, that this investigation was not
undertaken in relation to pauperism, as
might appear from the quotation from The

 

* At the time this was written unemployment
meant very largely the intermittent employment of
casually-employed men. This was very different
from the post-War chronic unemployment.
8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Times, but was an investigation into the personal, family, and collateral relationships of
persons in a particular district in East London who were in receipt of assistance from
private or public funds.

For this purpose, authority having been
obtained, the records of charitable organizations and of the local Board of Guardians
were examined, and it soon appeared that
the records of the latter body were so complete that they included most, if not all,
of the persons assisted in the district, or
that if by any chance such persons were not
included in the official records, some other
dependent member of the family was
included, and these gave the necessary connection. ‘The method gave the impression
that pauperism was the subject of the
investigation, but the inquiry was directed
to the biological relationship of defectives,
and their dependence upon public or private
funds was the method employed to discover
them.

Secondly, although the conclusions
reached in these separate investigations are
identical, they have been arrived at by
entirely different methods. The Departmental Committee reached their conclusions
from an examination of material in the
mass—the cumulative effect of statistical
data gathered by direct investigation in a
number of districts.

In this investigation we have built up the
data from investigations into the personal,
family, and collateral relationships and conditions—the result produced in biological
form. The inquiries are complementary
and the conclusions are the same, but the
methods we have employed enable us to
indicate the. possible line of development in
these groups, to suggest some causes of
their existence, and to make some general
observations upon the conditions found to
exist.

It is intended as soon as possible to make
the results of the investigation public in a
complete form and when this is done an
attempt will be made to deal with the work
on a statistical basis.

At the commencement the work consisted
of a collection of pedigrees in selected cases.

These pedigrees were instructive and suggestive. Valuable experience was gained in
this earlier work, but from the criticism of
it there emerged a much clearer understanding as to what was necessary if the final
results of such an investigation were to be
accepted. Among these was a recognition
that if valid conclusions were to be reached
the work must rest upon a statistical basis.
Accordingly, on a date in 1923 a complete
return was prepared of the individuals to be
included in the research—some 2,500 in all
—and the work has been so planned that
it is hoped to measure the social problem
group against the sum of the population in
the district concerned. I am not prepared,
however, at this stage to deal with the
statistical aspect.

Since the publication of the report of the
Departmental Committee the question has
been raised as to whether there is such a
thing as a social problem group. It is this
question that I propose to discuss here, and
for the purpose I have selected, from the
large number in my possession, some of the
diagrams showing the inter-relations of the
people comprising the social problem group
in the district concerned—pedigrees of the
families who were dependent upon charity
or public funds upon the selected date.

In considering these pedigrees it should
be remembered :

(x) That the figures and other particulars
mentioned have reference to a date early
in 1923.

(2) That persons in receipt of relief on
the grounds of unemployment were rigidly
excluded from the inquiry. It will be
remembered that unemployment relief was
at the peak in 1923; and it was felt that the
inclusion of such cases would prejudice the
acceptance of the results of research, since
the unemployed class could not generally or
legitimately be said to belong to the social
problem group. It should be borne in mind
that if the effect of this was to preserve
the original character of the investigation,
it also resulted in excluding from consideration a number of cases properly belonging
to the problem group.
THE SOCIAL PROBLEM GROUP 9

“A RACE OF SUB-NORMAL PEOPLE”

The pedigrees reveal that there is in
existence a definite race of sub-normal
people, closely related by marriage or
parenthood, not to any extent recruited
from the normal population, nor sensibly
diminished by the agencies for social or
individual improvement.

These families are closely inter-married,
they breed together in successive generations and have undoubtedly a higher birth
rate than that of normal people.

An examination of the pedigrees reveals
that, broadly speaking, defectiveness tends
to segregate into three main groups:

1.—Insanity and mental defect.
2.—Physical disability, tuberculosis, etc.

3.—The mildly incompetent, ‘‘ the spiritless and dull people,’’ not pronouncedly
defective, but not able to compete with
normal people so as to be at all times selfsupporting.

Some sample pedigrees will be found
folded into the back of the Review in such
a way as to enable them to be consulted
while reading this article. They represent
the conditions in these family groups as
they were found, by subsequent inquiry, to
be early in 1923. The data are calculated
to a date in March in that year.

I regret that one diagram (A6 of my
collection) is too large to be printed here,
since it illustrates a family with collateral
connections, in seven generations from 1770
to 1923. Naturally the information is more
complete in respect of recent years. There
are 262 individuals shown on it, 136 of
whom have been maintained for long or
short periods out of public funds. The
group is of the mildly incompetent type and
very little sickness is shown. ‘There are,
however, nine insane and two mentally
deficient, nine tuberculous, six epileptic,
and one blind. The first chart actually
given here illustrates the burden on public
funds of a small group of able-bodied members of this family.

INSANITY AND BLINDNESS

Diagram Azo of my collection illustrates
insanity with destructive eye disease in
four generations, with much collateral and
associated pauperism. ‘The diagram was
first published, but with much less detail,
in 1913 in Brain, reporting the observations
of Mr. E. Nettleship and myself. ‘Those
interested in the optical details are advised
to look up that volume. There have since
been many developments in the case, and
much additional information has come to
light, most of which is here included. The
association of mental disability and ocular
defects had not been described before this
case. The ocular defects are partly developmental, partly morbid. The pathological
changes are chiefly detachment of the
retina, based upon disease of the choroid,
but with iritis, and secondary cataract in
some cases. Both the mental and the
ocular conditions are hereditary. Both conditions are due to a common underlying
cause, and do not stand to one another as
cause and effect or as accidental coincidences. Syphilis, whether acquired or congenital, does not seem to have been a factor
in causing either the mental or the ocular
degeneracies.

The paupers shown in this diagram,
whether in this immediate stock, or
collaterally, undoubtedly became chargeable because they were so poorly endowed
mentally or physically, or in both respects,
as to prevent them competing with the
normal individual so as to be always selfsupporting. ‘The numbers in the group are
as follows :

In receipt of relief :
For long periods _... wee ee «FIO
Intermittently or for short periods 118

 

Children in Poor Law schools = «16
Insane and Imbecile +25
Mentally deficient we vee ams 3
Total 172

* One of these, born 1825, was in the workhouse
on Iog occasions, between 1862 and 1892, when he
died. Precise particulars are not available prior to
1872, but since that date he spent 3,092 days in the
workhouse.

+ Including 7 blind and insane.
IO

It is not possible to reproduce here the
whole of this diagram, but the part showing
insanity and eye disease is given in Chart II
and in Chart VI.

ASSORTIVE MATING AND INBREEDING

These pedigrees show that not only does
like produce like, as we should expect, but
that there is some subtle and unexplained
attraction of like for like in marriage and
parenthood amongst the various forms of
defectives. Members of insane stocks
marry into stocks similarly affected—the
potentially insane marry the potentially
insane. Feeble-minded inter-marry with
the feeble-minded ; tubercular stocks intermarry; whilst the mildly incompetent
people in a wider, more general way show
the same tendency, but show also bad
patches where they inter-marry with the
more definitely defective. This tendency
would no doubt be found amongst normal
people, and on this side contributes towards
the intensive segregation of sub-normal
people—to reject is to select.

The pedigrees show quite conclusively
that there is a social problem group. They
also enable us to form an opinion as to the
reasons for the existence of that group and
enable certain generalizations to be made.

I think that there is no doubt that the
reason for the existence of this group is
inbreeding—the repeated inter-marriage,
generation by generation, of defective
people. In some of these stocks inbreeding
has been so persistent that defectiveness is
a general condition of the members; many
of them are actually defective, most are
sub-normal in some respect, and all are
likely to transmit to their offspring one or
other of the defective qualities observable
in the stock from which they come. The
surprising thing is, not that they produce
defectives, but that they ever produce a
normal child.

This inbreeding is sufficient to account
for the existence of a social problem group
and, in relation to the attraction of like for
like, explains the segregation into family
groups of the different forms of defect
already mentioned. It should, I think, be

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

added that if defectives must marry or
become parents it is better that they should
be associated in that matter with other
defectives than that they should vitiate
good stocks or use the strength of such
stocks to carry on their defectiveness to
further generations.

The high-grade defective and the mildly
incompetent, but apparently normal, person
present a social problem of the utmost
importance and urgency. ‘They far outnumber the definitely defective; they contribute largely to the population of our
hospitals, prisons, and other public institutions. They maintain the birth rate of
illegitimate children ; they assist the propagation of venereal disease and, in this and
in other ways, they lower the standard of
life and health. They also lower the
standard of employable labour because, in
these days of standardized hours and wages,
they cannot earn the wages in the time
allowed. |

Wherever these people come into contact
with the administrative machine they clog
and hamper it in a variety of ways: they
create the need for much administrative
machinery that, but for them, would not be
necessary, and finally, because they are
insensible to either public or personal
responsibility, their birth rate is higher than
that of the normal members of the community. ‘The very need to provide for them
and for the social amelioration of their
conditions inevitably leads to methods
which increase their survival value, both
in the sense of production and preservation.

At this point it should be remembered
that a large proportion of this group,
although apparently normal, are carriers of
defective genes in the recessive form and,
if they become parents, are likely to have
a proportion of defective children.

“INDIRECT TRANSMISSION ”

The indirect transmission of mental disorder, which is illustrated in Charts III and
IV, presents another problem of much importance, and I doubt if sufficient attention
has been paid to its frequency or significance. It is at present impossible to
THE SOCIAL PROBLEM GROUP

estimate the relative frequency of the
phenomenon, but it certainly occurs very
often and possibly as often as does direct
transmission.

Chart V (Arz1), printed in symbols, illustrates at once the inter-marriage of insane
stocks and the difficulties of drawing correct
inferences from the particulars shown.

The insane shown upon this pedigree
were diagnosed as follows:

. General paralysis of the insane.
Do.

Do.

. Non-systematic delusional.

. Puerperal insanity.

. Recurrent melancholia.

. Melancholia.

Do.

i.
il.
lil.
i.
il.
1i1.
ill.
lil.

> Ww nom BR HW HY

In the case of the mentally defective this
problem is peculiarly difficult because it
would appear that transmission is even less
direct than in the case of the insane. The
point is often made that many mentally
defective children have normal parents.
Whilst it may be doubted, in some cases,
whether the parents are really normal, the
fact remains that in a large proportion of
others the parents are normal in all
respects. But an examination of these cases
reveals, at some point in the history,
evidence of defect; and in a large number
of families there are collateral defectives,
who show that, although there is no family
history of defectiveness in earlier generations, there are sufficient in recent generations, in different branches of the family, to
indicate the defective quality of the stock in
which the child appears.

“THE LAW OF ANTICIPATION ”

There has been much discussion upon
the subject of the “* Law of Anticipation,’’
as expounded by the late Sir Frederick
Mott in relation to the insane and as shown
in the work of the late Mr. E. Nettleship
in optical cases.

It seems clear that there is some process
of ante-dating and it is important here to

II

notice the effect of the phenomenon in relation to insanity and other forms of mental
disease. ‘The clear distinction between the
imbecile and idiot on the one hand, and the
insane on the other, has long been recognized both in law and medicine. I need
not dwell upon this distinction; it is sufhcient to say that the character of the
distinction is such that if the defect is
hereditary, the difference must have its
origin in the gamete—it is distinctive and
a true inheritance.

The operation of the law of anticipation
(or ante-dating) in cases of insanity is such
that if the defect appears in the third or
fourth generation, there is in many cases
nothing to distinguish the patient from the
case of the ordinary congenital idiot or
feeble-minded—and this although the insanity in the previous generations may have
been typical in all respects.

Chart VI (from diagram A2o) illustrates
this.

I have no doubt that before I close I
shall be expected to say something on the
subject of remedial measures. I regret,
however, that I can add little to what has
already been said upon the subject. The
more IJ learn about the social problem group,
the less inclined I am to make suggestions
for dealing with it. My function in this
article, as in the investigation, is one of
diagnosis, and this is much more important
at the present time, and in the present state
of our knowledge, than attempts to suggest
remedies. A case has been made out for
voluntary sterilization, and I have no doubt
that in certain cases segregation will tend
also to limit, if not reduce, the burden the
community has to bear. But when the
most has been made of these proposals, the
major part of the problem remains. We
should avoid undue emphasis upon the
value of either of these as remedies, remembering that whoever suggests that the problem can be dealt with by a single remedy,
must, by that fact alone, be wrong. ‘The
present position calls mainly for more
thorough investigation. We need a comprehensive and intensive investigation,
carried on in an atmosphere of inquiry and
IZ

discussion, under proper authority and by
competent persons—if they can be found—
effectively supported and properly financed.
Whilst ameliorative and palliative social
measures have been widely and fully
developed, this great field of research into

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

human heredity has been neglected. Investigation on the lines I have endeavoured to
suggest would not only indicate the dimensions of the problem, but would also afford
some indication of the possible lines of
remedial measures.

=) Oy”

THE SOCIETY'S FURTHER PROJECTS

Galton Dinner, the President, Sir

Bernard Mallet, said there was a special
appropriateness in his subject to a piece of
work to which the Society was now turning
its attention—namely, an attempt to investigate, so far as a private, unofficial body
could do so, the existence of a sub-normal
class (or social problem group) in the community, supposed to comprise about onetenth of the population, or some four
million persons, as was suggested by the
Mental Deficiency Committee in 1929, following on the investigations of Dr. E. O.
Lewis. It had been suggested in their
report that, ‘‘if we could segregate as a
separate community all the families in this
country containing mental defectives of the
primary amentia type, it would be found to
include a much larger proportion of insane

[¢ introducing Mr. Lidbetter at the

persons, epileptics, paupers, criminals
(especially _recidivists), | unemployables,
habitual slum dwellers, prostitutes, in
ebriates, and other social inefficients, than
would a group of families not containing
mental defectives.”’

Sir Bernard did not wish to go into
details of the Society’s scheme, but said
that among the results expected were those
from local investigations, such as had been
instituted by Mr. Caradog Jones of Liverpool. It was suggested in an article, which
he had signed, in the October number of
the Eucenics REviEw, that the Society
would be very glad to get into touch with,

and to assist, any Fellows or Members who
might feel inclined to set up investigations
of a similar kind in the neighbourhood in
which they lived. It seemed that a diagnosis
of this kind, which would, as it were, focus
or localize all this social inefficiency, should
make the treatment to be applied to the evil
easier than it was at present. The connection of this investigation with the researches
on which Mr. Lidbetter had been engaged
for many years into the relation of heredity
and social inadequacy in an East-end of
London area would become very apparent
from his address.

In remarking generally on the work of
the Society, Sir Bernard said it was sometimes reproached with a neglect of positive
eugenics in its propaganda. If that meant
that they ought to advocate something like
the breeding up of a race of super-men, he
must say that he shared the doubts expressed the other day as to positive eugenics
by Sir Oliver Lodge. There was no
*“mould into which we can or ought to
attempt to fit human beings,’”’ and variety
was of the essence of growth.

He feared that there was not much to be
done in these days by advocating further
relief from taxation of the classes the limitation of whose families they deplored ; but
he did not see any reason to despair of the
influence which the spread of eugenic
knowledge, and of the real danger arising
from the differential fertility of the social
classes, might have, in time, in encouraging
