JUVENILE DELINQUENCY

N informal luncheon was held at the

Eccleston Hotel, S.W.1, on Thursday,

April 23rd, 1942, when an address was
given by Mrs. Rackham, J.P., on Juvenile
Delinquency, in place of Miss Margery Fry,
who had had to leave for America. The Hon.
Mrs. Grant Duff was in the chair.

Mrs. Rackham said she would not speak on
the subject of heredity because that was the
Society’s subject and not her own. She had
been a magistrate for twenty-two years and
had learned that heredity played a very important part in the work of the Courts. The
controversy as to whether the larger part
was played by heredity or by environment
was an age-long one, and in the Juvenile
Courts there were some people who thought
that the evils caused by a bad environment
were so obvious, and at the same time so
remediable, that they could not be expected
to do more than deal with that aspect.
They were inclined to occupy themselves
with environment about which they knew
something rather than with the subject of
heredity which was obscure, particularly as
it was difficult to know how bad heredity
could be remedied.

She thought they must have regard to
both, although the idea of the born criminal
was now exploded. Cymil Burt said that the
number of criminal children who might be
said to have “‘ criminal blood in their veins ”’
was trifling. He added, however, that as a
result of his investigations into large numbers
of criminal children he came to the conclusion
that in more than a third of the cases there
was some deep constitutional failing which
was really the prime cause of their misconduct. |

That constitutional failing presented the
most obdurate type of delinquent with which
Juvenile Courts had to deal ; it was the type
in which punishment was not of any use ;
the only hope lay in some kind of palliative
treatment. Although such tendencies might
be irremediable, they could be recognized,
and when recognized, forestalled, and
directed into a right channel instead of a

wrong one. Deficiencies could be, to some
extent, made up, so child delinquents should
not be thought of as helpless victims of inborn
characteristics.

Putting these considerations aside there
were about 65 per cent of children of whom
it might be said that their delinquency was
caused either by bad environment or by

‘unhappy events in their lives. The speaker

65

confessed that it was with this 65 per cent
that she found herself most familiar.

Child Delinquency To-day ,

Much was heard about the heavy increase
in.the numbers of the children coming before
the Court and it was inevitable in war-time
that there should be an increase. Two things
had to be remembered : first, that although
the figures might be large, some of the
offences which brought children into court
were trifling and in more happily placed
homes they would not come into court at all ;
and secondly, that the number of children
who came into court was very small compared
with those who did not. In a place where
juvenile delinquency was high, possibly
one child in 80 or 90 might come before the
court ; in a place where it was low, it might
be one in 120.

This did not mean that the work of the
Juvenile Courts was not important—it was ;
the coming into court might be the first step
in the child’s downward course. Thirteen
was the peak age for male delinquents.
More came into court at that age than at any
other, which showed how important it was
to check delinquency at that time. Although
the court was a very good instrument for
finding out whether the chifd had or had not
committed the offence with which it was
charged, she did not think it was very good
for finding out very much about the child
himself ; the court could see the symptom
but often could not discover the cause. It
was fairly simple to decide, for instance, that
a child had taken something from a shop,
but the causes might be very varied: the
child might be hungry or greedy, the motive
66 . THE EUGENICS REVIEW

might be jealousy or spite; it might be a
desire to please, or a sort of bravado, other
children “‘ dared ”’ it to do something stupid ;
obviously all these causes needed different
methods of treatment.

Causes of Delinquency

Children became delinquent for most
diverse reasons. Sometimes it was because
of coming from a very poor home; but
sometimes because of coming from a very
indulgent home where the children had never
been taught to check their desires. It might
be a home which was too strict, or one where
no one took any trouble to control the child.
The child might be so dull or stupid that it
had no idea of the consequences of its actions ;
on the other hand, it might be quick-witted
and have a desire to show how clever it was.
A child in poor health might go wrong
because of some physical cause, and so might
a child overflowing with health and spirits
which did not find within the narrow limits
of its home sufficient outlet for its energies.

One of the main causes was the broken
home; one or both parents dead, or the
parents separated, or on such bad terms that
the home was a continual battleground. The
latest figures from an approved school for
boys showed that 40 per cent of the boys
came from homes of that kind and it was to
be feared that much of that kind of trouble,
which led to delinquency, was bound to
increase during and after the war. The
fathers were away (and children were suffering from that now) and a number of marriages
would be unable to stand the strain of separation, with the result that unhappy homes or
broken marriages would present a crop of
juvenile delinquents in years to come.

Juvenile Courts

The speaker now turned to a consideration
of the courts themselves. Naturally, the
great need was for better and younger
‘magistrates who understood and were interested in the work they had to do. Efforts
had been made for some time to get younger
magistrates, but these had not been as successful as they should. A report issued by
the Probation Officers’ Association said that

the average age of the magistrates in some
of the courts was over 70, which gave an
idea of how very old some of them must be.
It would also be better to have more women
magistrates.

One of the signs that the magistrates were
not keeping up to date was that there had
been a tendency to return to the discredited
punishment of birching. This method was
quick, cheap, and ineffective; it had been
dwindling to very small figures until the last
year before the war, but one was sorry to see
that it was rising again. It had been found
by experienced magistrates that boys who
had been punished in this way were nearly
always back again in a short time. If there
was one thing which a boy valued it was a
reputation for pluck amongst his mates, and
he would show he did not care about pain of
that kind. Cyril Burt said that in 99 cases
out of 100 birching made the offender more
furtive and defiant—the speaker was quite
sure the magistrates would never find the
hundredth case. Another authority, Mr.
Justice Du Parcq, had said that he had seen
many long criminal records which began
with the birching of a small boy. The punishment was made illegal in the Children’s
Bill when it was passing through the House
of Commons in 1934, but it was put back by
the House of Lords. The Bill was returned
to the House of Commons and the provision
was again taken out, but the Lords put it
back once more. It was thought better to
pass the Bill with the penalty of birching
included rather than that it should not be
passed at all.

Magistrates had other methods of dealing
with children ; they could be sent to one of
the approved schools of the Home Office, and
very useful indeed that method was in some
cases. Foster homes where children could be
boarded out were badly needed, especially
for the younger children. There were children
as young as eight years old in approved
schools for whom a home life would be far
better. Where children were before the
court because they were in need of care and
protection one felt that at least the first
choice should be to see if they would do well
in a foster home before going to a school.
JUVENILE DELINQUENCY 67

The one thing which the children had to
learn was to live as members of society, and
they could do best by living in an ordinary
home. The probation system was valuable
precisely because it left a child ‘‘in the open,”
with the chance of leading an ordinary life
but under guidance. It was very important
that the scope and quality of the probation
service should be maintained. It had been
very much weakened by the absence of men
officers on service and those left must not be
overburdened with more cases than they were
able to supervise.

Juvenile Court magistrates felt very much
the need of provision for border-line children.
There were institutions for those certified as
mental defectives, but there were a great
number of children who, though not certifiable, were unstable or neurotic or extremely
dull and backward. Such children were not
suited to large approved schools ;_ and there
was a great need for special homes to which
they could be sent. To plunge them into
normal schools might not be fair, and it was
difficult to leave them to the probation officer
because they might not be fit for the battle
of life and the probation officer could not
always be at their side. Although such

weak, border-line children might do well in ©

a foster home, it was not easy to find foster
parents who would undertake their charge.
A home on the lines of the hostels for evacuated children unsuitable for billeting would be
a useful model for the kind of home needed.
Another great need was more knowledge
of the children. Years ago a Departmental
Committee urged that there should be observation centres such as exist in some other
countries where children could stay for three
or four months to be observed under as
normal conditions as possible and as a result
could be sent back home or boarded out or
sent to a school or a smaller home. There
had never been observation centres in this
country. Many authorities were setting up
child guidance clinics which were a great
help to the magistrates, who could refer
cases to them for diagnosis ; but even then

it was often difficult to know what to do.

with the children, because of the lack of
special schools or special foster parents.

Social Factors

Mrs. Rackham finally urged that this
question of juvenile delinquency must not
be separated from the whole subject of child
welfare. The number of children before the
courts depended on the social system under
which the population lived and the background of the children’s lives. The “ bad ”’
or “‘ broken ’’ home was spoken of as the
main cause of children going astray, but that
did not take the matter very far. Why was a
home “ bad ”’-or “ broken” ? It might very
often be due to poverty, overcrowding, bad
housing, over-work, or the drunkenness of
one of the parents leading to impossible and
unbearable conditions of life. All these
questions affected the number of children
before the juvenile courts more than anything else. Although better magistrates and
a larger probation service were needed, yet
more than anything else we needed better
homes, better schools, better working conditions and better play places where the
children could occupy themselves and work
off their high spirits in a healthy normal way.

Discussion

Thanking Mrs. Rackham for her talk, Mrs.
Grant Duff said she was very glad of the
emphasis on the fact that all these questions
formed part of a great whole, and until
proper living conditions in a sane world were
attained they would be continually present.

In answer to a question on the categories
into which children’s offences fell, Mrs.
Rackham said that the great majority were
thefts of some kind or other—sometimes in
the home, more often from shops or stalls,
from automatic machines, from bicycles
(pumps, lamps, things left in the baskets
attached to bicycles), and then the bicycles
themselves or the motor cycles. There were
very few cases of any other description.
There were some of disorder in the streets,
pulling down fences, injuring trees, and so
on. There were very few sex offences or of
cruelty to younger children or animals.

Miss Stevens, of the Institute for the
Scientific Treatment of Delinquency, suggested that teachers in special schools would
need psychological training apart from
68 _ THE EUGENICS REVIEW

teaching abilities to understand the delinquent nature. Mrs. Rackham replied that
many teachers were trained; the head
master might have been a teacher or a
worker in boys’ clubs, and his wife would
often be the matron. Many of the schools
were denominational, which limited the
choice of teacher. Sometimes the masters
had to live in and had, therefore, to be single
men, which created another limitation.

Miss Stott, in answer to a question from
the Chairman, said that parents were apt to
find some difficulty with problem children.
Of 54 consecutive cases she had tested for
the Institute for the Scientific Treatment of
Delinquency 18 were definitely above average
intelligence and 24 below; only 12 were
of average intelligence, which showed a
distribution of intelligence exactly the reverse of that in the population as a whole.
In a normal institution one would find
approximately 25 of average intelligence
and 12 or 13 below.

The Chairman asked if the children were
brought back into social life by treatment,
and Miss Stevens replied that a great many
became perfectly normal. Mrs. Rackham
said that the great majority of children did
not return to court. The juvenile court could
not be blamed for the first appearance, but
it might be for the second. There were
baffling cases which appeared again and
again, where a child seemed to have every
advantage and yet continued to commit
offences. These were a minority, however.
Eight out of ten cases were not seen again,
but the two out of the ten were a great
problem.

Miss Stott said that even children who
appeared to have satisfactory homes might
be emotionally starved and psychologically
unstable. — )

Mrs. Rackham said that magistrates were
observers of external conditions ; they might
be told that the father was in work and there
was a good home and a good mother, and the
magistrates could only think it must be
inborn sin causing the child to steal. But
one had to try to penetrate further and find
out what was wrong, and that was often
difficult to do. 
Mr. Gun thought that heredity played a
small part in the question of morals as
compared with ability. Whether people
were to be stable or not depended on
heredity, but it was also a question of environment. He did not think that heredity
played a very great part. There were cases
where there seemed to. be something wrong
and with which nothing could be done. He
thought these were camparatively few in
number and bad environment was certainly
the reason for the vast majority of juvenile
delinquency.

Mr. Marindin asked whether evacuation
of either parents or children had contributed
to the increase in broken homes. Also
whether for the smaller offences the appointment of people who would deal with the
offences on the spot would not be more
effective ? During the very short time that
a child was at a remand home, was it possible
to give sufficient psychological treatment ?
How far was legal knowledge a necessary
qualification of magistrates, or psychological
knowledge, or experience in social questions ?

Mrs. Rackham replied that magistrates
were appointed by the Lord Chancellor. No
legal qualifications were necessary. The
Lord Chancellor had been making efforts to
get younger magistrates; but it was often
not until men and women had retired from
work that they could attend courts which
sat in the morning hours. There was a
separate panel for the juvenile courts, and
benches were urged to put their younger
members, and certainly women, on that
panel. The Howard League had always urged
that there should be some kind of training
for magistrates, but nothing had been
done. | |

With regard to evacuation, she lived in a
reception area which had had its full share
of evacuated children. Some authorities had
made careful investigations into the effects
of evacuation and had come to the conclusion that the separation of children from
their parents was bad mentally ; physically
the change might be good. There was often
great anxiety as to whether the parents were
in danger, and whether they had forgotten
their children. Parents very often suffered
JUVENILE DELINQUENCY 69

from jealousy. How far the figures in
evacuation areas were affected she did not
know. They had had some problems with
evacuated children in her area; they were
serious, but the numbers had not been
great.

With regard to the time in the remand
home, that ought not to be for long.. Remand
homes were not suitable places for a long
stay ; the children were there because the
court was not ready to deal with the case or
because the court had not decided what to
do, or because the child was waiting for a
vacancy in an approved school. To keep
children at a remand home for months when
they had been committed to a school and
knew that the school period would not begin
until they actually arrived there was an
unhappy position. Something could be done
psychologically at the remand home, but
the conditions were not suitable. The remand
home was a place where the child could be
cared for until arrangements were made for
it. An observation centre was a place where
it could stay for a few months and be
watched by skilled people. The two could
not be combined.

On the question of smaller offences, much
depended on the attitude of the parents.
Some such offences might be dealt with by
the education authorities. She agreed that

the machinery of the juvenile court was too
elaborate for these. very small offences.

Mr. Marindin said that one of the main
objections to birching was that it took place
long after the offence; if it took place
immediately the effects were likely to be
less harmful, and might even be beneficial.
He also suggested that some of the more
trifling offences could be handed to the local
headmaster to deal with on the spot, without
the intervention of the juvenile court. Mrs.
Rackham agreed that it might be less harmful. The time lag was absurd ; the child was
supposed to be medically examined to see if
it was fit to be birched and the punishment
was inflicted by a police officer who was
wholly unconnected with the boy or the
offence. Corporal punishment at school or
at home was another question from punishment at the hands of the court. She thought
what Mr. Marindin suggested often happened, but she would not mix it up with the
law. The case had to be properly proved
before any legal action could be taken.

The Chairman expressed the gratitude of
the meeting to Mrs. Rackham for her talk.
She also thanked those who had contributed
to the discussion and she hoped they could
combine in their different branches of life to
make a better world for their children and
grandchildren.

PHYSIOLOGICAL ZOOLOGY

Articles appearing in forthcoming issues :

REACTIVITIES OF COLPODA DUODENARIA TO ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS. u FACTORS

INFLUENCING THE FORMATION OF RESTING CYSTS. By C. V. TayLtorand A.G.R

Stanford Universi

. STRICKLAND,

ty.
RETARDATION OF EARLY CLEAVAGE OF URECHIS BY ULTRA-VIOLET LIGHT. By ARTHUR

C. Grese, Stanford University.

ON THE KILLING ACTION OF OPTICALLY ISOMERIC NICOTINES IN
PROBLEMS OF EVOLUTION OF THE NERVOUS oyetEM IN ANIMALS.
, University of Mosc

N. P. Smaracpova, Institute of Zodlogy

RELATION TO
By G. F. Gausg and

THE PRODUCTION OF DUPLICITAS CRUCIATA AND MULTIPLE HEADS BY REGENERATION
IN EUPLANARIA TIGRINA: By Roserr H. Sizser and Vixtror Hampurcer, Washington University.

Edited by W. C. Autzsz, Professor of Zodlogy, The University of Chicago. Published

Quarterly by the University of Chicago
Exglish dgents: CAMBRIDGE

Subscription : 35s. 2d.-per year.
UNIVERSITY PRESS
