THE EUGENICS SOCIETY’S
JUBILEE DINNER
WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 4th, 1957

of the Eugenics Society was celebrated
by a dinner at the Savoy Hotel, London,
1957, aS was briefly

Tk fiftieth anniversary of the founding

‘on December 4th,

reported in the January 1958 number of
: THE EUGENICS REVIEW.
_ After dinner, Sir Charles Darwin proposed
the toast of the Soczety’s guests. This was
replied to by Mr. E. M. Nicholson, who
kindly deputised at short notice for Lord
‘Simon of Wythenshawe, who was prevented
by. illness from attending.
‘The toast of the Eugenics Society was then
‘proposed by Sir Alexander Carr-Saunders;
Mrs. M. A. Pyke, who was to have responded,
‘was unfortunately unable to be present, and
‘her speech was read for her by Mrs. Nancy
Raphael.
.- Sir Charles Darwin then presented the
-Galton Medal to Dr. C. P. Blacker.

_ We print below the full text of the speeches
at the Eugenics Society’s Jubilee Dinner.

SIR CHARLES GALTON DARWIN, K.B.E.,
MLC. Se.D., F.R.S.

-My Lorps, ladies and gentlemen, I now
-have the pleasant task of proposing the
health of the guests of the Society. I have
noticed on past occasions when I have
attended other dinners that the speaker
‘sometimes found it difficult to find a unifying
thread to cover a rather miscellaneous list,
‘but in our case it is easy to do that because,
as some of you know, we not long ago issued
a paper we called our Statement of Aims,
‘so I merely have to take our Statement of
‘Aims book and see where they fit in it.
There are some very august guests whom
‘we shall not cover by doing-it in that way,
and I must ask their pardon for this, but I
do not want to overawe you with a lot of
names,

In going through the list of Eugenic
Studies there are two, one called Problem
Families and the other called Promising
Families, and I would like in the first place
to say that without exception we regard our
guests as members of Promising Families.
There is an old tradition in the Society that
after it had been in existence for about ten
years there was an exhibition held in order
to convince people of the importance of
eugenics, and in those days our interest was
rather inclined to be in negative eugenics.
In order to reveal the importance of it, they
had hung up on the wall a number of family
pedigrees, and one was of a family beloved
by all eugenists, in which every single
member had been in prison or in an asylum.
To avoid the law of libel they did not put
the names on the pedigree, but the people
were indicated by those nice little symbols
which showed whether they were masculine
or feminine. One of the less informed
visitors was not familiar with these. symbols,
and read one of them as meaning that the
member had been in prison and the other
as his having been in a lunatic asylum.
After that the visitor went on to the next
one with a different kind of pedigree, gazed
at it with rapt attention, and as he walked
away he said, “I never had any idea how
many Fellows of the Royal Society ended
in gaol.” That is just to show you that
tonight I am not talking about Problem
Families, but about Promising Families.

Taking the list of our Studies, one of the
first is the study of human genetics. I could
not find among our guests this evening any
specialist in that subject. But this allows
me, a little indirectly, to refer to one man
whom we were hoping to entertain this
evening. It is Professor Egon Pearson, of
University College, London, who is himself

. THE EUGENICS REVIEW, April 1958. 50, 1°
10 | THE EUGENICS REVIEW >

a very distinguished statistician, and the son
of the great Karl Pearson, and Karl Pearson
was the right-hand man of Francis Galton
in the study of the subjects of statistics and
of eugenics. We are much disappointed not
to have had Professor Pearson here, but
influenza has kept him away. |

The next item in our list of subjects is the
study of Population. There are a number of
names I could mention, but I shall limit
myself to saying how pleased we are to have
with us Max Nicholson, who was largely
responsible for that extremely important
labour, the organization of the body known
as P E P—Political and Economic Planning
—one of the most important things done in
recent times to tell us what is happening to
the world. Another person I would like to
refer to while on this question of population
studies is Colonel Ahuja, who is present
with us from India. India is the country of
the world which is paying the most serious
attention to this, I think, very grim
question of population increases.

The third name—I hope he is here to-night
—is Professor David Glass, who assisted
us very much in our Population Investigation Committee. The fourth one—I am
sorry to say he is not here—is Lord Simon
of Wythenshawe, who was to have spoken.
He has shown deep interest in a great many
aspects of things interesting to our Soczety.
In particular he undertook a journey to
Barbados where he was to study what could
be done about the excess population of the
West Indies. Unfortunately, influenza has
laid him low, so we should only like to
record our gratitude to him for the benevolent outlook he has adopted to all our
policies.

The next item on our list is the subject of
Migration, and here we realize the importance of this subject every time we walk up
the street and note the colour of the faces of
the people whom we meet, which is so
different from what it was twenty years ago.
We have among us Sir Clifford Heathcote
Smith, who has been active in this study of
Commonwealth migration. Our Soczety has
not formed any deep opinion on this subject;
we have not yet had the time to investigate

it properly, but we are hoping that soon
we shall have data before us which will
enable us to make up our minds on a great
many of the policies we shall advocate.
Since the subject will evidently involve
political decisions, we welcome members of
the House of Lords and House of Commons
tonight; for undoubtedly whenever anything about this question of inter-Commonwealth migration is settled there will be
need for legislation to deal with the
subject.

So much for half of our programme, the
studies; now I will turn to the policies. We
welcome here the representatives of many
societies with which we have co-operated
under the conviction that they are interested in the same kind of things as we are
interested in. These include the International
Planned Parenthood Federation—we welcome
Mrs. Houghton, the secretary—the Family
Planning Association, the British Social
Biology Council, and the National Marriage
Guidance Council. All these bodies are
doing work which we would consider very
closely associated with our own interest of
eugenics. In this connection we were
expecting to have Mrs. Pyke here to-night,
who is one of the members of our Council
and who was going to make a speech for us.
She is also an important member of the
Family Planning Association. Her task in
speaking has been delegated to Mrs. Raphael.

I have worked through the categories of
these classifications as much as I can, and
I am not bold enough to place one or two
other people who are here to-night. I would
hesitate to claim the right to say in which
category Sir Russell Brain fits, or Sir Henry
Tizard. On the other hand there are others
whom I find it very easy to place, one being
Sir Victor Mallet. His father was for a
number of years President of our Soczety,
so we welcome him very warmly, as undoubtedly a member of a Promising Family.

Another one I would like to mention is
Sir Alexander Carr-Saunders, who preceded

‘me as President of this Society and who has

the distinction of having been our first Galton
Medallist, and from whom you are going to
hear a speech later this evening.
BeOS ~ JUBILEE DINNER ge

| Ladies aid Cénglenien, Members I would
“ask you to rise and drink the toast of our
: guests.

Mr. E. M. NICHOLSON, C.B.

‘Mr. PRESIDENT, my Lords, Ladies and
Gentlemen, I have previously regretted, on
_the rare occasions when ill health has over-taken him, the absence of my friend Lord
Simon, and you will believe me when I say
I never regretted it so much as I do now. I
fear before I have finished you will probably
regret it too, but I will take advantage of his
-absence by making one or two remarks
-about him which I have been wanting to
“make fora long time.

Not only has Lord Simon given powerful
support, intellectual and material, to the
cause in which we here are all interested, but
he has shown the most extraordinary foresight and determination and concentration
jn picking out one after another the causes
which were going to be the crucial matters
.of each period over the last twenty-five
years. Since I have known him, he has
picked out, first of all, the need for getting
rid of slums. Then at the time when it was
-fashionable to talk about the advantages of
dictatorships, he made it his business to
examine how democracy could be modernized in the light of experience in advanced
countries such as Sweden and Switzerland
and he was tireless in making the case that
‘democracy could be superior even in.sheer
efficiency to dictatorships.

Shortly before the war he was a moving
spirit of a group studying the then much
neglected problems of defence against air
raids. Several of their recommendations
‘helped to save losses and the group forecast
-very accurately what the weight of bombing
would be on this city two or three years
later. He was also a leader in promoting
_public recognition of the needs of our
universities and in showing how very much
smaller the university population was here
than in other countries. He anticipated
by’ many years the current call to action on
the provision of more technologists. Quite
lately he went on to population. I think it
is‘encouraging to us that a man with that

3ER

record should have turned finally. to the
need for action on the question of population
as the number one problem of the world
to-day.

You have described only some of the
guests, Mr. President, and if I may say so
without offence, I think we, your guests,
have no illusions about ourselves. We do
realize what an indescribable lot of people
we are. We are very grateful to you for
asking us here on this Fiftieth Birthday
occasion. I cannot help looking back, and
forward; back to the First Birthday before
the first war, when the Soczety was first
founded, and when many of the ideas which
are now commonplace must have seemed as
outlandish as space travel. And Mrs.
Stocks has reminded me of the Twenty-fifth
Anniversary, at which Mrs. Besant appeared.
On that occasion no one could take anything
alcoholic until the Prophet of the Movement
had withdrawn. We may be more fortunate
than we realize! One wonders how your
guests will be chosen for the hundredth
anniversary. Not only the height and
physical measurements but all the normal
mental characteristics of every human being
will no doubt by then be duly measured and
registered. You will, however, no doubt
put your guests of A.D. 2007 through more
advanced machines and those who do not
make the grade will have to be tactfully |
disposed of by the secretary. How many of
us who have achieved the privilege of being
your guests to-night would clear that next
hurdle?

I have no doubt there will by then have
been much progress in techniques of improving the human race, and that just as
space travel, which was until recently a
subject for the “science pulp’ magazines,
has come to the threshold of reality, we will
in the same way in this realm of eugenics
find that questions still considered simply
as wild ideas are becoming very practical.

It does strike me that the ordinary man
and woman, with whom these things rest,
are often very much more progressive than
governments. After all, we have in this
country a population policy in operation
which appears quite favourable and has'
2-00 oe THE EDGENICS REVIEW

gone revel of the way to solve the probletns
anticipated over a hundred years ago which
are still evident in many other countries.
Scandinavia and some other parts of the
world have done even better. It is not
governments that. have brought these policies
into effect. The ordinary man and woman
have a way of taking up these things if they
are convinced that there is something ready
for their private use that does make sense
and does lead to a happier life. I have great
confidence that with research and education
you will find the ordinary man and woman
will show readiness for changes affecting
reproduction even if they seem to us
revolutionary and shocking.

Most extraordinary things are already
going on. The growth of artificial insemination for example is not encouraged by
governments. It is something the ordinary
‘man and woman are taking up where they
can get access to it because they think it
answers a problem. It does seem to me,
that just as Mrs. Besant who was here
twenty-five years ago made herself very
unpopular in pioneering birth control, so it
is the duty and privilege of this Soczety to
pioneer boldly and to give a lead, not just to
authority, but to the ordinary man and
woman. Even what seemed far-fetched in
eugenics may be accepted as a fact when
the Soczety comes to celebrate its next fifty
years.

We are moving very rapidly into a new
age on ‘these matters and we hope to keep
touch over a very wide field. I have the
privilege of representing P E P, and I would
say that the partnership between P E P and
the Eugenics Society over the report on
British Population ten years ago and over
the recent report on World Population has
been amongst the most fruitful that P E P
has undertaken. We have found the Eugenics
Society one of the most broad-minded and
effective bodies with which we have worked.
Those two reports have made a real impact
on opinion partly because your Society and
P E P have been able to reach agreement on
a very wide range of objectives.

Many other bodies represented here are
‘linked with the Eugenics Society in various

ways, and we are all aiming for the same.
things. We are all, whether. we like it or
not, conscripted into the army of the geod
arid just. Sometimes the army of the good
and just is not a very impressive sight. One
may be led to wonder whether it frightens
the enemy more or less than it frightens us.
However many beatings we may take, and
however difficult it may be, we must nevertheless try and keep the world habitable, and
a fit place for human beings to live in. We
must take care to conserve natural resources
so that we do not eat ourselves off our habitat.

May I, on behalf of the many bodies
represented here, say that we celebrate and
honour the achievements of the Soczety
during its first fifty years, and we do look
to you in this coming fifty years to set the
pace in the advance into these. unknown
territories. We will back you in our own
fields, and we look to you for a lead, especially in this field of quality of population.
Although excess quantity of population is a
very severe menace just now, quality is at least ;
equally important. If there were a reliable
chart which we could look at for changes in
quality of population, especially during the
first and second world wars, we would see
how much of the cream of the population in
Western Europe and not least in Britain
has been cut out of those age groups. The
quality of population is going to be more
and more an important matter, and it is
that aspect of quality for which your Soctely
above all stands.

We look to-night to your Galton Medallist,
who has shown rare courage in so many
fields, and I myself have had the good fortune
to be with him in many odd and remote
places. We do look very much to that.
courage in leadership from your Society, and
I would urge that you should take your.
courage in both hands, and we will back you
in this. We do feel the best is still to come.
You have great achievements to your credit,
but we do look to this Society to show how
we may reach an equilibrium between the
demands of a proper status for humanity,
which are almost overwhelming at the
moment, and the application of great intelligence and qualities of character to the
JUBILEE

equally fundamental tasks of conservation
which are also so necessary if we are not to
become the number one pest on this planet
—if we are to become not a pest but an
animal which is able to make terms with its
habitat and with its long-term future, and
able to live at peace with itself and its
neighbours—the plants and animals of this
world.

_ We thank you for your hospitality, and
would ask you to accept our good wishes for
the next fifty years.

SIR ALEXANDER CARR-SAUNDERS,
K.B.E., M.A., LL.D.

Mr. PRESIDENT, my Lords, Ladies and
Gentlemen, it is a great honour to propose
the toast of the Eugenics Society on the
occasion of its Jubilee. I think it is common
form on these occasions to say that you
cannot imagine why you were chosen for the
honour. I am not going to be so modest,
because I can see a very good reason why I
‘should be chosen. I joined the Soczety in
1913; I am told that I have paid my
subscription regularly—that is to say for
forty-six years—so I am almost due for a
jubilee myself.

I suspect, however, that this was not the
reason; I suspect the reason was that I am
produced as a sort of antique, who can tell
you about the great men and great deeds of
past days. I am getting quite accustomed
_to being produced in this way nowadays.
It is a great year in the mountaineering
world, the centenary of the founding of the
Alpine Club, and I find myself asked to
dinners given by clubs of enthusiastic young
mountaineers in the hope that I can tell
them something about the great men of the
mountaineering past, the story I heard from
Whymper about what happened on the
Matterhorn on the occasion of the first
ascent and so on.

I disappoint them, I am afraid, and I must
disappoint you because I did not know the
great man of eugenics, Sir Francis Galton.
To my lasting regret I never met him. The
more one hears of him, the more one reads
what he wrote, the clearer it becomes what extraordinary powers he had of path breaking

DINNER | 13
and pioneering, of seeing old, things in
new lights—all the marks of genius. There
was Major Leonard Darwin whom I did
know, and all who knew him retain great
admiration and affection for him. May I
say that it is a very fortunate and appropriate thing in the Jubilee Year of the Society
its President should be Sir Charles Galton
Darwin.

I have been thinking about the history of
eugenics, and it does seem to me that the
story is a very odd one. The eugenic idea
in the large is no more than this—the
recognition of the fact that like tends to
breed like amongst men as well as other
animals, and that this fact needs constant
attention in human affairs. Very long ago
to the earliest breeders of animals and the
earliest agriculturalists the fact that like
tends to produce like must have been obvious.
Whether they drew the obvious inference
about men we do not know; they could not
write; so they left no record. The Greeks
put two and two together, and all writers on
eugenics quote the well known remarks of
Plato and others which must be familiar to
you. |

Perhaps it is not surprising that, in the
ages which followed, the eugenic idea was
lost sight of. People were not interested in
that sort of thing. What seems to me odd
indeed is that in, let us say, the two hundred
years after the founding of the Royal Societythe eugenic idea did not again see the light
of day—not until the 1880s or thereabouts.

Scientific men in those days may not have
been in close touch with the breeding of
animals and plants, but they had before
their eyes the best of all examples of the
working of heredity in human affairs. They
could not help observing their own families
and other families known to them, and could
not help noticing how children of the same
parents, brought up in very similar conditions in respect of education, social and
material surroundings, diverged as they
grew up and came to exhibit extraordinary
dissimilarity. What could be at work to
produce such contrasts except heredity?
Yet the inference was not drawn.

I have brought with me Dr. Blacker’s
14. THE EUGENICS REVIEW

most valuable Galton Lecture which he gave
in 1945; in it he quotes a letter from Charles
_ Darwin to Galton written in 1869 acknowledging a copy of Hereditary Gentus. ‘‘ You
made a convert’’ says Darwin, “of an
opponent in one sense, for I have always
maintained that, excepting fools, men did
not differ much in intellect, only in zeal and
hard work.’’ Thus, until Darwin had read
Hereditary Genius, he had not drawn the
inference from facts of common knowledge
that heredity is powerfully at work in the
affairs of men. It follows that it is a mistake
to attribute to ecclesiastical dogma as much
importance, as has often been attributed to
it, in accounting for the failure of the eugenic
idea to see the light of day once more. It is
also strange that during these two centuries
teachers multiplied, and surely no teacher
faced with a dim pupil, and there are many
such, can really. persuade himself that if the
pupil had hada more stimulating background, better food and a happier home
and so on, he would have been a bright
person.

It was Galton to whom the re-birth of
eugenics is due. He converted Darwin, and
on that account alone I think he is a man of
great mark in the last century.

It is interesting to remember what reception greeted the re-birth of the eugenic idea
and what the climate of opinion was like
when the Society was founded fifty years ago.
The idea met with ridicule. How easy to
ridicule eugenics! Eugenists wanted to turn
society into a stockyard. And what did
they want to breed? Human mastiffs for
policemen, human greyhounds for postmen?

As to the climate of opinion, the eugenic
idea was launched into the world at a time
when two things were very much features
of the day. It was a time of much concern
for social reform and of determined efforts
to mitigate poverty, ignorance, squalor and
so on. Efforts in these directions were overdue, and eugenists, who are as much
concerned about social evils, and are as

humane as other people, were not opposed >

to, or lacking in sympathy for, these movements. But they issued a warning that
improvement of conditions alone could not

lead to the end of social evils. Improve
conditions as much as you will, and you will
still have the feckless, the poorly endowed,
the mentally defective and the intellectually
unstable—all sources of social problems.
The warning was not popular. It was
thought that eugenists were trying to find
supposedly scientific reasons for holding up
these efforts and depreciating the value of
what others were trying to do.

Another feature of those days was acute
class consciousness. There was a feeling of
guilt, and very properly so, about class
attitudes. To many in those days eugenists
seemed to be looking for pseudo-scientific
reasons to find justification for class differences. This was so because eugenists
pointed to social mobility; people moved
out of one class into another; in particular,
bright and energetic people moved from
manual to intellectual occupations. They
pointed to the fact, which could not be

denied, that the managerial and professional

classes were less fertile than the manual
working classes. They asked whether
those who ‘‘ moved up ”’ in the social scale
might not be better endowed; if that was so,
then unfavourable differential fertility must
be at work. And a very proper question to
ask! The question is important, very important, and no full answer is yet available.
But it made eugenists unpopular. They
seemed to be finding reasons for differences
between the social classes which could not
be removed by modifying conditions. Social
class is indeed a touchy subject. I notice with
interest that sociologists no longer speak of
an upper class; there are, it seems, only
upper and lower middle classes and manual
workers. Perhaps British Railways are not
quite up-to-date; they would have been
more in accord with the times if they had
degraded first class to second instead of
raising third to second. But let us not be
unfair to British Railways. They are doing
their best to diminish class differences.
What has the Soczety done? It has
attempted to keep the public mindful of the —
importance of heredity in human affairs,
and that is its main task. But is has not
confined itself to the reiteration of general
JUBILEE. DINNER 15

statements. The Soczety has, in the course of
its fifty years, accomplished a great many
- specific things, and I think it is right that
they should be mentioned and recorded.
- There are, first, the attempts to influence
legislation, and not unsuccessfully. The
“Mental Deficiency Act of 1912, which
-authorizes segregation of mental defectives,
resulted from advocacy by the Society and
other bodies; the same applied to the amend_ment to the Finance Act of 1928 concerning
children’s allowances for Income Tax. The
Society strongly advocated voluntary steri‘lization, and its proposals were incorporated
in the Brock Report which have, however,
not been implemented. Other activities of
the Society concern the initiation, the
encouragement and the financing of inquiries
and of research into various problems. I
think that one of the most important has
been referred to by previous speakers—
social problem families. That the country
is now aware that there are social problem
families is, I think, largely due to the
investigations sponsored by the Soczety and
the publications that have resulted. There
is also birth control into which the Society
has financed some very important and
successful inquiries; this is obviously a most
important matter in the whole field in which
the Soczety is interested.

There was the foundation of the Population
Investigation by the Society; that Committee
has become autonomous, and the volume of
work it has produced is astonishing—much
of it of great eugenic importance. I can only
give a few examples of what the Soczety has
done; one more thing I must mention and
that is the production of a symposium by
medical specialists under the title of The
Chances of Morbid Inheritance, a guide for
doctors who advise those with abnormal
family histories. I could mention many more
of these special activities, but that must
suffice.

I think it is not unknown to the Soctety
that the inspirer of most, if not all, of these
very useful and very successful activities
was the former General Secretary, Dr.
Blacker. It is not for me to speak at length
about Dr. Blacker, who is going to be

honoured by the Society a little later on, but
I must express my warmest admiration for
all he has done for it and my pleasure that
he is to be presented with the Galton Medal,
which will make him a double G.M.

I have no doubt that new opportunities
will arise for similar special activities, and I
have no doubt that, with Dr. Bertram as
General Secretary, they will not be missed.
There does remain the perpetual task of the
Society to make people more aware of the
importance of heredity in human affairs.
That is a task that can never be completed;
it calls for continuous activity on the part of
the Society so that the importance of heredity
will ever become more widely known and
appreciated. If I was speaking to a Society
that had as its objective one attainable aim,
it could hardly be appropriate for me to
wish that society a long life, but in regard
to the Eugenics Society that is not the
position. I think it would be too much to
say of the Society—esto perpetua!—but I
think that I may properly express the hope
that fifty years hence the Soczety will be
celebrating its centenary, and that it will
then have a second fifty years, equally
successful and prosperous years, to its credit.
With that may I propose the toast of the
Society, coupling with it the name of Mrs.
Raphael. 
MRS. RAPHAEL (deputizing for MRS. M. A.
PYKE)

Mr. PRESIDENT, Sir Alexander, my Lords,
Ladies and Gentlemen, as your President
has said, I am deputizing to-night for my
Chairman, Mrs. Pyke. Those of us who have
the pleasure and privilege of working with
her, who revolve round her, who pant after
her and pick up the pieces, know that she is
really irreplaceable. J am a most inadequate
second fiddle, but I have the notes she made
for her speech for you to-night, and I hope,
Mr. President, I shall play in tune. Here is
her speech:

I speak to-night in a dual capacity—it is
my duty and privilege to return thanks, on
behalf of the Eugenics Society, for the toast
you have just drunk—but at the same time
it is also my firm intention to say what 1
16 | _ THE EUGENICS REVIEW

think about the Soczety and about what it
has done for other societies.

The aims of the Eugenics Society surely go
straight to the root of all our troubles—if
we had better men we would have a better
world. Of course, a great many well-meaning
societies spend much earnest effort on trying
to make men better, and everyone can see
what an uphill job that is. What the
Eugenics Society wants to do is to find out
how to breed better men and then help the
world to do so. Perhaps it is a pity that our
commercial value is so low—if we were cows
or pigs or horses or dogs, or even budgerigars,
our breeding would very soon cease to be a
matter of chance. If we did not become
better and better budgerigars we should not
stand a chance.

How unlike the dog world is to ours. In
Horse and Hound I read the following sentence
—‘ If we firmly and conscientiously avoid
small bitches and big dog-hounds, breed
our pack for work and get them as goodlooking as we can we shall have done as
much for our country as a man may reasonably do.’’ In fact, it may be that it is man’s
pre-occupation with the survival of himself
and his family to the exclusion of any concern
for the betterment of the human race which
has led him often to suspect the whole subject of eugenics. However, that is a digression.

In pursuit of its ideal, the Eugenics
Society has maintained always a _ high
scientific standard, as instanced by the
quality of its lectures and investigations, its
publications and particularly its excellent
REVIEW (so ably edited by Mrs. K. Hodson),
and by the nature of the support it has
obtained and the high standing of those who
have become its officers.

It has another very rare asset almost
unique among voluntary organizations—
the Society actually has money and (perhaps
even rarer) it has used some of that money
to advance its work through other existing
organizations. In the Statement of Aims
these are called cognate societies. I can
assure you that it is a splendid thing to be
regarded as a cognate society by the Eugenics
Society. As representing one of these societies
to-night, I speak very feelingly on this subject.

During the last twenty-five years the
Family Planning Association has been given
free premises, donations, grants for research
and to help special ventures—not all at
once, of course, the Eugenics Society is
generous but not madly improvident. I
think we owe special thanks to the Soczety’s
treasurers, both the late Mr. Clinton Chance
and (I am glad to say) the very much
present Mr. Aird Whyte who we are so glad
to see with us to-night. And of course we
never forget what we owe to Dr. Blacker in
this matter. The Eugenics Soctety has a very
elegant badge, but it has no motto. I can
certainly suggest one; in fact for the last
twenty-six years this should surely have
been Quid Blacker Censet, or, for the benefit
of those whose education has been purely
scientific, ““ What does Blacker think? ”’

We are very grateful for Dr. Blacker’s
thoughts about the F.P.A. I can only
remember one occasion on which a request
which he supported was turned down by
the Society. I do not know which was the
crosser, he or I—we both scowled for a
fortnight. And that was the only time the
Society was wrong, because that particular
venture paid hand over fist, and the Society
would have had its money back—with
interest. However, that slight blotch on the
escutcheon only serves to show up an otherwise glorious record. The Family Planning
Association, the International Planned
Parenthood Federation, the North Kensington Marriage Welfare Centre, the British
Social Biology Council—we all have grateful
hearts; we know how much the generosity
of the Eugenics Society has lightened the
lives of thousands of men and women.

Before ending, I want to take this opportunity of expressing the Council’s gratitude
to Dr. Carter for the excellent work he did
during his five years’ sentence as General
Secretary which has just ended. But
fortunately we shall have the benefit of his
ability and experience on the Council. And
I know we would like to thank Miss Schenk
and the office staff for their tremendous
efforts and efficiency i in organizing to-night’s
dinner.

In conclusion, I want on behalf of all the:
‘JUBILEE DINNER 17

cognate societies to thank the Eugenics’

Society for its enlightened liberality—and
on behalf of the Council of the Eugenics
Society, of which I have the honour to be a
member, I want to thank you all for coming
to-night to celebrate this memorable and
happy occasion.

SIR CHARLES GALTON DARWIN, K.B.E.,
M.C., Se.D., F.R.S.

My Lorps, Ladies and Gentlemen, I now |

come to what I regard as the crowning event
of this evening—the presentation to Dr.
Blacker of the second Galton Medal. I may
say this was agreed unanimously by our
Council. Everyone who has taken any part
in our Soczety’s activities will know that he
has carried the whole Soczety on his shoulders
almost personally for something like twenty
years, and this without becoming a tyrant,
but with' the supreme quality of knowing
how to get the willing services of many good
men and true.

I hope this evening he is going to tell us
something about what he has done. He will
certainly know much more what he has
done for our Soczety than any of the rest of
us can, and [ shall not attempt to say anything about it, but he adds to his other
qualities the besetting virtue of being modest,
so that whatever he may tell us will be an
under-statement, and in hearing it you
must do whatever is the opposite of
discounting it.

I will not talk about his actions for the
Society for that reason, but I think we have
to import eugenic colour into the proceedings, and in awarding him this medal we
have examined him on the eugenic principle.
In one of his writings Francis Galton describes
certain qualities which constitute good
eugenic standards—health, energy, ability,
manliness and a courteous disposition—so
let us see how Blacker measures up to
classification on those five points.

Health: You have only to look at him to
judge of this, and I may mention in addition
that a good long time ago he captained the
Oxford University boxing team. I should
have thought that was a sufficient guarantee
of health.

Energy: Another quality he has, whether

under the category of health or energy I do
not know. Blacker, in addition to having
been a boxer in his youth, is a runner. I
should not be greatly surprised—realizing
this dinner was going to be something of an
ordeal for him—if he ran three miles this
morning—and that at the age of sixty-two.
However that may be, I do know that not
many years ago when he was medical officer
to the Coldstream Guards, he regarded it as
his duty to keep the recruits fit, and he
made them do a long run every day, and in
order to show it could be done he did it
himself—and he himself would then have
been fifty. I sometimes find myself wondering whether those recruits, when they had
to run their five miles a day, had an
absolutely uniform enthusiasm for all the
estimable qualities of Dr. Blacker.
' But of course the word energy refers not
merely to physical energy and I think we
can include the question of his intellectual
qualities. I might cite the fact that many
of us who are firm believers in eugenics tend
to sit back quietly and hope it will gradually
come about, but Blacker is not in the least
like that. As soon as he had made up his
mind that eugenics was a good thing he set
to work to find out what we should next do,
and got it done in every case. We have been
hearing about the various societies connected
with the development of the family, and
these largely owe their existence to the
energy of Blacker in getting them going.
This connects up with the next item.

Ability: A great deal of the quality he
has, this energy in getting things going,
could be ranked either as energy or as ability.
We can add to that the quality he has of
writing remarkably good works—many of
them short articles which come out in the
REVIEW, but I might specially cite the book,
Eugenics, Galton and After.

Manliness: When we come to the fourth
quality, manliness, it is a little difficult for
most people to say what exactly is meant
by that. In the case of Blacker it is particularly easy to do it. Blacker, I think, has a
very remarkable military record. He served

in both Great Wars in the Coldstream—_
18 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

 

ays

as an infantry ofhcer in the first war when
he was decorated with the Military Cross,
and as a medical officer in the second, being
decorated with the George Medal for the
occasion when he walked across a known
minefield to save the life of a wounded man.

Courteous disposition: Finally I come to
the question of courteous disposition (which
I must confess I thought was rather a queer
quality for Galton to have mentioned), but
certainly Blacker passes very well under
that. In this connection I will tell you a
story that probably few people know. My
uncle Leonard was President of this Society
until 1929, when he retired at the age of
seventy-cight or seventy-nine. Two years
later Blacker became secretary of the
Society, and knowing that my uncle.was
still deeply interested in the subject, Blacker,
every month or two, used to travel down to
a remote part of Sussex to call on my uncle
and tell him how things were going. I hope
Blacker enjoyed it, but I do know my uncle
enjoyed these visits enormously. As a trivial

The President presenting the Galton Medal to Dr. C. P. Blacker.

 

Photo: Rawoop Ltn.

digression I remember on one occasion I told
my uncle some funny story. He enjoyed it
very much and said at the end, “I must
remember that and pass it on to Blacker.
He will like it so much.”

So I think you will agree that Blacker
passes very high on all the five qualities set
by Galton as the qualities for cugenics.
Indeed he passes far above First Class
Honours, and in the light of that we can
unanimously agree we are doing the right
thing when we present Dr. Blacker with the
second Galton Medal.

Dr. C. P. BLACKER, M.c., ¢.M., M.A., M.D.

Mr. PRESIDENT, my _ Lords,
Gentlemen:

When, the day before yesterday evening,
I sat down in my armchair at home and
began to think of what I ought to say tonight, there floated into my mind a memory
of something that happened almost exactly
forty years ago.

Ladies and
JUBILEE

The occasion was the battle of Passchendaele and the scene a wood about three miles
behind the Line. I was second in command
of a company of which the company commander, Alan Dickinson, one of the bravest
and best men I have ever known, and also
one of the most modest, had just been
awarded a military cross. He was thrown
into a state of acute distress. After a period
of restlessness and painful indecision, he sent
for the sergeant-major and told him to get
on to parade all the men he could lay his
hands on—and never mind about their
dress. A motley group, mostly consisting of
company headquarters, including the company cooks, was assembled, and these Alan
Dickinson addressed. He told them about
the military cross and went on, in effect, to
say that it was not really he that had earned
it but they. It would be their colours that
he would be wearing in the future, not his
own.

This scene came back to me with astonishing clearness: a wood of stunted oaks providing a sort of camouflage; two ranks of
untidy and mystified men, wondering what
the excitement was about; in the back‘ground wet tents, and the company cooker
steaming away; out of a grey sky a drizzle
of rain and the continuous cannonade (the
rain being no less characteristic of the battle
of Passchendaele than the cannonade); and
standing in front of me a close friend under
‘much tension, apologizing for having been
awarded a medal. It was a moving scene,
not without its humorous side.

I must confess, Mr. President, that when,
about three weeks ago, I received your letter
telling me about this award I reacted rather
like my old company commander, though
I do not compare myself with him in any
other way. I thought of the many people—
officers, fellows and servants of the Society
—whom I have got to know since 1927, when
I was first elected to the Soczety and became
a member of its Council. Many of these
people I now count among my most valued
friends; and I feel that on this occasion,
which is historical for the Society, it would be
fitting if I recalled some of them to you.

- The last fifty years, as I think back on

4—ER

DINNER ( os 19

them, fall into three periods, about the first
of which—from 1907 to 1927—I know only
by hearsay.

The Soctety’s founder was the indefatigable and persuasive Mrs. Gotto, better known
as Mrs. Neville Rolfe. She told me an amusing story. She had been casting about for an
appropriate president of the Socrety and her
active mind hit upon the name of your uncle,
Mr. President, Major Leonard Darwin. She
sought him out and bluntly said that she
wished him to become president of the
Eugenics Society. He replied with a naive
question which he later made classical.
“What,” he asked, “is Eugenics?’ The
question has become classical because he
himself later wrote a small book entitled
What is Eugenics? of which the Society has
sold thousands. I must deny myself the
pleasure of telling you more of Leonard
Darwin, who was our president for no less
than eighteen years, from Ig1r to 1929, and
who would surely have been delighted had
he known that his nephew would succeed
him in the presidential chair twenty-five
years after he had vacated it. During his
eighteen years presidency he surmounted
many difficulties with a characteristic combination of tact and gentle candour. He was
immensely admired and loved by us all. A
great man.

There are now but two survivors of this
period who retain contact with the Soczety
—that most faithful of women, Mrs. Ursula
Grant Duff,and Sir Alexander Carr-Saunders,
the recipient of the first Galton Medal and
also a past-president. He was the author of
the volume on eugenics in the Home University Library, first printed in 1926, thirty-one
years ago. I thank him for the kind things
he has said and I hope he won’t mind my
adding that I have recently been trying to
persuade him to write a second and revised
edition of his useful book. Such a revised
edition would be of the utmost value to us
to-day.

Other names associated with this period
were those of Dr. A. F. Tredgold, whose son,

Dr. R. F. Tredgold, is now a Fellow of the

Society; and Dr. R. Langdon-Down, the
father of Lady Russell Brain whom we hoped
20 c

would be with us to-night. Langdon-Down
was, in my eyes, another great man, with the
same tact, courtesy, rectitude and gentleness
as Leonard Darwin. Also to be recalled with
gratitude is the name of Mr. E. J. Lidbetter,
the author of a volume describing prolonged
and painstaking researches, conceived as a
result of first-hand observations, into the
incidence of social dependency in an East
London Borough. The volume, Heredity and
the Social Problem Group, was published by
the Society in 1933. I have a letter from Mr.
Lidbetter expressing regret that he could not
be here to-night. To this period belong the
figure, memorable to all who knew him, of
Dean Inge, a firm believer in, and an eloquent
(if sometimes provocative) expositor of,
eugenics; and such redoubtable personalities
as Sir Ronald Fisher and Professor E. W.
MacBride.

The Soczety’s second period, as I see it, ran
from 1927 to 1945. This period was ushered
in by a large bequest from Mr. Henry
Twitchin, an Australian sheep-farmer and a
friend of Major Leonard Darwin. This
bequest banished financial cares and made
us rich by the standards of voluntary societies (though not by those of grant-giving
bodies). The responsibility of recasting the
Soctety in a fresh mould, made possible by
the bequest, lay with Sir Bernard Mallet
who succeeded Leonard Darwin as our
president. He was a man of the same rare
quality as Darwin and Langdon-Down, and
I am grateful to the Soczety, among many
things, for having enabled me to know these
three men. Sir Bernard Mallet’s son, Sir
Victor Mallet, is here to-night. Lady Mallet,
wife of Sir Bernard, also took a keen interest
in the Soczety and it is a pleasure to welcome
her cousin, Sir Michael Adeane, who is also
with us now.

- To this period belong the names of John
Fraser Roberts, David Caradog Jones, Julian
Huxley and David Glass; also the names of
Lord Horder, our honoured and active president for nine years, of Stanley Bramwell,
and of Clinton Chance whose family, and the
family of whose wife Janet Chance, have been
the Soctety’s warm friends. Horder,

Bramwell and Chance formed a happy and .

THE EUGENICS REVIEW ~

united triumvirate. They were close personal friends before the war, and together.
they sustained the Society during the inactive war years. Our debt to all three is
great. .

The third and last period of the half
century runs from 1945 to to-day. Among
the many people I would mention are Aird
Whyte, Janet Chance’s brother, among
whose numerous, unostentatious but highly
valued services to the Soczety, both as chairman and treasurer, I include his part in
organizing this dinner; Mr. Geoffrey Eley,
for several years our treasurer; Mrs. Barbara
Bosanquet, sister-in-law of Frederick Osborn
(director of the American Population Council,
and secretary of the American Eugenics
Society); and also, if it is not presumptuous,
Mr. President, yourself.

Of personalities loosely connected with the
Society whose writings on eugenics have had
a notable influence I would mention two:
Dr. Havelock Ellis who died in 1939 and
with whom I had an almost continuous
correspondence during the decade before’his
death; and Dr. Marie Stopes whom we hoped
would be among us to-night. It gave me
much pleasure to read a very recent tribute
to her from the pen of Mrs. Mary Stocks who
is now sitting on the President’s right. It
will be found in a symposium called The
Human Sum, produced in October this year
by the Family Planning Association. Of Dr.
Stopes’s book Married Love, first published
in 1918, of which hundreds of thousands of
copies have since been sold, Mrs. Stocks fittingly said that “‘no single publication in
our time has brought more happiness to
more people.”’

It was during the second and third of the
three periods, after the Society had received
Mr. Twitchin’s legacy, that began the cooperation with other organisations to which
Mrs. Raphael, on behalf of Mrs. Pyke, has
kindly referred. Of these organisations I will
mention first PEP, represented here by Mr.
Max Nicholson and Mr. Richard Bailey: I
have co-operated closely with Mr. Nicholson
over two fairly large reports with the costs
of which the Society was able to assist; and
many are the happy holidays I have spent
JUBILEE

with him in British and continental bird
sanctuaries. I wish I had time to tell you
what a courageous and many-sided—indeed
remarkable—man Max Nicholson is. I
mention the Family Planning Assoctation,
the Marriage Guidance Council, the British
Social Biology Council and the International
Planned Parenthood Federation whose leading representatives—Mrs. Margaret Pyke (to
whom we wish a quick recovery), Mr. Joseph
Brayshaw, Mrs. Eleanor French and Mrs.
Vera Houghton—are, or intended to be, with
us this evening. |
- Lastly I come to the Soczety’s servants to
whom, if I could, I would give bits of this
medal. To both the early and middle period
belong two people to whom I wish to pay
tributes. The first is the late Mrs. Cora
Hodson, a dedicated and deeply religious
woman whose undiscriminating generosity
seemed to some to outstrip the bounds of
prudence, or, to put it bluntly, who gave
away so much of her money and possessions
as to leave too little for herself; she largely
carried the Society on her shoulders during
the early and middle ‘twenties, being at the
same time the Soczety’s secretary and editor
of its quarterly REVIEW; she also travelled
much and gave lectures all over the country.
The second person whom I wish to thank is
Mrs. Guendolyne Collyer, who is with us
to-night. Upon Mrs. Collyer fell the responsibilities of dealing with the Soczety’s business
and finances which, after 1928, became
intricate. During the first ten years of its
existence, she was the business secretary of
the Population Investigation Committee, mentioned by Sir Alexander Carr-Saunders,
which the Society convened in 1936 and which
it financed and housed till the end of the war.
Mrs. Collyer kept with a noteworthy attention to detail, which was praised by the
Society’s auditors, numerous separate banking accounts; I shall always be grateful to
her for the kind way she inducted me into
the ways of the Society when I became its
secretary in 1931. |
To the middle period belong Mr. Eldon
Moore, editor of the REview from 1928 to
1933, and Miss Hilda Pocock among whose
many services was the preparation of an

DINNER 21

excellent film on eugenics of which I hope
that we will be able to make more use in
the future. |

To both the middle and last period belong
the late Dr. Maurice Newfield, who succeeded
Eldon Moore as editor, and with whose wife
Sigrid and son Gabriel we are happy to retain
contacts; and Mrs. Jessie Horner, our
admirable housekeeper. Our friendship with
Mrs. Horner began in 1933 when Clinton
Chance bought our house in Eccleston Square.
Throughout the war years, undeterred by the
successive phases of the bombardment of
London, she and her husband stood fast..
Both refused to move. Of Mrs. Horner, Aird
Whyte will agree, we are hard put to it to
say which is the greater, our debt to her or
our affection for her.

To the last period belong Miss Faith
Schenk, the main organiser of this dinner,
who has been with us for over eleven years;
Miss Sheila Kordik whose powers of deciphering my vile script are a perennial astonishment to me; Mrs. Kathleen Hodson, the
editor of the REVIEW since 1949; Dr. Cedric
Carter, general secretary since 1952; and now
his successor Dr. Colin Bertram, to whom I
wish you could have the opportunity of
listening to to-night as well as to myself.

To all these valued and faithful servants
of the Soczety I would, if I could, give bits of
this gold medal. I think I would give the
biggest bits to Sigrid Newfield and Mrs.
Collyer.

I conclude by thanking you, Mr. President,
on behalf not only of myself but also of my
wife and daughters, who are here with me,
for the very great honour you have accorded
to me to-day.

There were present at the dinner some
146 people, including guests of the Soczety,
Fellows, Members and their friends, but a
number who had expected to attend were
prevented by illness, a dense fog and the
serious railway accident at Lewisham that
evening. .

Those who accepted invitations included:

Major G. H. F. Abraham; Sir Michael and Lady

Adeane; Miss Addis; Mr. S. R. J. Addison;
Lt.-Col. M. L. Ahuja; Mr. and Mrs. A. Appelbe;
22 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Mr. RR. Bailey; Miss P. Barclay-Smith; Sir
Thomas Barlow; Dr. Barry; Mrs. C. Bawden;
Mrs. Baxter; Mr. and Mrs. A. Bennett; Mr. B.

Benjamin; Dr. and Mrs. G. C. L. Bertram; Miss
Bertram; Dr. and Mrs. W. R. Bett; Mr. and Mrs.
C. Binney; Dr. and Mrs. C. P. Blacker; the
Misses Blacker; Mr. H. H. C. Blake; Mrs.
Bootle-Wilbraham; Mrs. C. Bosanquet; Mr. D. G.
Bosanquet; Mr. and Mrs. It. A. Boyle; Mr. A. J.
Brayshaw; Mr. H. Brewer; Dr. J. C. R. Buchanan;
Mrs. D. Buxton.

Mr. L. J. Cadbury; Mr. and Mrs. A. Caroe; Sir
Alexander Carr-Saunders; Dr. and Mrs. G. B.
Carruthers; Dr. and Mrs. C. O. Carter; Mrs.
Clifford Smith; Mrs. G. Collyer; Dr. and Mrs. R.
Conrad; Dr. and Mrs. W. S. C. Copeman; Mr.
P. R. Cox; Dr. J. D. Cronin; Sir Charles and
Lady Darwin; Dr. and Mrs. Davies; Mr. R. A.
Eccleston; Mr. and Mrs. G. C. R. Eley; Miss
Ericson; Mrs. E. French; Dr. C. B. Goodhart;
Mrs. Goyder; The Hon. Mrs. U. Grant Duff; The
Rev. K. G. Greet; Dr. and Mrs. E. F. Griffith;
Sir Gerald Grove; Mrs. C. Gruby; Professor F.
Grundy; Miss V. Hardiman; Mr. and Mrs. H.
Hardman; Sir Clifford Heathcote-Smith; Professor E. Hindle; Mr. and Mrs. W. T. Hodson;
Mr. F. Hollins; Mrs. V. Houghton; Mr. and Mrs.
S. Hourmouzios; Mr. D. Hubback; Dr. Angela
Hughesdon; Dr. and Mrs. K. B. Hutton; Dr. M.
Hynes.

His Excellency The Indonesian Ambassador;
Mr. N. Isaacs; Dr. Margaret H. Jackson; Dr. D. Mcl.

Johnson; Mr. and Mrs. D. Caradog Jones; Dr.
and Mrs. T. Kelly; Miss S. M. Kordik; Dr. and
Mrs. W. P. Kraemer; Lady Lane; Dr. Evelyn
Lawrence; Dr. H. Lehmann; Dr. and Mrs.
A. D. Leigh; Mrs. D. Leonard; Dr. Hilda Lewis;
Professor P. Lindahl; Sir Ivison and Lady
Macadam; Sir Victor Mallet; Mrs. Money-Kyrle;
Mr. E. Money-Kyrle; Mr. Kk. Money-Kyrle; Dr.
A. E. Mourant; Mr. E. M. Nicholson; Dr. A. F.
and Miss E. M. Norman-Butler; Dr. H. Murray
Park; Dr. and Mrs. A. S. Parkes; Lt.-Col. C. L.
Pasricha; Mr. M. S. and the Hon. Mrs. Pease;
Mr. N.S. Percival; Dr. and Mrs. B. H. Pickard;
Captain R. A. Pilkington; Dr. and Mrs. A. Piney;

Dr. and Mrs. D. A. Pond; Mr. J. Prince; Mrs.
M. A. Pyke.

Mrs. N. Raphael; Dr. and Mrs. W. Linford
Rees; Dr. and Mrs. J. A. Fraser Roberts; Pro
fessor and Mrs. J. L. C. Rodrigo; Mr. D. Rolt;
Dr. and Mrs. G. H. Rossdale; Mr. and Mrs. H. F.
Rossetti; Miss F. B. Schenk; Dr. J. A. Scott;
Mr. and Mrs. G. C. Seligman; Mrs. A. Smith;
Mr. C. Sprigge; Miss Stephens; Dr. Marie Stopes;
Mrs. Mary Stocks; Lord Strathcona; Dr. Barnett
Stross; Dr. D. Swinscow; Dr. K. H. Tallerman;
Dr. and Mrs. C. J. O’D. Taylor; Sir Henry Tizard;
Dr. and Mrs. J. P. M. Tizard; Mr. C. W. Usher;
Mrs. L. Usher; Mr. and Mrs. N. Villeneuve; Mr.
and Mrs. G. Aird Whyte; Dr. Isabel Wilson; Mrs.
M. Woodside; Dr. and Mrs. D. Woollam; Dr.
and Mrs. E. B. Worthington; Mr. and Mrs. M.
Zander.
