THE BIOLOGY OF GROWTH

A Review of its Place in Heredity and Evolution

By G. R. de BEER
[Fellow of Merton College, Oxford]

ERE is a collection of five lectures*
which were delivered in 1925-6 by
members of the staff of the University of Missouri, in an attempt to present a
comprehensive concept of growth. While
each lecture contains matters of interest,
they are not all equal in value. A symposium of this kind cannot be expected to
show that cohesion which is usually looked
for in a book, but which a course of lectures
by different persons need not necessarily
achieve. Furthermore, when delivered in
the form of lectures to stimulate curiosity
and to focus attention, the subject matter
under review is excellent, but it appears a
trifle thin when cast into book form.
Certain matters have been omitted which
might reasonably be expected to occupy a
place in an elementary exposition of the
phenomena of growth. One of these is the
detail of the growth of the uterus of a
pregnant mammal, which is effected by increase in size and not in number of the cells
which compose the uterine wall; the subsequent involution of the uterus after birth
takes place by reduction of the size of the
cells. This important case serves as a warning that growth and cell-multiplication are
not necessarily synonymous. When dealing
with nutritional requirements, an interesting
point which might be mentioned is (as
Osborne, Mendel, and Ferry showed in 1912)
that that constituent of protein known as
lysine, which is essential for growth, can be
synthesized (or substituted for) in the body
of an adult mammal suckling its young

* Robbins, W. J., Brody, S., Hogan, A. G., Jackson, C. M., and Greene, C. W., Preface by Hooker,
H. D. Growth. London and New Haven, 1928. Humphrey Milford, Oxford University Press, Yale Univeray press. Pp. xiii and 189. 83 fig. Price $3.00

148.

from a diet which is deficient in lysine.
Such a diet is, however, insufficient for
growth if administered direct to the young
animals themselves.

Another important piece of work which
might have profitably been included is that
of Drew (1923). This investigator observed
that if tissues of an adult animal are allowed
to decompose at the temperature of the body
(i.e., to undergo autolysis), they furnish a
substance which has remarkable powers of
promoting growth when administered to
tissues growing in vitro. Further, this effect
is very similar to that which is produced by
an extract of a cancerous tumour. The more
malignant (i.e., rapid-growing) the tumour,
the more effective is its extract. It would
appear then that cancerous tissue differs
from Healthy tissue in that it possesses continuous supplies of this growth-promoting
substance, whereas healthy tissue possesses
it only when and as it is damaged. It is
further probable that this autolysed extract
plays a part in the normal process of repair
of the body, when damaged tissue is made
good by the growth of other tissue to take
its place.

The description of the pineal gland as
being situated ‘‘ at the base of the brain ’’ is
a little misleading, and the physico-chemical
postulates in the form of a catechism are
hardly illuminating. With regard to the
first of these: ‘‘ Why does growth occur?
Because there is an inherent tendency, or
force, which causes cells to divide,’’ Gray
(1927) has shown that there is probably no.
fundamental association between growth and
cell-division. ‘These two processes are the
factors which determine the size of individual cells. In some cases they may establish a well-defined equilibrium, but in others
not. At all events, the authors exerted

181
182

caution in not referring to the remarkable
work of Gurwitsch (1926) on the cell-multiplying effect of certain physical rays which
were supposed by him to be produced by
certain living tissues. Fortunately, this
caution may be relaxed, now that the essentials of Gurwitsch’s results have been confirmed by Reiter and Gabor (1928).

The book has, however, an unfortunate
demerit in that, although published in 1928,
it does not take account of the results of
studies on growth which appeared in the
preceding three years from the work of a
number of investigators, chiefly on this side

of the Atlantic. As the study of growth has

itself grown very rapidly during these years,
it is regrettable that the opportunity was
lost of presenting an up-to-date account of
it. The new results are certainly not as
widely known as they deserve to be, and
advantage will therefore be taken of this
opportunity for bringing them succinctly to
notice.

The late Dr. T. S. P. Strangeways, who
devoted so much of his life to the investigation of problems of growth in tissue-culture,
was led to conclude (1924) that the tendencies of a cell to multiply and to become
specialized and differentiated were more or
less mutually exclusive. This important
view is all the more significant when considered in the light of Drew’s (1923) experiments, in which he obtained the re-differentiation of the structure of the tubes of the
kidney or of a mammary gland from sheets
of tissue which were dividing rapidly and
had lost their previous differentiation. The
re-differentiation was induced by adding connective tissue to the culture. This result is
in full accordance with that of Champy
(1914), who found that epithelium and connective tissue grow only very little when
they are present in a culture together, but
as soon as the connective tissue dies the
epithelium loses its differentiation and grows
rapidly.

Turning now to the raw materials which
an embryo uses when it grows and differentiates, Needham (1926a) has shown in the
case of the chick that carbohydrates are
made use of first, then proteins, and lastly

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

fats are laid under contribution as sources
of energy. Further, he has shown (1926b)
that the selection of the kind of material
which an embryo uses as a source of energy
at a given moment is made by factors
residing within the embryo, and is independent of the supplies of the various
materials available. ‘The succession : carbohydrate—protein—fat, is of great interest
from several points of view, which Needham
discusses (1926c and 1927c). It is the order
of: ascending calorific value, descending
degree of intramolecular oxygenation, attack
by digestive ferments in the intestinal tract
of higher animals, decreasing solubility in
water, decomposition during autolysis, simplicity of synthesis by solar energy, etc.,
and Needham is inclined to ascribe a phylogenetic significance to it.

There is no relation between the periods
of maximum combustion of proteins and
fats and the periods of the maximum
absorption of these two classes of foodstuffs (Needham, 19274), but there does
appear to be a relation of this kind in the
case of the combustion and absorption of
carbohydrates (1927b). The nature of the
material which is absorbed during any given
period is probably controlled by variations
in the permeability to water-soluble and to
fat-soluble substances of the cells of the
blood-vessels of the blastoderm. Further
work indicates that in the building up of the
embryo, molecules of protein are brought
into the body of the embryo intact, and are
there broken down before being re-formed
into its own characteristic protein molecules.

The developing chick presents the very
interesting phenomenon of the “‘ foie transitoire’’ in the cells of the yolk-sac, which
regulate metabolism until the embryo’s liver
is sufficiently well formed to take on this
function for itself (1927b). The yolk-sac
of the chick is in this respect analogous and
indeed perhaps homologous to the placental
chorion of the mammal. Lastly, Needham
(1927d) has examined the degree of efficiency
with which the yolk and white of the egg are
converted into the flesh and blood of the
chick.
THE BIOLOGY OF GROWTH

GROWTH OF CANCEROUS CELLS

No mention of sources of energy during
growth would be complete without reference
to Warburg’s (1926) important results
derived from experiments on the respiration
of healthy and of cancerous cells. Whatever
the material from which energy is derived,
a healthy tissue obtains energy by burning
the raw material with oxygen: the process
known as aerobic respiration. A cancerous
tissue, however, obtains its energy by splitting up the molecule of raw material by
fermentation. So sugar is broken down to
lactic acid by the process known as glycolysis, and no oxygen is required for this
process. Obtaining energy by these means
is accordingly called anaerobic respiration.
Healthy tissues can obtain energy by glycolysis when they are deprived of oxygen, but
they respire aerobically when oxygen is
available, and glycolysis then ceases. But
a cancerous tissue will continue to obtain
energy by glycolysis, however much oxygen
is supplied to it, and the more malignant the
tumour is, the more energy does it derive
from glycolysis. A cancerous cell therefore
differs from a healthy cell in that its power
of aerobic respiration is damaged or
destroyed.

While dealing with energy-sources, those
who are attracted by general rules with remarkable exceptions to them will be interested in the fact that the amount of energy
(number of calories) which is necessary to
double the weight of the new-born of all
mammalian species investigated is proportionally the same for all, except for man:
4,808 calories are required to make 1 kg. of
normal body, except by man, who requires
six, times as much (Rubner, 1908).

Gray (1926, 1928a, and 1928b) has carried
out a number of investigations into the
growth of fish, and has been led to some
conclusions of great importance regarding
the attempts which have been made to
‘explain’? the growth of an animal by
means of a mathematical formula or
equation. He has shown (1929) that, when
the growth of an organism is plotted in the
form of a curve, that curve can always be
represented by more than one equation

183

within the limits of probable error in the
taking of measurements. When more than
one type of cell is present, as is always the
case in all animals above the Protozoa,
growth-curves are insufficient for the construction of the real equation on which the
processes of growth are based. It is therefore futile to expect to be able to ‘‘ obtain
the laws of growth ”’ simply by a consideration of curves.

Of a different nature are the results of
Huxley’s (1924a) re-investigation of certain
phenomena, and his discovery that in a
number of cases in which an organ grows
relatively faster than the rest of the body,
the differential growth-rate is constant
during long periods and is susceptible of
interpretation by a mathematical formula.
(This formula is y=bx", where x is the
body, y is the organ in question, k is a constant usually about 1.5, and b is a constant
of proportion.)

DIFFERENTIAL GROWTH

Without going into the causes of constant
differential growth-rates (which remain
obscure), attention may be paid to a number
of interesting and important consequences
which result from them. An organ or part
which grows at a constant differential rate
when compared with that of the rest of the
body is called a heterogonic organ. Such an
organ is the abdomen in female crabs, which
in them is wider than in the males; for,
while in the former it is heterogonic, its
growth in the latter is proportional to that
of the rest of the body, or isogonic. Females
of the so-called fiddler-crab are found with
a narrow abdomen, and this has hitherto
been taken to imply that in these individuals
there has been a qualitative change towards
maleness. Huxley (1924b) has made it clear
that the phenomenon is merely one of quantitative reduction in the relative growth-rate
(i.e., in the constant k) of a heterogonic
organ.

It has been known for some time that
male earwigs may be of one of two types:
either “‘ high ’? with large caudal pincers,
or “‘ low ’’ with small ones, and the distinction between them has hitherto been ascribed
184

to a difference in the factors inherited by
the individuals of one or the other type.
Huxley (1927a) has made it clear that the
difference is not one of heredity but of development, for there are two ‘‘ equilibriumpositions ’’ into which the degree of development of the pincers fall. The effect of an
increase in the size of the body is the transference of an increasing number of individuals from the ‘‘ low ’”’ to the ‘‘ high ”’
equilibrium-position. A similar phenomenon
is observable in respect of the size of the
horn in the beetle Xylotrupes (Huxley,
1927b).

These results are of considerable general
importance, for they show that the distinctions between ‘‘ high ’’ and ‘‘ low ”’ forms
of certain insects, which have hitherto been
considered to be of taxonomic importance,
have no basis whatever as a means of
classification (Huxley, 1927c).

EVOLUTION IN A STRAIGHT LINE

Another aspect of the work on constant
differential growth-rates has an important
bearing on the phenomenon which is usually
known as orthogenesis in evolution. When a
lineage of animals is considered, it is often
found that a certain variation (such as the
development of horns or antlers on the head,
for instance) becomes progressively accentuated, as if evolution were taking place along
a straight line in a definite direction. It is
now plain (Huxley, 1924a) that this result
will be achieved if the variation in question
involves a heterogonic organ, and if the size
of the body enlarges. This enlargement of
the body can in many cases be actually
shown to have taken place (as in that of the
fossil Titanotheres), and in the case of deer,
the relative antler-size rises steadily with
absolute body-size (Huxley, 1926).

The orthogenetic accentuation of the
heterogonic organ is therefore nothing more
nor less than a correlated variation. Why
the size of the body should increase during
evolution it is not easy to say, but it is
known that several factors, both internal and
external (such as glands of internal secretion, temperature, etc.), are concerned in it,
and in many normal environments selection

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

is exerted in favour of larger size. At all
events, this explanation of orthogenesis has
lifted the latter conception out of the category of mystical fancies on to the level of a
genetical and physiological problem.

It is of interest to note that the mathematically predictable size of a heterogonic
organ appears to be a maximum limiting
value, as is shown by the fact that in crabs
the claws (heterogonic in the male) can temporarily become reduced below this value, as
can the width of the abdomen in female
crabs (in which it is heterogonic). It is quite
possible that this limiting value may be
found to he due to some simple geometrical
relation, such as that of an area increasing
isogonically to an area remaining stationary,
as Bidder (1925a) has suggested.

Now, the heterogonic organs in male crabs,
the claws, are made up of a number of joints,
and if the relative sizes of the joints are
compared, it is found that the heterogouy
is more pronounced in some joints than in
others (Huxley, 1927c). ‘These facts lead
to the following important conclusion :
since (i) the proportion of size of organ to
size of body varies at different absolute sizes
of the body if the organ is heterogonic; and
(ii) the proportion of the parts of the organ
also vary inter se at different absolute sizes—
therefore species of animals with heterogonic
organs have no constant specific shape.

It is a remarkable thing that the joint of
the claw of the male crab which grows
fastest is not the terminal joint, but the
penultimate one; and similarly the portion
of the abdomen in which the growth is
relatively the greatest is near the hind end,
as Miss Shaw (1928) has shown. ‘These
regions may therefore be regarded as
growth-centres.

Another remarkable feature is that the
growth of the heterogonic claw appears to
affect the growth of the limbs in the adjacent
segments. In most crabs and lobsters the
large claw is on the first walking limb, and
it is found that, when compared with the size
of those of the female, in the male the second
to fifth walking limbs are larger, and the
limb just in front of the claw (the third
maxilliped) is smaller. Further, in
THE BIOLOGY OF GROWTH

Palemon carcinus, the claw is on the second
walking limb, and here it is the third to
fifth walking limbs which are larger in the
male than in the female, and the first walking limb is smaller (Huxley and Tazelaar,

1929).

THE LIMITS OF GROWTH

If studies on heterogonic growth show that
specificity of shape is not invariably to be
found in a species, other considerations show
that specificity of size in a species is not
universal either. Bidder (1925b) has pointed
out that, as a rule, aquatic animals grow
throughout life and have no fixed final adult
size. This power of perpetual growth cannot, however, be possessed by terrestrial or
aerial animals without involving a disturbance of physical and mechanical relations of
the animal with its environment, as a result
of which the animal’s life would be impossible. As Haldane (1927) shows, the size of
an animal living on land cannot increase
beyond a certain value, for in the process of
enlargement the weight of the body increases faster than, and outstrips the
increase in, the strength of the legs. A size
is reached at which the legs will not support
the body. To take another example: since
insects breathe by means of blind tubes, the
length of tube which permits a minimum
essential renewal of oxygen is limited. This
factor, therefore, limits the maximum size
to which insects can aspire.

In a similar way, it can be shown, as
Hesse (1924) points out, that warm-blooded
animals cannot live in cold climates unless
they are of large size. The larger the
animal, the smaller is the ratio of its surface
to its volume. As heat is lost by radiation
from the surface, a large animal has a heatloss which is low relatively to its size. Heatloss is made up for by combustion, and the
fuel is obtained by eating. A small warmblooded animal living in a cold climate has a
heat-loss so large relatively to its size that,
in order to make up for it, it would require
to consume more food than it would have
time to eat.

The examples here considered show how
important is the control of the size of

185

animals during evolution, so that it should
transgress neither maximum nor minimum
limiting values. Should this occur, the
animal would become extinct, and this is
probably the field in which the explanation
of the extinction of a number of fossil
animals of monstrous size is to be sought.
The factors concerned in this connection,
however, only act indirectly in their control
of growth, by killing off the animals which
have grown too much or too little for their
particular mode of life. It remains to consider the factors which act directly by controlling and limiting growth during
development.

THE HEREDITARY FACTORS

Of these factors there is unfortunately
little to say. It is, however, clear that the
limitation of growth in development has its
hereditary as well as its embryological
aspect. Concerning the latter, mention must
be made of Hesse’s (1927) demonstration of
the fact that for each type of structure of
an animal and for any given area of the internal surface of its gut, there is a maximum
size of the body which cannot be exceeded
owing to limitation of raw material digested.
With regard to the hereditary limitation of
growth, it is obvious that some factor must
be transmitted from parent to offspring
which brings it about that in identical environments Pekingese are invariably smaller
than St. Bernards. Robb (1929), who has
investigated the growth of giant and of dwarf
races of rabbits, has shown that the percentage growth-rate is identical for both
from birth to puberty, but the dwarfs are
only half the size of the giants at birth.
The greater size of the giants is therefore
due to a more rapid uterine growth.

The study of the factors which control
growth is one of the most important in
biology, in plants as well as in animals, and
reference must be made to the admirable
summary by Prat and Malkovsky (1927) of
the state of knowledge as regards growth
from a botanical aspect. But the study of
growth is no less fundamental in eugenic
science. ‘The hereditary aspect as reflected
in the inheritance of the most suitable size
186

for a given environment ; the embryological
aspect, concerned with problems of nutrition
and infantile environment; and the pathological aspect, dealing with endocrine disorders, and, most serious of all, with
tumours ; all these must form the foundation
of that knowledge which is the prerequisite
to any attempt at applying it in the control
of any species, whether domestic plant or
animal, or pest, or man.

LITERATURE CITED

Bidder, G. P. (19258)
growth-ratios and their significance.
115. p. 155.

—(1925b) Growth and Death. Proc. LInn. Soc.
London. p. 17.

Champy, C. (1914) La présence d’un tissu antagoniste maintient la differenciation d’un tissu
cultivé en dehors de lorganisme. ComMPT.
Rend. Soc. BIOL. 76. p. 31.

Drew, A. H. (1923) Growth and Differentiation
in Tissue-Cultures. BRIT. JOURN. Exp. PATH.

4. p. 46.

Gray, J. (1926) The Growth of Fish. I. The relationship between embryo and yolk in Salmo
fario. BRIT. JOURN. Exp. BIOL. 4. p. 215.

—(1927) The Mechanism of Cell-division. III. The
relationship between cell-division and growth
in segmenting eggs. BRIT. JOURN. Exp. BIOL.

Constant differential
NATURE.

4. p. 313.

—(1928a) The Growth of Fish. II. The growthrate of the embryo of Salmo fario. BRIT.
Journ. Exp. BIOL. 6. p. 110.

—(1928b) The Growth of Fish. III. The Effect of
temperature on the development of the eggs of
Salmo fario. BRIT. JOURN. Exp. BIOL. 6. p. 125.

— (1929) The Kinetics of Growth. BRIT. JOURN.
Exp. BIOL. 6. p. 248.

Gurwitsch, A. (1926) Das Problem der Zellteilung physiologisch betrachtet. Berlin.
Haldane, J. B. S. (1927) Possible Worlds.

Being the Right Size. London.

Hesse, R. (1924)  Tiergeographie auf Okologischer Grundlage. Jena.

—(1927) Uber Grenzen des Wachstums. Jena.

Huxley, J. S.  (1924a) Constant differential
growth-rates and their significance. NATURE.
114. p. 895.

—(1924b) The variation in the width of the
abdomen in immature Fiddler-crabs considered
in relation to its relative growth-rate. AMER.
NATURALIST. 58. p. 468.

—(1926) The annual increment of the antlers of
the red deer. Proc. Zoor. Soc. London. p. 1021.

On

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

— (19274) Discontinuous variation and Heterogony in Forficula. JOURN. GENETICS. 17. p. 309.

—(1927b) Studies on heterogonic growth. IV. The
Bimodal cephalic horn of Xylotrupes gideon.
_ JouRN. GENETICS. 18. p. 45.

—(1927c) Further work on heterogonic growth.
BIOL. ZENTRALBL. 47. p. I5I.

Huxley, J. S., and Tazelaar, M. A. (1929)
Growth-gradients and the axial relations of the
body. NATURE. 123. p. QI0.

Needham, J. (1926a) The energy sources in
ontogenesis. I. The urea content of the developing avian egg. BRIT. JOURN. Exp. BIOL.

3. p. 189.

—(1926b) II. The uric acid content and the
general protein metabolism of the developing
avian egg. BRIT. JOURN. Exp. BIOL. 4. p. 114.

—(1926c) III. The ammonia content of the developing avian egg and the theory of recapitulation. BRIT. JOURN. Exp. BIOL. 4. p. 145.

—(1927a) IV. The relation between absorption
and combustion of protein and fat in the developing avian egg. BRIT. JouRN. Exp. BIOL.
4. p. 258.

—(1927b) V. The carbohydrate metabolism of the
ceveloping avian egg. BRIT. JOURN. Exp. BIOL.
6.

eg VI. The relation between combustion,
constitution, and concentration in the developing avian embryo. BRIT. JOURN. Exp. BIOL.

5. Pp. 27.
—(1927d) The developmental efficiency of the
avian embryo. BRIT. JOURN. Exp. BIOL. 5. p.

43.

Osborne, T. B., Mendel, L. B., and Ferry, E. lL.
(1912) The réle of gliadin in nutrition. JOURN.
BIOL. CHEM. 12. p. 473.

Prat, S., and Malkovsky, K. M. (1927) Ursachen
des Wachstums und der Zellteilung. Protoplasma. 2, p. 312.

Reiter, T., and Gabor, D.
Strahlung. Berlin.

Robb, R. C. (1929) On the nature of hereditary
size limitation. I. Body growth in giant and
pigmy rabbits. Brit. JouRN. Exp. BIOL. 6.

(1928) Zellteilung und

P- 293.

Rubner, M. (1908) Das Problem der Lebensdauer
und seine Beziehungen zu Wachstum und
Ernéhrung. Miinchen and Berlin.

Shaw, M. E. (1928) A contribution to the study
of relative growth of parts in Inachus dorsettensis. BRIT. JOURN. Exp. BIOL. 6. p. 145.

Strangeways, T. S. P. (1924) Tissue culture in

relation to Growth and Differentiation. Cambridge.
Warburg, O. (1926) Ueber den Stoffwechsel der

Tumoren. Berlin.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXI, No. 3.
