HAVELOCK ELLIS
1859-1939

OW shall we estimate the debt we

owe to Havelock Ellis? If in seeking

an answer to that question we recall
inevitably his monumental Studies in the
Psychology of Sex, it is not from any wish to
underrate the extent or the diversity of the
other subjects over which his intellect ranged
to the enduring benefit of this and succeeding
generations. But this work, one of the
greatest contributions to knowledge ever
made by a single man, epitomizes as none
other of his writings the special qualities of
his genius. It is possible to say, turning the
pages now, that here is a complete and
balanced account of the state of knowledge
and opinion at the time when they were
written. These are works that can never be
superseded or become out of date. They
mark, precisely and in detail, a stage in our
cultural progress. We know that knowledge
will advance, facts will be added, theories
will be discarded; but both as an indispensable preliminary to more recent writings
and as an exact record of the facts as they
were known up to and including the beginning of this century the Studies are as
indispensable to the serious student as when
they first disturbed the complacency of a
hostile world.

But it is to belittle the fundamental
achievement of Havelock Ellis to regard him
merely as an artist, scholar and interpreter.
Havelock Ellis was a revolutionist. He
challenged, not aggressively but by the
character and consistent trend of his literary
output, the prevalent assumptions in his
society that ignorance was a virtue to be
cultivated for its own sake, that prudery was
equivalent to a becoming modesty, and that
sexual physiology, psychology and pathology
were obscenities tricked out to look like
science. The Recorder spoke for most of his
contemporaries when, in summing up the
case against Havelock Ellis’s publisher, he
said: “‘ I am willing to believe that in acting
as you did you might at the first outset

perhaps have been gulled into the belief that
somebody might say that this was a scientific
work. But it is impossible for anybody with
a head on his shoulders to open the book
without seeing that it is a pretence and a
sham, and that it is merely entered into for
the purpose of selling this obscene publication.”” That to-day we can recognize this
judgment for the barbarism that it was is
part of the debt that we owe to Havelock
Ellis. He made no counter-attack, he simply
went on with his self-prescribed task. “ The
decision I have been forced to reach,” he
wrote at the time, ‘‘ seems inevitable. To
wrestle in the public arena for freedom of
speech is a noble task which may be worthily
undertaken by any man who can devote to it
the best energies of his life. It is not, however, a task which I ever contemplated. I
am a student and my path has long been
marked out. I may be forced to pursue it
under unfavourable conditions, but I do not
intend that any consideration should induce
me to swerve from it, nor do I intend to
injure my work or distort my vision of life
by entering upon any struggle.... I
insist upon doing my own work in my own
way.” And so he did, and in the process he
initiated a social revolution which will not
be complete until it has resulted in a transformation of the moral attitudes of a whole
society.

Dr. C. P. Blacker writes: In Havelock
Ellis’s death, the cause of eugenics has lost
one of its most balanced, forceful and influential supporters. But of this Soctety’s policy
he has sometimes been critical.

With our qualified support of birth control
he has always been in sympathy and to our
pre-marital health schedules he accorded, on
several occasions, welcome public praise.

But of one aspect of our policy he strongly
disapproved, namely our approach to the
problem of eugenic sterilization. He opposed
our efforts to get the measure formally

tI
II2

legalized for persons broadly described as
“compos mentis.’”’ In several letters to me,
he expressed strong dissent from the view
that the voluntary sterilization on good
eugenic grounds of a mentally normal person
was illegal. It was the business, he said, of
the lawyers to find ambiguities and uncertainties in the law. He urged the Soczety
to try by all the means at its disposal to
encourage the judicious employment of
voluntary sterilization and thereby to get it
accepted as part of normal medical practice,
rather than to challenge the organized forces
of the opposition by seeking to legalize it by
Act of Parliament. A good precedent for the
course he advocated is the practice of bloodtransfusion. This has been widely adopted
without afterthoughts as to the legality,
under Section 20 of the Offences Against the
Person Act, of puncturing the vein of the
donor. Dr. Ellis gave his view of the legal
position in a memorandum, wherein he contended that, instead of forming a committee
to legalize voluntary sterilization, the Society
would be less harmfully employed in establishing one to legalize voluntary decapillation—i.e. the process of having one’s hair cut!

The resort to Parliament was, in his view,
open to the serious danger that a carefully
planned Bill might well emerge from the
“mangle ’’ of Parliamentary debate so
modified as to bear but a small resemblance
to the Bill which had gone in. Many unnecessary and unwieldy safeguards might be
introduced and the practice might be so
bound up with red tape that the result would,
in his words, be “‘ to sterilize sterilization.”’

His view has been borne out to the extent
that, despite much effort on our part and on
that of others, the unanimous recommendation of an influential and representative
inter-departmental committee has for five
years been ignored.

Mature consideration of Dr. Havelock
Ellis’s contentions in this matter has convinced me of their fundamental soundness.
An approach to the problem is now being
made along lines of which he would have
approved.

A feature of his character which I much
respected, as well as on occasions regretted,

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

was his uncompromising refusal to allow
himself to be lionized. On one occasion I
tried hard to persuade him to give a Galton
Lecture. I went as far as to offer to have him
conveyed to and from his home by car! But
with the utmost courtesy and firmness he
refused.

To myself and to everyone else who
approached him, he was invariably helpful
and encouraging ; and from my talks with
him I derived, even more strongly than from
the reading of his books, a sense of the
wisdom of his judgment and of the balance
and gentleness of his character.

Dr. Russell Brain writes: It would need
a history of English morals to explain the
nuances of the word “ purity,” but it is
significant that a word which in the first
instance implies freedom from alien elements
should have come to mean freedom from
sexual feelings produced by repression and
extolled as a virtue. If to-day the word
“ purity’ in this sense is hardly heard
outside certain religious circles and even
there induces a slightly uncomfortable selfconsciousness we owe it to Havelock Ellis
more than to anyone else. And yet if the
word could be rehabilitated there is no one
to whom it could be applied more aptly. He
was a new type of man, one of the first in our
era to view sex without the emotion of guilt.
He was free from alien elements because to
him there were none. We who come after
him are fortunate that his gifts as an artist
and a writer enabled him to emancipate
others as well as himself. |

Mr. Alec Craig writes: After his severe
illness last year Havelock Ellis, I believe,
realized that the end was not far off. At any
rate he employed the small measure of his
recovered health and strength in setting his
affairs in order.

One task was the disposal of his extensive
collection of books. I say “collection of
books’ rather than “library” because
Havelock Ellis had little of the bibliophile
about him. Although he possessed hundreds
of volumes from all over the world he
appeared to care little for books as books.
He kept them in no formal order but relied
HAVELOCK ELLIS

on his remarkable memory to guide him to
any reference he required. It was in connection with this disposal that I was
privileged to see something of him at a time
when his health made him more of a recluse
than ever. He asked me to help in disposing
of his rarer sexological books, and in carrying
out his wishes with regard to some hundred
volumes I had to visit him both at his house
at Herne Hill and at his country cottage near
Hayward’s Heath. Soon after he gave up
both places and retired to Suffolk, a county
in which many of his family had lived. The
hope that he would there spend a long and
tranquil evening to his life has unhappily
been disappointed.

I had met him previously in connection
with my own work and received most
generous assistance including loans of books
and little gifts of pamphlets.

His bodily weakness did not impair the
interest of his conversation. Over lunch one
sunny day at Hayward’s Heath he recalled
his childhood and how he once stole pennies
to buy pears, his favourite fruit. On another
occasion he talked about his voyages, ending
up by saying: “I liked the sailing ships
best.”” He spoke very sadly of Edward
Carpenter’s last days of infirmity and mentioned that Mrs. Ellis used to go and stay
with him, adding (characteristically) : “‘ But
I would never stay away anywhere.”

But there was no trace of ‘‘ anecdotage ”’
in his talk. He showed a keen appreciation
of present trends and controversies. Only
about the Surrealists he once shook his head
in a puzzled way and said: “ They are
beyond me.” He displayed not the least
bitterness with regard to the indignities to
which his work had been subjected, though
he quite realized that the law which had in
effect condemned him as a common pornographer was unchanged and unrepentant and
ready to treat in a similar fashion younger
writers who are sincerely striving to carry
on his work. He seemed to have a simple and
complete faith in the ultimate triumph of
reason and intellectual freedom.

1I3

Major Leonard Darwin writes: When
studying the ‘‘ Contents ”’ of the first volume
of the EUGENICS REVIEW, namely that for
Igo0g-10, the fourth name on the list of
authors is seen to be that of Havelock Ellis,
the subject dealt with being the sterilization
of the unfit. Is there any other man in England who can now point to a like continuous
and consistent advocacy for thirty years of
this measure of eugenic reform? I was not
then even a member of our Society, and
possibly on that account I am sorry to have
to own that I never became personally
acquainted with this pioneer of our cause.
I can only recall that on one occasion I
accidentally misrepresented his views, with
the result that I received a kindly and
courteous letter pointing out my error. I well
knew the value of his published works, and
cannot but regret that I did not come under
his personal influence. Some of those whose
names appear on the above-mentioned page
are still with us, I am glad to say—Inge,
Tredgold, and Poulton—but the losses we
have sustained, however inevitable, are
grievous. The works of Havelock Ellis will
remain with us permanently to help us in
our long and arduous campaign.

Lord Horder writes: The eugenics cause
has lost a valiant and sturdy supporter in the
death of the veteran Havelock Ellis. For
half a century his work, both in its contributions to sexology and in the more general
advocacy which his exceptional literary gifts
gave to sociological progress, has greatly
strengthened the activities of our Soczety.

It has been given to few men or women to
see their efforts on behalf of their fellows so
rounded off before they joined the great
majority. Ellis knew this and enjoyed a
quiet satisfaction from reflecting upon it.
Over and above his public work there stands
to his credit an enormous number of private
and personal efforts made in connection with
co-workers in the same field. To these he
was a constant source of encouragement, and
by them especially he will be greatly missed.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXXI, No. 2