THE PROBLEM OF MATERNAL MORTALITY
By GEORGE PITT-RIVERS

(Hon. General Secretary, International Unton for the Scientific Investigation of Population
Problems)

I. THE PROBLEM STATED

INCE 1911-15, when the maternal

death-rate was four per thousand live

births, there has been each year a
tendency for the maternal mortality rate in
England to increase or to be maintained.
From time to time the Minister of Health has
called attention to this fact, and the Press has
published its commentaries, accompanied by
medical and lay articles and correspondence.
The various degrees of alarm or surprise
expressed by medical men, lady “ welfare
workers,’’ and others, as well as the confident
prescription of remedial measures have become the familiar annual aftermath of the
publication of the Registrar-General’s and
Ministry of Health’s reports.

An examination of these reports during the
past ten years generally reveals a persistent
similarity. Their main features may be
grouped under the following heads.

(a) After a congratulatory insistence that a
“notable victory has been won since the
beginning of the century in halving the
infant death-rate,”’ usually described as ‘‘ one
of the best tests of health progress ’’ (Sir
Kingsley Wood, Parliamentary Secretary to
the Ministry of Health, October 5th, 1927)
attention is called to:

(5) ‘‘ The situation revealed by the present
maternal mortality rate in this country,
which is certainly disturbing and gives cause
for concern” (Idem. 1927). Similarly, in
1934, the Minister of Health again called
attention (House of Commons, June 2oth,
1934) to the prevailing high incidence of
maternal mortality, which has not been
reduced during the period since antiseptic
methods were first introduced. On the other
hand, while the maternal death-rate as a
whole continues to increase, and shows the
highest recorded for thirty years (it was 4°42

per one thousand live births for England and
Wales), the rate varies in different districts,
and as between rural and urban districts in
the same areas. In the county of Middlesex
the rise has been from 3-85 deaths per one
thousand births in 1932 to 4-77 deaths per
one thousand in 1933.* While returns show a
rising maternal mortality rate they also show
a diminishing birth-rate and a decrease in the
infant mortality rate, which has reached the
lowest recorded. No attempt has been made
to link these accompanying factors in an
etiological survey, beyond a hazarded opinion
that ‘‘ there must be operating some growing
adverse factor or factors, possibly concerned
with changing habits or mode of life.’’t

(c) In the search for the causes of maternal
mortality and puerperal complications, stress
has been laid on the importance of maintaining a strict asepsis. Yet an examination of
the reports shows conclusively that the increase in the total maternal death-rates cannot be attributed to any corresponding
increase in the deaths from puerperal sepsis,
and that specific infection cannot be cited as
an operative factor to account for the general
increase. In England, as in the United States,
maternal deaths from non-puerperal causes
associated with and aggravated by childbirth either remain static or tend to increase.
Although an improvement in _ technical
methods and an increase in hospitalization
has been anticipated as a means whereby to
combat the evil, medical opinion has at the
same time tended to show an increasing lack
of unanimity about the cause of maternal
mortality.

(d) In spite of an admitted etiological
failure in arriving at the causes of maternal
mortality, no lack of enthusiasm has been

* Report by Dr. J. Tate, Medical Officer of Health

for Middlesex.
t Idem.

273
274

shown in medical and lay quarters in proposing increased obstetrical and hospital
services to arrest the unabated maternal
death-rate, which traditional methods, in
spite of a greatly increased expenditure, have
in the past proved ineffective in arresting.

Il. THE DEMOGRAPHIC APPROACH TO
THE PROBLEM, AND THE USE OF
CORRELATIONS

It is then an undeniable fact that, in
spite of all the efforts of public health
authorities and of increased hospitalization,
the maternal mortality rate continues to rise.
It is one of the many problems of population
in which, for its elucidation, the physician
must join with the demographer, anthropologist, biologist, sociologist, and the statistician. This means that the problem cannot
be divorced from the problems of a lowering
birth-rate, of a lowering infant mortality
rate, of a postponement in the nuptial age,
of an increase in induced abortions, due to
the dread of pregnancy and the ineffective
use of contraceptives, and to economic
factors which are largely responsible for the
increasing reluctance on the part of women
in all but the lowest economic strata to bear
large families or any families at all.

It has not been generally recognized that
these phenomena are world-wide among
civilized peoples and that, if investigated in
relation to one another, they are explainable.

In all these departments of research mistaken opinions based on a faulty diagnosis
are prevalent, because of a failure to appreciate that the determining factors in the total
situation are correlated, and cannot be determined in isolation. As an instance could be
mentioned the very prevalent opinions, that
are currently accepted without any evidence,
on the effects of contraceptives on fertility, it
being generally assumed, from opposite points
of view, that the use of contraceptives and
the wide dissemination of birth-control propaganda are responsible for the lower fertility
rate.

With regard to the problem we are
primarily considering, references are frequently made to the growing use of analgesic

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

methods in labour, and, more relevantly, to
operative methods of delivery, increasingly
resorted to when there is insufficient indication for interference. Contrary to general
and popular assumptions these can be
shown to have contributed to, rather than
to have reduced, the high maternal deathrates in precisely those countries where
the greatest interest has been shown in this
problem.*

Associated with the phenomena of a later
age of marriage of both sexes, and of an
increase in celibacy, is the change in the
adult and mating sex-ratio in civilized populations. It is well established that when the
high peak in the growth of population has
been reached, the death-rate will overtake
the birth-rate, within a calculable period not
far distant, and inaugurate a period of population decline. Not only does this tendency
affect the age-grouping of the population
whereby the proportion of young to old
diminishes, but the adult and mating sexratio is also affected in such a way as to
bring about an increase in the proportion of
adult males to adult females of marriageable
age. This decrease in the proportion of
marriageable females, and the postponement
in the nuptial age, tends to operate unfavourably on the marriage rate and to increase the
number of celibates.

Il. WORLD REVIEW

In the United States maternal mortality
appears to have increased during the first
quarter of the century.f It also increased
during the first two decades in Germany,
Scotland, and Sweden. During the same
period it remained stationary in some fifteen
other European countries.

Basing our comparisons on the IgoI-Io

* It is not denied on the other hand that obstetricians
are beginning to appreciate the correctness of this view.
Cit.: ‘‘ The Responsibilities of the Obstetrician in the
Problems of Population,’’ by Dr. G. W. Kosmak,
Editor, American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology.
Ex. Proceedings Second General Assembly of the
International Union for the Scientific Investigation of
Population Problems; ed. G. Pitt-Rivers, 1932.

f¢ Cit., Woodbury, R. M., ‘‘ Maternal Mortality ”’ ;
U.S.A. Dept. of Labour; Children’s Bureau, Bulletin
No. 158, 1926.
THE PROBLEM OF MATERNAL MORTALITY

averages in New Zealand, Australia, United
States, Scotland, France, Spain, Belgium,
and Switzerland, maternal mortality averaged
between five and six per one thousand live
births. This rate is roughly twice as high as
it was in Sweden, Italy, and Norway, where
it averaged less than three.* Since 1920,
where available records are complete, the
following comparisons may be made, though
for different periods :

Low rates (1923-7) : Denmark 2-6; Norway 2°8; Finland 3:1. (1925-7): France
2°5; Holland 2-4. (1922-6): Italy 2-8.

High rates (1921-5): U.S.A. registration
area 8-3; (1923-7): Belgium 5-6; Australia 5-5 ; Germany 5:1; South Africa 4-9;
New Zealand 4°8; Switzerland 4:4.

While standards of accuracy and statistical
methods vary among different countries,
making international comparisons in rates a
matter of considerable difficulty, the correlations and inverse correlations in all countries
having a well-established bureau of the
census can be well supported by similar
correlations established by statistical comparisons between different districts over
periods of time in the same country. For
purposes of internal comparison the careful
reports furnished by the statistical and
medical health authorities in the United
States of America are of great value,
particularly since the United States has
been widely held to show one of the

highest puerperal death-rates in the civilized

world. |

A recent review by the New York Academy
of Medicine Committee on Public Health
Relationst has again emphasized the failure
to effect any reduction in maternal mortality,
more noticeable in relation to the general
death-rate, and in the infant death-rate.
Public health work appears to have effected
reductions in infant mortality and in diseases
of the respiratory system and the alimentary
tract ; on the other hand there has been an
actual increased mortality in infantile diarthoea and enteritis, congenital debility and

* Pitt-Rivers, Clash of Culture, pp. 83-4.

¢ Maternal Mortality in New York City, 1934,
published by The Commonwealth Fund. Investigations
into 2,041 cases.

275

malformations,* and in the cancer rate of
the general population.

On previous occasions I have called attention to figures which showed that in New
York State, in spite of the great extension of
public health centres and maternal welfare
clinics, there was no corresponding fall in
maternal mortality. tf

During the 1915-25 period in New York
State the deaths from puerperal causes numbered 15,876, representing a death-rate of
58°5 per ten thousand total births, or the
death of one mother in every 171 births;
while one in every nine deaths of women
between the ages of 15 and 44, irrespective
of conjugal state, was due to puerperal

. Causes.

In the age-group 25-9 maternal mortality
accounted for one in six deaths from all
causes, being the second most frequent cause
of death, the first being tuberculosis. The
fact which I am most concerned to emphasize, however, is that during this period
deaths from puerperal causes had actually
increased in the urban districts while they
had decreased in the rural. Neither antenatal care nor obstetrical services succeeded
in lowering the rate, although during the same
periods the infant death-rate fell steadily.

In accounting for this variation and the
lower maternal mortality in rural as compared with urban districts, it had to be
admitted that the rural practitioner usually
lacks facilities for the needless obstetrical
interference which has been suggested as one
of the leading causes of excessive mortality.{
Whatever conclusions may be drawn from
the facts, they can contribute little to
support demand for increasing the establishment of obstetrical clinics and hospitalization.

Among the causative factors cited by
medical statisticians to account for the
increase in maternal mortality mention may
be made of the continued reduction in the

* The Australian Commonwealth Bureau of Census
Statistics include congenital debility and malformations
as a classified cause of infant death.

¢ DePort, J. V., Maternal Mortality and Sill Births
in New York State, 1915-25; New York, 1928. Cu4t.,
Review, Pitt-Rivers, EUGENICS REviEWw, October 1928.

¢ DePort, op. cit.
276

size of families, which gives a greater proportion of first confinements. Reference is also
increasingly given to the assumed increasing
frequency of induced abortions and in the
frequency of efforts to avoid childbirth after
pregnancy has begun, and, as has already
been mentioned, of the growing tendency on
the part of women to demand instrumental
interference and the desire to make childbearing as easy and painless as possible. In
this connection reference may be made to
the inquiry into 2,000 cases attended in the
St. Bartholomew’s Hospital district, which
showed that septic infection followed instrumental delivery in ten times the number of
cases following normal delivery.*

IV. THE ABORTION RATE AND THE
USE OF CONTRACEPTIVES

In view of frequent references to the use of
abortifaciants and to induced abortions as
a factor conducive to subsequent puerperal
complications, some mention should be made
of the demographic indications which bear on
this subject. In the first place it must be
recognized that ineffective contraceptives
lead either to abortion or to unwanted pregnancies and illegitimate births. Since the
evidence for any rise in the illegitimacy rate
is frequently challenged, the following figures
are offered for what they are worth. The
rises are noticeable in the same countries, and
no comparisons are made between different
countries where different customs obtain.

According to the 1929 census for England
and Wales the proportion of illegitimate
births rose from 4:50 per cent. in 1928 to
4°55 per cent. in 1929. The maximum since
Igor was reached in the exceptional war
year of 1918, but the proportion of illegitimate to total births in the period 1901-5 was
given as 3°95 per cent.

The live illegitimate births registered in
1929 was 29,307. But in relation to the
abortion rate, for which we have no figures,
though all the indications suggest a rise, we
have to remember that a large proportion of
the abortion rate is potentially a reduction
in the total illegitimacy rate. Furthermore,

*Interim Report of the Departmental Committee on
Maternal Mortality and Morbidity, 1930.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

only a proportion of ante-nuptial or extranuptial conceptions result in illegitimate
birth. It is clear that a large proportion of
marriages following ante-nuptial conceptions is not in anticipation of marriages
already arranged, but is forced on the parties
by the condition of the woman and the
failure of contraceptive methods used. In
this connection Coghlan’s study of the New
South Wales vital statistics for the decennial
period of 1891-1900 is of interest.* Twentytwo thousand out of 85,000 marriages during
the period were contracted after conception
had taken place. Coghlan shows that in every
1,000 first-born children, 510 are of post-nuptial conception, and of the remainder, or antenuptial conceptions, rather less than half
are legitimate and rather more than half,
or 257, are illegitimate. The proportion of
seventh-month children which may, accord- .
ing to this calculation, have been erroneously
included in the ante-nuptial conceptions, is
very small, and could not appreciably affect
the proportions.

From the census figures for England and
Wales, comparing the rates for I921 and
1929, we find in the birth-rate per one
thousand total population: 22-4 per one
thousand in 1921, and 16-3 per one thousand
in 1922, or a decrease in the birth-rate of 6-1
per one thousand. The illegitimate rate was
I-02 in 1921, compared with 0-74 in 1929 ;
equivalent to a drop of only 0-28 per one
thousand. That is to say, there was a decrease
in the legitimate birth-rate of 5-82 compared
with a decrease of 0°28 in the illegitimate
rate. Thus, taking the nearest integer, we
find that, out of every twenty-four fewer
births per four thousand of the total population only one fewer birth per four thousand
of population represents the decrease in the
rate of illegitimacy.

The proportionate decrease in illegitimacy
is shown to be appreciably less than the
decrease in legitimate births. It compares
as 704 legitimate births in 1929 to one
thousand in 1921, according to the corrected
ratio by standard age rates, as against 804
illegitimate births in 1929 to one thousand in

* T. A. Coghlan, The Decline in the Birth-vate of New
South Wales. .
THE PROBLEM OF MATERNAL MORTALITY

1921. It must be allowed that this affords
some evidence of a fairly substantial rise in
the comparative rate of illegitimacy, apart
from the illegitimate or extra-nuptial conception rate, for which we have no figures. It
also affords some indications that the induced
abortion rate, for which we also have no
figures, must be assumed to have increased at
least proportionately. While it is manifestly
impossible to estimate the number of selfinduced and “ illegal ’’ abortions resulting in
injury though not in death, it may be noted
that of the 1,956 deaths directly due to childbearing investigated by the Departmental
Committee on maternal mortality between
1928-30, 168, or 10°5 per cent. of the total,
were classed under abortion. The deaths
due to criminal abortion recorded by the
Registrar-General in 1928 totalled 57, while
during the same year clinically induced
abortions followed by death from sepsis
numbered 224.

The suggestion made here, which further
research may determine, is not that the presumed increase in the abortion rate can be
held to be an operative factor in the maintenance of a high maternal mortality rate,
but rather that it has tended to increase the
sterility rate amongst the ante-nuptial or
unmarried women, in addition, of course, to
any other cause of sterility already operative,
such as gonorrheea.

V. MATERNAL MORTALITY AND INFANT MORTALITY—INVERSE CORRELATIONS AND CONCLUSIONS

Quite unreasonably, the reduction in the
rate of infant mortality has been hailed by
medical men as well as laymen as evidence of
a higher standard of national health and
fitness. For instance, Sir Arthur Newsholme
wrote: “infant mortality, the deaths of
children under one year of age, is the most
sensitive index of social welfare and of
sanitary improvement which we possess.”’
During the first two decades of the twentieth
century New Zealand led the world with the
lowest infant mortality rate and had the
highest maternal mortality rate. New
Zealand had the lowest infantile death-rate

277

(1922) of 42 per one thousand live births,
followed by Australia with 53. At the other
end of the scale Chile, in 1914, showed the
highest white-infant death-rate in the world,
of 286, while in the 1906-10 period it was 315.
The average for the white races was (I90I-I10)
about 150, and for the negroes of the United
States 241 for males and 206 for females.
Throughout Europe and America reports
have shown a tendency for a higher infant
mortality in urban than in rural districts.
There is also a tendency in European countries for infant mortality to increase downwards along the social scale. The countries
showing the lowest infant mortality rates,
during the early periods of recording before
1900, have also been the countries that succeeded in making the greatest percentage
reductions during the first decade of the
twentieth century.* In England and Wales
infant mortality declined from 109 in Ig1I-15
to 74 in 1929. New Zealand, the country
with the lowest infant mortality rate, showed
at the same time (Ig10-20) the highest
maternal mortality rate of about six per
one thousand live births, followed by
Australia with the next highest maternal
mortality rate, while Chile had the lowest
maternal mortality rate amongst the white
races. Public health work has certainly
reduced infant mortality, but it is precisely
in those countries where the reduction in
infant mortality has been effected that the
maternal death-rate is correspondingly high.
In England as in the United States the
maternal death-rate has actually increased
in the urban districts compared to the rural
districts in the same states in the same
countries ; that is to say, it has increased
precisely where hospitalization is greatest.
Neither ante-natal care nor obstetrical services have succeeded in lowering the rate.
Whatever conclusions may be drawn, this is
a statement of fact which cannot be denied.
In New Zealand, where European obstetrical
methods have been introduced among the
Maoris, the consequence appears to have
been to favour an increasing tendency of
puerperal complications among the Maori

* East, Mankind at the Cross-roads.
278

women. Yet, over the same periods in the
same countries the infant death-rates have
fallen steadily. In England we have reached
the lowest infant death-rate (under one year
of age) and the highest maternal death-rate
over a period of thirty years.

In both New Zealand and Australia, which
led the world in a low infant mortality rate,
cancer was annually responsible for more
deaths (1917-21) than could be assigned to
any other cause except diseases of the heart.
Comparing the cancer mortality rates in
England, Australia and New Zealand, the
actual annual rate, as well as the rate of
increase during the ten-year period ending
1921, is higher in the same order that the
infant death-rate is lower. Chile, on the
other hand, with the highest infant mortality
rate of any white country, showed one of the
lowest rates of cancer mortality. The next
highest cause of infant mortality in Australia
and New Zealand is assigned to congenital
debility and malformations. Here again there
is no sign of decrease. Since 1920 nearly half
the deaths of children under one year of age
in Australia are attributed to congenital
causes. New York figures, as already mentioned, show an increased mortality in infantile diarrhoea and enteritis. The mortality
figures do not, however, represent the gravity
of the eugenic aspect of the question, since
for every infant death due to congenital
causes there are many survivors who, if they
reach maturity, suffer permanently from the
handicap of a congenital defect.*

The report issued by Sir James Galloway’s
Committee on the National Standard of
Physical Fitness as the result of an analysis
of medical board examinations, 1917-18,
showed that two in every three of the men of
military age (17-18) failed to reach the not
very high standard which qualified them as
At or fit to shoulder a rifle in the firing-line.
It is estimated that one in 120 persons is
feeble-minded, one in 200 is insane, one in
every ten too sickly or feeble-minded to
be capable of supporting themselves.f In

* Cit., Pitt-Rivers, Clash of Culture, ch. v.

¢ Cit., Mental Deficiency Committee of 1929, and
reference by Lord Horder in address, Eugenics and the
Doctor, pub. B.M.J., Dec. 9th, 1933.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the year 1933 there was a total loss of
29,000,000 weeks’ work, equivalent to over
half a million persons for twelve months, due
to illness, for which insurance benefit was
payable.

Taking the maternal mortality rates
IQOI-I0 averages already referred to in New
Zealand, Australia, United States, Scotland,
France, Spain, Belgium, Switzerland, Italy,
Sweden, and Norway, the groups with the
lower maternal mortality have the higher
infant death-rate. The latest figures from
Canada show the same inverse tendencies.
Where, as already stated, the infant deathrate has been most conspicuously reduced,
the group of infant deaths from congenital
causes and malformations remains unaffected.

We are led to the following conclusions.
“ The significance is not so much that at any
one time and in any one district a low infant
and a high maternal mortality are most
frequently co-present, but that the rate of
maternal mortality tends to increase where
the infant mortality decreases, and that the
lowered infant mortality only results in a
constitutional impoverishment of parturient
mothers, reflected in a high or higher maternal
mortality rate in the next generation, sixteen
to thirty years later. The point is that
medical services and obstetrical advances
cannot and do not help. It is quite unreasonable to hail the reduction in the rate of infant
mortality as evidence of a higher standard of
national health and fitness, since the reverse
is much nearer the truth. But the truth, of
course, is likely to be unpopular, especially
with medical officers of health, who wish to
conceal the fact that their expensive services
for alleviating symptoms are actually aggravating causes.

“* We have succeeded in lowering the infant
mortality rate at the price of a high maternal
mortality rate and a constitutional and
functional impoverishment of the quality of
our breeding mothers. Survival of the strains
of pregnancy and parturition depends far
more on constitutional fitness and stamina
than on medical preparation and obstetrical
assistance. The child’s chances of survival,
however, are increasingly dependent, not
THE PROBLEM OF MATERNAL MORTALITY 279

upon its constitutional and hereditary robustness, but upon its protection from bacterial
attack and the artificial and medical assistance it receives. In short, we save the weak
or defective potential mothers at birth and
during childhood, who become increasingly

unfitted themselves to survive the test of
giving birth. The only remedy is the eugenic
one of caring for the finer stock rather than
subsidizing the diseased and defective.’’*

* Pitt-Rivers, Weeds in the Garden of Marriage,
PP. 73-4.

Statistical Studies in Genetics
and Human Inheritance

ANNALS OF EUGENICS

Edited by R. A. FISHER
(Founded by K. PEARSON)

The forthcoming issue, Volume VI, Part II, will contain articles by

R, A. FISHER
M. N. KARN
R. R. KUCZYNSKI

F. YATES
L. S. PENROSE
ELIOT SLATER

Subscription, in advance, 50/- per volume. Four quarterly parts
obtainable separately at 15/- each from Galton Laboratory, Gower
Street, London, W.C.

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVI, No. 4.
