WAR AND EUGENICS’
By LEWIS F. RICHARDSON, D.Sc. (Physics), F.R.S.

ARS have been regarded from
many points of view. There are

military historians who write about.

the technique of winning wars. There are
popular romances which emphasize the heroism of their own side and the wickedness of
their opponents. The adventure and fun in
war have been picked out by Alexandre
Dumas and by Ian Hay. There are also
literary historians who, long after the event,
make carefully impartial summaries of the
motives of both sides. Apart from descriptions of particular wars there are investigations of wars in general with a view to their
avoidance. The Nye Committee (1935)
investigated the influence of arms mariufacturers, so did Noel-Baker (1936). One
volume of Pitrim Sorokin’s Social and
Cultural Dynamics (1937) is concerned with
wars, ancient and modern. Quincy Wright
has published a comprehensive Study of War
(1942), its aim being not to win wars but to
prevent them. My own work has the same
purpose. The findings may seem emotionally
bleak. It is impossible to combine honest
research with a gratification of any one
nation’s patriotic feelings. The Eugenics
Society is notable for having had the intellectual courage to attend to emotionally
embarrassing problems. I shall rely on that
courage here. My results are offered as true.
Truth, even if at first it seems like tribulation,
should in the long run yield peaceable fruit.

Loss of Life Caused by Quarrels

Every accountant is interested in both
income and expenditure. Although the main
concern of eugenists is with the income of
human life, they may on occasion be willing
to attend to an item on the other side of the
account.

Anyone who tries to make a list of “ all
the wars ”’ is embarrassed by a multitude of
minor incidents which perhaps ought to be

* A revision of a paper read before the Eugenics
Society on December 6th, 1949.

25

included. Thus Quincy Wright (1942),
having made a list of 278 wars, remarked
that probably ten times as many might have
been added. The astronomers count stars
by first arranging them according to brightness. I applied this idea to wars by first
arranging them according to the number of
people killed. Statements of casualties are
sometimes uncertain by a factor as larg® as
three. So the subdivisions had to be broad.
It seemed statistically convenient to proceed
by factors of ten. The first world war caused
about 10 million deaths. The next smaller
magnitude of wars was taken to have caused
each about a million deaths, the next 100,000,
the next 10,000. But why stop there?
Although smaller incidents would not ordinarily be called wars, it seemed natural to
extend the classification to quarrels which
had caused respectively about 1,000 or 100
or I0 or xz deaths. The last class are.
ordinarily called murders. Some name was
then needed for any member of this wide
class. At first I called them all fatal quarrels.
But a more appropriate adjective would be
lethal or deadly.

Let the ‘‘ magmiude’”’ of any deadly quarrel
be defined to be the logarithm, to the base
ten, of the number of persons who died because
of that quarrel. The middles of our successive
classes are then at magnitudes 7, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2,
1,0. To make a clean cut between adjacent
classes we need to know, not the middles of
the classes, but their boundaries. Let these
boundaries be at 7-5, 6°5, 5°5, 4°5, 3°5,
2°5 .. . on the scale of magnitude. For
example, magnitude 3-5 lies between 3,162
and 3,163 deaths, magnitude 4°5 lies between
31,622 and 31,623 deaths, magnitude 5-5 lies
between 316,227 and 316,228 deaths, and
soon. This concept of magnitude has several
functions: (i) It tidies an intellectual
muddle ; (ii) It helps the research-worker to
decide what was important, apart from his
national prejudices ; (iii) It disguises the
distressful facts, so as to allow one to think

D
26

about them undistracted by emotion. Such
emotional detachment has, however, its
dangers for society.

The whole range of deadly quarrels is
shown in Fig. 1, which is reproduced, together with a numerical digest, by permission
of the American Statistical Association of
Washington, D.C. (Richardson, 1948,c). The
enormous ranges necessitate logarithmic
scales.

WORLD -TOTALS
3 FOR 126 YEARS
2 1820 to 1945

‘

°

=

M

p =LOG, (NUMBER OF QUARRELS PER UNIT RANGE OF DEAD)
o |

oo

 

° ‘ 2 3 4 S$ 6 7 8 9
pt = LOG, (NUMBER OF QUARREL-DEAD)
FIQURE 1. THE WHOLE RANGE OF FATAL QUARRELS
THE HORIZONTAL BCALE EXTENDS FROM A SINGLE PERSON ON THE LEFT TO
THE POPULATION OF THE WORLD ON THE RIGHT. TRE THREE DOTS AT THE LEFT
HAND TOP REPRESENT THE MURDERS. THE SHORT HORIZONTAL LINES REPRESENT
ESE LINES

THE WARS GROUPED BY MAGNITUDES. ONE OF TH 18s DOTTED, BECAUSE
IT GHOULD BE RAISED TO AN UNKNOWN HEIGHT. :

Fig. 1

There is a gap between the small wars and
the murders, because world totals are here
lacking. The slope of the graph between
magnitudes 2 and 1 is, however, supported
by some local samples, one of banditry in
Manchukuo and one of ganging in Chicago.

By these and other methods the, total
number of persons who died because of

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

quarrels has been computed and is summarized in Table I.

TABLE I
THE TOTAL NUMBER OF PERSONS WHO DIED
BECAUSE OF QUARRELS DURING THE 126
YEARS FROM a.pD. 1820 To 1945
Ends of range Total number

of magnitude of deaths in

millions How computed

744 36

6+4 6:7 By summation over a

5+4 3°4 list of quarrels

44 0°75

3+4 0°30 From the circular arc

2+4 0°40 in Fig. (1) by the

1+4 22 method described in

(Richardson, 1948, c)

ot4 9°7 Fromcriminal statistics

Total 59

A remarkable feature of the above table
is that the heavy loss of life occurred at the
two ends of the sequence of magnitudes,
namely the world wars and the murders.
The small wars contributed much less to
the total. The total deaths because of quarrels should be compared with the total deaths
from all causes. There are particulars given
by de Jastrzebski (1929) and in the Statistical
Year Books of the League of Nations, which
allow the total to be estimated. A mean
world population of 1-5 x 10° and a mean
death rate of twenty per thousand per year
would give during 126 years 3:8 x I0°
deaths from all causes. Of these the part
caused by quarrels was 1-6 per cent. This
is less than one might have guessed from the
large amount of attention which quarrels
attract. Those who enjoy wars can excuse
their taste by saying that wars after all are
much less deadly than disease.

Intermarriage as a Pacifier

The emotions aroused by quarrels are
intense, especially if the quarrel threatens to
cause loss of life. What can be strong enough
to compete with such an emotional disposition? Modern war affects everybody. In
present democratic conditions the drift
towards, or away from, war is influenced by
whole populations. The formal decision to
make, or not to make, war, may be legally
reserved for a few statesmen; but in fact
leaders are often pushed from_ behind.
WAR AND EUGENICS a9

Abstract ideas which might have convinced an intellectual statesman of the
eighteenth century may, therefore, be of
little avail to-day. As to what might influence the population in general, it would
be wiser to take a hint from a request brought
by a small boy to a public library: he said
‘““One love story and one murder; for my
mother.” The librarians, of whom I was
one, felt that the child had summarized the
popular taste.

The strongest motives that bind ordinary
individuals to live harmoniously together are
sexual attraction and family affection. Let
us, therefore, consider the possibilities of
international marriage, on account of the
strength of the emotions which marriage
involves.

Various objections to international marriage will readily occur to you.

First, the social relations might be
strained. A bachelor said to me: “Is it
worth while to abolish war at the expense
of ruining all marriages?” In Shakespeare’s All's Well that Ends Well, Bertram
remarks that ‘“‘ War is no strife, to the dark
house and the detested wife.”

Second, the genetic constitution of the
offspring may be unsatisfactory for certain
crosses. Notable at present is Dr. Malan’s
policy of racial segregation (Apartheid) in
South Africa. ‘All marriages between
Europeans and non-Europeans will be prohibited’ (1948, p. 8). I shall return to
genetic questions later. The difficulty, of
course, is to distinguish between a dislike of
those manners and customs which could
be changed by education, and a reasonable
fear of irreversibility. By irreversibility I
mean that it may be very easy to let foreign
genes into a population, and almost impossible to select those genes out again.

Third, that international marriage on
any large and rapid scale is impracticable,
and does not meet the demand of those
peacemakers who insist that ‘‘ We must do
something now !| ”

In view of these objections I wish to point
out that the problem of pacification goes back
as far as history ; and that there have been
some very long delays between aspiration

and satisfaction. Leonardo da Vinci made a
drawing of a flying machine. Four centuries
of mechanical invention and discovery, much
of it at first sight irrelevant to the problem
of flight, intervened before any man flew.
The results of aviation are partly joyous,
partly disastrous. Although the problem of
pacification feels urgent, there may be no
quick solution. There is a scarcity of reliable
pacifying influences; so that peace-makers
may have no option but to attend to methods
that would be both troublesome and slow.
It may be necessary to plan now for our
grandchildren or great-grandchildren.

Other Pacificatory Influences

The following other influences have been
mentioned or advocated as pacifiers: (i)
distraction by sports, (ii) hating a different
group of people, (iii) hating the evil in oneself,
(iv) armed strength, (v) collective security,
(vi) international trade, (vii) plenty of
living space, (viii) fewer frontiers, (ix) a
common government, (x) a common language, (xi) a common religion. I wish to say
something about each of these in turn.
The list is perhaps not complete.

Distraction by sports. Alistair Cooke, in a
B.B.C. broadcast on October 7th, 1947, from
New York, stated that the newspaper headline “‘ Reds have atom bomb,” though large,
was not so large as a headline announcing the
defeat of the New York baseball team. The
Communists were temporarily forgotten during an interest in baseball. It seems,
however, hardly likely that the release of
international tension by such distraction
could be maintained permanently.

Hating a different group of people. This is
an ancient device, used, according to Shakespeare, by an Archbishop of Canterbury, to
protect the Church by setting King Henry V
against France. The same device was used
by the Nazis when they focused German
hate on to the Jews. The present example
of this psychological mechanism is perhaps
accidental rather than deliberate: during
1945-9 British hate for the Germans has
diminished while British hate for the Russians has increased. These are special cases.
of the Freudian doctrine of the permanence
28

and transferability of affect. Some other
political examples have been collected by me
in a paper soon to appear (19500). Among
psychological processes, the diversion of
hatred seems to be unusually mechanistic
and reliable. But it does not tend to pacify
the world as a whole. |

Hating the evil in oneself. C. G. Jung
has recently suggested (1947) that people
should take their political quarrels home into
themselves. Personally I view this recommendation with the greatest respect.

Armed strength. This has been the policy
in which many nations have put their trust.
Few people feel the need for any statistical
test of this policy, because the proposition
that ‘if we are strong, we shall not be attacked,’’ seems to most people quite obvious.
We reach that conclusion by merely letting
our thoughts flow easily in an instinctive
channel. Moreover factual examples of the
success of the policy are easy to find. In
February, 1948, some Guatemalans proposed
to invade British Honduras, to which
Guatemala had long laid claim. Then
Britain sent warships carrying land forces,
and the active threat from Guatemala
subsided ; although up to September, 1940,
there was no agreed settlement (K. 9153,
9636, 10277). Please notice, however,
that the powers of Britain and of Guatemala
were very unequal. When disputes have
occurred between nations of roughly equal
power, the effects of armed strength have
been remarkably different.

Fig. 2 shows a statistical test of the policy
of armed strength for all the nations which
took part in the first world war. For comparison with the ancient Roman adage that
“Tf you desire peace, you should prepare
for war’”’ the abscissa represents a nation’s
insurance against war, and the ordinate
represents its subsequent sufferings by war.
The same theory asserts that the correlation
should be negative ; that the points should
slope from the left down to the right.

About the year 1910 an American professor, whose name I have unfortunately
forgotten, published a book in which he
said, “‘ What you prepare for, that you will
get.”” On his theory the points should slope

THE EUGENICS

\

DEAD, PERCENT

ARMED

ARMED DEAD, PERCENT.

REVIEW

EMPIRES ARE MARKED
6 €
&ND REGARDED AS WHOLES
3

&

w

twang €
eurZania
MONTE REGRO

he

oa €.
iraiad ¢.

muss ian €.

| SCLC aartian «
save

 

Os 19 98
PREWAR ‘DEFENCE’, £ PER HEAD PER YEAR

Fig. 2

up towards the right. The facts in the diagram do not support either of these conflicting theories. The correlation is so small
as not to be worth calculating.

Perhaps, however, it was injudicious to
divide the pre-war defence expenditure by
the population of the whole empire. So in
Fig. 3 the divisor is the population of the
metropolitan core only. But again neither
of the opposing theories is confirmed. One

EMPIRES ARE REPRESENTED
BY THEIA

METROPOLITAN CORES

Tenen pr Tumsct

2b suragaia
TENEGRO
wowres

q 3’

@
' SLAVS OF mussiA

       

JAPAN
SMITZERLAND DENMARN HOLLAND

 

° NOMMAY SWEDEN 19, re
PREWAR ‘DEFENCE’, & PER HEAQ PEA YEAR
Fig. 3
WAR AND EUGENICS

may conclude, from this sample, that the
effects of armed strength were erratic and
untrustworthy. Further particulars can be
seen in the microfilm Arms and Insecurity
(Richardson, 1949). ,
The process whereby armed strengt
antagonizes Great Powers, instead of pacifying them, has been analysed from the finan
cial point of view by comparing their total —

‘defence’ expenditure with the rate at
which that total increased. The main cleavage of policy in Europe in the year 1913 was
that between France and Russia on one side
versus Germany and Austria-Hungary on
the other. Britain and Italy were not then
so obviously attached. The total of the
defence expenditures of the four Powers
chiefly concerned is stated as U + V in
Table II and is plotted in Fig. 4 against its
time rate. These are quotations from a
monograph published by the British Psychological Society (Richardson, 1939). A straight
line appears. The more those Powers spent
on so-called defence, the more rapidly did
they increase that expenditure.
Taste IT

THE ARMS RACE OF 1909-14
Defence budgets expressed in millions of £ sterling

1909 I9I10 IQII I9I12 1913
France -- 486 50°90 57° 63:2 74°7
Russia - 66:7. 68:5 70:7 81-8 g2°0
Germany - 63°% 62°0 62:5 68:2 95'4
Austria-Hungary ... 20°8 2374 24:6 25:5 26:9
Total=U + V__...199:2 204'8 214:9 238-7 289-0
Time= A(U+V)/ At 56 107% 238 503

(U+ V) at same date 202°0 209°8 2268 263°8

 

Fig. 4

The same arms race was afterwards reexamined much more thoroughly with the
results shown in Fig. 5.

TRIPLE ALLIANCE

U, toe

 

ute TRIPLE ENTENTE
Fig. 5
The Triple Entente was composed of

France, Russia and Britain. The Triple
Alliance was composed of Germany, AustriaHungary and Italy. Their ‘‘ defence ’’ expenditures were expressed as sterling and were
denoted respectively by U, and U,. The
main diagram shows how the two sides went
along together. The top left hand inset is of
special interest. Here S=U, + Ug; pS is
the mean of S for successive pairs of years ;
and 8S is the annual increment. A strong
positive correlation appears, confirming that
the more they spent on so-called defence,
the faster did they increase that expenditure.
Further particulars are offered in the form
of microfilm (Richardson, 1949). The
simplest mathematical description of mutual
reprisals is the pair of simultaneous differential equations.
dx ay

—=y > ——*
at dt

I started from that idea in 1918. Various
other terms were afterwards put in, so as to
make the equations describe the financial
statistics of the arms races.

This financial analysis was suggested by a
psychological analysis, namely that one of
the usual reactions to threats is to make
counter-threats, if possible of a stronger
character. There is mutual stimulation by
mutual threats. Gregory Bateson has provided a suitable technical term to describe
the process. He calls it “‘ schismogenesis,”’
that is to say the growth of a cleavage.
30 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

In his book Naven (1936) he described two
kinds of schismogenesis in the Iatmul tribe
in New Guinea.

In order to explain national moods during
the first world war I found it necessary
to take a hint from depth-psychology so as
to regard each mood as consisting of a

Sudden

likened to the police versus a criminal;
whereas wars of one nation versus one nation
may be likened to ordinary quarrelling.
The number of deadly quarrels of each type
‘“y versus s”’ is shown in Table III, which
is quoted by permission of the Royal
Statistical Society (Richardson, 1947).

 

Long Long Sudden
arms race outbreak attrition armistice
{ Friendly \ Friendly Hostile Hostile War-weary
> > > >
Friendly Hostile Friendly War-weary Hostile

conscious part and a subconscious part.
The following summary is quoted from a
recent paper in Psychometrika (Richardson,
1948, a and 6). The name of the overt mood
is set above that of the subconscious mood.
See the adjoining table, which spreads across
both columns.

The changes of mood on one side of the
conflict are supposed to have been caused
partly by the existence of moods on the other
side: again a mutual stimulation. The
mathematics is rather like that of epidemics
of disease. I took the first notion of it from
a paper by Kermack and McKendrick on
cholera (1927).

From all this mass of evidence I conclude
that the popular policy of armed strength is
untrustworthy ; on some occasions it has
been a pacifier; on others a dangerous
irritant leading to war. Let us pass on to the
next policy, namely :

Collective security. The theory is that the
large majority of peace-loving nations should
forcibly repress a small minority of aggressive nations just as the police force suppresses a small minority of criminals.
Ranyard West (1942) has pointed out that
in the course of a few years a nation which
we may have been accustomed to regard as
criminal may be found to have joined the
police, and vice-versa. We may, however,
consider the proposition that justice concerning any one international dispute is to
be decided by the nations in majority on
that occasion, apart from whatever opinions
they held previously. If so, then wars of
many nations versus one nation may be

 

TABLE ITI
DEADLY QUARRELS OF ALL MAGNITUDES
GREATER THAN 3°55 WHICH ENDED FROM
A.D. 1820 TO 1939 INCLUSIVE

6 o There were also, beyond
5 0 Oo bounds of this table :
4 © O O 2 wars of 7 versus I, I war
S 3 o I 0 oO of 9 versus I, I war of 16
2 3 2 I r o versus 5. Thus making a
I 4224 5 5 2 1 total of 91 wars
Ir 23 4 5 6

There were thus forty-two quarrels of the
type one versus one, and only eleven quarrels
of four or more versus one. It is seen that
collective security is a new proposal and is
contrary to national habits.

International trade. A more direct opponent to the indignation and suspicion of
the arms race is needed. In 1938 I argued
thus. The opposite to war is not peace in
the sense of tranquil inattention to the
doings of foreigners. The opposite to war is
active co-operation with foreigners. Of the
various forms of co-operation, foreign trade
then occupied the greatest number of
persons. Therefore, foreign trade seemed the
most hopeful antidote to war. This supposition was later examined in connection with
the financial statistics of the arms race, and
those of the simultaneous foreign trade.
The results are available in detail only in the
form of microfilm (Richardson, 1949). The
rapidly falling foreign trade of the years
1929-33 coincided with a steady high value
of the ‘instability co-efficient ’’ deduced
from the expenditures on armaments. It
would be reasonable, therefore, to expect
that a rapid increase in foreign trade would
WAR AND EUGENICS 31

occur along with a less instability of the
political relations. But to quell the subsequent arms race of 1933-9 by reducing the
instability co-efficient to zero would have
required, if proportional, a boom of foreign
trade two and a half times more rapid than
the exceptional slump of 1929-33. In brief:
foreign trade is a pacifier, but not nearly
strong enough.

Plenty of living space. The standard
treatise on this subject was written by our
President, Sir Alexander Carr-Saunders
(1936). I will only remind you that there are
two motives: to seek more space and to
seek more company. At first glance these
motives seem simply opposite. Further
consideration shows that their interaction
is more complicated. Sir James Jeans
(1929) €xplained how stars would be formed
in a hypothetical primordial gas by the
interaction between gas pressure and gravitational attraction. A slight modification of
Jeans’s theory enabled me to explain how
towns would be formed by the interaction
between population pressure and gregarious
attraction (1941).

Fewer frontiers. There is a positive correlation of 0:77 between the number of frontiers
which a State has, and the number of its
external wars. This is shown by Fig. 6
(Richardson, 1950). For the peace of the
world it would be desirable to have fewer
frontiers; but, of course, they are not
easily altered.

20 25

WARS
15

EXTERNAL
10

 

10 a)
FRONTIERS
Fig. 6

preparation. The results for the world as a
whole are shown in Table IV.

TaBLe IV |
Persons in each cell 10,000,000 | 1,000,000 , 100,000
Cell-edges in A.D. 1910
between nations 167 592| 2,100
within nations 144 3,900| 48,000

 

 

 

The actual fightings during the interval
A.D. 1820 to 1929 in the whole world have
been classified so as to correspond to the
geographical opportunities by taking the
deaths to be about 2 per cent. of the cell
population. This is indeed a very rough
correspondence ; but it leads to a striking
result, shown in Tables V and VI.

TABLE V

Persons killed in the quarrel

Pairs of opposed belligerent groups, A.D. 1820 to 1929
inclusive
between nations
within nations ..

* Corrected for incompleteness of collection in the ratio 354 / 188.

The geographical opportunities for contiguous fighting have been estimated by
attending to maps on which the population
is divided among compact cells, each containing the same number of people. Such
maps were shown to, and discussed by, the
Geography Section of the British Association
in September, 1949. A full account is in

From 316,227 | From 31,622 From 3,162
to 31,623 to 3,163 to 317
52 137 224%
23 33 179*

See Richardson, L. F., 1948 ¢., pp. 523-46.

The smallness of the last two fractions in
Table VI shows that fighting within nations
has somehow been prevented. National
governments usually try to prevent fighting
between subordinate groups within their
territory. Another possible explanation is
that the subordinate groups may have intermarried with one another.
$2 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

 

 

 

TABLE VI
ACTUAL FIGHTING PER GEOGRAPHICAL OPPORTUNITY

Between nations ... 52 137 224
—- = 031 — = 0°23 = Ol
167 592 2,100

Within nations... 23 33 179
— = o16 = 0:008 = 0°004
144 3,900 , 48,000

The duration of common government prior
to an outbreak of civil war is shown in Table
VII.

These facts may be explained by saying
that obedience to a common authority is
easily broken when new, but becomes a habit
after a generation or two. Alternatively one
may ask whether intermarriage occurred.
Two roughly similar time lags have, however, occurred in circumstances where intermarriage was unlikely. Alliances welded
by wars have gradually fallen apart. Retaliations against a former enemy have
become less frequent as the time interval
increased. We may compare the rates at
which these effects fade away by naming
the time at which they are half gone (as in
radio-activity).

Showing disloyalty by civil war ...  23°5 years

Breaking an alliance welded in, war 14 years
Retaliation against aformerenemy 15 years

It looks as though learning and forgetting
were the main causes of these time lags.

The unifying effect of a common language
and a common religion has often been
mentioned. To see whether they deserve
this reputation I sorted out the number of
pairs of opposed belligerent groups who had a
common language for political purposes.
They were gathered from the whole world
over the 110 years from 1820 to 1929. The
observed numbers were compared with
expectations deduced, according to various
theories, from the total number of persons
who had that language. Thus P, was derived

  

  

 

from the theory that wars are made by
leaders with a world-wide range of action ;
P, from pairs of populations each of a million.
with a world-wide range of action ; P, from
pairs of populations each of a million, in
compact cells and capable of fighting only
with neighbouring cells. Preliminary results
were discussed at the British Psychological
Society’s meeting at Oxford in April, 1943.
The argument may soon be available in
microfilm (Richardson, 1950). It was found
that there was something in the Chinese way
of life, up to their revolution of A.D. IQII,
which had prevented fightings between
Chinese. Contrariwise it was found that there
was something which stimulated fightings
between groups who both spoke Spanish.
For the other chief languages the statistics
neither confirmed, nor refuted, Zamenhoff’s
belief that a common language, by promoting
mutual understanding, would have a pacificatory effect. There may have been such
an effect; but, if so, it was lost among
the various ambiguities.

A similar statistical technique was applied
to the effect of a common religion. That of
China has already been included as part of
its way of life. At first sight it looked as if
Christianity incited wars between Christians ;
also as if Mohammedanism prevented wars
between Mosléms. These suggestions, startling to the author, were, however, found not
to be statistically reliable. There was clear
evidence of more fightings of Christians
versus Moslems than would be expected from
their numbers in the world.

  

TABLE VII
Preceding years of common government oO 20 40 60 Over
to to Totals
20 80
Observed pairs of opposed belligerents “ee 41 13 5 15 94
Geometrical progression ... an 8 37°13 22°46 13°59 8-22 12°59 93°99
WAR AND

Summary of Pacifying influences other than

Intermarriage

The old Chinese religion and the habit
of obedience to a common authority have
both been effective. Less effective is international trade. Fewer frontiers might help.
Armed strength is erratic. Collective security
would be a new acquisition. These pacifiers
are neither so many, nor so convenient, as to
make attention to international marriage
seem unnecessary.

Examples of Intermarriage

We need some short name for a population
resulting from intermarriage in a bounded
area during many generations. It used to
be called a race; but the Nazis spoilt
that word. The anthropologists call it an
endogamous group. Let there be no pretence
of racial purity. Each endogamous group
will be characterized by its statistical
distribution of genes.

England. About a century after the
Norman conquest, Richard Fitzneal, Treasurer of King Henry II, stated that the
English and Normans had so intermarried
and the nations had become so _intermingled that among the free classes it was
impossible to distinguish between them.
That is quoted from D. J. Medley (1901).
Wars between Normans and English in
England had ceased before Fitzneal’s time,
and did not recur. The French and English
languages remained distinct and both in
use in England for three or four centuries
after the Conquest. (G. M. Trevelyan, 1926.)

England and Scotland. After the union of
the Parliaments in A.D. 1707, the Scottish
peers journeyed to London. One consequence was a progressive intermarriage
between the Scottish and English aristocracy.
This is conspicuously shown in_ the
genealogies of Scottish families. For this
information I am indebted to the Rev.
D. W. P. Strang, M.C., D.D. The last notable
fighting of Scots versus English occurred in
A.D. 1746, and those Scots were mostly
Highlanders.

South Africa. The High Commissioner for
the Union of South Africa, Colonel Deneys
Reitz, told the Press on January 14th, 1943,

EUGENICS 33
that English and Dutch in South Africa were
freely intermingling and intermarrying, and
within the next thirty years or so even their
most fervid racial politicians would find it
hard to distinguish an Englishman from a
Dutchman. (Zhe Times, London, January
15th, 1943, p. 2, col. 5.)

Persia. Alexander the Great, after conquering Persia, held a great marriage feast,
in which he and ninety of his generals and
friends were married to Persian brides.
After Alexander’s death there was fighting
between his generals, but the division was
not the former one of Macedonians versus
Persians. (H. G. Wells’s Quiline of History,
1920, pp. I9I, 194.) |

In Louisiana soon after 1769, when the
Spanish took it over by treaty from the
French, “Many French Creoles were appointed to office, intermarriages of French
and Spanish and even English were encouraged by the highest officials, and in general
a liberal and conciliatory policy was followed,
which made Louisiana under Spanish rule

quiet and prosperous.” (E. 14, 430.)

In New Zealand there were wars between
the Maoris and the British from 1861 to
1871 (W. P. Reeves in E. 16, 401). By 1929
the situation of the Maoris was described
thus: ‘ At present the native people number
about 54,000, but the percentage of white
blood is rapidly increasing, so that ultimately
miscegenation may be expected to absorb
the Maori into our New Zealand population.”
(R. Firth in E. 14, 834.)

In Germany the Nazi discrimination
against Jews was moderated for those who
had one non-Jewish parent or three nonJewish grandparents.

The racial mixture in Brazil is described
by Calogeras (1939, pp. 18-30). The Portuguese discoverers called the natives Indians.
* Unions with Indians of both sexes evoked
no criticism except when they were illegal
or contrary to religious sanctions.”” Negro
slaves from Africa were imported from A.D.
1538 to 1850. The Negroes constituted the
lowest social stratum of the colony, and
racial crossing with them was looked upon as
degrading. Yet, in spite of everything,
crossing between the Negroes and Portuguese
34 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

began very early, and has persisted with
intermixture also of Spaniards and Italians.
There has been “‘ a progressive and noticeable
whitening of the skin of the local population
in large sections of Brazil.’’ ‘“‘ Roosevelt
rightly pointed out that the future has
reserved for us a great boon: the happy
solution of a problem fraught with tremendous, even mortal dangers—the problems of a
possible conflict between the two races.”

In assessing the pros and cons of such a
mixture between Europeans, Amerinds and
Negroes, it must be noticed that Brazil has
not been particularly law-abiding nor peaceful. Numerous armed insurrections are
mentioned in Brazilian history ; but usually
with particulars insufficient to fix the magnitude. From the interval a.D. 1820-1939 I
have collected sixteen deadly quarrels,
probably of magnitudes between 3.5 and1.5,
Their alleged causes include local autonomy,
Conservatives versus Liberals, discontent in
the navy, fanaticism, personal ambition, and
the world economic depression of 1929-34.
Only one of them was a conflict of races.
It occurred in 1871 between the Government
and Negroes in the province of Minas Geraes.
(H. H. 23, 661.)

A contrast between Argentina and Peru
during the years A.D. 1810-24 is described
by Levene in his History of Argentina (1937,
p. 316) in these words:

When the Spanish-American colonies revolted
against the motherland in 1810, the viceroyalty
of Peru remained apart from that movement.
Two chief causes explain that phenomenon :
first, the heterogeneous character of its population which was composed of aborigines, Negro
slaves, and the mestizos resulting from the
admixture of Indians, Africans and Spaniards.
The cohesion which the fusion of races had caused
in the provinces of La Plata, and which early
produced among us the phenomenon of a spontaneous democracy did not, therefore, exist in
Peru. A second cause was due to the powerful
Spanish resistance in Peru.

Levene’s statement is certainly relevant to
the relations of intermarriage to co-operation,
yet its indications are not clear. For the more
thorough race-mixture in La Plata was
accompanied not only by “ spontaneous
democracy’”’ but also by revolt against
authority and by numerous faction fights.

Jews in England and U.S.A. Dr. Eliot
Slater (1947) collected some evidence that in
England and the U.S.A. the marriage of
Jews with non-Jews is now occurring so
frequently that in two generations there may
not be much distinction left for the antiSemites to talk about.

In the foregoing examples intermarriage
was accompanied by common government,
so that it would be possible to argue that
pacification was caused by either or by both.
The following examples are specially interesting because they relate to intermarriage
apart from common government.

In Europe, Professor Arnold J. Toynbee
has expressed the opinion (1937, p. 37) that
royal marriages made on the whole more for
peaceful change than for new trouble.

Italy and U.S.A. A pacifying effect in the
midst of war was reported by the British
Broadcasting Corporation on September
6th, 1943. Six British soldiers had maintained themselves for a week behind the
Axis lines in Italy, having been given bread
and cheese by Italians. ‘‘ Nearly every
Italian they met claimed to have relatives
in the United States.”

Intermarriage may not have a pacifying
effect if there are strong religious differences.
For example :

(a) The Moslems of China have had wars
against the Confucians. Edgar Snow (1937,
p. 322) noted that “.. . while markedly
Turkish features are not infrequent among
them, the physiognomy of the majority
is hardly distinguishable from the Chinese,
with whom they have for centuries intermarried.”

(6) In 1947 the Government of the Soviet
Union forbade Russians to marry foreigners.
The British have been complaining about
the retention by Russia of the wives of
British men who have left Russia.

Action Suggested

Marx and Engels ended their Communist
Manifesto of 1848 with the slogan ‘‘ Working
men of all countries, unite,” meaning “ unite
in organization against the owners of propWAR AND

erty.” The experience of the first world war
showed that the bond of the socialist international organization was not strong enough
to restrain national patriotisms. Lenin complained about it in 1915 (reprinted 1940).

There does not seem to be any immediate
practical possibility of whole nations intermarrying. In peace-time it is the wealthier
and more enterprising part of the population
which travels abroad, and which experiments
in new customs. International marriage is
already noticeable among those classes of
society. So, taking a hint from Marx and
Engels, I suggest the slogan :

‘“‘ Managers of all countries, unite—by
matrimony, in order to hold the world
together ! ”’

An inner mentor reminds me that it is
very rash thus to indulge in a full-throated
slogan before the social scientists have
thoroughly investigated the proposal,
especially its irreversible genetical effects.
So I come back to the genetics of the socially
desirable qualities such as courage, kindliness, memory and intelligence. Here I feel
deplorably ignorant. Moreover, I recently
asked an eminent psychologist and an
eminent geneticist, and they both said that
there was not much sure knowledge on the
subject. Strong opinions, however, abound.
One is told that half-breeds have all the vices
of both parental races. One hears also the
counter-argument that the vices of halfbreeds are due to the social contempt which
they suffer from both parental races. How
shall truth be disentangled from amongst
such intense prejudices? I suggest two
sieves for straining out prejudice and letting
truth pass through :

(i) Lay aside, meantime, all general
impressions, and attend only to definite
tests, designed to be as little dependent on
schooling as possible. These at present
relate mostly to intelligence and to memory.

(11) Collect the results of tests on halfbreeds only from places where race-prejudice
is weak or non-existent, so that there halfbreed children grow up in a socially approved
environment. According to Romanzo Adams
(1934) one such place is Hawaii. According
to Levene (1937, p. 316) another is Argentina.

EUGENICS 35

Intelligence and the Race Crossing

S. D. Porteus (1937), Director of the Psychological Clinic of the University of Hawaii,
made a study of young persons aged g to 18
attending Honolulu schools and found the
following average test-quotients on the form
and assembling test :

Boys GIRLS
Number Average | Number Average
tested T.Q. tested T.Q.
Chinese eof 14 102:2 170 100-8
Chinese-Hawaiian} 145 IOI'7 121 95°2
Hawaiian 94 97'7 77 89-1

That is to say the half-breeds were on the
average intermediate between the averages
of the parental races.

Russell Munday (1934), a schoolmaster in
Buenos Aires, compared the intelligence
of x91 children whose grandparents were
all from the same nation with the intelligence of 117 children having grandparents
from more than one nation. He found no
significant difference. The nations considered
were European. Negroes and Amerinds
were not included.

These quotations from Porteus and from
Munday relate to the average intelligence of
groups of people. But it should be noted
that individuals are usually scattered about
the mean of their group to an extent greater
than the difference between the means of any
two well-known races. For example the Scottish Council for Research in Education (1933)
found that the average differences in intelligence quotient between Scottish, Californians and English (at Halifax, Yorkshire)
were negligible in comparison with the
standard deviation of individuals from their
means.

Ruth Byrns (1936) studied intelligence
and nationality among 78,560 high school
students in Wisconsin, U.S.A. She listed
twenty-seven European nationalities, also
Negro, Syrian and the large American group.
The nationality of the pupil was taken to be
that of the parents. The intelligence was
tested. The fact that all of these pupils had
completed approximately ten to twelve
years of schooling minimized the influence
of educational differences and tended to
eliminate the differences due to language
difficulty. The selective influences of migra36 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

tion and of schools are such that it is not
profitable for our purposes to compare the
mean intelligences of these different national
groups; but (p. 459) Byrns states that
“.,. the full range of ability is.found within
every natio-racial group.”

Porteus (1931, p. 363) tested a very primitive people, the Australian aborigines, and
found them, on the average, far below the
Americans in intelligence quotient, thus:
Americans 97, Australian aborigines 80.
Yet Porteus remarked that “. . . there are at
present among the aborigines, individuals
whose planning capacity is decidedly above
the average of whites... .”

The managers of all countries, whom it
was suggested should unite by matrimony,
would, of course, be selected individuals,
superior to the averages of their countries.

Conclusion. I submit that a strong
prima-facte case has been made for the
further consideration of international marriage as a hopeful pacifying influence.

REFERENCES

Adams, Romanzo (1934), in Race and Culture
Contacts, edited by Reuter, E. B. London: McGraw
Hill.

Bateson, Gregory (1936), Naven. Cambridge University Press.

Byrns, Ruth (1936), Journ. Social Psych., 7, 455-70,
Clark University Press.

Calogeras, J. P., trans. Martin, P.A. (1939),
History of Brazil. University of North Carolina Press.

Carr-Saunders, A. M. (1936), World Population.
Oxford : Clarendon Press.

E. refers to the Encyclopedia Britannica, 1929,
14th edn.

H.H. refers to Historians’ History of the World (1907),
edited by Williams, H. S. London: The Times.

Jastrzebski, S. de (1929). Article ‘‘ Death-rate ”’ in E.

Jeans, Sir James (1929), Astronomy and Cosmogony.
Cambridge University Press.

Jung, C. G. (1947), Essays on Contemporary Events.
London : Kegan Paul.

K stands for Keesing’s Contemporary Archives,
Bristol. Page numbers are given.

Kermack, W. O., and McKendrik, A. G. (1927),
Proc. Roy. Soc. London, A, 115,, 700-22.

Lenin, V. I. (1940), Socialism and War. London:
Lawrence & Wishart.

Levene, R., trans. Robertson, W. S. (1937), A History
of Argentina. University of North Carolina Press.

Malan, D. F. (1948), What “‘ Apartheid’’ Means.
Public Relations Office, South Africa House, Trafalgar
Square, London, W.C.2.

Medley, D. J. (1901) in Traill & Mann’s Social
England, 1, 534. London: Cassell & Co.

Munday, Russell (1932), Brit. J. Educ. Psych., 2,
I-7.

Noel-Baker, P. J. (1936), The Private Manufacture of
Armaments. London: Victor Gollancz.

Nye Committee (1935) Report No. 944, Part 2.
United States Government Printing Office.

Porteus, S. D. (1931), The Psychology of a Primitive
People. London : Arnold.

(1937), Primitive Intelligence and Environment.
New York: Macmillan.

Richardson, L. F. (1939), ‘‘ Generalized Foreign
Politics,” Brit. J. Psychol. Monog. Suppit., No. 23.
(1941), Nature, of December 27th.

(1947), J. Roy. Statistical Soc., 109, 130-56.
(1948, a and b), Psychometrika, 18, 147-74 and
197-232.

(1948, c.), J. Amer. Statistical Assn. Washington, D.C. 48, 523-46.

(1949), Ayms and Insecurity, a book in microfilm, from the author, 2nd. edn.

(1950, @.), Statistics of Deadly Quarrels, a book
in microfilm, from the author.

(1950, b.), Brit. J. Psychol. (Medical Section).

Scottish Council for Research in Education (1933),
Intelligence of Scottish Children. University of London
Press.

Slater, E. (1947), Eucenics Review, 89, 17-21.

Sorokin, Pitrim <A. (1937), Social and Cultural
Dynamics. American Book Co.

Snow, Edgar (1937), Red Stay Over China.
Victor Gollancz.

Toynbee, A. J. (1937), in Peaceful Change. London :
Macmillan

Trevelyan, G. M. (1926), History of England. London:
Longmans Green.

Wells, H. G. (1920), Outline of History. London:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

London :

” Cassell.

West, Ranyard (1942),
London : Methuen.

Wright, Quincy (1942), 4 Study of War. University
of Chicago Pr

Conscience and Society.

Eugenics Review, Vol XLII, No. 1
