P. K. WHELPTON

B.S. (Cornell), Director, Scripps Foundation for Research in Population Problems

CLYDE V. KISER
Ph.D., Milbank Memorial Fund

Social and Psychological Factors

Affecting Fertility

SUMMARY OF CHIEF FINDINGS AND IMPLICATIONS FOR FUTURE STUDIES *

Purpose, Scope and Methods of the Study

HE PURPOSE, SCOPE, and methods of
the Indianapolis Study have been described in published articles. Briefly stated,
two types of situations, existing during the
late thirties, prompted the study. One was the
generally low level of birth rates of the period,
especially in cities. It was believed that further
knowledge of the social and psychological factors
affecting fertility would be needed if this country
were ever to attempt any form of legislation
designed to encourage larger families. The other
situation was the existing status of research in
differential fertility. Previous studies of data of
the census type had indicated the relation of
fertility to such factors as region, rural-urban
residence, colour, nativity, occupation, education, and other measures of socio-economic
status. These had been followed by a series of
studies which indicated that the observed group
differences in fertility had arisen almost
altogether from group differences in age
at marriage and in prevalence and effectiveness of contraceptive practice rather than
from group differences in fecundity—the
physiological capacity to reproduce. It was
realized, however, that contraception is only the
means of family limitation, and that the next
step might well be that of trying to investigate
the social and psychological factors affecting
resort to contraception and the size of the
planned family.

* This shortened version of the summary of the findings
of the Indianapolis Survey is reprinted from the Milbank
Memorial Fund Quarterly (July 1958, 36, 3) by permission of the authors and of the editors of the Quarterly.

35

The specific aims and scope of the study
developed with the discussion and field experimentation which went on over a period of two
years during 1938-40. They were finally set by
the decision to try to test twenty-three hypotheses concerning the relation of fertility planning and size of planned family to given social
and psychological factors. Altogether, six
separate schedules and questionnaires were
developed, which provided for upward of
1,000 specific items of information, most of
them being pertinent to one or more of the
twenty-three hypotheses.

The study was conducted in Indianapolis in
1941. Data for testing the hypotheses were
obtained from an adjusted sample of 1,444
“relatively fecund” couples with the following
characteristics: husband and wife native white,
both Protestant, both finished at least the eighth
grade, married during 1927-1929, neither previously married, husband under forty and wife
under thirty at marriage, and residents in a
large city most of the time since marriage.
Couples with these characteristics were located
by means of a preliminary Household Survey
of virtually all white households in Indianapolis.

Chief Findings of the Study

The facts of chief significance that were learned
from the Indianapolis Study are discussed
briefly under three headings: (A) Household
Survey data on religion and fertility; (B) contraception, fecundity, and fertility, and (C)
hypotheses on the relation of social and psychological factors to fertility planning status and
size of planned family. It will be noted that one

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, April 1959, 51, 1.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

cannot find data on any of these three topics in
reports of the United States census of population. Except in a recent sample survey the Census
Bureau has collected information regarding
religion only in the census of religious organizations. It has never asked questions regarding
contraception, attitudes, or psychological characteristics.

(A) Household survey data on religion and fertility

Of the 41,498 native-white unbroken first
marriages with wives fifteen to forty-four years
of age in the Indianapolis Household Survey,
80 per cent were Protestant unions, 10-8 per
cent were Catholic unions, 5-8 per cent were
Protestant-Catholic mixed marriages, 1 per
cent were Jewish unions, and 2-3 per cent were
of other or unknown combinations. The fertility
rates were highest for the Catholic couples and
lowest for the Jewish. The fertility rate standardized for age was about 18 per cent higher for
Catholics than for Protestants. It was about 25
per cent lower for Jews than for Protestants.

The fertility rate was relatively low for
Protestant-Catholic mixed marriages. These
marriages were about 10 per cent less fertile
than Protestant unions and 23 per cent less
fertile than Catholic unions. However, they were
about 21 per cent more fertile than Jewish
unions.

Nearly three-fifths of the Protestant-Catholic
mixed marriages involve Catholic wives and
two-fifths involved Protestant wives. However,
the fertility rates for these two sub-divisions
were virtually the same.

The higher fertility rate for the Catholic than
for the Protestant unions persisted at each level
of education and rental value of the dwelling
unit, except possibly at the lowest rental-value
levels. The range of the variations in fertility
was wider, and the inter-class differences in
fertility by rental value of the home were
sharper, for the Protestant unions than for the
Catholic unions. Nevertheless, the general
pattern of variation was much the same for
the two religions. Among both groups fertility
was inversely related to rental value of the
home except in the top rental-value levels where
the relationship became direct.

36

'(B) Contraception, fecundity and fertility

Virtually all of the 1,444 “relatively fecund”
couples reported some experience with contraception. The proportions were 98 per cent for the
1,444 ‘relatively fecund” couples, and 64 per
cent for the 533 ‘“‘relatively sterile’’ couples.

About 70 per cent of the “‘relatively fecund”’
couples began contraception before the first
pregnancy and an additional 21 per cent began
before the second pregnancy. Over one-fourth
(28 per cent) of the “relatively fecund” couples
were classified as “‘number and spacing of pregnancies planned” in that (a) they had planned
all of their pregnancies by stopping contraception in order to conceive or (b) they had practised
contraception regularly since marriage, and, presumably in consequence, had no pregnancy. An
additional 14 per cent of the couples were classified as ‘“‘number planned” in that they planned
the last pregnancy in the manner described
above but had one or more previous pregnancies
under other circumstances. Thus some 42 per
cent of the “relatively fecund” couples were
‘“‘planned families” as defined in the Study
(“number and spacing planned” and “‘number
planned” combined). The proportion of “‘planned
families” in the group was enhanced intentionally by the restriction of the sample to nativewhite Protestant couples of at least complete
grade-school education, and residents of Indianapolis or another large city most of the time since
marriage.

As indicated above, a high proportion of the
couples were “‘relatively sterile” according to the
criteria that were used. Over one-fourth (27 per
cent or 533) of the 1,977 couples were classified
as relatively sterile. This proportion was not
found to vary systematically by socio-economic
status.

An attempt was made to estimate the relative
influence of impaired fecundity and deliberate
family limitation in reducing the fertility of the
1,977 couples below the “biological potential.”
**... High, medium, and low estimates of normal
fecundity are obtained by utilizing, respectively,
the experience of the most fecund 60 per cent, 75
per cent, and 85 per cent of the couples.” “...
The medium estimate of the normal reproductive ability of the couples in this study during the
twelve to fifteen years since marriage is a birth
SOCIAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL FACTORS AFFECTING FERTILITY

rate of 6,325 per 1,000. Impairments would have
lowered this rate to 4,594 (a reduction of 27-4
per cent) if no control measures had been used.
If all couples had been normal (or above) in
fecundity, contraception and abortion would
have caused the birth rate to be 2,074, or 67-2
per cent below the estimated normal capacity.
Actually, because of impairments and deliberate
control, the birth rate was 1,699, or 73-1 per cent
below capacity. In other words, partly because of
defects in the reproducive system, but primarily
because of contraception and illegal abortion,
the number of births to couples studied was only
26:9 per cent of the number that could have
occurred if all of the couples had been normal
(or above) in fecundity.”

The use and effectiveness of specific methods of
contraception was described by Westoff, Herrera,
and Whelpton as follows:

Condom and some kind of douche used separately or together account for approximately 72 per
cent of all exposure with contraception for the
total group studied. Diaphragm and jelly, which
accounts for about 7 per cent of all contraceptive
exposure, tends to be used later in the marriage
period than condom and douche. There is a
definite increase in the use of more effective
methods over the marriage period, although over
35 per cent of the couples were using comparatively ineffective methods after twelve to fifteen
years of marriage.

The belief that a method offered ‘‘reliability”’ is
the chief reason for using a method and for
changing from one method to another.

For “relatively fecund” couples using contraception “always’’, contraception in general is 92 per
cent effective from the point of view of the reduction in uncontrolled fertility.

Individual method of contraception vary widely
in their effectiveness. They range from the highly
effective methods of diaphragm and jelly, condom,
and condom combined with douche to the least
effective method of the safe period, suppository,
and douches. These differences support, in general,
the results of previous studies on this subject.

It should be noted, however, that suppository
and douche (by themselves) reduced greatly the
risk of conception. The most effective method—
diaphragm and jelly—had an “effectiveness ratio”’
of 99-5 per cent before the first pregnancy and
95:7 per cent after the first pregnancy. For all
douches used singly the corresponding ratios
were 86:6 per cent and 81-7 per cent. The effectiveness of rhythm (or safe period) was lower

partly because during the 1930s a substantial
proportion of the users of this method were misinformed as to what was the safe part of the
cycle.

(C) Findings from hypothesis testing

A rather arbitrary classification of the twentythree hypotheses under five categories is shown
in Table 1. Under each category the hypotheses
are listed in the order in which they will be considered in the report. An effort has been made to
indicate in applicable cases (a) the direction (i.e.
direct or inverse) of the relationship found
between the variable dealt with in the hypothesis
and both fertility-planning status and size of
the “‘number and spacing planned” family,
and (b) whether or not the findings support the
hypothesis. It should be emphasized that “‘support” of the hypothesis does not necessarily
mean scientific confirmation, but merely that the
direction of the relationship found is or tends to
be the same as that hypothesized. The table provides inadequate indication of either the quality
of the data or of the strength or consistency of
the relationships found. However, a few cases of
especially inadequate data are noted, and the
term “partially” supported is used for cases in
which the relationship is weak, not complete, or
is known to arise almost entirely from the influence of another variable.

Cases of “‘no support” of the hypothesis might
arise from finding no relationship at all (indicated
by “‘O” in columns 4 and 5), or a relationship of
the direction opposite that hypothesized. The
report of “‘zero”’ relationship does not necessarily
mean that none really exists, but simply that
none was found in this study.

Status and Security

Socio-Economic Status. The first hypothesis
listed is ““The higher the socio-economic status,
the higher the proportion of couples practising
contraception effectively and the smaller the
planned families.” As expected from previous
studies, the first part of this hypothesis is definitely borne out, for the proportion of couples
practising contraception effectively tends to increase rather sharply and consistently with rising
socio-economic status. The second part of the
hypothesis—positing an inverse relation of
fertility to socio-economic status among planned

37
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

INDIANAPOLIS STUDY HYPOTHESES CLASSIFICATION AND RESULTS OF ANALYSES?

CLASS AND SUBJECT OF HYPOTHESIS

(1)

I. Status and Security
Socio-Economic Status
Economic Insecurity
Economic Tension

II. Community and Family Background
Family and Childhood Situations
Residence and Migration History
Doubling-Up of Families
Health of Wife and Husband
Health of Children

III. Interest in Home and Children
Liking for Children
Parental Preference Regarding Sex of
Children
Children Wanting Brothers and
Sisters

Reasons for Second Child:
Belief ‘“‘Only Child” Handicapped
Desire To Insure Against Childlessness

IV. Personality Characteristics
Personal Inadequacy
Feeling Children Interfere
With Personal Freedom
Ego-Centred Interest in Children
Fear of Pregnancy

Rationality of Behavior:
Tendency to Plan
Interest in Religion
Adherence to Traditions
Conformity to Group Patterns

V. Marital Adjustment and Husband-Wife
Dominance
Marital Adjustment
Husband-Wife Dominance

 

1Symbols:

+ = Direct relation with hypothesis variable (Col. 4-5).
— = Inverse relation with hypothesis variable (Col. 4-5).
0 = No relation with hypothesis variable (Col. 4-5).

DNA= Does not apply (Col. 4 and 6).

38

HYPOTHESIS
NUMBER | ARTICLE

2)

rm NO WW

DIRECTION OF
RELATION FOUND

FertilityPlanning | pletely

Status |Pl. Fam.
(4)

HAS THE HYPOTHESIS
BEEN SUPPORTED

  
   

FertilityPlanning

Status

No

No
Partially
Partially

Partially
Partially
Partially
Partially

Size of

Completely

Pl. Fam.
(7)

No*®
No?’
Partially
Partially
Partially

Partially
Partially

Partially

No
Partially
Partially

Partially
Partially
Partially
Partially

Partially
No‘

2Results believed to be spurious because of selec
tive factors.
’Data on health very inadequate. ;
4Some results found on reformulated hypothesis.
SOCIAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL FACTORS AFFECTING FERTILITY

families—is not supported. As expected, the
familiar inverse relation of fertility to socioeconomic status is rather sharply manifested for
the total sample of 1,444 “relatively fecund”’
couples. It is also found to some extent within
the “number planned” group considered separately. Within the ‘“‘number and spacing planned”
group, however, the opposite type of relation is
found. The fertility rates for this group are
relatively low, but they tend to be directly instead
of inversely related to socio-economic status.
This direct relation is most sharply manifested
when husband’s income is used as the measure of
socio-economic status, but it is also found rather
consistently in classifications by rental value of
the home, net worth, occupation, education, and
score on Chapin’s Social Satus Scale.

The “‘number and spacing planned’’ couples
are highly homogeneous with respect to success
in preventing unwanted pregnancies. The group
is composed (a) of couples who practised contraception regularly after marriage and had no
pregnancies, and (b) of couples whose every
pregnancy was deliberately planned by stopping
contraception in order to conceive. Hence, the
factor of differential prevalence and effectiveness
of contraceptive practice (the factor underlying
the general inverse relation of fertility to socioeconomic status) is removed for this group.

Economic Security. The next hypothesis is:
“The greater the feeling of economic insecurity,
the higher the proportion of couples practising
contraception effectively and the smaller the
planned families.” The classifications by feeling
of economic security are based mainly upon the
multiple-choice replies of wives and husbands to
a series of questions about confidence in meeting
future expenses, frequency of facing the possibility of husband’s pay cut or unemployment, and
the like. | :

The first part of the hypothesis is not borne
out by the data. Among the couples studied, the
effective practice of contraception is directly associated with economic security rather than with
economic insecurity, but this relation virtually
disappears when socio-economic status is held
constant. The second part of the hypothesis is
supported by the data. The size of “planned
families” and particularly the size of ‘“‘number
and spacing planned” families is directly associ
ated with economic security, or, as the hypothesis
states, inversely associated with feeling of
economic insecurity. This relationship is maintained, but to a smaller degree, when socioeconomic status is held constant.

Economic Tension. The hypothesis [1] labelled
“economic tension’”’ was phrased “The greater
the difference between the actual level of living
and the standard of living desired, the higher the
proportion of couples practising contraception
effectively and the smaller the planned families.”’
Actually the results tend to yield the opposite
types of relationship, but there is also good
evidence of the existence of selective factors in
the measures used.

An effort was made to get at the difference
between actual and desired level of living through
two types of approach—the quantitative and the
qualitative. The quantitative approach was that
of comparing what the couples had with what
they wanted with respect to three items: income,
home and automobile. Thus, certain sections of
the schedules provided data on family income,
value or rental value of home, and purchase
price of the car if a car was owned. Other sections
furnished the replies of wives and husbands to
such questions as how much income the family
would need in order to live in a satisfactory manner, how much they would have to pay to buy or
rent a house in which they would /ike to live,
and how much they would have to pay for the
automobile that they would /ike to own. In each
case the amount of the desired item was coded
as a percentage of the actual.

The qualitative data were the multiple-choice
replies, ranging from “‘very much” to ‘“‘very
little’, to questions regarding amount of additional income needed, interest in having a better
home, and interest in having a car or better car.

With both types of data the degree of economic tension (i.e. the extent of the difference
between actual level of living and standard of
living desired) is inversely related to socioeconomic status. This is true despite the fact that
the quantitative data manifest no tendency for
the poorer people to be unrealistic in their statements regarding what they wanted. Nevertheless,
the owner of a second-hand car bought for a few
hundred dollars could quite reasonably—and
frequently did—express a desire for an automo
39
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

bile costing two or three times this amount. This
almost always placed them in a higher “‘tension”’
category than, say, persons who owned a
Cadillac that was purchased new. Thus the
groups with high economic ‘“‘tension” are
weighted with couples of low socio-economic
status. This probably helps to account for the
failure of the data to support the first part of the
hypothesis—the higher the degree of economic
tension the larger the proportion of couples
practising contraception effectively.

It was noted above that within the “number
and spacing planned” group, fertility is directly
associated with the socio-economic status.
Selection of this type should operate towards
support of the second part of the hypothesis—
the greater the difference between the actual and
desired levels of living the smaller the planned
family. However, it seems reasonably sure that
another type of selection affects the classifications
by economic tension, for couples with large
families would tend to be the ones stating that
they need more income. Since they need room for
children they would also tend especially to think
in terms of a larger house and hence a more
expensive house. Selection of this type probably
accounts partly for the observed direct (rather
than inverse) relation of ‘“‘economic tension”’, as
measured, to size of planned family. Whatever
the reason, it is certain that the measures of the
difference between actual and desired levels of
living which were used in the study were far from
adequate. The hypothesis appears important on
logical grounds; it is to be hoped that satisfactory
measures can be developed for testing it in future
studies.

Community and Family Background

Family and Childhood Situations. Hypothesis
12 states “‘Family and childhood situations and
attitudes affect the proportion of couples practising contraception effectively and the size of
the planned families.”’ The “family and childhood
situations” relate to the parental homes of the
wives and husbands interviewed and include such
items as “by whom reared’, “‘parents’ marital
history”, ‘“‘parents’ fertility”, ‘‘happiness of
parents’’, and extent to which parents encouraged
the wives and husbands interviewed to have more
children.

40

Kantner and Potter first concentrated on one
of these components, and analyzed the relation of
‘“‘parents’ fertility” to the fertility of the couples
in the Indianapolis Study. Previous studies, including a recent one by Berent, had indicated
sharp relations between fertility of parents and
fertility of offspring. However, Kantner and
Potter found that:

Among the Indianapolis couples the relationship between the fertility of the older and younger
generation is negligible except perhaps in the case
of couples originating from families of identical
size. Even in the latter instance, however, less
than 10 per cent of the variation in the fertility of
the younger generation is attributable to the size
of the family of origin. Except among the efficient
planners, what relationship there is appears to be
partially dependent upon differences in socioeconomic status. Thus we have in the case of the
present relationship, a hypothesis of low predictive
value so far as the Indianapolis data are concerned.

The authors further stated:

It would certainly be unwarranted to conclude
that the relationship in question is negligible under
all conditions. Where a greater range in the fertility of both the older and younger generations
is found, the influence of the parental generation
on the succeeding one might be more evident.
Related to this is the likelihood that if couples
even less efficient at contraception than those in
our inefficient planner subsample were included,
a greater continuity of family size pattern would
be apparent. Finally, the couples taken into the
Indianapolis Study were chosen in such a way
as to maximize differences between the two generations: for example, many were of rural background
but no strictly rural couples were sampled; many
had parents with less than eight years of education,
yet no couples with so little education were
admitted to the sample, and so on.

With respect to the more general factor of
childhood situations, Potter and Kantner stated:

To test the hypothesis that childhood experiences influence fertility, several types of information were collected about the family of origin in
addition to its size. These may be classified as
those dealing with (a) the affectional tone of the
home (e.g. happiness of children, happiness of
parents) and the difficulties encountered by the
parents in raising their children (b) the extent to
which parents actively encouraged their children
to have families of their own, and (c) the structural
characteristics of the family of origin (e.g. marital
history of parents, ordinal position and number of
siblings, occupation, and education of parents).
Although there is much that is interesting in these
data, no association between them and either
SOCIAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL FACTORS AFFECTING FERTILITY

fertility or fertility planning has been found. This
negative result is especially true for the items
relating to the assessment of childhood and
parental encouragements to family formation (a
and b above). Regarding the structural characteristics, couples reared in broken homes or reared
by persons other than their biological parents
exhibit above-average fertility. Examined within
socio-economic categories, however, these differences tend to disappear.

Reasons for so many negative findings are not
difficult to find. During the time that elapses
between childhood and marriage, early experiences
become entangled with a multitude of other
influences, the disentangling of which poses formidable problems in a nonlongitudinal study.
Even if full information were available on all significant intervening influences, the small size of
the Indianapolis sample and the frequently skewed
response distributions would tend to frustrate
analysis. Other problems probably arise because
childhood is recalled so selectively. This does not
mean, however, that future research should ignore
the childhood milieu. With the aid of more appropriate study designs certain early influences may
yet appear as important determinants of fertility.

Methodological Lessons of the Indianapolis Study
Four broad types of “lessons” are discussed:
those concerning (1) the independent variables;
(2) the dependent variables; (3) the size and
character of the sample; and (4) the general
design of the Study.
1. The independent variables

In a study entitled “Social and Psychological
Factors Affecting Fertility’ the social and psychological factors were, in the nature of the case,
assumed to be the independent variables and
fertility behaviour was considered to be the dependent variable. It was realized from the beginning, of course, that in social science there is an
interaction of variables and this matter will be
discussed later. For the present, the chief lesson
to be emphasized concerns the generally closer
relationship of fertility to broad social factors
(including the economic) than to the psychological factors. More specifically, the relation of
fertility and fertility-planning status to socioeconomic status was consistently sharp. The
observed relation of fertility behaviour to most of
the psychological characteristics considered was
generally much less pronounced or less regular,
especially when socio-economic status was held
constant.

There was one outstanding exception. The re
lation of economic security to the size of completely planned families was conspicuous and
quite independent of socio-economic status.
Nevertheless, the central problem of a future
investigation might well be that of trying to
secure a better understanding of the factors
underlying differential fertility according to
socio-economic status and especially the role of
psychological factors.

As indicated in previous critiques, the scope of
the Indianapolis Study was too wide for adequate
treatment. There were twenty-three hypotheses,
each of which was concerned with the relation of
a given social or psychological factor to effectiveness of contraceptive practice and size of planned
family. Thus when we say that the scope of the
Indianapolis Study was too broad we mean that
too many social and psychological factors were
included for investigation.

2. The dependent variables: Effectiveness of contraceptive practice and size of planned
families

In our opinion, the measures of fertility-planning status and size of planned family did not
pose problems comparable with those associated
with the independent variables.

3. Size and character of the sample

The Indianapolis Study sample has frequently
proved to be too small to afford good tests of the
hypotheses considered. A reduction in scope of
the study should make it possible to have not
only better data but also larger samples.

4. General design of study

The attempt to study social and psychological
factors affecting fertility by the actual collection
of data at only one point in the married life
(twelve to fifteen years after marriage), raises a
variety of problems. First of all is the question
of memory. To what extent can the person
remember the details regarding, say, contraceptive practice since marriage, attitudes towards
successive pregnancies, and attitudes of the past
twelve to fifteen years about a variety of other
things? In the second place, the dependence on
retrospective or ex post facto data frequently
makes it difficult to differentiate between cause
and effect. This deficiency was illustrated particularly by the data regarding preference as to
the sex of children, by the relation of economic
security to fertility among ‘“‘excess fertility’

41
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

couples, and by the data on “economic tension”’.

An indicated lesson of the previous condition
is the need for a study that will utilize changes
in time as the fundamental units of classification.
A longitudinal study of some type is rather
clearly indicated. If a study can “catch”? couples
before they are married or before they have a
child of a given order, it has a good chance to
overcome some of the problems associated with
the use of retrospective data.

Application of ‘‘Lessons’’ in New Studies
Several studies of fertility have profited to
some extent bythe experience of the Indianapolis
Study. Many of the questions and procedures
developed for the Indianapolis Study were used
in subsequent investigations in Puerto Rico,
India, and the United States.

One study in particular has been based upon
the experience of the Indianapolis Study and in
fact is frequently referred to as the successor to
the Indianapolis Study. This is the Study of
Social and Psychological Factors Affecting The
Future Fertility of Two-Child Families. This
study is being carried out under the technical
direction of the Office of Population Research of

42

Princeton University. It is sponsored by the
Milbank Memorial Fund, with grants from the
Carnegie Corporation of New York, The Population Council, and the Milbank Memorial Fund.

The basic purpose of this study is to learn some
of the social and psychological factors affecting
the occurrence of and the time required for
third births among couples who recently had
their second births. Instead of being restricted to
highly homogeneous couples in a single city, the
new study purports to be representative of all
native-white two-parity couples in seven of the
eight metropolitan areas of the United States
with a population of two million or more in
1950. The study attempts to avoid the biases
inherent in ex post facto data by collecting some
of the basic data before the event of the pregnancy for the third child. It is partially longitudinal in design in that second visits will be made
some two and a half years after the first visit. It
is possible that additional visits will be made
still later. It is hoped that by constant improvements in study design we may eventually have a
“breakthrough” of new knowledge in the complex field of motivations regarding size of family.
