THE IDEAL OF AN ELITE
By PAUL BLOOMFIELD

HE former Master of Balliol, Lord
Lindsay, once told me this story. He
was listening to a discussion about
élites when it occurred to him to get up and
ask: ‘‘ What is the difference between the
élite and the elect ? ’’ And somebody at once
answered: ‘“‘ You choose the élite—God
chooses the elect.’’
This wise sentence sounds a little rebuffing.
It needn't be taken to be so. Anyhow, we
can’t usurp God’s prerogatives; and the
tdea of an élite still calls for description,
provided we go on thinking it really stands
for something. The idea, we should notice,
came before the ideal, if only because the
idea must originally have been evoked by
what appeared to be the thing itself. I mean
that from very early times it must have
seemed obvious to people all over the world
of primitive civilization that there was such
a thing—that there were individuals and
families, say Pharaohs, who were an élite—
however one was going to account for the
fact, and whether one approved of there
being picked persons (or of those particular
persons being picked) or whether one did not.
Before suggesting how it was that people
had such perceptions at all, I ought to
explain why I have invited the attention of
an audience (almost certainly an élite) to this
fresh discussion of the subject. My reason is
that there has been, as we know, an immense
revulsion against social inequalities—so immense that the notion of xatural inequality
has come in for some of the reprobation (a
good deal of it fromm people who might be
thought themsclves to have more than an
average share of hereditary endowments).
Ani, of course, from the point of view that I,
and others here with me, take of this reaction,
it is not wholly good ; it is even in some ways
very bad and dangerous, and must be met
with all the reasonable arguinents we can
truthfully use.
* Dangerous’ needs explaining. Dangerous
to whom or what 2?) The answer involves a

fundamental principle. I should say that if
we feel concern for the future of mankind, we
have to think in terms of men, women and
children even before institutions. And since
exceptionally gifted individuals exist, and
often transmit their abilities, then there
already is a case for making the most of them
rather than letting their seed run to waste.
This, of course, is part of the positive policy
of eugenists. An ideal élite 1m being tends to
be able to look after itself. But what if
social policy is dysgenic—bad for the survival
of an élite ? The danger of that is a danger to
the whole community : it is the danger I was
referring to.

So now to go back to the beginning, to the
idea of an élite. But let us break our journey
in the sixteenth century. Here is the great
Montaigne writing about “the Inequality
amongst us.’’ After quoting Plutarch, he
says: “In truth I find so vast a distance
betwixt Epaminondas, according to my
judgment of him, and some that I know, that
are yet men of good sense, that I would willingly enhance upon Plutarch, and say that
there is more difference betwixt such and
such a man than there ts betwixt such a man
and such a beast :

Hem! wir viro quid praestat !

and that there are as many and innumerable
degrees of minds as there are cubits betwixt
this and heaven.”’

What a brilliant essay it is. It also takes
us back, with those Latin words of Terence,
two hundred years further than Plutarch.
Later on in the same essay Montaigne rather
drifts towards a more conventional theme—
the Wusions of greatness, the need to remember that “ handsome is as handsome does ”’
that kind of thing; but the earlier pages
penetrate excitingly to’ the heart of the
matter. The distinction is drawn between a
man’s outward circumstances and. his real
personality. “‘ Measure him = without his
24

stilts,’’ says Montaigne ; ‘let him lay aside
his revenues and his titles, let him present
himself in his shirt.’”’ Then he refines the distinction still more. After telling an excellent
rude story about Antigonus, he says:
“He...” [that isa man] “‘...is but a man
at best, and if he be deformed or ill-qualified
at birth, the empire of the universe cannot

set him to nghts.’’ Now this, which is a ~

little over-pessimistic, being written in the
infancy of modern medical science, does seem
to show that Montaigne understood very well
that the inequalities which he notices among
us have a great deal to do with our congenital
equipment—I must not here say “ hereditary.” But as a matter of fact the element of
heredity, of like begetting like, was intelli
gently commented upon a couple of thousand

years before Montaigne. I am thinking of the
Greek poet Theognis, who contrasted the way
men were sticklers about mating their beasts
eugenically with their fecklessness in marrying any sort of girl so long as she had plenty
of money.

Now the idea of an élite did not spring, as
I may have been taken to mean, entirely
from its being observed that there was sucha
thing as an élite, an aristocracy, a selective
breed of human beings comparable with the
selectively bred flocks of rams and asses.
The king’s subjects felt ‘‘ there’s a divinity
doth hedge a king.” But the king felt it about
himself, too. Our unsympathetic James I, as
we all know, believed in his own election—by
divine hereditary right. However, this suobjective aspect of the matter is important.
Whatever we may think of James, we
probably shouldn’t put down as wrongheaded a poet, say, who felt he had a mission
—felt he had been born, chosen, elected by
destiny to write what he and nobody else
possibly could write. That some people
should feel themselves elected is a fact about
human nature. When Hesiod met the Nine
Muses they revealed to him what he was
good for. Joan of Arc learned about her mission from St. Catherine. The New Testament
begins with a genealogy—the line of the
family who were an élite among a people who
regarded themselves as Chosen. Later in the
Gospel story, when Jesus has finished preach
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

ing on the Mount he turns to his disciples and
says to them, “Ye are the salt of the earth.”
Chatham believed in 1757 that he was the
only man who could save England, and a
modern organizer of victory of not less capacity must have felt that kind of confidence
when he cried, in a tight corner—‘‘ Courage,
boys : Comrade Trotsky is leading you ! ”’

' Well, posterity judges by results—without
there always being a consensus of opinion,
because, as I need hardly say, people’s views
of success differ. There has even been a
tendency to challenge the opinion that either
individual great men or élites have played
such an important part in history after all. I
shall come to that. Meanwhile [ have been
trying to make the point that there is a subjective sense of election, and that it is often
confirmed, as you might say, by general

agreement. Elites objectively regarded can be

traced from early beginnings by the usual
methods, and I should now hike to glance for
a moment at origins.

‘‘T doubt,’’ wrote Breasted, ‘* whether any
of those travellers who ride on their donkeys
through the palm groves that now cover the
streets and houses of ancient Memphis .. . I
doubt very much whether any of them
realizes that what they are about to see is the
earliest known revelation of family life.” The
family life, of course, of an élite: the nobles
of the Pyramid Age. It is unlikely that they
owed their original noble status to any more
or less respectable sanction than capitalists
have done—and it it had to be brains or
brawn, not both, then probably brains. Anyhow, those Memphite nobles gave a memorable account of themselves on their tombs.
Can their evidence be accepted in their own
favour, as proving they had learned to deserve
their social eminence 2? Breasted thinks so.
Combined with certain other indications the
tomb rehefs, he says, “ furnish us with conclusive historical evidence that moral discernment had its roots 1m the life of the family.”

So vou sec, far from having moved away
from the position of the tamily as the breeding ground (in) two senses) of the moral
character, We are more than ever to-day persuaded that a certain kind of family life is
the best nursery of the social virtues. When

 
THE IDEAL OF AN ELITE 25

all families come up to the quite unsnobbish
five standards of eugenics, there should be a
sort of universal élite. My ideal of an élite,
then, has something to do with family and
family traditions: it is a hereditary élite.
Now you know that those men whom Jesus
called the salt of the earth were to turn their
backs on their homes and families. But then
they were a body of the elect ; and observe
how the Roman Church has taken pains to
prevent their example in that respect from
influencing the great body of non-elect—how
by its encouragement of devotion to the
Madonna it has affirmed the dignity of
women as mothers, the duty of filial piety,
in short the value of the institution of the
human family. On the other hand, unfortunately, as you will most fully realize if you
have read Pope Pius XI’s Encyclical, Casts
Connubi, the Roman Church opposes
measures of birth control without which, in
the view of eugenists, the most formidable
of the world’s population problems can
hardly be solved. That is rather beside my
present point. ...

You had probably been expecting my ideal
of an élite to have something to do with
family and hereditary ability and so on—
but, after all, that band of the elect who were
the salt of the earth were not the only
unhereditary corps d’élite we can think of.
Corps d’élite is properly used of crack regiments ; however, I suppose that in times of
stability under a monarch, or I dare say a
republic too, the officers of such regiments do
tend to come from a few privileged families.
No: the rivals of my élite are not Guardsmen
but Commissars and Yogis—and Managers.
Koestler described Yogis and Commissars as
“at the two ends of the sociological spectrum.”’ He said that “‘ the real issue ’”’ was
between them, that is, between the fundamental conceptions of Change-from-Within
and Change-from-Without. I don’t want to
seem to be pinning him down to what he
wrote some years ago, as if it was his last
word, but the fact is that in his well-known
essay he admirably expressed a situation
that has to be reconsidered perennially.
Wholesale Change-from-Without—Detailed
Change-from-Within. Emphasis on Condi
tions : emphasis on the Inward and Spiritual.
And in between nothing, according to Koestler, except “the muddled intermediary
bands of the spectrum.”

But doesn’t the world somehow live? Is
nothing going on without the leave of Commissars or Yogis ? Of course there is. What
as ‘‘ the real issue’ ? Our issue is something
to do with those compromises by which
people really do live, unless they are under a
despotism : live sometimes successfully and
creatively—and compromise is just what
Koestler says that Commissars and Yogis are
no good for. The “ real issue ’’ is realizing
our intimations of our humanity, inspired by
love and guided by reason (as you have heard
said before) ; and just as the Commissar at
breaking point must find he has to acknowledge the irrational (not anéz-rational) in
human nature, so the Yogi sometimes surely
asks himself why the Creation exists at all
except to be loved. Of the reasons why the
Commissars fall short of my ideal of an élite
it is only necessary to name one—that they
believe their Change-from-Without (housing
schemes, social services etc.) can do the work
of heredity. This is a tragic error. As for the
Yogis, I should have thought that long ago
Mahayana Buddhism would have cut across
their ingrowing philosophy with its idea of
the Bodhisattvas ; and Bodhisattvas themselves may be, can only be, elect (and very
wonderful too); they cannot possibly be
thought of as an élite. We can agree that
outward conditions are most important and
that the inner life is an immaterial something
of the highest value, but the improvement of
human society depends also on breeding.
That is, it depends on the kind of people who
both are exemplars of, and are capable of
transmitting (and not only genetically but
also morally and intellectually), the qualities
we should like to see distinguishing the whole
human family, a universal élite—making
the use of this descriptive noun finally unnecessary.

It has seemed to me, while I have been
thinking about these things, and on reading
the bitter and sometimes, I imagine, insincere
criticisms which are made of eugenic policy,
that not quite enough distinction is

D
26 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

commonly drawn between parents as nature
and parents as nurture. What I mean is—they
are both. Plato in the Republic eliminated
them from their children’s environments, a
measure I don’t believe he would have
recommended if he had been writing to-day
after studying modern psychology. Even
to-day two and two are not always put
together. The lady who recently wrote to one
of our week-end reviews saying it was tyrannical and a shame to discourage the feebleminded from having children, because, she
said, most of such children were likely to be
normal... that lady ought to have been
asked whether (apart from the eugenic
aspect of all this) she would think the best
atmosphere for her grandchildren to grow up
in would be a home made for them by a
feeble-minded father. I believe one reason
why the ideal of an élite needs to be taken
seriously is precisely because parents have
this double role—of representing both nature
and nurture. And I should have thought it
was sufficiently obvious that no culture
could regenerate itself all the time: if you
want a civilization of any value it has to have
continuity and stability. It must be a kind
of second nature in the people who are
animated by it. There is a lot of sense in the
well-known saying that it takes three generations to make a gentleman. Rome was not
built in a day, and a favourable atmosphere
for what is best and steadiest in human
personality does not come into existence over
night. For such an atmosphere an élite
appears to me indispensable. They ave the
atmosphere.

The other day a friend, who has reasons to
feel some complacency with his own ancestors, asked me whether, in fact, the Victorian
upper classes had not been very backward as
patrons of the arts. I ought to have had the
presence of mind to answer him with the
words put by Bernard Shaw into the mouth
of his Caesar answering a remark by Apollodorus. “‘ Is peace not an art? Is war not an
art?’ But I should not have cared to round
off with : ‘‘ All these we give you in exchange
for a few ornaments ’’—because, of course, I
think the ornaments almost as important as
Apollodorus the Sicilian did.

Now one of the less amusing paradoxes of
modern history is that the kind of things I
am saying and am going to say would have
been anathema to Karl Marx. It is a paradox
because Marx’s disbelief in the importance of
the impact of individuals on the course of
events has by nothing been more significantly
belied than by his own enormous influence in
our time. I have got to introduce this question of the importance of eminent individuals
because an élite, in my sense, though it may
be known by its standing or privileges, is
NOT in my sense ideal unless its fame and
position are justified by the proved worth of
a sufficient number of the individuals composing it. They must be a constellation of
valuable men and women—real stars—not
just a nebulous confraternity of entrenched
conservatives. And not ALL of them stars.
Among a real élite, sensitive and unworldly
people are not allowed to go to the wall.
Their more imponderable qualities are treated
with consideration and love—they are not
derided. A totalitarian élite has other views ;
a sensitive plant among them could consider
itself happy to be merely sterilized.

Something, then, ought to be said about
this question of the effectiveness of individuals as compared with Movements, and
after that something to explain how the
organization of an élite encourages able
families to pull their weight.

Well, Bryce seems to me to have been
talking good sense when he said: ‘ Think
... what it would have meant in the American Revolutionary War if Clive, who died in
1774, had lived to lead the troops of George
III and had there been no Washington to
oppose him .. . or how different the course
of events in the Civil War if Seward instead
of Lincoln had been nominated at Chicago
for the Presidency.’”’ In an essay he once
wrote called “‘ Is History a Fraud ? ’’ Professor J. B. S. Haldane rejected the claims to
importance of Heroes—and of Movements
too—and of Thinkers into the bargain:
rejected, I mean, their claims to have done
much to change the course of history. Yes
... but a sentence creeps in, in which he says
the very opposite. I quote. “ If Galileo and
a few more like-minded men had been burned
THE IDEAL OF AN ELITE 27

alive at an early age, we might very possibly
still be living under a civilization not greatly
different from that of the middle ages.”’

I don’t think I need go on about this. I do
indeed believe with Kropotkin that common
humanity wonderfully survives the disasters
brought upon it by those men, “ great ”’ in
Fielding’s ironic sense, whose works have
constantly to be undone by the good men.
But this implies that the good men are
effective. They count—and that is what I
believe élites do.

So let me pass to the élites: the families
gifted by nature, nurtured by the opportunities they had the wit and courage to
seize, and to use for founding and perpetuating a certain kind of family tradition. I hope
I shall not get into trouble for quoting a
passage from one of Machiavelli’s Discourses.
He may be your bée noire, but you cannot
deny that he was a shrewd observer and brilliant historian. There are two points here,
both relevant tomy theme. Having remarked
on the contrasting attitudes adopted by a
number of ancient Roman families of equal
distinction, he says’: “‘ This can scarcely be
wholly due to heredity—(‘“‘nascere del sangue”’
are his words)—for intermarriage would
bring about variation: so it must be set
down to the different way in which this
family and that educates its children. For
when a child of tender years begins to understand, it makes a great difference that he
should hear some things spoken of with
approval and some things with disapproval,
since this must needs make an impression on
him, by which, later on, his own conduct will
be regulated in all walks of life. If it were not
so it would have been impossible for the
Appii to have had the same desires, and to
have been moved by the same passions, as
Titus Livy says many of them were. . . .”

What he is saying is, first, that within the
bounds of any particular class there are likely
to be striking differences of social precept and
practice—and this being so I should never
expect any class to be altogether conterminous with a true élite. Secondly, Machiavelli’s intelligent speculation is that, granting
there are hereditary influences at work, it is,
over and above them, something to do with the

way children are brought up—and in a gifted
family more conspicuously than in another—
how they turn out after that, what notions
they have of their obligations to the community, and so forth.

So now I come to what I believe is a fair
illustration of how it all works. It would be
enough to say “¢hat it all works.” This
should show that the “‘ ideal ” part of it isn’t
an airy—or reactionary—notion. In English
history since the beginning of the seventeenth
century four family connections strike me as
having played a quite extraordinary part.

I won’t take the Villiers line, the descendants of Sir George Villiers—eight prime
ministers and so on. By the fact that they
include the cream of our titled aristocracy
we might be involved in too much argument
about the advantage it must have been to
them to live close to the Throne. Nor will I
take the brainy, brawny, philanthropic progeny of the herculean Colonel Barclay, First
of Ury—though not because he and that
other, remoter, sire of the Quaker clan, de
Gournay, were less blue-blooded than those
others (they were not: a fact a little obscured
by their phase of legal subordination). And
thirdly, I shall not speak of that series of
Fellows of the Royal Society and other
remarkable people tracing descent from the
Staffordshire potter Thomas Wedgwood—
with whom, by the way, as with the
Barclays, Francis Galton himself was
connected.

I think the fourth of our élites should suit
us best. So let me quote a few lines from a
book, a novel, written by a highly talented
member of this ideal and at the same time
very substantial élite . . . a book published
in I9QIQ:

Denham had accused Katharine Hilbery of
belonging to one of the most distinguished
families in England, and if anyone will take the
trouble to consult Mr. Galton’s Hereditary Genius
he will find that this assertion is not far from the
truth. The Allardyces, the Hilberys, the Millingtons and the Otways seem, to prove that intellect
is a possession which can be tossed from one
member of a certain group to another almost
indefinitely, and with apparent certainty that
the brilliant gift will be caught and held by nine
out of ten of the privileged race... .

E
28 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Then a little further, the writer, with the
fair-mindedness that goes with just this
“ gift ’’ that she speaks of, admits the possibility of a controversial element. She says:

It may be said, indeed, that English society
being what it is, no very great merit is required,
once you bear a well-known name, to put you
into a position where it is easier on the whole to
be eminent than obscure. And if this is true of
the sons, even the daughters, even in the nineteenth century, are apt to become people of
importance—philanthropists, and educationalists if they are spinsters, and the wives of
distinguished men if they marry.

I shall have a word to say about some of
those women. In general, it is one thing to
step easily into a position of eminence, and
another to distinguish oneself in it. Our
writer really took this for granted, and readily
admitted—with that same fair-mindedness—
that the kind of families she had in mind
produced their exceptional number of black
sheep.

Then notice carefully this sentence :

... The Allardyces had married and intermarried, and their offspring were generally
profuse, and had a way of meeting regularly in
each other’s houses for meals and family celebrations which had acquired a semi-sacred character, and were as regularly observed as days of
feasting and fasting in the Church.

My quotations are from Night and Day...
by Virginia Woolf, daughter of Sir Leslie
Stephen. 7

The historic élite, then, to which I should
like to direct your attention—or that fraction of it that is all we have time to consider
—need be traced back no further than the
mid-eighteenth century, to two Scotsmen,
neither of them grandees. It would be
incautious to put that more strongly, for, as
Shelley’s friend Hogg said of the Scots and
Swiss : “ I should much like to see a person
from either nation of a bad family or of a new
family.’”” Anyhow, from Aberdeen came a
James Stephen and from the Highlands a
John Macaulay ; and another James Stephen
and a Zachary Macaulay found their way to
a village south of London: Clapham. Perhaps a third ancestor might be introduced—
James Pattle, of the Bengal Civil Service,
reputed the biggest. liar in India, who died of

drink, but not before becoming the father of
six beautiful daughters and one plain one.

Now ideally all this should be presented
under some title such as “ From Clapham to
Bloomsbury,” and we should trace the
progeny of twelve sires (twelve isn’t many)
instead of being limited to a glance at only
three lines. Twelve or three—it isn’t a story
of Courtiers or Commissars or Yogis. Clapham in parts was certainly very rich, but the
Stephens and the Macaulays had to earn
their way up. At all events, the descendants
of my three non-aristocratic sires were very
able in each generation; they had family
solidarity ; they gathered round them other
people with their kind of outlook. How much
power to make themselves useful as well as
happy that sort of cliquiness means to the
elbow of people like that ! .. . And between
them and their friends they liberalized—I am
not speaking of economics—as much of the
world as could be liberalized by them. (I
don’t say that nothing that any one of these
did was ever open to criticism.) Without
bothering about chronological order, let me
take some of their women, referred to too
modestly by Mrs. Woolf. When it came to
the revolution in the status of women, and
the period following it also, where should
Oxford and Cambridge have looked for heads
of their women’s colleges except to the women
who had grown up as hitherto unmobilized
units of this élite and the other élites ? Ona
genealogical table you will find Virginia
Woolf between two cousins, Katharine
Stephen (head of Newnham) and Dr. Janet
Vaughan (head of Somerville). Move beyond
Dr. Vaughan and you come to Miss Strachey
(another head of Newnham). The Macaulays
link through the Trevelyans with the descendants of John Penrose; and there you
have a Dame Emily Penrose (another head
of Somerville). And so on.

Of course, if I had been sticking to chronology I should have begun with the antislavery work done by Zachary Macaulay and
Sir James Stephen. Macaulay made such a
good job of running the settlement for poor
negroes in Sierra Leone that when he retired
the British Government took it over as a
Crown Colony. Stephen, whose step-mother
THE IDEAL OF AN ELITE

was Wilberforce’s sister, drafted Buxton’s
Emancipation Bill—he did it in two and a
half days, one of which was a Sunday, and
one of the only two Sundays in his life on
which his evangelical conscience allowed him
to work. The plot thickens. Intermarriages
multiply. These were the days when the pen
was mightier than the sword. I suppose the
books on Constitutional Law by A. V. Dicey,
Stephen’s sister’s son, are classics. One of
his own sons, Leslie Stephen, was a very
notable, very pivotal, figure indeed in English
nineteenth-century history. As a dignified
renegade from the Church he gave social
standing to agnosticism. As editor of the
Dictionary of National Biography he helped
to set on foot a great propaganda for the
serious, truthful appreciation of the national
genius—with a certain bias for the liberal
openness that is still incomplete in his
brother FitzJames’s biographical notice of
their father (not in the D.N.B.).

Meanwhile Zachary Macaulay’s famous
son had written his report on India—a document of which we can really say without
fatuity that it was fraught with historic consequences. The energies of all these people
were stupendous. I wish there was time for
more than a snap of Mrs. Cameron, the plain
Pattle sister, turning at fifty into a pioneer
of art in photography. . . . Lord Macaulay
did not marry, but his sister was the ancestress of eminent Trevelyans, including the
great scholar and liberal the Master of
Trinity. The Macaulays themselves have
been a wonderful academic and _ literary
galaxy, and Miss Rose Macaulay the novelist
is one of them... .

I don’t think we have to go even as far as
this before beginning to feel that to doubt
the ideality of a true élite is pure oafishness.
The special opportunities of birth, the comforts of mutual admiration—when there is
much to admire—and solid support which
membership of clans of this rare kind offers
the well-endowed individual are everybody’s
good fortune. The lives of the ones I am
talking about were worth living. Of the
greater ones among them it could not be
said, as I think Marx said of the Mills, James
and J.S., that they only stood out because of

ters, prison reformers, orientalists.

29

the flatness of the surrounding country.
Indeed it would I think be very difficult for
any man to have had a more desirable human
setting than Leslie Stephen. He married a
lady who must have been the most exquisite
of James Pattle’s grandchildren: you can
read about her in the memoir of Stephen by
F. W. Maitland, who himself owed inspiration for his work to Dicey and his own wife
to the Pattle connection. And his brotherin-law, Lady Stephen’s nephew, was H. A. L.
Fisher, yet another liberal historian in our
élite and, of course, a great name in
education.*

We cannot now go on with the list.
Remember again the words of Virginia
Woolf—how the offspring of the people in
her novel “‘ had a way of meeting regularly
in each other’s houses, etc.”” Well, if you
read the family memoirs of any of our four
élites, say, for instance, Percy Lubbock’s
delightful book about the Gurneys of Earlham, you soon get an idea, if you aren’t
lucky enough to have it already, of why this
family spirit, overlapping into coteries, is the
best humanizing influence in the world. For
such coterie-making people like the Stephens.
have—as someone said to me last week—am
instinct.

This instinct helped to create Bloomsbury,
the group who were the secular liberal successors to the evangelical Clapham sect of a hundred years before. In the interval they had
guided British society into some of its better
courses. I’m afraid Bloomsbury kes been
popularly disparaged, associated with socalled highbrowism. Well, the members of
that set were not only eminent writers and
critics ; also philosophers, economists, painTheirs
was not a narrow and precious culture. And,
by the way, among people like that you can
do your best work and not be afraid of getting the sack. . .. In our not-very-wellpatched-up materialistic society, victim of

two wars and over-population, in which most

* Let me put in here that it seems to me that children
of a father and mother who don’t get on, or who separate, are comparatively safe from psychological troubles
if their parents belong to a large and humane family

group.
30 —Ct« THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of our fellow citizens are much too busy producing goods for export, we still hear a lot
aboutculture. Myimpressionisthat asarbiters
of taste the people who used to live in Gordon
Square exercised a better influence than any
public corporation—in which the closest
bonds are likely to be between the managers,
interested chiefly in management.

This brings me to the moral of it all, as I
see it.

A differential birth-rate and heavy taxation
militate against the survival of an élite as
such. These are in a way greater dangers, to
my mind, than technological and managerial
revolutions per se, for, just as you find able
descendants of sires of our aristocratic élite
on the Labour benches, so you might expect
to find members of any of the true élites
among the managers. I qualified with “ina
way ”’ because a managerial élite, even if
partly drawn from an ideal one, is itself no
true élite: the soczal function has changed—
and ability does not of itself, or when successfully applied to management, confer the title
of élite.

In the last month two interesting articles
have appeared in the papers, relevant to my
theme. In the one, Professor Butterfield,
reviewing the Pembroke papers, describes
English liberty as a. process of privileges
filtering down to an ever broader section of
the population. He writes with satisfaction.
He is thinking more of the past than the
future. In the other article, G. M. Young
writes—with dissatisfaction—of the obstacles
there are nowadays to the continued emergence of what he calls the New Patriciate. It
is a too-theoretical State Socialism that raises
the obstacles. Now we know from recent
history that of all people nowadays the totalitarians most self-consciously believe in
having an élite or vanguard. As James Burnham emphasizes, they insist that their
various élites represent or stand for “‘ the
people as a whole.’”’ This is not what an
élite in my sense quite does. My élite zs something, and it realizes something. When in a
position to maintain itself, such an élite is
ideal for guaranteeing that the filtering-down
process should not be checked ; and at the
same time it is ready to assimilate and make

common cause with the New Patriciate. And
this is how it truly serves ‘‘ the people as a
whole.”’

Discussion

Dr. C. P. Blacker and Mr. Cecil Binney
took part in the discussion which followed at
the Members’ meeting to which this lecture
was addressed.

Dr. Blacker said that, if he understood
Mr. Bloomfield correctly, he (Mr. Bloomfield)
recognised that there were several possible
meanings of the word élite. Yogis, Commissars and Bodhisattvas were members of
élites of certain kinds—trivals of Mr. Bloomfield’s élite; so were Mr. Burnham’s
Managers. Mr. Bloomfield had used the term
to denote members of certain broad family
connections, some doubtless containing their
quota of black sheep, which tended to form
coteries centred on certain places such as
Clapham or Bloomsbury; these produced
men and women eminent in diverse fields
who came to be recognized by posterity as
constituting galaxies or constellations of
talented, energetic and successful people.
Within these kinships were transmitted not
only inborn qualities of value but also family
traditions wherein these qualities flourished
to best advantage. This genealogical ideal
of an élite, advanced by Mr. Bloomfield,
implied that man was not only the architect
of his environment but also its beneficiary.

How are these élite families chosen?
They are not self-nominated, as were Joan of
Arc, Chatham or Trotsky; nor are they
chosen by God, whose ultimate separation of
an elect of sheep from a large but rejected
body of goats hardly affects us in this life ;
not by Pontiffs sanctifying or beatifying posthumously certain favoured mortals who come
to constitute a sort of celestial élite. Nor are
they elected by electorates such as choose
the House of Commons; nor are they
appointed by kings or prime ministers who
keep the House of Lords abreast of the
times ; nor are they picked by people like
Lord Lindsay, albeit that his predecessors as
Masters of Balliol sometimes picked well.

By a process of assortative mating which
THE IDEAL OF AN ELITE 31

is perhaps not entirely fortuitous, the members of Mr. Bloomfield’s élite somehow
choose themselves. When they make these
choices, they are largely unaware of the ideal
they are unconsciously fulfilling. How are
these creative choices and their vitalizing
sequences influenced ? Dr. Blacker suggested
two ways. The first was by means of the
process of assortative mating ; not only was
geographical mobility here important—the
sort of mobility which made it possible for a
James Stephen from Aberdeen and a John
Macaulay from the Highlands to come
together—but also a social mobility by which
individuals who are appropriately endowed
will be translated into a stratum in which
they can meet people like themselves. Such
geographical and social movements perhaps
occur more readily to-day than formerly.
The second process consisted in what Mr.
Bloomfield had called proliferation (proles
and fero): numerous offspring should be
born. Here we are less well placed to-day
than were our forebears. James Pattle, if he
had lived to-day, might have had but two
daughters instead of seven, six beautiful and
one plain.

There might be reasons, suggested Dr.
Blacker, other than the movement towards
egalitarianism why the ideal of an élite was
unpopular to-day. By his race theories and
persecutions, Hitler, a follower of Nietzsche,
had so poisoned the word that on some lips
it was tainted. The Americans, for whom the
word “ democratic’’ connotes something
approaching an absolute good, abjure the
antithetical conception of aristocracy. And
Mr. Bloomfield had reminded us of the
influence of Marx. But the countries and the
systems which most passionately reject the
notion of a genealogical élite nevertheless
take pains to foster what might be called an
eclectic élite. The Kremlin vests power and
prestige in the members of the Communist
Party, led by Commissars, who are a political
élite. And most American universities have
followed the prototype of the German
students corps in developing their system of
fraternities of which the members may enjoy
the prestige of an élite.

Dr. Blacker went on to say that recent

political developments in this country gave
more prominence to the ideal of an eclectic
than of a genealogical élite. A socialist
society like ours, though striving to realize
the ideal of equality, must yet appoint its
tiers of bureaucrats who constitute a managerial élite after the pattern of Burnham.
Every organised community has its own
particular system of authority and delegated
responsibility. Authority and responsibility,
wielded by or resting upon a minority which
is in fact an eclectic élite, must permeate a
ministry, an industry, a political party or a
profession no less than a battalion or a ship.
The problem which increasingly confronts. us
to-day, when widened educational opportunities have facilitated social mobility, is to
select the right people for our managerial
élite. In Napoleon’s army every private
soldier was encouraged to think that he held
a field-marshal’s baton in his knapsack ; in
the secondary schools of to-day every boy
has at least as much reason to believe that he
holds a bureaucrat’s fountain pen in his
waistcoat pocket. Dr. Blacker quoted the
findings of Proctor, an American psychologist, who in 1923 studied the aspirations of
American high-school boys. Proctor found
that sixty-one per cent of his boys aspired to
occupations for which there were social
vacancies for under five per cent. If the
fashions of thought, the tone and the moral
code which prevail in a community are in
fact set by a small but influential minority,
then it is essential that this minority should
be properly picked. But how are we to find
the men and women with the requisite
ability, integrity, energy and imaginativeness ? How is the raw material of our eclectic
élite to be identified ? That is perhaps the
central problem which to-day confronts the
social administrator and the political theorist.

* ok *

Mr. Cecil Binney, while expressing his
appreciation of the paper, questioned whether
the reader was correct in regarding an élite
as essentially hereditary, and said that he
agreed with the Russians and Americans as
depicted by Mr. Bloomfield though he was
not himself either, but a Manchester liberal
32
and an opponent of the hereditary system.
This might sound heretical, but it was noteworthy that as belief in hereditary qualities
had increased, largely as a result of Galton’s
work, so belief in hereditary institutions had
declined. The House of Commons, which was
elective, was exalted above the House of
Lords, which was hereditary. There was
really no inconsistency, for there was a limit
to the extent to which qualities were
inherited, and the best government would be
made by selection, but paying special attention to those who might be expected to have
inherited ability. The Russian Commissars,
who doubtless regarded themselves as an
élite, were the successors of the Turkish
Empire, where there was no hereditary aristocracy, partly because the absence of surnames made it difficult to identify relationship ; but the most remarkable example of
an élite class which was not hereditary was
supplied by the bishops of the medizval
Church, who were a small class selected from
the select class of clergy.

Turning to the question how far progress
was due to individual men, Mr. Binney suggested that scientists were a bad example.
Science progressed gradually, and some
inventions had been made simultaneously by
more than one person. To take the most

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

obvious modern example, none of us knew
who invented the atomic bomb ; if fifty of
those engaged on it had been put to death, it
would only have been invented some years
later. It was otherwise with political events ;
some events of far-reaching consequence
were due to a particular personality, and it
was a melancholy reflection that the decisive
fact was often not the appearance of a man
of genius but the existence in a position of
importance of a person of unusual incompetence. He suggested that the most interesting of the ‘ifs’ of history was what would
have happened if Charles I’s elder brother
had survived and come to the throne. Even
if he had not been the very remarkable man
he was believed to be, he could scarcely
have been like Charles I, who threw away a
position of immense strength. On the other
hand, Cromwell, though a man of great
ability, could never have established anything permanent in view of the enormous
feeling in favour of the monarchy. The same
might be said of the Russian revolution ;
only a small number of people could ever
have desired the present régime; the
Czarist régime was in urgent need of reform,
but there was no reason why the Czar, had
he been a man of ability, might not have
preserved the monarchy in an altered form.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLII, No. 1
