INTERNATIONAL EUGENICS FEDERATION

Report of the Annual Meetin?,

gress the International Federation of

Eugenics Organizations met under a
new President, Dr. Charles B. Davenport—
Major Darwin having retired at the Amsterdam meeting in 1927.

Especial interest attaches to this meeting,
held in Munich, from the fact that amongst
the scientists entertaining the Federation
was Dr. Ploetz (vice-President), who founded
not only the first Race Hygiene Society in
Germany (some years before the Eugenics
Society had its birth) but who also initiated
international work long before the first
International Congress in London 1912.

The President was the only representative
from the United States. Cuba sent as delegate Dr. J. E. de Sandoval, Secretaria de
Sanidad, Havana, who is representing in
Europe the newly formed office of Eugenics
and Homiculture established in December
last year as the centre of the Pan-American
Union. In addition to Dr. A. Ploetz, Germany was also represented by Professor
Dr. Lenz (acting as delegate for Dr. Otto
Krohne). For Great Britain Sir Bernard
Mallet, K.C.B., and Dr. Schiller (representing Professor MacBride) attended. Dr.
Gini from Italy and the two Netherlands
delegates, Dr. van Herwerden and Dr. Frets,
were present. Dr. Jon Alfred Mjoen came
from Norway, and the Polish Society was
represented by Dr. Victor Borkowski,
bringing credentials from the Polish
Government, whose courtesy in thus honouring the Federation is gratefully recorded.
Dr. Otto Schlaginhaufen, Director of the
Swiss Institute of Race Biology in Zurich,
vice-President for the past year, represented
Switzerland. The first meeting was held at
the Hygiene Institute. The election of
Austria as a co-operating country was proposed by the President, and Dr. Reichel, one
of the promoters of the Vienna Society for
Race Hygiene, took his place on the
Federation.

| ‘OR the first time since the last Con
The Report for the year presented by the
Administrative Secretary showed the decease of Professor Johannsen of Denmark,
and the retirement of Dr. Lucien March of
France, who has been a member since 1921.
It was also reported that the President had
attended the Pan-American Congress in
Havana. He gave an account of the
proceedings and of the formation of the
Pan-American Union for Eugenics and
Homiculture.

_It was agreed to amend the constitution of
the Federation so as to allow of representation on the Federation of Unions formed for
analogous studies, and for work of an international character. An invitation will be
sent to the Union as well as to the States
who have joined it, to maintain membership.

Sir Bernard Mallet described the organization of the International Union for the
Scientific Study of Population Problems, of
which he is a vice-President, and proposed
that future co-operation with this Union
should be realized when possible.

The members for Italy elected in 1925
were re-elected for a further term of three
years, as was also Dr. Frets. Two further
additions to the Federation are the Genetical
Institute of Helsingfors for Finland, and the
Eugenics Society of Esthonia. A new
member was elected for a term of three years
for Norway in the person of Dr. Halfdan
Bryn, President of the Royal Academy of
Science at Trondhjem, surgeon in the
Army, well-known for his work in physical
anthropology. .

MEETING IN ROME

The President took the advice of the meeting on the question of future assemblies,
accepting an invitation from Italy to hold the
Federation in Rome simultaneously with the
Italian National Eugenics Congress at the
end of September, 1929, and in Zurich in
1930. He also announced that in 1932 the
International Genetical Congress will be

185
186

held in Ithaca, New York. The American
members were empowered to attempt to arrange that the sections on Eugenics and
Heredity of Man should be organized in conjunction with the International Federation
in lieu of a yearly Eugenics Congress.

The Federation having accepted the resignation of Dr. Govaerts from the Scientific
Secretaryship, he, together with Dr. Gini,
were elected vice-Presidents for the ensuing
year. It had been hoped that Dr. van
Herwerden would take over the secretaryship given up by Dr. Govaerts; but as she
was unable to accept his post owing to pressure of other work, it was agreed to allow
the secretaryship to lapse until the next
meeting.

On the presentation of the financial statement by the Administrative Secretary
(audited by Dr. Gini), the Italian and Swiss
delegates (commenting on the fact that five
countries had failed to make contributions
in the past year), suggested that the constitution and work of the Federation should be
revised. A decision was deferred, all countries being asked to suggest whether the
work of the Federation should be reduced or
increased.

Reports were presented on other international activities.

(2) An International Congress on Tuberculosis is being held in Rome during the
autumn and Dr. Ensch (who was prevented
from attendance at Munich because he is
going to Rome) was appointed as delegate
from the Federation.

(b) The President reported that the prize
known as the ‘‘ Draper Prize’’ is being
offered both in the States and in Europe
for a work (to be completed by next May)
on ‘‘ The relative fertility of Nordic and
other peoples in any region of Europe or the
States.”’

(c) Dr. Gini announced that the Bibliothéque Internationale would probably not
be continued beyond the first two volumes,
as the Society in Rome, which had proposed
to give financial assistance, had been dissolved : it is hoped, however, to publish the
volume for Italy and one for Belgium, a

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

manuscript of which has been sent in by
Dr. Govaerts.

(d) Dr. Mjoen reported that the work of
the Programme Committee was nearly completed, as all the original members of that
Committee have now approved of the Programme with the exception of Professor
Nilsson-Ehle, whose reply has been delayed through illness. Dr. Mjoen is also
collecting comments from a number of
specialists and from some Societies, and has
published those already received in book
form from the Winderen Laboratory.

WAR AND EUGENICS

The International Committee on the
eugenic or dysgenic effects of war.—This
Committee, initiated last year, will be under
the direction of Dr. Gini, and the following
have already agreed to take part in the
work :

General Harrison Hunt (Michigan) and
Lieutenant-Colonel A. G. Love, U.S.
Army ; Surgeon-General Jungblut (Berlin) ;
Dr. W. Winkler (Vienna); Count Yanagisawa (Tokyo); Dr. Govaerts (Belgium) ;
Professor Carr-Saunders and Dr. Stevenson
(England).

The Federation agreed to Dr. Gini’s proposal to secure two members, one from the
army and one scientist, from each of the
belligerent countries, and also to include
inquiries in neutral countries which had
been considerably affected by war conditions, having one representative for each of
these latter.

(f) The President reported progress in the
formation of the Committee on Race-crossing, and in view of the fact that Professor
Lundborg, although willing to serve on the
committee will not undertake the chairmanship, it was agreed that he should himself
fill that post. The first work of this Committee will be the ascertainment of areas in
which studies of human hybrids can be most
usefully undertaken, and a further objective will be the standardization of methods,
anthropometrical, psychological, and physiological, in the hope of so co-ordinating
work as to secure comparable results in
different fields. The members are ProINTERNATIONAL FEDERATION

fessor Hermann Lundborg, Professor Nilsson-Ehle, Dr. Mjoen, Dr. Eugen Fischer,
and Dr. Rodenwaldt.

The Federation asked that as further
details in the programmes of others of the
foregoing Committee are available, they
may be brought before them for discussion,
together with further objectives included in
research programmes.

A small sub-committee investigated the
question of future finance, and the Federation finally approved a proposal to assess
each Society or Institute maintaining membership, instead of making an assessment
of annual contributions from the States to
which these Societies belong, such assessment to be revised annually and for the
current year to stand at fifty shillings
(English).

THE MIGRATION PROBLEM

The most lively discussion of the assembly was aroused by the resolution deferred
last year and standing in the name of Dr.
Frets, on the desirability of immigrant receiving countries making inquiries into the
family histories of intending immigrants
as well as into their personal performances.
Finally a vote was taken in which Dr, Frets,
Dr. van Herwerden, Dr. Lenz, Dr. Ploetz,
Dr. Reichl, and Dr. Schlaginhaufen, voted
in favour—while Dr. Gini, Sir Bernard
Mallet, Dr. Mjoen, and Dr. Schiller voted
against.

A public meeting was organized by the
Munich Eugenic Society on Thursday evening, Professor Rtidin gave an hour’s
address, in which he surveyed eugenic
aspects of recent psychiatric work.

Dr. Davenport opened the proceedings by
giving a brief and comprehensive account of
his work on F.1.hybrids in Jamaica. In
particular, the mental tests taken on this
group showed a much wider range of variation than that which obtains in either the
white or black parental races, and although
in intelligence tests some of the hybrids

187

score higher than the less intelligent
parental group, the hybrids also contain the
largest number of least well endowed (all
three groups being considered).

To those who read or heard Dr.
Nilsson-Ehle’s interesting discourse at
Amsterdam on crosses these data gave striking corroboration of the plant phenomena
which he had described.

A further interesting survey of racemixture (sent by Professor Lundborg) was
read by Dr. Lenz, and Dr. Davenport read a
careful paper sent by Dr. Laughlin surveying sterilization in the United States to
date.

On the afternoon of Thursday the whole
party went out to the fine new Kaiser Wilhelm Institute (built partly by the Rockefeller Foundation) in which the work of
Kraepelin is being carried on. Dr. Riidin,
who will soon take up residence in Munich
as Director, came all the way from Basle to
explain the work to the visiting members.

On Friday afternoon Dr. and Mrs.
Ploetz, with their family, entertained the
Federation and Conference visitors at their
house in Herrsching.

The Federation and visiting scientists
were entertained at dinner on Friday night
in the Bayrischehof by Dr. and Mrs. Ploetz.
Dr. Davenport delivered the greetings sent
by the Honorary President, Major Leonard
Darwin, to the Federation and their German
entertainers, in response to which (on the
proposal of Miss van Herwerden), the telegram of greeting was dispatched.—‘ A ffectionate greetings of Federation and guests
assembled at Ploetz dinner.’’ *

It is hoped that the papers read at the
Conference will be published in the German
or English journals so that they will be
available to general readers.

Abstract from the Administrative
Secretary’s Report.
* Major Darwin’s reply was, ‘‘ Warmly appreciate

kind greeting, and with every success to
Federation.”’

Eugenics Review, Vol. XX, No. 3.
