PHYSIQUE AND CHOICE OF CAREER*

By J. M. TANNER,

Introduction

ERY many considerations enter into

\ | the choice of a career. There is the
family expectation, bound up with
social prestige and financial reward. There
is the inspiring example of an admired
figure, whether artist, scientist, moneyspinner, craftsman, teacher or criminal.
There is the recognition during the educational period of special latent abilities,
making success in some careers more
probable than in others. There is also, and
most importantly, the desire to lead one
sort of a life rather than another, a desire
which springs from sources within the individual. Entrants to a life-long career
match up the demands of their temperament
with the opportunities for satisfying these
demands that their projected role in the
community will give them. It is unlikely,
for example, that an individual whose prime
loves are for physical adventure and social
participation will choose a career of librarianship. (The extreme or the perversion of this

normal process also occurs, when the needs

are psychopathological and complex- rather
than imstinct- and training-determined; the
individual is impelled towards a _ career
which may be highly unsuitable—that is
may satisfy his neurotic but not his normal
needs).t

* A paper read at a Members’ Meeting of the
Eugenics Society on March 24th, 1954.

t What Adrian (1953) has said recently about the
factors governing the choice of a medical career is
characteristically clear-sighted and unanxious: ‘‘ Most
of us were at school when we decided to become doctors
and no doubt we believed that the chief reason for our
choice was a praiseworthy desire to look after our
fellow men when they were sick. At that age one is not
ashamed of generous impulses and has not learnt to
question their origin. Few of us now would be bold
enough to assert that we can always deciderationally and
from the best of motives; we may suspect that we took to
medicine to please or spite our parents or because
we wanted power over weaker people or for the more
prosaic reason that circumstances conspired to push us
into it. Yet the fact that there is a good reason for medical
work is not to be set aside, and most of us can take
comfort in the reflection that in this case at all events
our unconscious urges made us choose very sensibly.”’

M.D., Ph.D., D.P.M.

With this in mind, it may not seem particularly strange that one of the factors
affecting the choice of career is the individual’s physique, and more particularly
his shape and tissue structure rather than his
size. It is this factor, amongst the many,
that I wish to talk about, and I should
emphasize that the singling out of this one
aspect for study and description by no
means implies a wish to exalt it in importance over the others. It is a convenient
factor to study, it allows of quantitative
and objective results, it has some possibility
of serving as a link between many of the
other factors, in a way I shall discuss later,
and it interests me personally : that is all.

So first I shall present evidence, both from
my own and other people’s studies, that
different careers actually do attract persons
of different physiques ; then I shall discuss
reasons why this should be so, and lastly I
shall pass in brief, speculation the way in
which such choices influence and on occasion
change our culture, using that word in the
anthropologist’s sense.

Comparison of Physiques of Sandhurst Cadets,
Oxford University Students and Medical
Students

Materral. The material that I want to
spend most of the time discussing consists
of 287 officer cadets of the Royal Military
Academy, Sandhurst, constituting the entire
intake of March 1952 ; 171 Oxford University
students constituting a 50 per cent sample of
the freshmen of two colleges in 1949 and
1950; and 162 medical students of St.
Thomas’s Hospital of the University of
London, constituting the entire male entry
at the preclinical stage for the years 1950 to
1953 inclusive. Thus for the medical students
and the officer cadets the sample was a
complete one. For the Oxford students it
was far from this, and consisted of those
who volunteered to attend for examination
at the Pilot Student Health Service at that

149
150
time operating there. Such a selection might
well be suspected of bias, but at least in the
most important respect—that is in the character which most clearly differentiates Oxford
students from the other two groups—it was
possible to demonstrate for one of the two
colleges that no bias occurred.* Briefly, a
list of all those who represented the college
at some game or other was obtained, with
the presumption that these were the people
relatively high in mesomorphy, the component of physique apparently lower in this
group than in the others. It was then
possible to discover whether these gamesplayers had volunteered in deficient or
excessive numbers for our study. The
statistical result was clear-cut ; the gamesplayers and non-games-players turned up in
equal proportions ; games-playing was quite
unrelated to volunteering. The second college
could not be studied in this way, but as no
significant differences in physique occurred
between the two colleges, the presumption is
that no bias of this sort occurred there
either. So that in all probability these 171
students do constitute a relatively unbiased
sample of Oxford University students.
Methods. All three groups had_ their
physique assessed in precisely the same way.
some dozen anthropometric measurements
were taken, in every case by the same
anthropometrist, Mr. R. H. Whitehouse.
Photogrammetric photographs were taken,t
and the pictures somatotyped by the usual
anthroposcopic procedure plus the use of

3 ——_—.
the Ht./,/Wt. tables.| Miss Barbara
Honeyman kindly somatotyped all the
pictures as well as and independently of
me, and Dr. C. W. Dupertuis also somatotyped a number of them. The results of all
three observers agreed closely, and have
recently been published in full. The final
somatotype was agreed between Miss Honeyman and myself, with reference of some
cases to Dr. Sheldon. Dealing with this

age group, and having access to this expert

* Tanner, 1952a.

+ Dupertuis and. Tanner,
1953a.

ft Sheldon, 1940; Tanner, 1953b.

1950; Tanner,

1951;

§ Tanner, 1954.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

help, I am in little doubt that the somatotypes are substantially correct. Also
all three groups were somatotyped together
so that no possibility of bias on going from
one group to another occurred. The details
of the way in which the physical measurements and the pictures were taken can be
found elsewhere.|| A description of the
somatotype classification of physique will
be found in Sheldon (1940), and a more
recent appraisal of it in Tanner (1953 a, b).

Results

(a) Physical measurements. A full account
of the ‘physical measurements will be
published elsewhere ; suffice it to say that
there are no significant differences in height
between the three groups, but that the
Oxford students weigh slightly less than
the other two groups, particularly when the
effect of age is allowed for. (The mean ages
are 18-5 for the cadets, 22:1 for the medical
students and 21:0 for the Oxford students,
but the range was greater for the medical
and Oxford groups, and a small significant
increase of weight with age was apparent in
the Oxford, but not in the medical students.
This small age difference is practically without effect on the other physical measurements and entirely without effect on the
somatotypes). There is very little difference
between, the three groups in gross body size,
as estimated by surface area. The officer
cadets, however, have wider shoulders and
thicker knees and elbows than the two
student groups.

TABLE 1

MEAN SOMATOTYPE RATINGS FOR R.M.A. OFFICER CADETS, MEDICAL
STUDENTS, AND OXFORD STUDENTS (ABOVE) AND DIFFERENCES BETWEEN
MEANS (BELOW)
Endomorphy Mesomorphy Ectomorphy
3°68

Officer cadets (287) .. 3°07 4°53

Medical students (162) | 2°85 4°20 3°83
Oxford students (171) 3°27 3°62 3°88
Cadets—Medical + -g2** + +33%* —-15*
Cadets—Oxford —+20** +-or** —-20*
Medical—Oxford —-42** +56" —+05

** Significant at r per cent level.
* Significant at 5 per cent level.

(b) Somatotypes. The differences in
physique are most succinctly shown by

|, Tanner and Weiner, 1949; Tanner, 1953a.
PHYSIQUE AND CHOICE OF CAREER

the somatotypes, in which very clear-cut
distinctions appear.* These are shown in
Table 1. All the differences except one are
statistically significant. The most striking

MESOMORPHY

 

»

é ea
E [a
res
S
z
é / oz e
zz o™ “nm
e
au ZZ
a”
0
ENDOMORPHY
os
Cron = me
RP ie eno, 9
OMORPy,

 

I5r

comparison is of officer cadets with Oxford
students ; the cadets are much more mesomorphic, and somewhat lower in endomorphy
and ectomorphy. The medical students lie

OXFORD STUDENTS 1948-50
N= 285

e ee ECTOMORPHY

a7

as a>
quot?

ect
“apni
ewoowo®

Fic. 1
Somatotype distribution of 283 Oxford University students. (From Tanner, 1953a.)

*In the somatotype classification of body build
there are three components, each rated 1 to 7 on
a series of criteria. Everybody has some of each
component; there are no “‘types.’’ The components
are negatively intercorrelated so that people designated by the three ratings 262 and 253 exist, but
not people such as 111, 777 or 266. The first component,
called endomorphy, has as its extreme the 711, who is
as near spherical as is humanly possible; he has a round
head, a large fat abdomen predominating over his

thorax, weak, floppy, penguin-like arms and _ legs, |

antero-posterior diameters of the body which are
relatively greater than those of the other extremes,
and usually much subcutaneous fat. The second
component, called mesomorphy, has as its 171 extreme
the classical Hercules, with bone and muscle predominating, a cubical massive head, broad shoulders
and chest, heavily muscled arms and legs and low
antero-posterior body diameters. The third component,
called ectomorphy, has as its 117 extreme the totally
linear man, with a thin peaked face with receding chin
and high forehead, a narrow body, spindly arms and
legs, and a large skin and nervous system area relative
to his size.

between the other two groups in mesomorphy ; in endomorphy they are lowest.
Both student groups exceed the officer
cadets in ectomorphy, but do not differ
between themselves. The somatotype distributions of the cadets and of a somewhat
larger group of Oxford students (obtained
under the same circumstances as the 171)
are given in Figures 1 and 2, and in Figure 3
both the cadets and the 171 Oxford students
are plotted simultaneously. The three components are plotted on triangular graph
paper: the preponderance of those high in
mesomorphy (at the peak of the triangle)

. amongst the cadets can be seen by looking at

the dotted distributions, and is demonstrated in Figure 3 by the numbers given
outside each sector of the triangle.
152

Other Authors’ Results

There are thus very distinct differences
between those who choose a career as Army
officers, as doctors:or as ex-graduates of
Oxford University. Before discussing the
reason for these differences, let me draw to
your attention various other studies on the
same subject, all of which, happily, show a
very fair measure of agreement.

Perhaps the most striking of these, and
the only one generally available (which
Hooton 1948, is not) dealing with normal
adults is Garn and Gertler’s (1950). In the
course of work on the relation of physique
and coronary heart disease, Garn and
Gertler had occasion to measure and somatotype a sample of 100 healthy men employed
in a general factory plant. Of these, twenty

were actively concerned with research, either |

as scientific -workers or as technical assist
 

THE EUGENICS REVIEW ee

executive and planning ones. Table 2
shows some of the measurements given in the
original paper, comparing the two groups.

TABLE 2
DIFFERENCES IN SELECTED MEASUREMENTS BETWEEN TWENTY SuUBJECTS WORKING IN A RESEARCH GROUP AND EIGHTY SUBJECTS WORKING IN THE GENERAL PLANT OF A Factory. Data ABSTRACTED FROM
GARN AND GERTLER, 1950

Difference
Measurement Plant Research (R-P) st

+ 35°2 33°3 —I9 1-2
Aeight (cm. ) 176-9 179°3 +2:7 2-1
Weight (Ib.) . 176°6 167'2 — 94 r°6
Height/Weight .. .. 12-4 12°9 +0°5 3°1
Nose length (mm.) .. 56°3 58-4 +19 3°0
Chest breadth (cm.) a 30°5 28:9 —1°6 3°1
Waist breadth (cm.) a3 29°7 27°9 —1°8 3°5
Chest depth (cm.) a 22-9 21-2 —I-7 29 .
Endomorphy .- He 3°8 3°2 —o'6 2°4
Mesomorphy #8 es 4:0 3°4 +0°6 2°3
Ectomorphy 29 4°2 —1I'3 5°2

tis he ratio at the difference to its standard error.

There are very clear statistical differences,
both in straight measurements and in the
somatotypes. The research group is considerably more ectomorphic, and correspondingly rather lower in the other two

ants, while the remaining eighty were in the components. The physical measurements,
general plant on various duties, excluding when surveyed in full, bear out this
SANDHURST CADETS 1952
. MESOHONFEY N=287
ae
ee eer
FF of
& ea se iy a
eo an
5454: Z @e . e e. . . “
e %e eo *
a Na? ”
f/ #3 “te
i/. " fo os woe
z sae  @& 9 a
i / ¢3 ° a ° °
¥ m™ - a 34
ai ao
ENDOMORPHY cTOMCAPHY

fcr os
MOR, 4
c

00M ORE Hs

 

as
as a
waren?

i, al ecto

enDoworrnr©

Fic. 2

Somatotype distribation of 287 officer cadets of the Royal Military Academy, Sandhurst.
(From Tanner, 1953a.)
PHYSIQUE AND CHOICE OF CAREER

conclusion in detail. The two groups were
closely comparable in age and in ethnic
origins, and seemed to differ only in that
more college graduates were in the research
group than in the remainder. Accordingly

153
between those convicted of different sorts of

crime. Lacking any very workable classification of physique, his study was more of a.

‘high-altitude aerial survey than a detailed

Garn and Gertler measured also the execu- ©

tives of the factory, who were largely college
trained ; but found these were very closely °

matched with the general plant physique
and actually differed from the research group
slightly more, rather than less, than did the
general plant group. So the difference, as
in the case of medical students and army
officers, lies not so much in educational level,
as in some deliberate choice of a preferred
type of work. |

The other groups that have been studied
are criminals, delinquents and students.
Hooton (1939), in an immense study of the
morphology of some 17,000 prison and reformatory inmates, showed that significant
differences in various measurements existed

map of the ground, but he did show,- for
example, that those persons who were in
both the shortest one-sixth and the heaviest
one-sixth of his population headed the list
of crimes for rape and sex offences and
assault but were lowest (of nine groups) in
murder, whereas the converse extreme group
of tall and. slender criminals were first in
murder and robbery, but lowest or next to
lowest in burglary, assault and rape and
other sex offences.

The study of juvenile delinquents by the
Gluecks (1950) dealt with delinquents as
opposed to non-delinquents only, but, with
the advent of somatotyping, produced much
more clear-cut and comprehensible results.
Five hundred delinquent boys age eleven to
eighteen: were measured and somatotyped

W SANDHURST CADETS

MESOMORPHY

WA ws
v 34 a
Vv
0 15 f/* .” v
8 v
v
“tH f v v " v ee
oN yy "° vv

oo (UWF
@ vee ia © ov
i : v Ze ¥ °
eee o3a Vv
¥ 1 ext ° a 634
“ °

 

 

OXFORD STUDENTS

oO

 

Fic. 3

Somatotype distributions of Oxford students and Sandhurst cadets compared.
(From Tanner, 19538.)
154

by Dr. C. C. Seltzer (as part of a much wider
sociological work-up) and compared with
500 non-delinquent controls carefully
matched for age, general intelligence, ethnic
origin and residence in underprivileged
neighbourhoods. There emerged the clearest
evidence, both from the statistical comparisons of measurements and from the somatotype comparisons (which are difficult at this
age) that, although the two groups differed
insignificantly in general body size, - the
delinquents were considerably more mesomorphic. They were also less in ectomorphy,

3 ———

with a lower Ht./,/Wt. ratio at each
year of age from eleven to sixteen and over.
There seemed to be less difference in
endomorphy ; the greater amount lay with
the non-delinquents, but not by much.
These differences, then, are in the same
direction as those between the officer cadets
and the Oxford students,:a not altogether
facetious comparison to which I
return later. Sheldon, Hartl and McDermott
(1949) and Epps and Parnell (1952), have
also discussed physique in relation to
delinquency.

Lastly, returning to students, there are
three studies that should be mentioned, the
latter two dealing with choice of faculty
within a general university group. The first,
by Woods, Brouha and Seltzer (1943)
compared the ratings of potential excellence
as an army officer made on Harvard
University Officer Training Corps students
by their officer instructors with their
physique as determined by Seltzer. The
only characteristic specifically considered
was the masculine-feminine component of
build* which is fairly: closely related to
mesomorphy. An association was found
between masculinity of build and _ high

ratings for officer excellence. Later Seltzer

(1945) found that in 258 students studied
under the auspices of the Grant Foundation
at Harvard that there was a significant
relation between choice of faculty and
masculinity component. I have gathered

togéther his figures and given them in Table

* Tanner, 1951.

shall

s

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

3, together with the appropriate statistical.
test. Evidently there is a_ predilection

TABLE 3

RELATION OF FacuLty CHOICE AND MASCULINE COMPONENT OF
PHysiQvE In 258 Harvarp UNIVERSITY STUDENTS. DATA FROM
SELTZER, 1945

Masculine component
High
Faculty choice
Natural and social sciences... °
Arts, letters and philosophy ..

? = 11-3,

. &I7I
60
P = <-oo1

11 (6 per cent)
16 (21 per cent)

towards arts, letters and philosophy on the
part of those low in physical masculinity
(and hence also low in mesomorphy). The
results of Terman and Miles (1936) on the
relation of occupation and psychological
masculinity should be compared with this.

Finally, there is a recent study by Parnell
(1953) in this country, which is perhaps
open to criticism on the ground that many
of the somatotypes have been obtained in an
unconventional and at present unwarranted
manner, and also for its sketchy statistical
treatment. The results nevertheless agree
with the expectations derived from previous
work ; the chief finding is that students of
engineering, dentistry and medicine are
more mesomorphic and less ectomorphic
than students of physics and chemistry.

To all these studies I would like to add one
clinical impression and one serious though
provocative remark. It seems to me that
professional mathematicians, taken as a
group, are more ectomorphic than most
other academics; and I believe it would
be most illuminating to see what assortment of physiques with specialisms occurred
in the very wide spectrum of possible lives
offered by the medical profession.

Discussion

So much then for the evidence that some
relation exists between physique and choice
of career. We must now discuss the possible
ways in which this relation may arise. Let
us go back for an example to the comparison of the more mesomorphic officer
cadets with the more ectomorphic Oxford
students.

The difference between these two groups
might be due to the following causes :
PHYSIQUE AND CHOICE OF CAREER

(a) Social background, i.e. early environmental effects.

(0) Self-selection by subjects (or subjects’
parents) of their career.

(c) Institution selection, of those presenting themselves as candidates for
entry.

(Z@) Physical changes after entry to the
institution.

The social background certainly cannot
account for the differences, since the small
effect of social class on physique is in the
opposite direction. The backgrounds of the
officer cadets and Oxford students are
fairly similar, but on the whole a greater
proportion of the cadets are from the higher
social classes. The effect of social class on
physique probably continues to operate even
with the Registrar-General’s categories I and
II but it is in the direction of the higher
class being more ectomorphic, or at least
having less weight for given height.* For
the juvenile delinquents of the Gluecks,
social class was carefully matched between
the two groups; in Garn and Gertler’s
factory workers educational level, closely
related to social class, was shown to have no
effect ; and in Seltzer’s study of faculty
choice social class and many other socioloical variables were compared between the
two groups without any significant differences
emerging.

Physical change after entry to the. institutions must be seriously considered for
the Sandhurst-Oxford comparison, though
it is irrevelant to the delinquent and to the
student faculty-choice data. Even for the
cadets, however, it must be rejected as
responsible for more than a very small
fraction of the differences observed. It is
true that the cadets had for several weeks
before measurement been taking more
exercise than the students, but exercise of
this variety has very little if any effect
on muscular bulk and none whatever on the
skeleton. Even the far more strenuous
and effective exercise of weight-lifting,
specifically designed to increase muscular
bulk, has been shown to produce unspec
* Healy, 1952.

155,

tacular and transient effects in young men,
and to have had very little effect on anthroposcopic ratings of somatotype.f

The remaining two causes, self- and institution-selection are without doubt the
main ones. The officer cadets and the
students are both self- and _ institutionselected, and selected for differing attributes. These attributes are to a small
extent physical and so very intimately linked
with physique—the good games-player has
a better chance of being accepted as an
officer cadet and even, it is rumoured, as a
medical student. But probably the chief
differentiating attributes are psychological,
in the sphere of temperament. The life and
interests of an army officer differ from those
of a doctor, and entrants to either profession
go through the matching process I have
mentioned before, equating the demands of
their temperament with the opportunities
for satisfying them that their projected
career will give. It seems that the more
ectomorphic men, on the whole, find at least
the appearance of a satisfactory life more
in medicine than in the Army; the more
mesomorphic find the reverse.

These studies lend support, at least in a
general way, to the findings of Sheldon and
and Stevens (1942) on the relation of
physique and temperament. Mesomorphy
in physique is alleged to be related to a
component of temperament called somatotonia, which is defined by high relative
scores in such traits as assertiveness of
posture, love of physical adventure, need
for and enjoyment of physical exercise, love
of power and domination over things and
people, ruthlessness, physical courage, indifference to pain, aggression and assertiveness under the influence of alcohol, need of
action when troubled, and love of the goals
and activities of youth. This is the extraversion of action, and these are traits prized

highly (though of course not exclusively)

in the combat officer. Ectomorphy, on the
other hand, is related, it is said, to temperamental cerebrotonia, defined as high scores
in traits such as restraint in posture, love of

jf Tanner, 1952b.
; 156,

privacy,. inhibited social address, self-consciousness, abhorrence of noisiness, hyper‘sensitivity to pain, secretiveness of feeling,
need of solitude when troubled and orienta_ tion towards the goals and activities of
. later periods of life. Cerebrotonia is practically the equivalent of Jung’s introversion ;
and these traits do perhaps in fact distinguish
the academic group ; at least one can hazard
_ the generalization that extreme cerebrotonia
is as yet more acceptable than extreme
somatotonia in a Senior Common Room of
one of the older universities.

Then there is the fact that both combat
officers and juvenile delinquents (and in
later studies by Sheldon’s group, adult
criminals also) are comparable in being above
average in mesomorphy. This is not in the
least surprising, but it is instructive, and
exemplifies well the relation I believe to
exist between individual constitution and
the group culture. For both careers some
of the expectations of behaviour are the
same—power, risk, action, crisis—; it is
the object, in the psychoanalytical sense,
towards which this energy is directed which
is different. The somatotonic energy and
drive, the need to express these traits of
behaviour, is, I believe, fundamentally
inborn, though certainly open to some
moulding in childhood, and it is the sort of
built-in, trammelled, energy, which the
ethologists have investigated so beautifully
in animal experiments.* It seems to me that
somatotonia is probably as much an instinctual drive as mating behaviour, but
that its objects are much less _ specific.
Because of this, society can manipulate its
expression far more than it can the expression of the mating drive ; indeed it is the
existence of drives with such variable goals
that creates human society as we know it, and
it is the particular manipulation of them that
creates different cultures within that society.

The form of the factual results is also
interesting because these occupational groups
are subcultures, in the anthropological sense,
which maintain themselves by attracting
people whose temperamental needs they

* Lorenz, 1952; Tinbergen, 1951, 1953.

~

- THE EUGENICS REVIEW

cater for, and by rejecting, forcibly perhaps,
those whose view of the world is radically
different. Such subcultures may come to
wield great power inside the whole culture
and may on occasion transform the whole
culture into their own pattern. (cf. Morris,
1949). In this physical and temperamental
differences between individuals lie as the
pervading background even of economic and
social history. Infinitesimally small in individual effect, they nevertheless provide the
link which joins the laboratory study of
the individual and the historical study. of a
culture to make the subject matter of human
biology.

Summary |

We have ended up, I am afraid, far from
our start, and perhaps I should close by
returning you there, because there are
surely some amongst you who are hardminded.and respect facts and decry speculation, even reasonable speculation. Let me
bring back to mind then, that differences of
physique have been observed by various
research workers between occupational
groups ; that they cannot be explained by
the effect of the occupation, or by social
origins or by educational attainment. They
represent a mixture of personal selection for
the preferred way of life by the individual
and individual-admission by a subculture
to the group. The effect of this tendency on
social patterns is, in a sense, obvious enough :
without knowing the details of the process,
it is perfectly plain that subcultures persist.
But data like these, I believe, enable us to go
into details, to back sociological truisms
with a hard core of quantitative biology.
It is in this way I believe that the science of
human biology can contribute to our understanding of ourselves in our culture and
bridge the immeasurably harmful gap that
now yawns between the social and biological
sciences.

REFERENCES
Adrian, E. D. (1953), ‘“‘ The Scientific Approach to
Medital Research.” Lect. Sct. Basis Med. 1, 1-15.
Dupertuis, C. W., and Tanner, J. M. (1950), “‘ The
Pose of the Subject for Photogrammetric Anthropometry, with Special Reference to Somatotyping.”’
Amer. J. Rhys. Anthrop. N.S. 8, 27-48.
PHYSIQUE AND CHOICE OF CAREER

Epps, P., and Parnell, R. W. (1952), ‘‘ Physique and
Temperament of Women Delinquents Compared
with Women Undergraduates.” Brit. J. med.
Psychol. 25, 249-255.

Garn, S. M., and Gertler, M. M. (1950), ‘‘ An Association between Type of Work and Physique in an
pndustrial Group.”’ Amer. J. phys. Anthrop. N.S.

8, 387-398.

Glueck, S., and Glueck, E. (1950), Unraveling Juvenile
Delinquency. New York: Commonwealth Fund.

Healy, M. J. R. (1952), ‘“ Some Statistical Aspects of
Anthropometry.” J. Roy. Stat. Soc. B. 14, 164-184.

Hooton, E. A. (1939), The American Criminal. Vol. I.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univ. Press.

Hooton, E. A. (1948), Body Build in Relation to
Military Function. Dept. of Anthropology
Harvard University. Pp. 213 (not seen by author),

Lorenz, K. Z. (1952), King Solomon’s Ring. London:
Methuen.

Morris, C. (1949), In Kluckhohn, C., and Murray, H..A.

Personality in Nature, Society and Culture. New
York: Knopf.
Parnell, R. W. (1953), ‘‘ Physique and Choice of

Faculty.”’ Brit. med. J. 2, 472-475.

Seltzer, C. C. (1945), ‘‘ The Relationship Between
Masculine Component and Personality.”” Amer. J.
phys. Anthrop. N.S. 3, 33-47.

Sheldon, W. H. (1940), The Varieties of Human
Physique. New York: Harper.

Sheldon, W. H., Hartl, E. M., and McDermott, E.
(1949), The Varieties of Delinquent Youth. New
York: Harper.

197

Sheldon, W. H., and Stevens, S.S. (1942), The Varieties
of Temperament. New York: Harper.

Tanner, J. M. (1951) ‘‘ Currant Advances in the Study
of Physique. Photogrammetric Anthropometry
and an Androgyny Scale.”’ Lancet. 1, 574-579.

Tanner, J. M. (1952a), ‘‘ The Physique of Students.
An Experiment at Oxford.’’ Lancet. 1, 405-409. ©

Tanner, J. M. (1952b), ‘‘ The Effect of Weight-Training
on Physique.” Amer. J. phys. Anthrop. N.S.

0, 427-462. ,

Tanner, J. M. (1953Aa),
and Physique of the Human.’
London Univ.

Tanner, J. M. (1953b), ‘“‘ Growth and Constitution.
In Anthropology Today: an Encyclopedic Inventory.” Ed. by A. L. Kroeber. Chicago: Univ.
Press.

Tanner, J. M. (1954), “ The Reliability of Anthroposcopic Somatotyping.”” Amer. J. phys. Anthrop.
N.S. In Press.

Tanner, J. M., and Weiner, J. S. (1949), ‘“‘ The Reliability of the Photogrammetric Method of Anthropo-.
metry, with a Description of a Miniature Camera
Technique.” Amer. J. phys. Anthrop. N.S. 7%,
145-186.

Terman, L. M., and Miles, C. C. (1936), Sex and Personality. New York: McGraw-Hill.

Tinbergen, N. (1951), The Study of Instinct.
Univ. Press.

Tinbergen, N. (1953),
London: Collins.

Woods, W. L., Brouha, L., and Seltzer, C. C. (1943),
Selection of Officer Candidates. Cambridge: Harvard
Univ. Press.

“ Investigations on the Growth
Ph.D. Thesis.

Oxford:

The Herring Gull’s World.

 

\ ' J d 7
LE IS HOLD A LARGE STOCK OF BOOKS ON EUGENICS

—LLLLLCUAND «(ALLIED SUBJECTS.

FOREIGN BOOKS NOT

IN STOCK OBTAINED -IN STOCK OBTAINED UNDER BOARD OF TRADE LICENCE. CATALOGUES
ON REQUEST. PLEASE STATE PARTICULAR INTEREST.

 

SECOND-HAND BOOKS: A constantly changing large stock of Medical and Scientific

Literature on view, classified under subjects. Lists and quotations post free.

or small collections purchased.

Libraries

 

LONDON: H. K. LEWIS & Co. Ltd., 136 Gower St., W.C.1

Telephone: EUSton 4282, —

Business hours: 9 a.m. to 5:30 p.m., ‘Saturdays to 1 p.m.

 

Eugenics Review, Vol, XLVI, No. 3
