HUMAN

HYBRIDS

Racial Crosses in Various Parts of the World

By RACHEL M. FLEMING

of so-called ‘ superior’ races to pre
serve privileges denied to other races
on account of their so-called ‘ inferiority ’
are tending to darken counsel in the study
of racial biology. Another form of political
effort is a desire to demonstrate separateness of physical type, so that a subject race
may claim autonomy. It is only with
painful slowness that man is learning to
study himself scientifically and dispassionately, and to apply biological and genetical
laws to his own case. Humanity to-day is
the result of long racial crossing; it is difficult to apply the term ‘“‘ pure’’ to any
physical type. All human races are capable
of fertile crossing one with another, and
man’s tendency to wander both over land
and sea, frequently unaccompanied by the
women of his own type, has led to marked
heterogeneity of inheritance everywhere.
The story of the ‘‘ Sons of God ”’ and the
*‘ daughters of men’’ is world wide and
possibly as old as the oldest prehistoric
find. And yet in a book published in 1928
we read, ‘‘ Only a pure race is a strong
race ’’; while the facile statement that the
coloured half-caste inherits the worst of both
sides, as if the laws of heredity bowed to our
colour prejudice, is commonly quoted and
believed.

There is need for scientific study into
human heredity, and it is much to be hoped
that such studies may be increasingly
carried out in fields where political prejudice
does not intrude. The difficulties are
obvious—the limitations of our life span,
the impossibility of experiment, and the
complications of environmental] conditions.

Poet iecates issues involving the right

SUPERIOR HALF-CASTES

E. Rodenwaldt has therefore rendered a
great service to the study of human heredity
by seizing the opportunity of examining the
results of an experiment in human crossing
which has been worked out in Kisar, an
island in the East Indies 127°35’E. long.,
8°s'S, lat. His results are published in Die
Mestizen auf Kisar * (in German) in two
volumes, one of which gives detailed measurements and photographs of the Mestizos
(half-castes) whom he observed. It contains
a remarkable family tree showing the very
complicated inter-marriages between the
descendants of Mestizo families, and also,
by an ingenious device, indicating their
skin, eye, and hair colour heredity. No
student of human heredity can afford to omit
the study of these volumes. The Mestizos
of Kisar are ideal material for such a study.
The Dutch East Company had a station
here in the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries, and soldiers of Dutch, French,
German, and British nationality became the
ancestors of the Mestizos. From 1819 onwards the island was no longer a station for
troops, and the half-caste families formed
a group which felt itself superior to the
natives and tended to inter-marry. Thus
we have available for research a sort of
natural experiment in human breeding
which has gone on for about two centuries.
Rodenwaldt points out, however, that there
are many difficulties even in this exceptionally favourable situation. To begin with,
the Europeans themselves were of varied
origin, as their family names, still used by

* Rodenwaldt, Ernst. Die Mestizen auf Kisar.

Batavia (van G. Kolff) and The Hague (Nijhoff). Vol.
I, pp. 483; Vol. 2, Tables. Undated and unpriced.

257
258

the Mestizos, indicate. They may have
belonged to any one of the physical types
commonly classed as European to-day, but
differing in stature, build, colouring, and
other physical characters. Again, the
natives themselves were by no means homogeneous, and fell into at least three distinctive groups. ‘Thus it would be impossible to differentiate many skeletal measurements. But certain differences exist between
Europeans as a whole and the natives of
Kisar ; skin colour decidedly, hair-type and
colour and eye-colour to a less extent.
Again, the shape of the nose, the ear, and
lips, and the proportions of the limbs seem
distinctive.

Measurements were taken on 194 Mestizos
and on 46 apparently full-blooded natives,
while observations on colouring and weight
were taken on a further 49 natives. ‘The
Mestizos are classified according to the proportion of European blood which it seemed
probable that they had inherited, the evidence being partly documentary and partly
oral.

Group One. 10 boys, 5 girls, and 3 children. Of their 64 ancestors, the proportion
was 27 to. 37 European and 37 to 27 native.

Group Two. 35 boys, 27 girls, and 23
children. 18.0 to 26.4 European and 46.0
to 37.6 native.

Group Three. 21 boys, 17 girls, 30 children. 9.6 to 17.5 European and 54.4 to
46.5 native.

Group Four. 14 boys, 5 girls, and 4 children. § and less European and 56 and more
native. ,

The numbers are not large, but this is
more than compensated for by the greater
amount of certainty with regard to ancestry
and with regard to definite inheritance
which it was possible to get.

It is a great advantage for other
workers in this field that the details of
every actual measurement are given, as also
are photographs showing family likenesses ;
the inheritance of separate physical characters is treated individually, family by
family. We feel strongly that it is along
these detailed and individual lines that definite information as to the working of

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

heredity is best traced. It is at present
fashionable to present to readers a formula
with a correlation coefficient, which is, after
all, but a mathematical ghost corresponding
to those psychological ghosts, ‘ the man in
the street,’ ‘the average man,’ or ‘ the
economic man.’ Rodenwaldt presents these
mathematical abstractions to his readers and
solemnly records them over and over again
for individual factors, in a case where he
has 4 men and 2 women. Thus, on p. 216,
“No. of Women 2. Actual Index 41,49.
Average 45. Coefficient of variation
+2.829.’’ Obviously the 45+2.829 in the
case of these 2 women represents an abstraction that does not exist, and can only
be misleading. We confidently expect to
find a statement in the work of some future
author. ‘‘ Breadth-depth index of the nose
for Marna women 45+2.829 (Rodenwaldt,
Die Mestizen auf Kisar).’’ ‘The presentation
of abstractions and the basing of statements
as to racial biology upon them is seen in an
extreme form in The American Negro, by
M. J. Herskovits*—e.g., p. 61, ‘‘ Thus,
for example, the average nostril of the wellto-do Harlemites (male) is 37.5 mm., while
that of the general population is 41.3; the
average lip thickness of the former is 19.8
mim., that of the latter 20.8.’’ No statement
is given about (1) the numbers measured ;
we feel that it is extremely improbable that
“the general population ’’ presented itself
for measurement, and it is clear from a
phrase on the same page that the whole of
the ‘‘ well-to-do ’’ was: not measured; nor
(2) about the maximum and minimum
widths recorded; nor (3) the criterion for
** well-to-do.”’

The importance of knowing numbers on
which statements are based appears on p.
23 of the same work (see top of next page).

Now it should be noted that the numbers
of subjects on which the author bases his
theory with regard to the variability of the
mixed American negro are greatest in the
cases of 2, 3, and 4, and that it is precisely
in these three cases where the averages most

* Herskovits, Melville J, The American Negro: A
Study in Racial Crossing. New York, 1928. Knopf,
Pp. 92.
HUMAN HYBRIDS

TABLE—RACE VARIABILITY

Types. Variability.
(z) 30 Kajiji eh wes 3-94
(2) 96,239 White American
troops... ses 3-51
(3) 539 Pure Sioux Indian 3.50
(4) 897 Mixed American
negroes ... 3.45
(5) 19 Ekoi 3.07
(6) 37 Kagoro 3.00
closely approach one another. Variability

averages based on such widely differing
numbers are certainly not strictly comparable mathematically. His suggestion, that
dark-skinned men select lighter skinned
women because they thus gain social standing nearer to the dominant white race, and
that this is tending towards lighter colouring in the American negro, is interesting.
Is there evidence of a large population of
childless, dark-skinned women ?

MENDELIAN HEREDITY IN MAN

His remarks on p. 78 that ‘‘ most of the
traits in man for which they [the eugenists |
claim Mendelian heredity are of a pathological nature,’’ and his further remarks on
Pp. 79 need to be modified in view, not only
of Rodenwaldt’s study, but of many other
studies now available. Rodenwaldt, from
p. 312 onwards, carefully discusses, family
by family, the evidence for and against a
Mendelian type of human heredity and
proves, we think conclusively, that Mendel’s
laws do apply to human beings. A striking
example, which the photographs clearly
bring out, is the dominance of the European type of nose. He also gives further
evidence of the recessive character of the
blue eye, noted by C. C. Hurst, Inheritance of Eye Colour in Man (Proc. Roy. Soc.,
Ser. B., Vol. lxxx, 1908, p. 85). Observations on children of white women and
negro men, and white women and Chinese
men in our seaport towns gave the same
result. (Fleming, Anthropological Studies
of Children. EucEenics REviEw, Jan.,
1927.) The disappearance of the light eye
appears to be progressive from generation
to generation among the Mestizos.

259

As regards skin colour, we have noted in
half-caste children in our seaport towns a
tendency for different intensity of darkness
in special parts of the body, e.g. the forehead, the back of the neck (even though
covered by hair), the legs. Rodenwaldt does
not report on variations of skin colour in the
same person. He does, however, discuss
disharmony in other inheritances, notably
in the ratio of arm-length and leg-length.
Our own observations of disharmony have
been most marked in the case of the jaws.
Where a European woman with a small
V-shaped palate has been crossed with an
African with widely arched jaws, the resulting disharmony in one or two cases was so
great as to interfere with speech. We note
in photograph No. 122 an appearance of
disharmony between the maxilla and the
mandible, while in No. 66 there is a very
marked pre-normal occlusion indicating disharmony of this inheritance in Mestizos of
Kisar. He finds that women are more
variable in type than men. This may be a
sex character; we have found in studies of
growth taken on British children that the
girls vary much more in type of growth
than do the boys.

Apart from physical traits, Rodenwaldt
notes other traits influenced by the admixture of white blood. Mestizo women, in
spite of the difficult water supply, preserve
the tradition of Dutch cleanliness, and their
persons and clothing are notably cleaner
and neater than those of the natives.
Whether this is the effect of tradition or of
psychological heredity or of a combination
of both, it is difficult to say. Whatever we
may call it, the trait is evidently derivable
from European admixture. Again, the percentage of people living at a high cultural
level is much greater in Group I, which has
the largest percentage of European ancestry. Is it right to infer the desirability of
back crossing with Europeans?

ANGLO-NEGRO AND ANGLO-CHINESE

Recently the writer visited Cape Town
and had many conversations with workers
among the ‘coloured’ (half-caste) colony
there. One worker of long experience had
260

observed the same rule of a higher cultural
level and a general demand for better living
conditions among those with a large admixture of white blood. He suggested that encouragement of intermixture between the
best of the coloured people and the whites
would tend to raise the standard of life in
Cape Town. Some ‘ coloured ’ people with
a large admixture of white blood showed
such small traces of native inheritance that
they had ‘‘ passed over ’’ into the white
section and were making good there. Needless to say, this solution is most unpalatable to advocates of ‘ race purity,’ and there
may be sound objections to it. On the
other hand, it may ultimately be less harmful than the present cruel system of stigmatizing the half-caste socially, and so creating
a moral and social environment for him
which adds undesirables to the community.
For some time past the writer has been in
close contact with girls of Anglo-Chinese
and Anglo-Negro origin who are unable to
find employment because social stigma
refuses to allow them to mix in our
society in the ordinary way. They
are British citizens, and they are the
weakest of our citizens, and as such
need protection. Whatever action may be
taken to prevent such intermixture in the
future, if it can be proved to be undesirable, it certainly seems a bad policy of
citizenship to penalize half-castes for a fault
of birth for which they are in no way
responsible. Liverpool, always to the fore
in attempts towards civic betterment, has
formed an ‘‘ Association for the Welfare of
Half-Caste Children’? (Hon. Sec., Mr.
G. E. Haynes, B.Sc., University Settlement, Nile Street, Liverpool), and a wholetime research worker has been appointed.
We hope that other seaport towns may soon
follow this example of scientific research
into a serious problem.

An Anthropometric Study of Hawaiians
of Pure and Mixed Blood,* by Leslie C.
Dunn and Alfred M. Tozzer, calls attention

eee
* Dunn, Leslie C, and Tozzer, Alfred M., An
Anthropometric Study of Hawaiians of Pure and
Mixed Blood. Papers of the Peabody Museum, Harvard University., Vol. XI, No. 3, 1928. Pp. azz.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

on p. 98 to the danger of mathematical
abstractions noted above. The authors have
preferred to retain a separate seriation of
measurements by sex and age. They point
out that the changes obtained by applying
corrections for age and sex are probably
wholly fictitious; ‘‘ the resulting amplified
distribution appears larger than the standard; its probable error is lowered by the
larger number of individuals in it, although
the number of original observations remains
the same.’’

MULTIPLE SOUTH SEA HYBRIDS

Observations were taken on pure Hawaiians, on Chinese in the island, on
Hawaiian-White hybrids, Hawaiian-Chinese
hybrids, and on tri-racial and multiple
hybrids. The effect of back-crossing with
Hawaiian, White, and Chinese was also
noted. The authors conclude that physical traits are inherited separately, so
that the offspring of mixed crosses may
present a mosaic of various hereditary
factors. This seems to be the general conclusion of workers in this field. We have
ourselves seen a child with blue eyes, flaxen
ulotrichous hair, and an almost black skin.
Interestingly enough, no reference is made
to heterochronia in tabulating eye colour.
Our own researches reveal a fairly high percentage of this among British children and
a lower percentage among half-caste children. In British children the condition is
sometimes a temporary phase of growth.

The appendix giving full tables for each
individual case, with references to family
relationships, is useful and scientific. We
feel, however, that the treatment of individual families in Rodenwaldt’s way, by
giving photographs, family trees, and a detailed account, family by family, of the
heredity of each factor considered would
have greatly increased the scientific value
of the monograph. We hope that the Peabody Museum of American Archzology and
Ethnology, under whose auspices the book
is published, will arrange for a further publication in this form. Both in the Mestizos
of Kisar and in Hawaiian-European crosses,
the body weight resembles that of the
HUMAN HYBRIDS

natives, which is greater than in the case
of Europeans. It may be that here we have
a case of Mendelian dominance, but, as each
author points out, there is also the possibility of dietetic factors and of habits depending on environment being responsible
for the greater weight. It is an interesting
point upon which further research could
shed light.

BLACK, BROWN, AND WHITE

Race Crossing in Jamaica,* by C. B.
Davenport and M. Steggerda, is remarkable
for the number and variety of detailed
observations taken. The number of subjects
was 54 Blacks, 93 Browns, and 50 Whites.
As these studies included tests for intelligence, and as comparisons between negro
and half-caste and white are given on the
results, we feel it is unfortunate that
prisoners are included in the coloured groups
and not in the white group. Prisoners are
certainly people who have demonstrated a
lack of social intelligence, and for purposes
of cultural comparison we feel that either
they should have been omitted from all
groups or included in the same proportion
in all groups. Especially in the case of
women do we feel that the cultural scale is
heavily weighted against the coloured and
for the white in intelligence tests. The introductory pages, notably pp. 16 and 17,
strike us as scrappy and disjointed. They
also contain many vague statements, e.g.,
‘“* Marriage occurs at an éarly age,” ‘“‘ The
effects of inbreeding are not markedly injurious, though some cases of feeble-mindedness and insanity occur.’”? It may be of
importance to this study that there is an
ice-cream parlour in the island of Grand
Cayman and also that there are very few
clothes lines, but to read such disjointed
information, without being given any indication of its value in the inquiry, is disappointing. ‘The space devoted to this might
well have been given to an expansion of the
suggestion that mosquitoes are ‘‘ an almost

* Davenport, C. B., and Steggerda, Morris, Race

Crossing in Jamaica. New York, 1929. Dept. of
Genetics, Carnegie Institution. Pp. 516.

261

deadly enemy.’’ Again, why are oranges
and limes less abundant, and has this a
prejudicial effect on health and physique?

The same passion for undigested detail
seems evident in the measurements taken—
20 minutes were devoted to getting 63 physical measurements, 20 minutes to general
observations, build, pilosity, drawing of
hand and foot, examination of teeth, taking
of hair sample, and finger and palm prints,
testing by dynamometer, and 30 minutes
were given to sociological and psychological
tests and to having a photograph taken.
Thus 70 minutes were spent on each individual. The taking of 63 measurements in
20 minutes is a remarkable feat.

The queries for social data strike some
curious chords. ‘‘ Do you hate anyone?’’
Is a truthful answer expected? The answer
which occurs to the reviewer is that I’d hate
to be asked such an impertinent question.
Again, ‘‘ Are you very nervous?’ How
does a subject judge this? We are told
that if an individual was ‘“‘ real bright ”’
(whatever this may imply) he was asked all
kinds of questions, and that if he was ‘‘ dull
and ignorant ’’ he was asked, ‘‘ Do you like
to teach, preach, and make public
speeches ?’’

A great lack in the tabulating of the
results of anthropometric observations is
that each character is treated separately, so
that we cannot get any picture of the individual man measured. Tables showing distributions, absolute and percentile, means
and standard deviations, mean and probable
error, standard deviation and probable error,
coefficient of variation, are given for all
sorts of characters; but when we remember
that the numbers on which they are based
are so small as 52, g1, and 50 (e.g., for
pinna breadth, male), 30, 51, and 42 (for
nasal height, female), we feel that the
authors are justified in stating on p. 463
that ‘‘ The conclusion of the whole discussion in this section (the evidence for dominance) is that dominance can not properly be
studied by noting the relation of the mean
of the mixed population to one or the other
allelomorphic trait, but only by family
studies.’’ And when the size of the samples
262

taken to form the means for Jamaica is considered in the light of the general population at the last census—White 14,476,
Coloured 157,223, Black 660,420, they lose
all significance. On the other hand, if the
data for each person had been tabulated and
family evidence for inheritance of specific
characters given, on the method adopted by
Rodenwaldt, definite data on human heredity would have been available.

In the final chapter some family studies
are given, but a most curious procedure is
adopted. ‘The female absolute measurements are given, which is of great value,
but they are ‘‘ reduced to male equivalents ”’
for purposes of study of heredity. The
writer has measured some thousands of men
and women in an attempt to find out differences of secondary characters due to sex and
has found that racial type profoundly affects
type in women. Moreover, many adults
seem not to be completely sex-differentiated.
Of what racial type was Mrs. P. on p. 441,
and what specific sex differences could one
be sure would apply in her case? And was
the correction applied for the same racial
type.as that of her husband? We note that
her “‘ reduced ’”’ stature is 121 mm. greater
than her real stature. Do children inherit
from their mother a stature ‘‘ reduced ’’ to
male proportions? Again, it is stated that
“in stature each of the children exceeds
either parent,’’ the children being 4 girls,
aged respectively 27, 25, 18, and 15. The
father’s height is 1738 (unreduced to female
proportions), the mother’s (unreduced)
1564, and the actual stature of the children
respectively 1628, 1634, 1639, 1665. ‘Three
factors need to be inquired into here—was
there evidence that the mother probably
carried genes for taller stature? Was there
any specific cause which arrested growth in
the mother? We have found that illness or

malnutrition during childhood affect growth.

Again, was the environmental condition of
the children conducive to better growth than
that of the mother? It is stated that the
family belongs to the ‘‘ Brown ” group, i.e.
a mixed group racially. Is it therefore possible to apply to all the children one uniform
“‘ reduction to male coefficient ”? ?

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

RACIAL MEGALOMANIA

This study of Jamaica was undertaken
““ with specific reference to its significance
for the future of any country containing a
mixed population.’’ Now all countries con-.
tain a mixed population, and the implication
here is obviously ‘‘ mixed as regards skin
colour.’”? No reference is made to Lord
Olivier’s summary of the social value of the

_ mixed races in Jamaica (see White Capital

and Coloured Labour, 1929). The white
races have suffered recently from an outbreak of publications extolling their virtues,
written by themselves. In the individual an
outburst of self-glorification too often precedes megalomania and general paralysis.
We cannot be sure that the same rule applies
to societies, but it is worth considering the
possibility. Efforts have been made to prove
that the ‘ black ’ is somatologically different
from the ‘ white.’ He is. But is this somatological difference really greater than that
between the tall, blue-eyed, fair-skinned,
yellow-haired white, and the short, browneyed, sallow, brown-haired white? No doubt
the Romans, had their fancy run that way,
could have proved ‘‘ somatological ”’ reasons
for the permanent inferiority of the Ancient
Britons and other savage North European
tribes. Does intelligence necessarily depend
on skin colour? The ‘‘ golden, sun-kissed ”?
Egyptians had a blossoming of artistic
civilization as great as that of any whiteskinned race. Buddha and Confucius have
given the world two great systems of philosophy. Our ‘white’ standards of beauty
are not the only standards—‘‘ I am black,
but comely, O ye daughters of Jerusalem.”
Recently the writer chanced on a conversation with a negro in which the subject was
the beauty of an ode of Horace, and within
five minutes was told, ‘‘ Those educated
negroes are the worst type, with their airs
of superiority.’’ How would the white race
fare in a socio-psychological test for “‘ airs
of superiority ’’ ?

The fact is that it is difficult to avoid prejudice if we are going to test ‘ black,’
‘white,’ and ‘ coloured’ for superiority or
inferiority. Could we not approach studies
HUMAN HYBRIDS

of mixed populations from the angle of
study of what is best in them, frankly recognizing that each of us has bundles of
possibilities in our inheritance intrinsically
good, and that a mixture of these bundles
may benefit all humanity; that, as Professor Fleure has said, we need not think of
races as all climbing the same ladder. Negro
and white have differing capacities ; according to Davenport and Steggerda, the former
excel in music, the latter in common sense.
According to Pearl (Human Biology, Vol.
I, No. 2, May, 1929) they have differing immunities from disease. All students of
racial intermixture agree that almost every
factor of heredity is separate and may be
inherited from either side. It is not inconceivable that hereditary bundles might sort
themselves out into such combinations as the

263

Nordic nose and the common sense of the
half-caste’s father, and the dark skin,
musical ability, and lesser tendency to endocrine and nervous disorder of the coloured
mother. Studies of half-caste children in
our seaport towns show that a child inheriting this desirable combination would be at a
great disadvantage because of its social en-.
vironment. We know little as yet of heredity in such matters; we know a great deal
of the effect of environment. The environment can be altered if we will, the heredity
is an established and unalterable fact. Even
if laws preventing intermixture of white and
coloured races could be enforced in the
future, the millions of half-caste and their
offspring must still be with us. Biological
studies designed to help them to make the
best use of their heredity are a crying need.

THE GALTON DINNER

will be held at

THE REMBRANDT HOTEL
SOUTH KENSINGTON

on Monday, February 17th, at 7.15 p.m. for 7.30
The Galton Lecture
NATURAL SELECTION IN MAN

will be given by

PROFESSOR 5S. J. HOLMES
(Professor of Zoology, University of California)

Fellows and Members are requested to get their
tickets (10/6) from the Secretary as early as possible

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXI, No. 4.
