PAUL BLOOMFIELD

A Note On Malthus’

NLESS MY EARS deceived me, Mary
| Stocks in her most interesting 1959

Galton Lecture said of Malthus: “He
wanted the poor to starve.”’ Perhaps my ears
did deceive me, because in the reprint of the
Lecture in this REview (51, 11) I can only find:
‘*...he wanted the poor law abolished altogether.”’ He wanted, as a matter of fact, something even more unthinkable.

The population problem, to which Malthus
had begun drawing attention in 1798 in the first
edition of his famous essay, did not much
disturb Government or the educated public till
after Waterloo, seventeen years later. By then
the failure of the Speenhamland system of poor
relief was becoming increasingly apparent,
though that system was hardly as economically
profane as it has been represented; the incentive
it offered to the poor to have large families
was not glittering. The children, quite simply,
were born, and more and more of them were
surviving infancy. By the early ’twenties James
Mill cautiously, and the amazing breeches-maker
of Charing Cross, Francis Place, boldly, were
advocating contraceptive methods for “the
people”. They had not the slightest chance of
success. An alternative relief for over-population, sending men and women to the colonies,
seemed hardly less unpalatable to the Tory
ministers, to the exiguous Colonial Office staff
or to Cobbett, the most vigorous radical
propagandist of the day. (Whigs as well as
Tories then and later were haunted by the loss
of America.) And yet something had to be tried.
In 1826, therefore, a Select Committee was
appointed to discuss the possibilities of emigration. The Colonial Under-Secretary, WilmotHorton, presided.

The most impressive witness called to give
evidence before this Committee was Malthus

* With the permission of my publishers, Longmans, I am
including in this note some passages from my forthcoming
life of Edward Gibbon Wakefield.—P. B.

himself. He was at the time sixty years old.
Though this quiet, truth-loving person had
been, as John Stuart Mill had said, for the last
twenty-five years ‘“‘the best-abused man of his
age’, later ages have not been content to let
that record stand: he has been one of the bestabused men ever since, and of course not in
England only. When Shelley had declared in his
Preface to Prometheus Unbound, a poem chiefly
written among “‘flowery glades and thickets of
odoriferous blossoming trees”, that he would
rather go to hell with Plato and Bacon than to
heaven with Paley and Malthus, Malthus had
already for many years been teaching history
and cogitating in the less idyllic environment
of Haileybury College. The great reproach
used against him, by those who did reproach
him—and that meant almost everybody except
John Stuart Mill, some of the younger generation of Benthamites and Sydney Smith—was
that his “‘principle’’ was a piece of class Jesuitry
aimed at the liberties, such as they were, of the
labourers, the poor, the paupers. A good many
people everywhere at last realize that even if
the relation between numbers and resources
is not regular in the way Malthus made out,
he was not saying too much, and that, on the
contrary, the need for birth control has become
more urgent since modern medicine has achieved
such wonders of death control. It is one of the
Malthusian ironies of the present century that
during the sixty years which have included the
two world wars world population has doubled.

The ideal check on population increase,
Malthus said, was “moral” restraint. Husbands
were not to sleep with their wives! But the result
of the lack of restraint that he deplored was not
just more people, but more paupers. It was at this
point that the kindly, worried Malthus seemed
to show the cloven hoof, for obviously it was
not the rich who usually created paupers when
they had large families. The Whig chief, Lord
Grey, for instance, with his eight sons and two

87

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, July 1961, 53, 2.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

daughters, was getting on very well without
assistance out of the rates. If there was going to
be legislative action, it was .with the paupers’
connubial affairs that society would interfere—
to stop them begetting more paupers. In fact
in the last year of Malthus’s life, 1834, Chadwick’s
Poor Law Amendment Act segregated husbands
and wives ‘in the institutions for paupers and
set the seal on the unpopularity of ‘““Malthusianism”

All the leading Whigs were for a time tarred
with the same brush. On one occasion O’Connor,
the Chartist orator, delighted his audience with a
picture of Lord Brougham and his wife being
sent to a workhouse of which he was overseer.
“TI shall be sorry for Lady Brougham. I know
no harm of her. But I would have no pity for
him. ‘No, no, Harry’ I will say to him, ‘you
may not go with my lady; this is the way for
you; otherwise you might breed.’ ”’ But resentment against the Act of 1834 did something else
—made it for a long time a tradition with the
English left wing to confuse the harsh statute
with the harsh natural principle, and, by condemning the one, they seemed to be exposing
the falseness of the other. This in spite of the fact
that the radical Francis Place a rationalist
with compassion for human “weakness’’, was
one of the pioneers of “‘Neo-Malthusianism’’.
As I said above, he made propaganda for artificial methods of birth-control which it remained
impossible to discuss openly in polite society
for another hundred years.

The condom, commonly known as the French
Letter, often made of goldbeater’s skin, had
been in use since the seventeenth century, if not
before. Carr-Saunders believes that Place may
have been the author of the “diabolical handbills’’ circulating in the ’twenties; these leaflets
were meant to instruct the poor how to limit
their families, and whether Place had written
them himself or not “he was prepared to sacrifice
much popularity” in this cause. It was not indeed
a hopeless cause, but the difficulties can be
imagined if one considers that in despite of the
sex-sophistication we have to-day, and the
clinics, and the informative books and the talk
that goes on, there are believed to be at least a
hundred and fifty thousand illegal abortions a
year in this country.

88

After all, there is no disguising that it was a
““shovelling out of paupers” that was being
meditated. Malthus, to do him justice again,
was trying to formulate that concept of optimum
numbers which is the beginning of demographic
wisdom. Suppose resources to be unlimited: it
does not follow that the ideal size of population
would be unlimited also. If the poor people
confined in the Black Hole of Calcutta, a
hundred and forty-six of them in a space of
twenty feet square, had had as much roast
chicken and champagne as they wanted, and
arrangements had been made to air-condition
their living room, they would still have lacked
something—namely freedom consistent with the
requirements of the spirit as well as of the body
and its members. A high material standard of life
is not by itself a guarantee of social health.

In their report, Wilmot-Horton’s Committee
recommended a scheme of emigration as a relief
for “redundant” able-bodied paupers. This
was to be an alternative to the heavy poor-rates.
According to Malthus the present arrangement
was most uneconomic and, economically speaking, of course he was right. But he did not want
the poor to starve: giving evidence before the
Committee he spoke with strong disapproval
of looking on the unemployed as a convenient
labour reserve, an attitude that many people
complacently took for such a long time to come.

Neither he nor Wilmot-Horton was exactly
proposing to “‘shovel out’? the paupers against
their will. They were to go voluntarily. But
suppose they preferred to stay at home? There
was the rub. Malthus’s opinion was that if they
were offered a chance of emigrating and
refused to go, their claim to relief in the parish
would be even less valid than he considered
it was under actual circumstances. ,.. One gets
a vivid impression of the conflict that was
agitating his methodical soul, the conflict
between a good heart and a mind groping for
the irrefragable economic principles on which
the poor laws should be reformed, if necessary
(for the good of the greatest number?) with a
new bureaucratic ruthlessness. The kindness in
him had flashed out in his answers to questions
relating to the poor in Ireland. For instance
he was asked: “What circumstances in your
opinion contribute to produce a taste for comA NOTE ON MALTHUS

fort and cleanliness among a people?’ He
answered: “Civil and political liberty and
education.” The half-truth in a nutshell.

Then if there was to be this scheme of emigration, who was to say which paupers were
redundant? And how was it to be financed?

The paupers’ fate was to be decided by “‘the
district, parish or individual who may consider
such emigrants redundant, either as tenantry
or as labourers”. To speak of “‘such emigrants”
in that context was begging the question, however. If anything significant had come of all this
there can be little doubt that the scheme would
have been abused. Would it have been easy
to stop a harsh magistrate, a callous landlord, a
Scrooge of the counting house, from presenting
any poor devil he had a grudge against with a
ticket—but not a return ticket—for the antipodes? As to the question, what the financial
arrangements were to be, the answer was that
the districts, parishes and individuals that earmarked the redundant paupers for—let us
call it by its right name—deportation, were to
find the money. They were to pay with lump
sums, loans to the “emigrants”, from whom
they were to get their money back when these
had made good.

Asked what he thought, Malthus had said:
**If it can be shown that the expense of removing
such labourers by emigration is less than that
of maintaining them at home, no doubt can
exist of the expediency of so removing them’’—
and one is glad to know that he added: “‘and this
independent of any question of repayment.”

In the upshot, the Wilmot-Horton Committee’s Report had little effect. Two streams of
emigration nevertheless began flowing in the
*thirties. The one was directed to North America,
especially to the United States, and was practically spontaneous, though in 1840 Russell set up
a Board to try to regulate it. The other and lesser
movement was extremely important for the
British Empire and Commonwealth; it had been
carefully organised by a young man who, while
the Wilmot-Horton Committee was sitting, had
got himself gaoled for abducting a girl heiress.
Largely owing to him, Edward Gibbon Wakefield, Canada was kept loyal to the Crown, and
Australia and New Zealand were opened up for
systematic colonization by the British people.

The Wakefield system would have: satisfied
Malthus because the aid given under it to
working-class emigrants was “independent of
any question of repayment.”

If Mrs. Stocks did not say that Malthus
wanted the poor to starve there have been plenty
of others to make the indictment. But the true
charge against him is that he, who in the teeth of
hatred and vilification stood so bravely by his
“principle”? (which was one day to inspire
Darwin’s principle of ‘“‘natural selection’),
should have been ingenuous enough to believe in
“moral restraint’ as the poor man’s contraceptive.

We are often in a quandary more serious than
most of us realize when we try to evaluate the
greatness or the goodness of eminent men.
How, for instance, do we balance Malthus’s
wisdom against his naiveté?

When in the early sixteenth century the good
Las Casas, Bishop of Mexico, found that the
Spaniards’ Indian slaves were constitutionally
unfit for working in the mines, he recommended
that they should be replaced by Africans, who
were hardier. His intentions were entirely
merciful. Though he lived to be sorry for what
he had proposed we might feel he should have
come out against slavery at the start. But the
trouble, of course, was a “principle”. The
principle of slavery seemed to him to be in nature
—not to mention that like some other Spaniards
he had sincerely believed that enslaving the
Indians was the first step towards christianizing
them. So Malthus believed that unsexing the
paupers was a first step towards assuring them
not indeed of life everlasting but of a living wage.

Or take the case of the kindly Darwin. He too
was obsessed by a principle—his own, inspired
by Malthus. In 1881 he wrote in a letter: “‘.. . I
could show fight on natural selection having
done and doing more for the progress of civilization than you seem inclined to admit... . Looking to the world at no very distant date, what an
endless number of the lower races will have been
eliminated by the higher civilized races throughout
the world.” Nobody could suspect that Darwin
wanted the elimination of a single man or woman
—any more than Malthus wished a single pauper
to starve. Unfortunately these good men, like
Las Casas lovers of humanity, believed in the

89
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

force majeure of supposed natural laws without
sufficiently taking either human psychology
or human ingenuity into account—an error
into which Darwin’s cousin Galton did not fall.

That Darwin was a “good’’ man is sufficiently
clear from his own and his biographers’ evidence.
Less is known about Malthus, though copies
of Bonar’s Life, first published in 1885 and last
reprinted nearly forty years ago, are not hard to
lay hands on; but one may doubt whether it is
often read.

What was he “like”? An intelligent old lady,
Mrs. Herbert Martin of Hampstead, described
him in her memoirs as “a polite, handsome,
kind old man, tall and slender, with dark eyes’’.
The attractive portrait by John Linnell shows
him a benign and scholarly figure, “erect and
cheerful’’ says Bonar. One cannot notice from it
that he had the hare lip to which the defect in
his speech was due. He was married and had
three children, and his domestic life seems to
have been happy. He was not ambitious—
“there is no sign that he desired more money or
wanted to be more in the sun”. More money,
that is to say, than he had inherited, together
with his salary as Professor of History and
Political Economy at Haileybury. As for being
more “in the sun’”—surely he had enough of
being so much in the limelight!

One is grateful to him for giving the Reverend

yo

Sydney Smith, that nonpareil among English
wits and parsons, a chance of alluding to him
in a letter. Writing from Combe Florey in
Somerset to Lady Holland in July 1831 Smith
says: “Philosopher Malthus came here last
week. I got an agreeable party for him of unmarried people. There was only one lady who
had had a child; but he is a good-natured man,
and, if there are no appearances of approaching
fertility, is civil to every lady, Malthus is a real
moral philosopher, and I could almost consent
to speak as inarticulately, if I could think and
act as wisely.”

When Malthus died, an aunt of Mrs. Herbert
Martin’s wrote to a friend: ‘‘I want to talk to
you of the good man who is gone... No one
who knew him could help loving him’’; and to
another friend: ‘““We have just lost a man of
whom it might be said that no one was more
beloved and no one more abused.... His
temper was proof against all the ill-treatment
he met with, whether in print or in viva voce
debate amongst his brother political economists;
his conversation was particularly elegant, classical and engaging. His friends justly, I think,
upbraid the pusillanimity of the late ministry in
omitting to confer some mark of their esteem
on a man they so loudly extolled, and by many
of whose ideas they had profited, but whose name
had the vulgar cry against it.”
