THE DECLINING BIRTH-RATE: ITS CAUSES
AND EFFECTS.

By A. K. CHALMERS,
Medical Officer of Health, Glasgow.

Ir need scarcely be explained that the volume which bears this
title contains the Report of the National Birth-Rate Commission, and the chief evidence taken by it over a period of fully
two years, throughout which its sittings extended.

The Commission was appointed and had begun its work
before war was declared or even generally anticipated in this
country, but the war has added an importance to the work
which cannot readily be over-estimated. The object of the
inquiry cannot better be indicated than by abbreviating the
Commissioners’ description of it. It was to inquire into the
extent and character of the decline in the birth-rate; its relation
to infant mortality ; its distribution, topographically and according to income, occupation, and religious profession of the
parents; the relation of sterile to fruitful marriages; the alleged
causes of the decline, whether physiological (age at marriage,
effect of town life, etc.), or prudential; the effect of the decline
on the children, on their parents, and on home life; and its
economic and national aspects.

Broadly speaking the main question before the Commission
was not whether the birth-rate is falling, but why? The gossip
of the market-place had for long had his answer ready, but there
was the usual doubt as to whether it contained the whole truth.
According to him the explanation lay wholly in a volitional
and deliberative act, excusable—if it were to be excused—under
the guise of prudential motives. And when the motives came to
be reckoned with, two principal groups were readily distinguishable, both operative in the same direction. In one case it was
assumed that the few children would be more vigorous than the
many ; that they would be more amply equipped for the struggle
by a more prolonged period of education, while the parents
would have more freedom, more ‘‘enjoyment of life.’’
THE DECLINING BIRTH-RATE. 323

On the other hand it was feared that over-population would
result in over-competition for a limited amount of subsistence,
and reduce the individual chance of earning a living. Clearly,
in the first case, the motive had much to be said for it. The
conception of home and family life places obvious restrictions
on reproduction as a purely physiological process. But the
theory in question was based on an assumption which has never
been demonstrated, and is not, we believe, in the main true,
that a reduction in quantity necessarily implies an improvement
in quality ; while the dread of over-population has been mainly
the economist’s method of explaining the fall in the artisan rate.
Once started in a vicious circle of reasoning fallacies grow like
nettles, and the Commissioners, we think, have done a
valuable public service in bringing the question back to a
discussion on the merits. With much urgency the effect of a
selective birth-rate has been pleaded of late years, and with
much misgiving as to the answer the question has been asked,
‘“‘ Who will form the next generation of Englishmen?’’ Were
we to accept the teaching that the economically unsuccessful in
life are always and only reckless people, so reckless in fact that
they had proposed, and were proceeding to supply 50 per cent.
of the next generation, then the resulting moral degeneration
added to physical unfitness would complete the ruin of the race.
On the surface, perhaps, the conclusions seemed logical, but we
have been brought back to revalue the data with the suddenness
of a cataclysm. In grim earnestness the answer has come
from the trenches that we are neither morally degenerate nor
physically unfit. On the contrary, the lesson is being taught
with all the ruthlessness of a race struggle, that if the soldier
when he returns to civil life is given an equal opportunity to
display his manhood, then from the depths of the present trial
we may find a stimulus to recreate a social England which may
well remain the pattern of civilisation for many centuries.

An additional report follows the principal one, and we
could well have wished that it had been given a more prominent
place in the volume, for although the report itself deals at
some length with the evidence submitted, the additional report
makes what we think is a fairly successful effort to present a
324 EUGENICS REVIEW.

reasoned consideration of the probable effect of a permanently
low birth-rate on the future of the race, and contains some
pertinent and withal practical suggestions regarding the
incidence of taxation, and other methods of alleviating the
burden of parenthood, which are presented, without any trace of
dogmatism. Nor do we remember to have seen elsewhere so
dispassionate a statement of the problem of adjusting the balance
between East and West as is here given in a few sentences.
Although couched in language the significance of which may
easily be missed, it serves to suggest a racial struggle still
in the womb of history, which for magnitude may well overshadow the present Armageddon of western nations.

But the decline in the home birth-rate does not stand alone.
A similar movement is in progress throughout the peoples
inhabiting western and north-western Europe, and from a
consideration of declining birth-rates the problem passes to a
more complex form in the question ‘‘ Is there also a decline in
the fertility of western civilised nations?’’ Are we the unconscious witnesses of the slowly gathering twilight of European
civilisation? And if it be said that the Commissioners have
not categorically answered this question it must also be admitted
that they have brought within handy limits, and to some extent
crystallised, evidence which hitherto, and for the most part, has
been scattered widely throughout the transactions of societies,
and in official reports. But the excellence of the volume does
not lie here, it lies rather in the demonstration that a subject of
great national importance, bristling throughout with difficulties,
both of thought and expression, can be presented to the general
reader without offence, and with a sense of the gravity of the
issues which lifts it out of the atmosphere of sensationalism.

The results of the inquiry are gathered into five chapters,
dealing in succession with the statistical evidence; the
economical and social aspects; the housing question (all social
inquiries lead thitherward); the medical aspects; and the moral
and religious aspects of the question.

The intricacies of the problem are obvious from the outset.
Broadly speaking the birth-rate of England and Wales has
fallen by about one-third within 40 years. Its maximum since
THE DECLINING BIRTH-RATE. 325

registration began was in 1876, when the crude rate was 36.3
per 1,000; in 1912 it was 23.8. Incidental to this part of the
inquiry the Commissioners pay a well-merited tribute to Miss
E. M. Elderton’s Report on the English Birth-rate, and quote
her conclusion that the decline north of the Humber has been
generally more marked in those districts in which a higher
standard of living has been found. Hampstead and Shoreditch
are cited in opposition as local illustrations of the same discrepancy. But a corrective comes from Norfolk, where, in the
“‘ mainly rural part of the county,’’ the decline has been slightly
greater than in the city of Norwich, and the final conclusion is
the uniformity of the decline in town and country.

The inquiry is then carried to a consideration of the fertility
of social grades, and a grouping of the married male population
under 55 years into five classes is given to show that in Ig1I
the birth-rate of the upper and middle classes was 119 per
1,000, against 213 for unskilled workmen, while that of
skilled workmen occupied an intermediate place with a rate
of 153. The absence of the age of the wives of these groups,
however, leaves one unconvinced that the figures represent their
true fertility, and this view is strengthened by a subsequent
statement in the report, based on information supplied by Dr.
Stevenson, and supported by the Scottish Census Report, that
the fertility for any given age of husband decreased steadily
with the age of wife, and that the fertility for any given age of
wife was little affected by age of husband, although somewhat
greater for young husbands.

For long it has been recognised that death-rates decrease
as the size of house increases, and it would appear that fertility
also is similarly related to the economic standard which the
house represents. ‘‘ The more prosperous the social class the
lower is the fertility,’’ and although there is a higher death-rate
among children born in the smaller houses their effective births,
1.e., the number surviving through the first year of life, remain
higher than among their more favoured brethren—a conclusion
by no means new, and one which opposing schools of sociologists will apply in contrary directions.
326 EUGENICS REVIEW.

The influence of religious profession is marked by a query
as the available evidence is obscured by racial and social
differences. Among Jews in the East End of London it rose in
1886-90, when the birth-rate fell for London as a whole. But
the Jewish birth-rate varies in different countries. In Bulgaria,
Galicia, and Russia it exceeds Whitechapel. Elsewhere it is
lower than the French birth-rate; in Bavaria in 1913 it was 16;
in Breslau in 1906 it was only 15.

Within the United Kingdom, and apart from Jews, the
fertility in Connaught ‘‘ has been rising in the last few years
with even greater rapidity than it has been declining in this
country.’’ It might appear that the prevailing dogma which
ascribes reduced fertility to material prosperity is in some
danger here, but the Commissioners escape the dilemma by
adopting a suggestion which would explain the rise in
Connaught, despite its increased prosperity, to the efficiency of
a “‘religious bar ’’ against artificial restriction of fertility. We
wonder, indeed, we doubt, whether the explanation is so simple,
and are more in sympathy with a subsequent statement that
the Commissioners do not feel justified in drawing any very
definite conclusion as to the effect of religious profession.

In considering the effect of education apart, from social
position, the report deals with Mrs. Henry Sidgwick’s inquiry
into the “‘ Health Statistics of Women Students of Cambridge
and Oxford, and of their Sisters ’’ (1890), and with the results
of a new investigation conducted for the Commission by Miss
Agnes Savil and Dr. Major Greenwood, Jun.

The conclusion in both is the same. ‘‘ The fertility of the
non-college woman did not differ significantly from that of
the college woman .. . there is no- physiological difference
between the fertilities of the two classes ... although the
postponement of marriage generally attendant upon university
education of women must to some extent reduce their average
output of children.’’

The report next deals with the alleged effect of contraceptive
methods, but the material it presents is limited and not convincing. It is confined to the Fabian Tract on ‘‘ The Declining
Birth-Rate,”’ and to the facts elicited by their own inquiry, and
THE DECLINING BIRTH-RATE. 327

by one conducted by Lady Willoughby de Broke. An analysis
of the combined results leads to the statement that after making
allowance for differences in duration and of age at marriage the
average size of family is greater among those who adopted conscious methods of restriction, than among those who did not;
which is something of an anti-climax. Neuroses, and the
grosser lesions affecting health and fertility, have been ascribed
to some of the methods adopted, but for detail one must refer to
the evidence itself.

Considering that the whole function of reproduction is
physiological and vital, and only incidentally influenced by
food and environment, it is surprising that only two witnesses
were found to support the suggestion that some part of the
declining birth-rate might be attributed to cyclical variation in
the power to procreate or conceive. We have seasonal and
cyclical variations in disease, and in almost every form of vital
activity we are acquainted with, there are periods of activity and
repose. That similar variations should occur in fertility does
not seem improbable. In one case the illustrations were drawn
from local records of the city of Glasgow. In the other
suggestions were drawn from a wide field, and since the report
was issued a further contribution to this aspect of the question
has been published by Dr. Brownlee in ‘‘ Public Health ’—
(the Journal of the Society of Medical Officers of Health) for
June and July, 1916, and the paper should be read in connection
with this section of the report. Its conclusions are (1) that at
two epochs centering about the years 1600 and 1800 high birthrates existed in England and Wales as a whole; (2) that during
the intervening period centering about 1700 the birth-rate was
considerably lower, a phenomenon again observed at the
present day; and (3) that a considerable part of this oscillation
in the birth-rate is an expression of race physiology.

For eugenists the short chapter in the report which deals
with the economic and social aspects of the declining birth-rate
is full of interest.’ While recognising the inheritance of both
mental and physical characters the Commissioners think that
the greater part of class inferiority is probably due to bad
surroundings and example, and we agree. But the Legislature
328 EUGENICS REVIEW.

must recognise that ‘‘ any form of State relief which favours the
reckless at the expense of the provident, will, in itself, have the
effect of multiplying the former and diminishing the latter.’’
““Tf,’? says Sir Francis Champneys in his evidence, ‘‘ you
allowed a man to write off in his income-tax paper the expenses
of education as he does his life insurance, it is possible you
would have a good many more babies than you have.’”’

The reader will have gathered that while the report does
not contain much that is very new, it abounds with suggestions
for the statesman and economist, as well as the biologist.

Not one, but many contributory causes are apparently in
operation in reducing the birth-rate of western Europe, and
not one only, but many peoples are affected. Associated conditions which seem to be causes in one case are absent in others.
The report does not claim to have exhausted the subject—
evidence regarding reproduction in other forms of life might
have been included with advantage—but it may truly be said
to have prepared a basis, and indicated many directions for
future work. If it reaches a second issue its utility would be
greatly enhanced by the inclusion of an index.
