THE TREATMENT OF ANCESTRY IN
MODERN BIOGRAPHIES

By W. T. J. GUN, FRAHIST.S.

HEN speaking at the Society’s

Reception last November, on Sir

Francis Galton’s influence in genealogical and biographical studies, I observed
that the old fashion of dismissing ancestors
as of no account had largely died out in
recent years.* At the time I was merely conveying my own general impression, but I
have since studied various biographies of
leading men which have appeared during the
present century, for the purpose of obtaining
more exact data on this matter. The biographies have been on the whole a selection
at random, but all the subjects have been
men of considerable note.

The list in alphabetical order is as follows :
Birkenhead, Bonar Law, Bryce, Chamberlain, Cromer, William Crookes, Curzon, Gladstone, Goschen, Harcourt, Joseph Hooker,
Irving, Kelvin, Kitchener, Labouchére,
Lecky, Lister, Lloyd George, John Morley,
Florence Nightingale, Parnell, Redmond,
Rhodes, Lord Roberts, Theodore Roosevelt,
Rosebery, Salisbury, Arthur Sullivan—
twenty-eight in all, which should be a sufficient number for the purpose. Two biographies
each have been consulted in the cases of Lister,
Parnell, Rhodes and Roosevelt, so the total
number of separate biographies in the survey
is thirty-two. As might be expected, the
treatment of ancestry in these biographies
differs very widely, but a certain average
train of thought may be traced, to which
reference will be made later.

REMOTE ANCESTORS

In considering direct ancestry, three main
divisions may be made, viz. the parents, the
grandparents and the remoter progenitors.
To take these in the reverse order, very few
of the biographies make mention of remoter
ancestry other than that in the direct male
line. In other words, traditional genealogical

* EUGENICS REVIEW, January 1934, p. 255.

29

methods are almost universally followed.
Eleven of the biographies give a fairly full
account of the earlier male line, twelve more
make some reference to it, in the remaining
nine the ancestry previous to the grandfather
is ignored. It is only fair to say that in most
of the last-named cases such ancestry would
be very difficult to trace, and only in one or
two instances does it seem to have been
deliberately omitted. The family, then, in
the narrower sense of the word, is decidedly
present to the minds of nearly all the biographers, but only eight out of the thirtytwo give any account of remoter ancestry
other than in the direct male line.

GRANDPARENTS AND PARENTS

The attitude adopted towards the grandparents presents features of special interest.
It is obvious that the paternal grandfather
will usually assume the most attention. Of
the thirty-two biographies, nine give a fairly
detailed account of this progenitor, in thirteen more he is mentioned, in ten he is ignored.
His wife, of course, does not fare so well, the
paternal grandmother receives a full account
in five cases only, is just mentioned in seven
more, is ignored altogether in twenty-one.
Turning to the maternal grandfather we
find that the attention given to him does not
compare so very unfavourably with that
given to his opposite number on the paternal
side. He receives a full account in seven
cases, is mentioned in eleven more, ignored
in the remaining fourteen. His wife fares
very badly. There are only three full
accounts of the maternal grandmother, she
is mentioned in five other biographies, and is
completely ignored in twenty-four—i.e. in
three-quarters of the whole number. It is
evident that from the data supplied in
modern biographical works, we can hardly
ever form an opinion on the characteristics
of the grandparents as a whole.
30

The parents, in the opinion of biographers,
stand in a very different position. In almost
every instance there is at least some attempt
at a characterization of the father, indeed
in only one case is this altogether absent. Of
the remaining thirty-one, I would classify
fifteen as good accounts, twelve as fair, and
four as slight. Quite clearly the actual
eminence or otherwise of the father plays a
part, in addition to the attitude adopted by
the biographers. With regard to the mother,
accounts of one kind or another are given in
nineteen cases, and of these nine may be
classified as good character sketches. In
twelve instances nothing more than the
mother’s name is given; in one she is ignored altogether.

THE “TYPICAL ” BIOGRAPHER

The general train of thought before referred to may now be considered. The typical
biographer would seem to have in mind
something very much like the following:
“TI must say something about the father and
will look him up. I will add remarks about
the mother. I will not bother much about the
grandparents, unless indeed one or more of
them was a striking character. I will say
something about the family (ie. the direct
male line ancestry) if its general history is
interesting.”” In other words the typical
biographer is usually interested in history
not infrequently in a somewhat narrow
genealogy, but rarely in biology or in problems of heredity. If he himself has the
interest he is inclined to think that it will
not be shared by his readers.

INADEQUATE GENEALOGIES

To turn to individual biographies—two
stand out for their striking inadequacy in
this connection: Lord Zetland’s Life of
Lord Curzon, and Mrs. Sarah Millin’s recently
published Life of Cecil Rhodes. The commencement of the former may be quoted :
“George Nathaniel Curzon, eldest son of
Rev. Alfred Nathaniel Holden Curzon, 4th
Baron Scarsdale, and of Blanche, daughter of
John Pocklington Senhouse of Netherall, was
born at Kedleston in Derbyshire on Jan. I1,
1859. Here within the walls of the stately

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Adams mansion built on the site on which for
nigh on eight centuries had stood the home
of an unbroken line of Curzons, he spent his
boyhood.’”’ The unbroken line is literally
the only reference to ancestry, other than
the bare names above.

Lord Zetland is at least passive and negative, but Mrs. Millin is active in her opinions.
“The meaning of Rhodes’s ancestry,” she
tells us, ‘‘ lies in its very lack of meaning.
It proves merely that men like Rhodes come
independent of their begetting and also of
their land. For greatness is a sort of genius,
a quality, not an accident or an achievement,
a gift and not an inheritance.’’ A very passing reference to the existence of the father
follows. Mrs. Millin’s fantastic views are
not shared by Mr. Basil Williams, who, in his
Life of Rhodes, gives a good account of the
paternal ancestry, though he is uninformative as to the maternal.

Biographies with scant ancestral details
are those of John Morley, Bonar Law, Irving,
Sullivan, Crookes, Kitchener and Cromer,
but, except in the case of the last two, further
details would no doubt have been difficult to
obtain. Cromer’s Life is by Lord Zetland,
which accounts for the inadequacy on this
point ; he is, however, moved to give rather
more detail than he did in the case of Curzon.
Cromer’s ancestry was actually, of course,
of the most remarkable interest in almost
every direction. Biographies that may be
regarded as very fair from our point of view,
though not much actual interest in heredity
is evinced, are those of Gladstone, Kelvin,
Lister, Florence Nightingale, Lord Roberts,
Redmond, and Theodore Roosevelt.

THE FEW EXCEPTIONS

There remains the first class, those biographies with a detailed account of ancestry,
and an evident appreciation of the importance of heredity. To the excellence in
these respects of Mr. Garvin’s Life of Joseph
Chamberlain I paid a tribute in this REVIEW
for April 1933 (page 50). Almost if not
quite equal is Mr. Leonard Huxley’s Life of
Joseph Hooker, which likewise traces ancestry
in every possible direction. Nearly as adequate also are Lord Crewe’s Life of Rosebery,
THE TREATMENT OF ANCESTRY IN MODERN BIOGRAPHIES 31

and Mr. A. G. Gardiner’s of William Harcourt ; in both cases, of course, the opportunities for genealogical research were manifold. A most interesting study is contained
in Mr. J. H. Edwards’ Memoir of Mr. Lloyd
George, the only biography of a living man
included in this survey. There are good
accounts of all the grandparents and more
particularly of the grandmothers, both, it
may be mentioned, women of strong character. The Life of Lord Birkenhead, by his son,
is specially notable for the attention paid to
the influence on his character of his gipsy
grandmother; but there is a complete
absence of information about the mother and
her relatives. This last fault is not attributable either to Mr. Barry O’Brien’s or to Mr.
St. John Ervine’s biography of Parnell, both
full of interesting details of the ancestry, on
both sides, of the Irish leader.

In the remaining three biographies the
opinions of the writers, two of them women,
on the subject of heredity are clearly expressed, and may be quoted in full. Lady
Gwendolin Cecil in her life of her father,
remarks: ‘‘ Robert, Lord Salisbury was the
third member of his family to occupy the
position of First Minister of the Crown. The
many generations that separated him from
his predecessors deprive the repetition, it is
to be feared, of any scientific value and reduces it to a coincidence, assisted at the most
by a consciousness of tradition. Actually the
most suggestive facts in the family history
emphasize the influence of the mother, rather
than of the father, upon the hereditary
transmission of talent.’’ As a statement of
the Galtonian position this could hardly be
bettered.

Mrs. W. E. H. Lecky in the life of her husband opens as follows: ‘“ The parentage of
remarkable men always has an exceptional
interest, whether they can trace all their
characteristics to it or whether the transcendent faculty which distinguishes them appears to be a freak of Nature independent of
heredity. There are instances where an
eminent man seems to emerge out of commonplace surroundings, while there are yet
distinctive elements in his remote ancestry
which throw some light on his performance,

and are worth recording.’”’ One sentence
smacks too much of Mrs. Millin, but Mrs.
Lecky subsequently gives a most admirable
account of her husband’s ancestry.

Lastly, Mr. H. A. L. Fisher prefaces a firstrate study of the forefathers of James Bryce
in these words: “ The origin of genius and
exceptional talent is one of the mysteries of
life. We cannot tell how or why it arises, how
it will be sustained, or at what intervals it
will manifest itself, but that some stocks are
more continuously effective than others is
one of the commonplaces of observation.’’
Mr. Fisher is very right, but it is to be feared
that, in the ordinary use of the word, knowledge of these facts is not as yet a commonplace.

BIOGRAPHICAL DICTIONARIES

A word may now be added as to general
biographical dictionaries. The scope of these
quite clearly limits the amount of reference
to ancestry, but details of such in the earlier
dictionaries are almost entirely wanting ;
the name of the father is given, but very
rarely that of the mother. This is notably
the case in Michand’s Dictionnaire de Biographie Universelle, published in the middle
of last century. Appleton’s Cyclopaedia of
American Biography, which came out somewhat later, did connect up relatives in the
male line, but totally omitted to refer to those
on the maternal side. I am not aware how
far Sir Leslie Stephen was directly influenced
by Galton, but certain it is that the Dictionary of National Biography, for the scope of
which Stephen was responsible, was in this
respect, as in most others, a great improvement on its predecessors. The mother and
her parentage are practically always mentioned, and references are invariably made to
immediate relatives of note, on the maternal
as well as the paternal] side. This excellent
example has not been followed by the
American Dictionary of National Biography,
now in progress, which in this respect is no
improvement on Appleton, rather, indeed,
the reverse. I am informed by a prominent
American eugenist that he had urged the
Editors to be less sparing of ancestral detail,
but in vain. Galton is a prophet who seems,
32 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

in this respect, to have had most honour in
his own country.

THE INFLUENCE OF GALTON

How far Galton has influenced individual
biographers this study leaves a rather open
question. His name is not actually mentioned in any of those which have been
passed under review ; but Lady Gwendolin
Cecil, Mrs. W. E. H. Lecky, Mr. A. G.
Gardiner, Lord Crewe, Mr. J. H. Edwards,
Mr. St. John Ervine, Mr. H. A. L. Fisher, and
most especially Mr. Leonard Huxley and

Mr. J. L. Garvin must certainly be reck oned
among his disciples. Mrs. Sarah Millin stands
alone as quite definitely in an opposite camp,
though Lord Zetland might perhaps be prepared to join her. The others would seem to
come under the heading of the typical
biographer previously defined, not actually
hostile to Galton’s theories, but not specially
influenced by them.

It is hoped to elucidate this matter further
by a parallel study of biographies which
appeared between 1830 and 1870, the period
immediately preceding the publication of
Hereditary Genius.

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVI, No. 1
