A CONTRIBUTION TO THE BIOLOGY OF SEX.
By GEOFFREY SMITH.

BrEForeE addressing this Society on a subject which at present
has very little practical bearing on racial improvement, I must
urge as preface that speculations which may be legitimate and
useful in the domain of theory are apt to be interpreted mischievously if transported prematurely into the arena of practical
affairs in which human interests are concerned. Crude
biological analogies applied to human life are not so completely
out of fashion that a biologist, speaking to such a society as
this, can expect to be absolved from the suspicion of preaching
a practical doctrine when he is merely describing facts of
economy or organisation presented by the animal kingdom.
It is perfectly true that we can no longer look upon man as
isolated from the rest of creation, and independent of the laws
which govern life in all its manifestations, but the study of
nature, though it may throw much light on the possibility of
what man can attempt, may be coldly silent on the question of
what he ought to do.

There are several problems connected with sex, the solution
of which would have an important influence on human affairs,
but apart from their solution which, indeed, may seem very
remote, the mind craves for some guidance as to the attitude
in which they are to be faced. Of these problems I propose to
say something about three. First, there is the determination
of sex; what are the factors which determine the sex of the
offspring, and what likelihood is there that these factors will be
ever controllable at will? It will be admitted that this question
might assume a practical aspect of some importance.

Second, what is the adaptive meaning of sex in general,
and how far is the sexual constitution of the human race better
or worse adapted for life under civilised conditions as compared
with animals living in a state of nature? This question is very
largely theoretical, but I suppose that our views on the subject
might influence our attitude on such practical affairs as sexual
hygiene.
A CONTRIBUTION TO THE BIOLOGY OF SEX. 19

Thirdly, what are the conditions of development and
inheritance of the so-called secondary sexual characters, i.e.,
all those psychical and physical characters in which the sexes
differ from one another apart from the primary organisation
immediately connected with reproduction? This again is a
highly theoretical subject, and can chiefly influence our attitude
to affairs by tingeing our views or prejudices with the mellowing light of philosophy.

Recent discoveries concerning the determination of sex
have had the effect of convincing most biologists that the
artificial production of male or female at will is further off than
ever, if not permanently impossible. Professor Correns! concludes his excellent summary of recent work with the prophecy
that before long we may be able to prove ‘‘ that the determination of sex in human beings, according to our wishes, is as
practically impossible as the squaring of the circle or perpetual
motion is theoretically.’’

This attitude, which within the last ten years has been
steadily gaining ground and represents a complete change from
that commonly adopted in past times, is due to a weighty
accumulation of cytological evidence, tending to prove that sex
is irrevocably determined at fertilization by the mating of the
gametes which combine in fertilization to form the zygote.?

Before these discoveries it was very commonly assumed
that the zygote was sexually indifferent during a considerable
period of its development, and that various environmental conditions might play a part in biasing the development towards
the male or female state; it is now known that in a very large
number of animals the spermatozoa or male sexual cells are of
two kinds produced in equal numbers, and differing in the
number or constitution of their chromosomes, and that one kind
in fertilization, viz., the kind which contains the X chromosome,
gives rise to a female zygote, and the other, which lacks the
X chromosome, gives rise to a male. Since these two kinds of
spermatozoa are produced in equal numbers and since fertiliza
* Correns, C. Die Vererbung und Bestimmung des Geschlechts. 84, Versammlung
deutscher Naturforscher und Arzte in Miinster. Sept. 12th, 1912.

2 Caullery, M. Les Problémes de la Sexualité. Bibliotheque de Philosophie
Scientifique. (Useful summary of recent work.)
20 EUGENICS REVIEW.

tion takes place between the gametes apparently at random, the
chances are that the sexes are produced in equal numbers, and
certainly no alteration of the environment acting on the zygote,
subsequently to fertilization, can affect its sexual constitution.

We may grant that the evidence in favour of this view is
overwhelmingly strong; but having granted that, we may bear
in mind certain facts which show that the production of the
sexes in equal proportions may be materially modified by conditions which may not ultimately prove to be completely beyond
artificial control.

It is known that in certain animals, such as the Phylloxera’
and the Bee’, that the egg when fertilized invariably gives rise to
a female, and this is due to the fact that the male-determining
spermatozoa are either abortive and incapable of effecting
fertilization or else by a modification of the maturation processes
they are never even produced, so that fertilization is always
effected by a spermatozoon carrying the female determinant.
Now if it were possible in an animal which normally produces
spermatozoa of the two kinds in equal proportions to eliminate
at will wholly or in part one or other kind of spermatozoa, it
would be possible to produce male or female zygotes at will.

We have evidence in birds that certain conditions do
actually bring this result to pass in a determinate way; thus
Guyer, Mrs. Haig Thomas and myself? have shown that when
various kinds of birds, such as distinct species of pheasants,
pigeons, and probably finches, are hybridised, the normal proportions of the sexes are completely upset, and a very great preponderance of males is produced; and it appears that this
result is due to the female zygotes either not being formed in
their full proportions or else to their dying at a very early stage
of embryonic development indeed.

The fact that this result can be brought about by hybridisation shows clearly that the male- and female-forming gametes,
or else the male and female zygotes at a very early stage of their

1 Morgan, T. H. Sex-determination in Phylloxera and Aphids. Journal of Exp.
Zool. Vol. VII.

2 Nachtsheim, H. Uber die Geschlechts Bestimmung bei der MHonigbiene.
Archiv f. Zellforschung Bd. II. Hft. 2. 1913.

3 Smith, G. and Haig Thomas, R. Sterile and Hybrid Pheasants. Journal of
Genetics. Vol. 3. No. 1. ;
A CONTRIBUTION TO THE BIOLOGY OF SEX. . 2I

development, possess a different physiological constitution,
exhibiting a different degree of sensitiveness and _ viability
under varying circumstances, and if this is so, it appears to be
not outside the bounds of possibility to find some artificial
means of increasing or decreasing the proportions in which
effective gametes of one or other kind shall be produced and of
thus controlling the proportions in which the sexes are produced.
While admitting therefore that the artificial control of sex
determination is as remote now as ever, I do not at all agree
with Professor Correns that recent discoveries have proved the
physical impossibility of such a control.

It is, perhaps, of interest to note that if in man, as seems
to be the case, sex is determined by the nature of the male
gamete which effects fertilization, the means of artificially controlling sex must be sought not in accordance with the old
usage of subjecting the female during pregnancy to various
conditions of nutrition, etc., but in so affecting the male as to
alter the proportion in which he produces the two kinds of
spermatozoa. |

I turn to the second of the three problems proposed for discussion, what is the adaptive meaning of sex in general, and
how far is the sexual constitution of the human race better or
worse adapted for life under civilised conditions as compared with animals living in a state of nature? In regard to
the first part of this question, what is the adaptive meaning of
sex in general, biology is not so much silent as dubious and
confused. It is a strange thing that despite all the minute
knowledge we have of sexual phenomena in plants and animals,
despite the fact that all these varied phenomena, can be reduced
in terms of the cell theory to the simple proposition that the
fact underlying them all is the fusion of two nuclei, yet we are
really in the dark as to what this nuclear fusion really portends,
what advantage it confers or what function it subserves. One
thing seems certain, that in its origin, and, indeed, at the
present time among the lower forms of life, it has nothing to do
with increasing the power of reproduction and multiplication.
Consider the bacteria, how they grow and increase; consider
protozoa like Euglena or Amoeba proteus; in none of these forms
22 EUGENICS REVIEW.

is a sexual process hinted at, yet they might be taken as patterns
of rapid reproduction. Indeed, a consideration of sex and
reproduction in the lower forms of animals and plants leads to
the conclusion that the two processes so far from being connected are directly antagonistic, and that active propagation
so far from being favoured is actually checked by the appearance
of the sexual forms. The vulgar error that sex and reproduction are necessarily bound up with one another as cause and
effect is shattered by a comprehensive survey of the conditions
occurring in the animal and vegetable world as a whole; so
that we must look for some other explanation of the advantage
which is gained by that fusion of nuclei which it is admitted is
the essential fact in sex.

An examination of the various theories, none of them
completely or even considerably satisfactory, which have been
propounded on this head, would lead me too far afield, and
interesting as the topic may be, it is after all one that is very
remote in its bearing on the upper scales of creation, because
whatever may be true of sex in its origin and in the lower forms
of life, it is an indisputable fact that sex and reproduction in
the mammalia are so indissolubly connected that sexual reproduction is the only form of reproduction that occurs, or, as far
as we know, can possibly occur. It may be of interest to
observe that in the last few years parthenogenetic development
has been artificially produced in a vertebrate, the frog’; but it
is only with great difficulty that the tadpoles so produced can
be reared through their metamorphosis, and it must be remembered that in no case, even in the invertebrates, has it been
possible to obtain by artificial parthenogenesis normal adult
animals capable of reproduction.

We may pass from the general meaning of sex to the more
special question of the respects in which the sexual constitution
of man is better or worse adapted to the conditions of civilised
life than is the case with organisms living in a natural state.

It is often the custom to regard organisms in a natural
state as very perfectly adjusted to their conditions of life, and a
lamentable comparison is drawn between their happy state and

* Bataillon, E. Archiv de Zool. Exper. rgrt.
A CONTRIBUTION TO THE BIOLOGY OF SEX. 23

that of human beings on whom civilization appears to have
conferred a not unmixed blessing. I suppose that this was
the attitude of many of the eighteenth century philosophers,
such as Rousseau, and though Darwin clearly insists on the
imperfection of adaptation found in organisms, yet the immense
emphasis which the Darwinian teaching laid on adaptation has
tended to the conviction that every organ and function in an
animal or plant living under natural conditions is well adapted
to some beneficial purpose, and that where we fail to perceive
this it is due to our ignorance and not to a fault in nature.

Metchnikoff? in his book, ‘‘ The Nature of Man,’’ has made
an interesting contribution to this subject and has pointed out
that in all living things, including man, the process of change
and evolution has resulted in producing what he calls disharmonies as well as harmonies in their constitution, and though
he is at especial pains to bring into prominence the disharmonies
in man’s constitution, to which he attributes all the ills that
human flesh and spirit are heir to, yet he admits that disharmonies
are not confined to such civilised man but are exhibited by
natural species as the necessary accompaniment of the evolutionary process.

In the matter of the sexual economy of animals and plants
we meet with many marvellous and perfect adaptations for
securing the propagation of the species and for ensuring crossfertilization : of the existence of disharmonies, which in the case
of man we must admit to occur, there has hitherto been little or
no evidence in natural species, but a case to which I have paid
a good deal of attention has suggested to me that the radical
changes in sexual economy which many organisms have undergone as the result of alterations in their mode of life have
ended in endowing some of them with very anomalous and disharmonious characteristics. Specialisation and success in
regard to one set of conditions may bring an organism into such
a position that many of its properties, which were suited to a less
specialised mode of life, become useless and even harmful, and
yet are not eliminated owing to the almost perfect adaptation
of the organism in other directions, and this appears to be as

true of natural species as of civilised man.
1 Metchnikoff, E. The Nature of Man.
24 EUGENICS REVIEW.

There are certain parasitic crustacea, related to the
barnacles and known as Rhizocephala,’ which, instead of fixing
like the barnacles on rocks and other inanimate objects, have
taken to living parasitically on crabs of various kinds. The
parasite gains an entrance into the crab while it is still a
minute larva, by penetrating the base of a hair on the crab’s
body; and having gained an entrance it proceeds to grow into
a system of branching roots which ramify throughout the crab’s
body following the courses of the blood sinuses. A part of this
system of roots becomes applied to the crab’s body where the
tail joins on to the thorax, and in this part which takes on a
saccular form the reproductive organs, both ovaries and testes,
are developed, and thrust to the exterior in an investing sack.
This sack attached underneath the crab’s tail grows to a large
size as the reproductive organs within it grow to maturity, being
nourished all the time from the root system which remains inside
the crab’s body (Fig. 1). Now each parasitic sack being carried

   

. , -~\
AAA - “S20 ee

3
= oo _
Pra Soe ee

Pek sy:
eA hn Coote aah
a. nef)
{ Bi te = oe
ae “*
NSS s wet ak
wa

   

Fig. I.—Female Spider-Crab (/nachus) from under surface, showing Saccudina attachee
to Abdomen.

1 Smith, G. The Rhizocephala. Naples Monographs. No. ag.
A CONTRIBUTION TO THE BIOLOGY OF SEX 25

  

EFFECT OF SACCULINA ON INACHUS,

Fig. 2.—Abdomen of—A. normal male; B. normal female; C. young female; D. and
E. infected males, from ventral surface ; D. and E. show modification to female state.
about by the infected crab is entirely isolated from all other
adult members of its species, so that cross-fertilization between
two sacks is impossible, and as a matter of fact we find that
self-fertilization invariably occurs, the spermatozoa produced in
the sack fertilizing the ova produced by the same sack. Now
this in itself would be nothing more remarkable than continuous self-fertilization, but the story by no means stops here.
If we examine the sack some few hours or days after it has
come to the exterior we almost invariably find fixed to it a
number of minute larvze varying from one to about thirty, of
its own species and resembling in every detail the larve which
infect the crabs. There can be no possible doubt that these
represent the so-called complemental males which Darwin
originally discovered in other cirripedes, the object of which is
to ensure cross-fertilization in the hermaphodite adults. But
it can be clearly proved that these larve in the parasitic
Rhizocephala never develop into males, never form spermatozoa,
and never therefore fertilize the hermaphodite individuals, but
26 EUGENICS REVIEW.

degenerate in situ, while fertilization is invariably affected by
the spermatozoa of the hermaphrodite itself. This means that in
every generation a considerable proportion of the larvz produced,
perhaps a half, supposing that these degenerate complemental
males are produced in numbers equal to the hermaphodites, are
sacrificed to an instinct which is now useless, and are absolutely
of no service to their species. If these humble organisms could
reflect on their position, I think they would be justified in
taking a pessimistic view of life. The fact is that the species
is otherwise so prolific, so perfectly adapted to its parasitic
habitat, that it can afford to throw away a considerable proportion of its offspring in every generation, and it is only for the
sacrificed individuals that the tragedy is a real one.

Since the investigations of this remarkable case of disharmony, suggestions have occurred that the phenomenon is not
an isolated one. Maupas has found evidences of the uselessness of the males in certain nematode worms in which the
females have become self-fertilizing hermaphrodites, and here it
is true the males are produced in small numbers; yet they
are produced despite their uselessness. I am investigating at
the present time a parasite of solitary bees, called Stylops, in
which it appears that the females reproduce parthenogenetically,
and the males which are often produced in about equal numbers
to the females are unable to gain access to them and are useless
in the propagation of the species.

These facts, the evidences of these grave disharmonies in
the sexual economies of natural species, may be useful in preparing the mental attitude with which we may approach the
question of the sexual disharmonies in man. At any rate the
naturalist need not consider that in passing from the animal
kingdom to that of man he is entering a region where civilization
has exerted some fatal and mysterious influence which is outside
the order of nature. .

Metchnikoff argues, and his view is well supported by the
facts, that a principal source of the sexual disharmonies in
civilized man lies in the fact that the period of maturity and the
period when the conditions of civilization permit marriage do
A CONTRIBUTION TO THE BIOLOGY OF SEX. 27

not coincide, and with the increase of population and the
advance of civilization become more and more sundered.
There is evidence, drawn both from the condition of savage
races and from the physiological constitution of man, to show
that man’s sexual nature is adapted for reproduction at a much
earlier period of life than that at which civilized conditions permit
its exercise. The result is that mankind is gifted during a
considerable period of adolescence with a faculty, the use of
which is necessarily restrained and forbidden until some time
after the attainment of the adult state. From this fact, according to Metchnikoff, springs a great part of the evils attending
the sexual condition of the human race, and though it would be
absurd to pretend that this explanation covers the length and
breadth of the case, yet an examination of the facts he adduces
may convince us that he has assigned a true cause to many
fundamental features of it. Without going behind the evidence
which he cites, I would first point out that the period of
adolescence when the sexual nature of man is developed is a
period when the character is largely in process of formation
and the restraining power of the reason is not at its strongest
pitch, and then ask you to consider what proportion of the kind
of evil we are dealing with is in its origin engendered in early
youth or even childhood. If that proportion is considerable, a
heavy responsibility rests upon a nation of protecting its
youth from the evil results of this disharmony of human
nature, results which may be incident everywhere, but, perhaps,
nowhere more markedly than in the overcrowded dwellings of
town and country.

The problem appears to me to be largely an educational
one, and while upholding that ideal of education, which keeps
before it as its main object the engrossment of mind and body
in healthy occupations and interests, we mav urge that the
frank recognition of what may be termed a natural disharmony
in a part of man’s nature is a juster attitude of the teacher’s
mind than a system of mysterious taboo based on the conception that everything connected with sex is inherently evil. For
the illumination of the shadows of the underworld we mav
prefer the even if not brilliant daylight of science to those
28 EUGENICS REVIEW.

intermittent flashes which aim at a transcendent sublimity, but
frequently only achieve an obfuscated sense of the ridiculous.
The third question proposed for consideration was, what
are the conditions of development and inheritance of the
secondary sexual characters? Sexual dimorphism, 1.e., some
degree of differentiation in bodily form and function between
the two sexes apart from the primary sexual qualities, is found
to a varying extent in all the great groups of the animal and
vegetable kingdom, and it may affect almost any organ or
system of organs in very various ways. But it is possible to
trace a certain community of nature in the male secondary
sexual characters on the one hand and in the female characters
on the other, and it is seen that the two classes of characters
are to some extent parallel to the characters exhibited by the
sexual cells themselves. Thus the male cell or spermatozoon is
characterised by motility, a preponderance of chromatin over
cytoplasm, and an absence of reserve food material, while the
female cell or ovum is immobile, and exhibits a preponderance
of cytoplasm over chromatin and a large store of food material
or yolk. Now to some extent the secondary sexual characters
run parallel to those of the sexual cells, for the male is on the
whole more active than the female and its secondary sexual
characters are due more to cellular activity and proliferation of
tissues rich in chromatin while those of the female are concerned more with the elaboration and storage of reserve food
material for the nourishment of the next generation. A
survey of the animal kingdom would confirm this general statement with, of course, some exceptions, due mainly to the transference of characters from one sex to the other by a process we
shall discuss later. There is then a general parallelism between
the physiological nature of the sexual germ cells and the
secondary sexual characters of the body in the two sexes, but
this parallelism is still further and even more significantly
expressed in the fact that a large number of secondary sexual
characters depend for their full development upon the presence
and growth in the body of the corresponding reproductive gland
in which the sexual elements are being produced, nourished and
matured. Such secondary sexual characters, which are
A CONTRIBUTION TO THE BIOLOGY OF SEX. 29

dependent for their proper development upon the primary reproductive organ, are said to be correlated with that organ, and
we may speak of them shortly as correlated characters.

It has long been known that removal by operation of the
reproductive glands, especially at an early age, inhibits the
development of certain secondary sexual characters, and it may
even cause the assumption of characters proper to the other sex.
Thus in birds removal of the ovaries in the fowl, duck, pheasant
or ostrich is followed by a partial or almost complete assumption of the plumage proper to the cock birds of these species.
Removal of the testes in the male fowl, on the other hand,
does not influence the plumage but only the comb and wattles.
The plumage of the cock bird, therefore, at any rate in the case
of the fowl is a non-correlated character, whereas the hen
plumage of the hen is a correlated character and does not
develop in the absence of the ovary. In the case of numerous
moths with highly developed secondary sexual characters, both
in respect to structure and colour, it has been shown by a very
careful series of experiments that removal or even transplantation of the reproductive glands have absolutely no effect on the
development of these characters, which must therefore all be
classed as non-correlated.

We must therefore clearly recognise at the outset that
secondary sexual characters may be of two kinds, 1, correlated,
and 2, non-correlated. Of course it is often impossible to say
of some complex secondary sexual character that it falls clearly
into one or other of the two classes, but by means of experiment it is possible to analyse these cases and determine to what
extent and in what particulars they are either correlated or noncorrelated.

It is of great physiological interest to enquire how this
correlation, where it does exist, between the development of the
sexual gland and of the secondary sexual characters affecting
distant and various parts of the body is brought about. It has
been proved by a large number of observations that the effect
is produced not primarily through the nervous system, but by
some chemical change brought about in the blood or body
fluids by the growth and activity of the reproductive gland, and
30 | EUGENICS REVIEW,

that this change in some way influences the cells of other parts
of the body to develop in a typical way. Analogous
influences are also exerted by the so-called ductless glands,
such as the thyroid, thymus, and suprarenal bodies, and they
are said to give rise to specific internal secretions or hormones
which, travelling in the blood, affect various systems of organs.
Now it is true that substances can be procured from the thyroid,
the suprarenal and pituitary bodies, which when injected into
the blood exert a specific effect, notably on the blood pressure,
but it is quite incorrect to suppose that anything approaching
the normal and complete action of these glands can be imitated
by injecting extracts or preparations of them. In the case of
the reproductive glands there is a voluminous literature from
which the incautious and inexpérienced reader is likely to conclude that the development of the correlated secondary sexual
characters can be induced in an animal deprived of its reproductive glands by the injection of extracts of these glands
obtained from other animals of the same species. A critical
examination of this literature and a repetition of some of the
more striking experiments has convinced me that this conclusion is quite erroneous and that at the present time there exists
no sound evidence for the view that the action of the living
cells of the reproductive glands can be replaced to any degree
at all by the injection or administration of emulsions or extracts
of the glands; that the existence in fact of a reproductive
hormone in the ordinary sense of the word is unproved.'

On the other hand there is evidence that the growth and
activity of the reproductive glands do influence materially the
composition of the blood, and that this is brought about by
the cells of the reproductive glands demanding a special nutriment from the blood and thereby stimulating a definite type of
activity in the nutritive and metabolic organs of the animal, so
that the composition of the blood is ultimately altered in a
profound degree.

By examining the condition of the blood and of the socalled ‘‘ liver,’ which is really the sole metabolic organ, in the

common shore-crab, Carcinus, it is possible to show that the

1 Smith, G., and Schuster, E. Quarterly Journal of Micros. Science. Vol. 57.
1912, and Anat. Anzeiger. Bd. XLI. No. 13. 1913.
A CONTRIBUTION TO THE BIOLOGY OF SEX. 31

composition both of the blood and of the liver undergoes the
most striking changes according to the sex, period of maturity
and of growth of the individual crab.'

Stated shortly, the blood of the female during the period
when the ovaries are growing and storing up the yolk becomes
progressively charged with fatty material and with the yellow
colouring matter, lutein, so that the blood at this period is
bright yellow in colour. The blood of the male on the other
hand never becomes charged with this fatty material, or with
lutein, but it is frequently bright pink in colour owing to the
presence of tetronerythrin, another pigment which is deposited
in the skin especially at the periods preceding a moult.

Corresponding to these striking differences in the appearance and composition of the blood in the two sexes, it is found
that the liver of the female maturing its ovaries is heavily laden
with fat, while that of the male shows a less constant supply of
fat, but an excess of glycogen especially as the moult is
approached. Now we can obtain a remarkable sidelight on these
phenomena from the effect which the parasitic Rhizocephala,
the group of parasites which I have already mentioned, exert
on their hosts, the crabs in question. The presence of these
parasites with their branching system of roots, which follow
all the blood channels of their host and take up nutriment from
the blood, causes a profound modification of the sexual
characters in the various species of crab which they infect.
The most marked changes are observed in the spider-crab,
Inachus, which is very common in the Bay of Naples, and is
found infected with Sacculina there in great numbers. The
changes consist in the partial or total degeneration of the
internal reproductive organs in both sexes; while the males
take on externally the structure of females, being totally transformed in respect to their secondary sexual characters towards
the female condition. The infected females do not assume any
male characters; on the contrary the presence of the parasite
tends to make the young female prematurely assume adult female
characters, so that the parasite may be said to act throughout
as a feminising agent. In addition to these changes a still more

t Smith, G., Q.J.M.S.. Vol. 59 Part 2, 1913.
32 EUGENICS REVIEW.

striking effect is to be observed in that the infected males, after
having been modified externally into females, may in certain
cases partially recover from the disease and regenerate internal
reproductive organs, and when they do this they regenerate an
ovary with eggs which may attain their full growth. It will
be noticed that these males first of all develop the secondary
sexual characters and then the primary character, viz., the
ovary, of the female, so that the usual order of events is exactly
reversed, and it is impossible to hold that the development of
the secondary sexual characters is determined by a hormone
produced by the reproductive gland, because the latter is not
present at the time that the changes occur. If however we
look into the physiology of the nutrition of the parasite and its
effect on the metabolism of the host, we find that the Sacculina
roots are playing the same part in the metabolism of the host
as the ovary plays in a normal female individual. The roots
can be shown to take up fat from the blood, just in the same
way as the ovary does, and to stimulate a constant fat-production
in the liver, while the glycogen storage is diminished. Changes
are also brought about in the blood, but these are not so easy
to interpret and I cannot enter into them here.

The result of all these considerations is to show that the
effect of the reproductive gland on the correlated secondary
characters is brought about by a deep-seated influence exerted
on the nutritive and metabolic properties of the organism owing
to the fact that the male and female reproductive cells respectively demand a special set of nutrient substances from the blood.
The satisfaction of this demand leads to a series of reactions in
the blood and in the metabolic organs, and this results in widespread alterations of various organs which thus come to exhibit
the so-called correlated secondary sexual characters.

We have seen that the secondary characters are of two
kinds, correlated and non-correlated. It is highly probable
that the non-correlated characters were at some period of their
history correlated and that they have been secondarily emancipated from their correlation by some shifting of the factors
in heredity. We know that both correlated and non-correlated
characters, especially the latter, can be shifted in heredity from
A CONTRIBUTION TO THE BIOLOGY OF SEX. 33

one sex to the other without the reproductive capacity of the
individual being in any way affected. Thus there are breeds
of fowl in which the females are spurred and there are others
in which the male exhibits hen-plumage, but both males and
females in this case are normal in their reproductive capacity.
It is obvious in the case of hen-plumage that since this
character is normally correlated with the presence of a functional ovary, it has been emancipated from this correlation
when it develops typically in a normal functional male.

It appears that this transference or shifting of characters
from one sex to the other has played an important part in the
evolution of many species. Mr. Bateson in his recently
published book, ‘‘ Problems of Genetics,’’ calls attention to
some interesting cases in birds where local varieties are distinguished by the fact that in one variety the males are differently
and more brightly coloured than the females, in another variety
the males and females may be similarly and brightly coloured,
while in another males and females are dully coloured like the
female of the first variety. Of especial interest are those cases
where an apparent inversion of the secondary sexual characters
proper to either sex has occurred. Darwin’ mentions the cases
of the Painted Snipe and an Indian Quail, in which the females
are larger, brighter coloured, and more pugnacious than the
males, and also the case of the Cassowary, in which ‘‘ the male
would be thought by anyone to be the female from his smaller size
and from the appendages and naked skin about his head being
much less brightly coloured; the male alone sits on the eggs
and takes care of the young, while the female during the
breeding season exhibits a most pugnacious disposition, and
her wattles then become enlarged and more brilliantly coloured.”’
The same is true of one of the Emus, Dromaeus irroratus.

I have collected a few rather striking instances of this kind
of inversion among insects. In some of the Lamellicorn
beetles of the family Onitidz the females possess horns on the
clypeus and thorax, whereas the corresponding males have
them much less developed or absent. Generally speaking in
Lamellicorns it is the males which possess these horns, whereas

1 Darwin, C. The Descent of Man. Chap. 16. abd
34 EUGENICS REVIEW.

the females are without them or have them in a much reduced
condition. It must be concluded that these Onitidz have passed
through stages in which at first the male only had the horns,
then both sexes had them, and subsequently the males have
lost them but the females retained them.

Another instance, affecting the colouration, is seen in a
certain group of Pierine butterflies, in which as a general rule
the males are brimstone yellow and the females of a much paler
yellow or white. A well-known instance of this is the common
English Brimstone Yellow, Gonepteryx rhamnt. Now in the
genus Catopsilia, by examining the various species we can
find every phase in the transference of the yellow colour to the
female, and its disappearance from the male, while one Asiatic
species, C. crocale, presents a marked polymorphism, some of
the males being bright yellow, others with wings partially
bleached, and the females may be either white or else show every
gradation to the bright yellow of the male. Finally in the
common African C. florella, the males have completely lost the
yellow colour, the wings being whitish as in our G. rhamnt
female, while the females are of two kinds, bright yellow or else
white. In this case we see an inversion of the usual colour of
the sexes in this group of butterflies.

These few instances show us in a striking way how
secondary sexual characters may be transferred from one sex
to the other in the course of evolution, leading sometimes to the
assimilation of one sex to the other, and in certain cases to the
complete inversion of the usual condition.

Looking at the variations in the secondary sexual characters
which may occur within the limits of a particular species,
it will be seen that these variations may occur as the result
of quite two different processes; first an individual may
exhibit abnormal secondary sexual characters as the result of
some abnormality of the reproductive gland acting on the correlated characters; and secondly it may exhibit abnormal
characters owing to hereditary shifting or transference of
factors without there being any abnormality of the reproductive
gland at all. It appears that this latter kind of abnormality
more frequently affects characters which are normally nonA CONTRIBUTION TO THE BIOLOGY OF SEX. 35

correlated. In man most of the secondary sexual characters,
indeed, many adult characters apart from sexual differences,
such as the formation of the skeleton, are to some degree correlated with the development of the reproductive gland; and
for the full normal development, psychical as well as bodily, of
an adult human being of either sex, the presence of a normal
reproductive system is necessary. Owing to the profound and
far-reaching nexus between the development of the general
characters of body and mind on the one hand and of the reproductive system on the other, we should not expect to find a
great deal of hereditary shifting of these characters from one
sex to the other, though such a process is by no means
impossible, and probably does occur to some degree. There is,
however, practically no scientific knowledge of it.

This must complete our short survey of some of the lines
of thought indicated by recent biological work on sex; there
are, of course, many others which would well repay study and
reflection. I have said nothing on the subject of sexual selection, and the influence of sex on the development of the
zsthetic sense and many of the highest mental and moral
qualities. If it may seem that I have dwelt solely on the lower,
material, and perhaps somewhat repellant aspects of the subject,
my excuse is that while lofty and beautiful things have little to
gain and perhaps something to lose by being subjected to a
scientific analysis, the harsh, confused and repellant facts
attain a certain dignity and become more tolerable when they
are seen, however dimly, as necessary parts of a cosmic order.
