- MARRIAGE (CERTIFICATES OF MEDICAL. :
EXAMINATION) BILL

Explanatory Memorandum

"Medical examination of school children and of all persons joining the Armed Forces of the
Crown is made compulsory by the Minister of Education and the Service Ministers respectively. This Bill makes it compulsory that persons before marriage shall be medically
examined, and that they shall exchange certificates stating that they have been so examined.
in the previous six weeks.

A BILL to make it compulsory for the exchange of certificates of medical examination
between persons before marriage.

Be it enacted by the Queen’s most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and consent
of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, in this present Parliament assembled, .
and by the authority of the same, as follows : .

(1) Every person proposing to marry shall cause himself to be examined by a registered
medical practitioner. |

(2) Each person shall obtain from the registered medical practitioner a certificate stating
that he has been medically examined on a certain date.

(3) sAt the time of entering into a marriage each person so entering shall produce to a
person who is about to celebrate such a marriage a declaration that he has within a period
of the preceding six weeks complied with subsections (1) and (2) of this section, and that he '
has exchanged the registered medical practitioner’s certificate with the person he intends
to marry.

~ (4) The person whose duty it is to celebrate such marriage shall notwithstanding any
enactment or any custom or usage to the contrary, postpone for one week the celebration
of the intended marriage, unless the. provisions of subsections (1), (2) and (3) of this section
have been complied with.

(5) In this section the expression “‘ marry ”’ shall mean to contract a marriage by any
means recognised as lawful by the law of England and Wales or by the law of Scotland or of
Northern Ireland, in the case of a marriage to be celebrated in Scotland or Northern Ireland
respectively ; the expression “ marriage ”’ shall be construed accordingly ; and the expression
“celebrate ”’ in connection with a marriage shall include registration and the performance

of any other duty which will make the union of two persons into a lawful marriage. |

39
