ON SEX LIMITATION IN HUMAN GENETICS’
By H. HARRIS, M.B., B.Chir.(Camb.)

T is well known that in many instances
« hereditary disease the condition is

observed to occur more frequently in one
sex than in the other. This phenomenon may
be observed in quite a wide range of diseases.
Thus hzmophilia probably occurs only in
men and never in women. Colour-blindness
is about ten times as common in men as in
women. Leber’s optic atrophy is found in
about six men for every one woman. Multiple exostoses occur about twice as commonly in men as in women. On the other
hand, diabetes mellitus is about one and a
half times and otosclerosis about twice as
common in women as in men.

These remarkable facts have been known
for quite a long time, and the matter was
discussed at some length in 1861 by William
Sedgwick in a paper “On Sexual Limitation in Hereditary Disease.’’ He quoted
most of the examples mentioned above
and also many others, and was able to
give detailed family histories derived from
his own clinical practice. Charles Darwin
was also interested in the problem.

Sex ‘Linkage and Sex Limitation

On the data then available it was possible
to observe that two rather different sorts of
phenomena were occurring, and it is of some
interest to see how Darwin has described
them.

From the various facts recorded by Dr.
Prosper Lucas, Mr. Sedgwick, and others, there
can be no doubt that peculiarities first appearing
in either sex, though not in any way necessarily
or invariably connected with that sex, strongly
tend to be inherited by the offspring of the same
sex, but are often transmitted in a latent state
through the opposite sex... .

In ordinary cases of sexual limitation the sons
or daughters inherit the peculiarity, whatever it
may be, from their father or mother, and transmit it to their children of the same sex; but
generally with the hemorrhagic diathesis, and
often with colour blindness, and in some other

* A paper read before the Eugenics Soctety on,
January 2oth, 1948.

7O

cases, the sons never inherit the peculiarity
directly from their fathers, but the daughters,
and the daughters alone, transmit the latent
tendency, so that the sons of the daughters
alone exhibit it. Thus, the father, grandson, and
great-great-grandson will exhibit a peculiarity—
the grandmother, daughter, and great-granddaughter having transmitted it in a latent state.

We now know that in this second group of
disorders mentioned by Darwin the different
frequencies in the two sexes can be explained
by the hypothesis of sex linkage. It can be
shown that, if the condition is determined by
a recessive gene located on the X chromosome, then the observed difference between
the two sexes can be easily explained and the
actual configuration of the pedigrees, the
peculiarity of which Darwin so clearly
described, can be readily understood. This
seems to be the most probable interpretation
of the inheritance of colour-blindness, hazmophilia, and of certain forms of icthyosis
vulgaris.

However, in many instances the configuration of the pedigrees and the relative
frequencies of the condition in the two sexes
make a diagnosis of sex linkage extremely
improbable, and it would appear that the
genes responsible are located on autosomal,
and not on sex, chromosomes. Otosclerosis,
diabetes mellitus and multiple exostoses are
typical examples of this class of condition.
Here the chromosomal location of the gene
does not serve to elucidate the nature of the
unequal distribution of the disease in the two
sexes. It has become customary to refer to
this latter set of phenomena under the
general term of sex limitation, so as to distinguish them from the cases of sex linkage,
in which the cause of the occurrence of the
differing frequencies in the two sexes is quite
different and is, in fact, rather better
understood.

Variations in Manifestation Rate

Now, when sex limitation of this sort
occurs, it is apparent that not all the indiviON SEX LIMITATION IN HUMAN GENETICS 71

duals who carry the gene or genes appropriate
for the particular condition, and whom we
would expect, in the ordinary Mendelian
manner, to develop that disease, do in fact
do so. In other words, the manifestation rate
of the gene is diminished and we do not find
segregations of the classical 1:1 or 3:1
type. What is more, the manifestation rate
differs in the two sexes, so that, although
equal numbers of the two sexes may actually
carry the appropriate genes, differing proportions of them in fact develop the particular condition. Thus, if there is full
manifestation in the male sex and complete
failure of manifestation in the female sex,
we will find the condition only in men and
not at allin women. If there is three-quarter
manifestation in men, and a half manifestation in women, then the disease will occur in
the population in the proportion of three
males to two females. We can, therefore,
pose the problem in the following way : What
are the conditions which allow the disease
to develop in a manifest form in some individuals carrying the appropriate gene and
inhibit its development in others? Furthermore, how do these conditions differ in the
two sexes so as to produce the observed
differing manifestation rates? It is clearly
part of the general problem of the mode of
action of the gene and of how this is influenced by its environment. The environment may vary because of differences in the
genetic make-up of different individuals, or
because of external influences. In virtually
all cases we have practically no idea of what
in detail is happening.

Diabetes Mellitus

Some of the problems which may be involved and the difficulties which may be
encountered in their elucidation can be
gathered by considering briefly the situation
with regard to a common inherited metabolic
disorder, diabetes mellitus. This disease is
today far commoner in women than in men.
For every three female diabetics there are
probably only about two, or rather less than
two, males. This fact we know from a study
of the attendances of patients at diabetic
clinics, from hospital admission rates and

from mortality statistics. Whether or not
this has always been so is not at all clear.
During the second half of the last century the
mortality figures for this country suggest that
considerably more men died of diabetes than
women. It was not till about 1920 that the
female death-rate from diabetes began to
exceed that of the male. Figures from the
Joslin clinic in the United States show a
somewhat similar state of affairs. The exact
significance of this remarkable change is
diffcult—and perhaps impossible—to ascertain, being bound up with the whole problem
of the manner of certification of death and
the facilities for diagnosis, which have of
course altered considerably over the last
century.

However, if we consider the position today, we find that, while the overall number
of female diabetics is greatly in excess of the
male, this sex difference is not true for all
forms of the disease. In diabetes starting in
childhood, adolescence or early adult life, the
two sexes are equally affected. In diabetes
starting between the ages of 40 and 70 there
are very many more women affected than
men. Finally, in diabetes starting in very
old age, there is probably no difference in the
frequencies in the two sexes, although it is
possible that the males are in excess. All
these types of the disease are certainly
inherited and their distinction on genetical
grounds is not easy, though it may perhaps
be possible.

These findings are based on the ordinary
working-class population which we find
attending hospital outpatient departments
and clinics.

To add to the complexity of the matter, it
appears probable that among the wealthier
classes, who make up the private patients of
consultants, there are about equal numbers of
the two sexes affected. This is mainly due to
the occurrence of the disease in relatively
many more males of the wealthier than of the
poorer classes. This curious effect is apparent
also in the mortality rates for different social
classes which have been compiled by the
Registrar-General.

All sorts of suggestions can be put forward
to explain these differences in the mani72 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

festation rate in the two sexes and the variations which occur in different age groups, in
different social strata, and at different times.
The influence of the menopause, of variations
in diet and of differential fertility spring to
mind as possible etiological factors, but how
precisely the situation is created is not yet at
all evident. It is an example of the action of
the gene in a very variable environment.

Premature Baldness

Another example of sex limitation which
presents somewhat different problems is that
of premature baldness. Premature baldness
is common in men and is very rare in women.
It is inherited and appears to behave as a
simple Mendelian dominant, with the exception that, when a woman carries the appropriate gene, she does not generally develop
the condition, while, when a man carries it, he
does. In about half the cases, a man seems to
inherit it from his father, and in about half
the cases from his mother. In the former
instance the father is affected, but in the
latter the mother is not. About half the male
offspring of an affected father will develop
the condition, and about half the male offspring of a mother who transmits this condition, but who is not herself affected, will
likewise develop the condition.

We may ask—why does the condition
develop in men carrying the gene and only
rarely, if ever, in women? A possible answer
may be found in the differing endocrine
patterns of the two sexes. Sabourand
pointed out that baldness rarely, if ever,
occurs in eunuchs, and Hamilton has shown
that, if eunuchs are treated with injections
of androgenic hormones, baldness develops
in some cases and not in others. It appears
that it is liable to develop only where there
is already a hereditary tendency to baldness.
This fits in with the familiar observation
that women who develop masculinizing
tumours of the adrenal or ovary and produce
a large amount of androgenic secretions
occasionally become bald. It seems possible
that premature baldness will develop only if
there is an adequate amount of male hormone present in the person carrying the gene
appropriate for the condition. This is prob
ably so in most men and not in most women.
Thus, men carrying the gene will develop the
condition and women will not.

This is perhaps only a first approximation
to the actual state of affairs, but it does serve
to illustrate the sort of way in which sexual
limitation of a character like this might be
determined. It is interesting to note that,
with a character such as this, if the gene
frequency were sufficiently common in a
given population, the character would tend
to appear as a secondary sex characteristic.

- This is indeed the situation in most Western

countries with regard to baldness, but it is
not so among at least some Oriental peoples,
such as the Burmese, in whom baldness is
very rare even in men. Charles Darwin
summed up the whole matter quite clearly.
He said: “‘ A tendency to baldness in men
before the advent of old age is certainly
inherited, and in the European, or at least
in the Englishman, is an attribute of the
male sex and may almost be ranked as an
incipient sexual character.”

Intelligence

Genetically determined metrical characters, which are thought to depend on the
action of a large number of additive genes,
may show sexual limitation of a rather different sort. General intelligence is commonly
supposed to be inherited in some such way as
this, and a comparison of the distribution of
intelligence quotients in the two sexes is of
some interest. Various surveys which have
been carried out suggest that, while the mean
value of the I.Q. is the same in the two sexes,
there is very much more variability among
boys than among girls. As a result there are
many more boys than girls at the two extremes of very high and very low intelligence.
There is, however, no satisfactory explanation of why the variance among boys should
be so much greater than among girls.

Huntington’s Chorea

It is now proposed to consider a set of
phenomena of a rather different order from
those already discussed. Dr. Julia Bell has.
collected together all the available pedigrees
of Huntington’s chorea in the literature, and
ON SEX LIMITATION IN HUMAN GENETICS 73

has found that, in the 991 cases recorded,
there were about equal numbers of the two
sexes. Actually, there was a slight excess of
males, but the difference was not considered
significant. The disease appears to be inherited as a simple dominant. It is transmitted fairly regularly from one or other
parent to about half the offspring. Occasionally, however, the disease appears to skip
a generation. Dr. Bell noticed a very curious
phenomenon in her data. She found that,
when the disease was derived from an affected
father, there were considerably more males
affected than females in the offspring, while,
when the disease was derived from an affected
mother, there were slightly more females
than males (see Table 1).

TABLE 1
HUNTINGTON’S CHOREA

Affected sons <Affecied daughters
Mother affected ... 153 173
Father affected ... 232 163

It appears as if, in some family groups, there
is a tendency for the disease to be limited
to the male sex. This occurs rather too
markedly for it to be written off as a chance
finding. Haldane has shown that, if we
consider also the sex of the affected grandparents, this tendency is still evident and is
perhaps even more striking.

Under ordinary circumstances, if a disease
is equally frequent in the two sexes and if it
is inherited as a simple dominant, we would
not expect any difference in sex ratio of the
affected offspring, whether these were derived from an affected father or from an
affected mother. Even if there occurred sex
limitation of the type already discussed,
we would have no reason to expect that the
sex ratio of affected offspring would differ
significantly, whether the condition were
derived from an affected father or from an
affected mother. The observations of Dr.
Bell are, therefore, very striking and very
curious.

Multiple Exostoses

What is perhaps more remarkable is the
rather diverse range of other conditions for
which published data are available and which
appear to show the same sort of phenomenon.

Stocks and Barrington (1925) analysed all
the published cases of multiple exostoses and
found that this condition was about twice as
common in men as in women. The disease
seems to be inherited as a dominant with the
peculiarity that, while the manifestation rate
is complete in men, or nearly so, it is definitely reduced in women. Stocks and
Barrington found nineteen examples of
apparently unaffected women transmitting
the disease to their offspring, but could find
no clear example of this occurring in men.
Thus the condition can be regarded as sex
limited in the ordinary sense that we have
already discussed above. However, if we
consider the offspring of affected females, it is
found that there are nearly as many females
affected as males, and this contrasts with the
distribution in the progeny of affected males,
in whom there are nearly three times as
many male offspring affected as female (see
Table 2).

TABLE 2
MULTIPLE EXOSTOSES
Affected sons Affected daughters
Father affected ... 227 81
Mother affected ... 59 46

It seems as if in some families, but not all,
there tend to occur runs of affected males,
and this is well outside the range of chance
variation.

Sex Limitation in Different Sibships

Penrose, by a method based on the analysis
of pairs of sibs, has shown that a similar sort
of effect may be found in diabetes mellitus.
Apparently the disease is more likely to occur
in pairs of sibs of like sex than in pairs of
unlike sexed sibs. The departure from the
expected values is too great to be explained
by chance. In other words, there is some sort
of sex limitation occurring which in some
sibships favours the males, and in others the
females.

It seems likely that something similar
occurs in the non-sex-linked forms of
icthyosis vulgaris and in_ cleido-cranial
dysostosis.

Penrose has also described the same sort of
phenomenon as occurring in certain mental
disorders. It is interesting to note that
74 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

William Sedgwick in 1861 gave an account
of a family which, he considered, illustrated
just this point. This description is perhaps
worth quoting in full, because it illustrates
also the way the problem may present itself
in clinical practice.

Amongst the cases which I have at present
under observation in private practice, there are
some well marked illustrations of sexual limitation in hereditary disease, in addition to those
already mentioned. One is a case of hereditary
imbecility limited to the female line. The
mother suffered from the occasional recurrence
of mental derangement, and died later from
phthisis at the age of fifty-two years, leaving a
family of three children, consisting of one boy
aged fifteen years, who being very intelligent is
qualifying himself for a teacher in one of our
Government training schools; and two girls
aged eighteen and twelve who are both imbeciles.
A sister of this woman had occasional attacks of
mental derangement to a greater extent than
herself, and there are three maternal aunts
(maternal grand-aunts of the children) in whose
family a like condition prevails. The first aunt
has three children, the eldest of whom is a
daughter very eccentric in manner and silly in
conversation ; the other children are a son and
a daughter both intelligent. The second aunt has
had four children, two sons who are intelligent,
one being a modeller and one an accountant, and
two daughters, one living and very eccentric, the
other died in Hanwell lunatic asylum. The third
aunt has two children—namely one son who is
an intelligent schoolmaster, and a daughter who
is intelligent in most subjects, but is a religious
fanatic and has lately taken up with the
Mormons.

Here, then, is a very curious phenomenon.
In a series of inherited diseases as diverse as
Huntington’s chorea, multiple exostoses,
diabetes mellitus and icthyosis vulgaris,
there appears to be a tendency for the disease
to show in different families a predilection
for one or other sex quite outside the ordinary
range of variation which we would expect if
the sexes were picked out at random. It
appears to be independent of the overall sex
distribution of the condition in the general
population. Penrose has suggested the name
‘familial sex limitation’’ to describe the
phenomenon.

Discussion
How can we account for these findings ?
They are not immediately explicable in

simple Mendelian terms. Furthermore, there
are apparently no satisfactory analogies
that can be drawn from animal genetics.

The first question we must certainly raise
is whether the whole thing could not be due
to some sampling bias introduced by the
method of collection of the data. There is
nothing so easy in human genetics as to discover apparently remarkable new phenomena and to find on closer observation that
they arise solely from the way the material
has been collected, and have in fact no
biological reality. In most of the examples
mentioned above we are relying on data
observed by a large number of investigators
and recorded in the literature in a more or
less haphazard manner. However, in the
case of the mental disorders and of diabetes
mellitus, Penrose has demonstrated that the
same effects may be observed in familial data
from a randomly collected series of propositi.
We must ask if there is anything in these
methods of collecting data which would tend
to produce the observed effects. Are we for
some reason more likely to find an excess of
sibships or family groups in which one or the
other sex preponderates and a relative
scarcity of sibships and family groups in
which this does not happen ? It is indeed very
difficult to see how such selection can be
taking place, but it would be perhaps unwise
at this stage of our knowledge to exclude
altogether the possibility.

Another possible cause of the phenomenon
which must be discussed is the following : it
might be that in the families considered there
tend to be produced an excess of offspring of
one sex or the other, so that any particular
family will be liable to have a preponderance
of boys or a preponderance of girls, and so
the disease would naturally occur more frequently in the sex which preponderated.
There is indeed some evidence to suggest that
in human families there may occur some such
phenomenon. Data recorded by Geissler
and more recently by Slater do indicate that
in human families the distribution of the
sexes is not quite as we might expect it to
be if it were determined by a random process.
There appears to be a significant excess of
families in which there are mainly boys and a
ON SEX LIMITATION IN HUMAN GENETICS 75

similar excess of families in which there are
mainly girls. It is also true that very occasionally one comes across large families in
which there is a very gross and remarkable
excess of one or the other sex. However, the
actual quantitative degree of this particular
phenomenon, if it indeed exists, is far too
small to account for the remarkable deviations observed in the data discussed above.
Furthermore, it is possible to show directly
that in fact the sex ratio abnormalities to be
found in these families is not due to an overall excess of one sex or the other in the
families, but is due to an apparent tendency
for the disease under consideration to be
more likely to pick out the one rather than
the other sex in any particular case.

Are there any possible genetical explanations ? In the case of Huntington’s chorea, it
has been suggested by Haldane that, if there
existed modifying genes tending to lower the
age of onset of the disease in males, a man
carrying such a modifier would be more
likely than the average man carrying the
main gene for the condition to develop the
condition, and his sons would also, on the
average, develop it before his daughters, and
so be more likely to be included in the recorded data. This would account for the
observed disturbances in sex ratio.

In the case of multiple exostoses, it might
be that there are modifying genes which tend
to make the condition less severe or perhaps
fail to appear altogether in females, even
when the main gene is present. This again
could produce the observed distortion in the
sex ratios. There is, perhaps, a piece of
internal evidence from the data collected by
Stocks and Barrington which tends to support this hypothesis. If such modifiers
actually existed, then we would expect them
to be present in females who, while not themselves apparently having the disease, are
nevertheless, so far as can be seen from the
pedigree, actually transmitting it. We would
not expect to find them present in females
who actually manifest the disease. We would
therefore expect a deficiency of affected
females compared with males in the offspring
of the former group of women, and not in the

latter. Actually we find the data set out
in Table 3.

TABLE 3
MULTIPLE EXOSTOSES
Affected sons Affected daughters
Mother affected ... 59 46
Mother unaffected
but transmitting 28 7

The hypothesis of sex-limiting modifiers
could also account for the phenomenon in
the other conditions mentioned. However,
there is really very little direct evidence in
support of such a hypothesis and until this
is brought forward we must suspend judgment.

A further question that we may ask is how
this phenomenon is related to or can be distinguished from the phenomenon of partial
sex linkage described by Haldane. In some
instances, for example Huntington’s chorea,
the distinction, as Haldane has pointed out,
is fairly clear. In others, particularly where
the manifestation rate may be low, the differentiation is not at all easy. It may be that
some of the phenomena which have been
attributed to partial sex linkage should really
be regarded as examples of familial sex
limitation—and perhaps vice versa.

Finally, I think one can do no better than
quote the conclusion of the discussion of the
same problems by William Sedgwick in 1861.

It may be urged that there is perhaps no
subject connected with our profession which
needs a deeper research than the hereditary
transmission of disease and, if the preceding
cases of sexual limitation in hereditary disease
are insufficient for any practical deductions to
be as yet established, I will venture to claim for
this branch of the subject a greater consideration
than it has yet received and at the same time
suggest the necessity for admitting a more
extended application of the principle of the
hereditary transmission of disease than some
writers of the present day seem willing to allow.
The absence of any satisfactory explanation of
the phenomena of sexual limitation in disease
does not destroy the interest of our observations
or the possible usefulness of our research.

It is true that we know now a little more
about the matter than William Sedgwick
did, but, really, it is not very much more
considering that he was writing eighty-six
years ago.
76 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

REFERENCES

Bell, J. (1934), ‘‘ Huntington’s Chorea,’”’ Treasury of
Human Inheritance, IV, 1.

Darwin, C. (1868), Animals and Plants under
Domestication, 2, p. 73. London: John Murray.

Haldane, J. B. S. (1941), J. Genetics, 41, 141.

Hamilton, J. B. (1942), Am. J. Anat., 71, 451.

Joslin, E. P., Dublin, L. T., and Monks, H. H. (1936),
“Studies on Diabetes Mellitus,” Am. J. Med. Sci.,
191, 759.

Penrose, L. S. (1942), ‘‘ Auxiliary Genes for Deter mining Sex as Contributory Causes of Mental Illness,”’
J. Ment. Sct., 88, 308.

Penrose, L. S., and Watson, E. M. (1945), Proc. Am.
Diabetes Ass., 5, 163.

Registrar-General, Decennial Supplements, England
and Wales, 1921-31.

Sabourand (1914), Arch. Mens. Obstet., 5, 1.

Sedgwick, W. (1861), ‘On Sexual Limitation in
Familial Disease,” Brit. and For. Med. Ch. Rev., 27,
477-98, and 28, 198-214.

Slater, E. (1944), “‘A Demographic Study of a
Psychopathic Population,” Ann. Eugen., 12, 121-37.

Stocks, P., and Barrington, A. (1925), Treasury
of Human Inheritance, ITI, 1.

DISCUSSION

Dr. Darlington said that the conditions
which Harris had necessarily in the first
instance considered together would probably
on analysis prove to be heterogeneous. Differences in expressivity of particular genes
between the sexes were known in Drosophila,
and even differences characteristic of particular families. On the other hand spontaneous interchange between sex chromosomes and autosomes discovered by his
colleague, Dr. Muldal, would account for the
appearance of complete and partial sex
linkage in the affected families for genes

which were normally autosomal. A study of
the chromosomes by recently improved
methods would therefore be useful where this
situation was indicated.

Dr. Slater remarked that he had been
much interested in Dr. Harris’s paper,
which focused attention on a problem of
great medical interest and importance, which
had been much neglected for along time. The
findings with diabetes were closely paralleled
by those made with peptic ulcer, except that
in this case there was a male preponderance.
Here, too, there was a marked recent increase
in incidence, chiefly in one sex ; in children,
however, the incidence was the same in both
sexes. Pregnant women were almost immune
to ulcer, and if an ulcer patient became
pregnant, she was likely to remain free from
symptoms for the duration of the pregnancy.
In his investigation with Dr. Hugh Gainsborough, there had been a marked excess of
single and widowed women. The explanation
for such facts must lie in a difference between
the sexes in the internal biochemical milieu,
in which the genes produced their effects.
Attempts were often made to explain such
preponderances by postulating the effects of
sex-linked genes, as for instance with manicdepressive psychoses, which were considerably more frequent in the female than the
male sex. This could be shown to be false in
this instance, as there was no tendency for
manic-depressive men to have manic-depressive daughters, rather than manicdepressive sons.

PUBLICATIONS OF THE ROYAL ANTHROPOLOGICAL SOCIETY

21 BEDFORD SQUARE, W.C.1

JOURNAL OF THE ROYAL
ANTHROPOLOGICAL INSTITUTE
In Half-Yearly Parts Fifteen Shillings Each

HUXLEY MEMORIAL LECTURES
(Complete List on Application)

MAN

A MONTHLY JOURNAL OF
ANTHROPOLOGICAL SCIENCE
Annual Subscription, £1; monthly numbers 2s. net

OCCASIONAL PAPERS
(Complete List on Application)

Eugenics Review, Vol. XL, No. 2
