THE QUALITY OF THE RURAL POPULATION
By BARBARA S, BOSANQUET, B.A.

(EMBODYING THE PAPER READ BEFORE A MEMBERS’
MEETING OF THE EUGENICS SOCIETY, MARCH 21st, 1950)

‘Writing and ploughing are two different talents ; and he that
writes well must have spent in his study that time which is necessary
to be in the fields by him who will be master of the art of cultivating them.’’-—JETHRO TULL (1674-1741).

INTRODUCTION

O easy generalizations can be made
N about such an infinitely varied group

as the rural population of the British
Isles. Our cities have been built up by
people who were originally country folk.
What are those still living, or coming back
to live, in the country like in comparison
with country-dwellers of the past and with
town-dwellers of to-day, and why are they
important ? This paper seeks to clarify some
aspects of the first question and to answer the
second. The field to be surveyed is vast,
both in Britain and in America. Some of the
studies of the physical and mental qualities
of rural people in both countries will be
summarized, and their implications discussed, in the hope of stimulating further
research.

Food and the Rural Population

We have become so accustomed to thinking of ourselves as an industrial nation, living
within an Atlantic civilization which is about
three-quarters urban, that we tend to forget
what this implies. Dr. Parkes reminded us
in the Galton Lecture this year that our
position in relation to the world food situation may become precarious, and Dr. Julian
Huxley sounded a similar warning in March.*
We are importing more than 60 per cent of
our food now, though during the war it was
less by calories (57 per cent. in 1943) and

* Speech at the Association of Scientific Workers,
March 4th, 1950.

75

much less by weight.* Our food problem is
part of our rural population problem. If we
lived in a rational world, with real free trade
and international or supra-national law it
would be possible to support our 49-odd
million people—about 43 million of whom
live in towns—in comfort, with a maximum
of industrial production and of food importation. But we do not live in such a world ; the
“if ’’ is too large, and sooner or later we
must face it. In the terse words of Sir
Charles Arden-Close:t ‘‘We have some 49
million people to feed, and shall find it difficult to feed them.”

The quality of our rural population will
become of increasing importance as the
realization of this hard fact sinks in. The
health, intelligence and character of the
people who deal with the soil of Britain, and
all the others who make up rural society,
may have even more bearing on our survival
than the quality of our miners and industrial
workers, our scientists and our statesmen.
The query “‘ What is a desirable density for
Britain’s population ° ’’ springs immediately
to mind, and, linked with it, the question
of planned immigration and emigration, but
these vast issues cannot be dealt with here.

Rural Decline and Recuperation

The exodus from the countryside of Britain
reached its peak at the end of the nineteenth

* Paper read by Dr. K. G. Fenelon to the British
Association, Section F, Economics and Statistics,
Newcastle-on-Tyne, September 1949.

¢ Cf. Arden-Close (1948).
76 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

century and led many to predict (especially
after the first world war) that our rural
population would become derelict. These
jeremiads have not come true and the time is
ripe for a re-appraisal of the situation. Since
roughly 1880, when the importation of grain
and meat from overseas impoverished British
agriculture, until the 1930’s, the morale of
the rural community has been low. What
this ‘“‘ rural exodus ’’ has meant in terms of
human suffering no one can tell. Since the
1930's, however, strong recuperative forces
have been at work, forces starting at the
“* grassroots,” but also strengthened from the
cities. Not only the Ministries of Agriculture,
of Town and Country Planning, of Education
and of Health, but also Churchmen, professional and business men and many private
organizations are working to strengthen
these new forces.* The success of this
process of recovery depends largely on the
quality of the people who live in our countryside.

Other Countries

How long have we been an urban nation,
and how do we compare with the rest of the
world? The answer is that we are the most
urban nation in the world. The two charts
below will help to make this clear. Table I
shows the percentages of the total populations of various countries which are engaged
in agriculture. Crude birth-rates for 1948
are also given, although this is later than
the dates of most of the agricultural percentages.

We all know of the association of falling
birth-rate with rising urbanization,t but, as
we see in the figures for Czechoslovakia and
the United States, it is not a perfect correlation. (Both these countries have fairly high
birth-rates for 1948, though they are more
than two-thirds urban, but this is probably
due to the post-war ‘‘ boom in babies.’’)

* These “‘ forces ’’ began before the first world war.
Cf. Fordham (1916) and Holdenby (1913) in their
concluding chapters.

{ Cf. Blacker (1947) and Chandrasekhar (1949). For
India the figures are roughly 80 per cent. engaged in
agriculture, and an estimated crude birth-rate of 45 for
the decade 1931-41. '

SUES TEEVELYAN GM, "ENGLISH SOCIAL HISTORY” FF 11,393,527 5 KEATIIGE,G. &
LITTLENCOD, Re “Th AGRICULTUEAL " THELAACET, 2.08. 42; ALSO,HMEMLSWORTY WAIGUCAL LECTUES,

TABLE I

PERCENTAGE OF TOTAL POPULATION IN VARIOUS
COUNTRIES ENGAGED IN AGRICULTURE

COUNTRY: PER CENT:

 

 
   

BIQMH RATE,
2 2 30 40 & bo P89 gD too 1948,
mon weirs | AA is
CHINAS localities (1945) 162-4. %L- Wy, |_ Eee AVAILABLE
SPAW (1920) Isbiy id 23-0
avy (1931) ar3b hb
SWEDEN (1g20) f 18-4
FRANCE (1926) 208
GERMANY (Igzz) 18.9
CZE-CHOSLOWAMAA (1930) 4
SWITZERLAND (1930) ig-0
BELGIUM (1q20) 7.3
U.S.A. (1948) 24.4
ENGLAuD & WALES cay 18.0
Ug31)

SOURCES: CARR- SAUNDERS, Am. “WORLD POPULATION” p. I4. 1936.
KIRK, DUDLEY. °EUROPE'S POPULATION BITHE INTER-WAR
a
MEARS . LEAGUE OF NATIONS. 1946

TACHEN. POPULATION i MODERN Giuta”. UNIVERSITY OF
CHICAGO PRESS. Igab,

The Past in Britain
Table II shows, very roughly, the change
from rural to urban life in England and the
United States :
TABLE II
RouGcH PERCENTAGE OF RURAL TO TOTAL POPULATION

 

The biggest change comes, as we should
expect, in the century after 1790, when the
industrial revolution was in full swing. But
it is interesting to note that even before the
eighteenth century, when the agricultural
revolution transformed rural England, the
drift from the countryside had begun. (The
THE QUALITY OF THE RURAL POPULATION 77

rural population is, of course, not the same
as the agricultural population, the proportions varying widely at different periods.)

As early as 1662 Graunt thought that
London needed a “ continuous recruitment
from the country”’ to keep its population
from being decimated by disease. “ The
strength of the country is driven ... to be
wasted, into towns ”’ laments another writer
of the seventeenth century.* Trevelyan
(1944) ascribes this partly to the growth of
industry and commerce in the seventeenth
century, partly to the better roads. He
quotes Arthur Young as deploring this rural
exodus :

Itis...afact that . .. expeditious travelling
depopulates the Kingdom; young men and
women in the country villages fix their eyes on
London.... The numbers who have seen
London are increased tenfold, and of course ten
times the boasts are sounded in the ears of
country fools to induce them to quit their
healthy clean fields for regions of dirt, stink and
noise.—Farmer’s Letters (Ed. 1771, p. 353).
Young implies that it is the fools who leave

the countryside, an assumption with which
many of us might agree, but which is disproved by much of the evidence. It is only
too true that many of the intelligent and
ambitious sons and daughters flocked to the
towns. The bad cottages at home, bad even
when compared with ancient city slums, the
higher town wages and better prospects of
advancement were having their effect even
then.

The Real Issue

The essential question is whether the
townward movement has been selective
genetically ; whether it has permanently
lowered the level of country people’s inherited
ability, both mental and physical; or
whether the family strains in the countryside
have been strong enough to bear this “‘ demographic hemorrhage.”’t This is the fundamental issue and there is as yet no adequate
answer. Most observers find rural ability

* Dr. Pennecuik’s editor (1815).

+ Tricart (1949) describes the depopulation around
Vezelay (Yonne) as ‘“ L’hemorragie demographique.”
The emigration has deprived the countryside of its
élite. Those remaining are often incapable of reading :

“Un appauvrissement humain, en quantité et en
qualité.”

lower than urban, but to-day they are more
cautious about drawing conclusions than
they were a decade ago. They can be
divided into those who support the theory
of selective migration, that the towns have
taken the best, and those who think the
migration has been non-selective. Before
discussing these questions in more detail, as
to physical and mental quality, we will
briefly. survey some past opinions.

Selective Migration ?

It is undoubtedly true that in certain areas
the migration fas been selective. The
Census Report for 1881 states that

The industrial centres attract from the rural
districts those who are comparatively strong in
mind and body ; and the children born to these
stronger parents are less liable to congenital
deficiencies than the offspring of the comparatively feeble parents, mentally and physically,

who are left behind.— 1881 Census, G.R. (p. 71).

In 1906 the Board of Agriculture, in its
Report on the Decline in the Agricultural
Population, found that the ‘“ young smart
men were leaving country pursuits.’’ Farmer
witnesses to commission after commission
have complained of the deterioration of
their farm workers, and similar complaints
are frequently heard to-day. The movement
reached its peak around 1880, and is described as a “‘ tremendous social disaster ”’ by
Trevelyan: ‘“‘ The vitality of the village
slowly declined, as the city in a hundred ways
sucked away its blood and brains.”* The
important inquiry into migration by Dr.
Hill (1925) presented much evidence that the
pick of the countryside—‘‘ some of our best
and youngest men” were leaving. The
Report of the Mental Deficiency Committee
(1929, Part IV), to which I shall refer later,
found “at least a partial explanation” of
the inbreeding of inferior families in the
theory of selective migration. Some American investigators, especially before the
thirties, also supported the selective migration theory.t

* Op. cit., P. 474.

+ E.G. Pintoer (1917) concluded that the more intelligent families were leaving the villages. Pyle and Collings
(1918) thought that city environment hastened develop
ment, and that the city children were of better stock.
See also other references in Shimberg (1929) pp. 43 and 46.
78 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Non-selective Migration ?

One of the first of those who did not fully
accept selective migration was Charles Booth.
Although he said in his famous survey that
London was “ kept up in bone and sinew and
energy by the country element pouring in
...afterwards to be transformed into
waste,”’ he also thought that the countryside sent its “‘ dregs ”’ cityward as well as its
“cream.’’ Davies (1931), writing of the rural
population between 1871 and 1928 in the
most detailed survey yet made in Britain,
says :

Very probably the migration movement may
be led by the most enterprising . . . natives ;
... but very probably, also, it includes a large
body of followers—people who move to the
towns into situations found for them by their
friends and relatives who have gone before—and
these followers are not inherently likely to be
more enterprising or of higher mental quality
than those who remain. ... There are also those
of definitely inferior quality—the vagrants and
“social wreckage of the province ’’—who drift
...to the towns.—(p. 167).

Most American experts now seem to favour
the non-selective theory of migration. Zimmerman (1930) writes that the best families
and the poorest are the most likely to
migrate from American farms to the cities.
Klineberg (1938) thinks that the existing
evidence does not justify broad generalizations about the selection of intelligence in
population movements. Gist (1943), writing
in Missouri, concludes :

If cities are selective of intelligence, sex and
age, may they not likewise be selective of the
emotionally unstable, the restless, the romantic,
the delinquent ? It is possible also that farms
and villages are more attractive than cities to
persons who are emotionally stable, content,
unimaginative and home-loving.—(p. 154).
One of the doughtiest champions of the

non-selective theory in England is Professor
A. W. Ashby. He shows convincingly
(Ashby, 1935) that “too many general
theories have been built on local information,”’ and concludes that

Migration has not been sufficiently selective,
except possibly in a few isolated areas, to lower
the general physical or mental capacities or
qualities of the rural population as compared
with those of the past or the urban population
of the present time.—(p. 9)

PHYSICAL QUALITY

Before proceeding with an examination of
more detailed studies of physical quality let
us look at actual numbers. The rural
population in 1921 was about 8 million, and
now it is somewhere around 64 million.*
Professor Stamp (1949) classifies the rural
population as: (1) Primary (farmers and
farm workers) ; (2) Secondary (middlemen
and professional workers) ; and (3) Adventitious (retired people and town workers
living in the country). The primary farming
population is slightly larger than the secondary (counting dependants, the two groups can
be roughly estimated as just over and just
under 3 million each). The third group,
people who live in the country but are either
retired or else work in nearby towns is far
smaller as yet; but in many areas it is
increasing, and its influence is greater than
its numbers would suggest.

Professor Stamp shows that the primary
rural population (farmers and farm workers)
dropped from 92 per square mile of cultivated
land in 1871 to 50 per square mile in 1941.
The number of actual farmers has remained
practically stationary (the 1941 Farm Survey
gives it as 215,900), so it is among the farmworkers that the decrease has occurred.
Lord Addison (1939) writes: ‘“‘ Where
there were 100 employed who were under
2I in 1921, there were only 73 in 1931, and
the figure has become smaller since then.”
The average rural parish of to-day numbers
400, whereas in 1871 it was 720. We must
remember that this reflects, to some extent,
an increased efficiency in agriculture due to
mechanization. The question arises, what is
a desirable density in rural areas ?

Fertility

While the main reasons for the shrinking
of the rural population during the last

* See Report of the Committee on Land Utilisation
in Rural Areas (1942), also Tilley (1947). The term
*‘ rural ’’ is taken to mean, in Britain, a district termed
‘rural ” under local government classification, though
this may be inaccurate in the case of mining or suburban communities. In the United States “rural ”
usually means a community of under 2,500, but the
distinction between a farming: area and a village or
small-town area is usually made.
THE QUALITY OF THE RURAL POPULATION 79

seventy years are, first, migration to cities
and abroad, and second, the swallowing up of
rural districts by urban and suburban
development,* the natural rate of increase
must be studied by all who are concerned
with eugenics. Actually the crude figures
show consistently lower figures for rural than
for urban birth-rates, as we see in Table IV.
We can get a more accurate picture, however,
by comparing urban and rural birth-rates
per thousand women of child-bearing age.
This takes into consideration the fact that
rural districts have many fewer women and
some fewer men between the ages of 20 and
39 than urban districts.t Davies (1931) gives
a table showing the birth-rate per thousand
females aged 15-45 from 1870 to I9g2I, as
follows :

Rural Urban
1870 .-. 158-9 143°!
1921 O15 86-2

(Op. cit., p. I0T.)

The fertility-rate of rural women was thus
15°8 higher than that of urban women in
1870, and 5:3 higher in 1921. In the decade
between 1921-31, according to Innes (1941)
the decrease in the birth-rate was 21 per cent
for agricultural labourers as compared with
43 per cent for semi-skilled textile workers
and 50 per cent for semi-skilled miners. This
decrease in fertility among rural women is
due partly to the average age being higher
and partly to the increased urbanization of
many rural districts, which undoubtedly
means more use of contraceptives. {

The Federation of Women’s Institutes, in
their memorandum to the Scott Committee,
stressed the rural housing shortage as an
indirect cause of the falling birth-rate. Other

* Maps in the Report of the Committee on Land
Utilisation in Rural Areas (pp. 6 and 7) demonstrate
the depopulation of nearly all parts of rural England
and Wales in the pre-war years. The greatest increases
were around London, and near Liverpool, Manchester
and Birmingham. The most disturbing map (p. 6)
shows how the greater part of this expansion was made
on good agricultural land.

+ Cf. Ashby (1935), pp. 9-10. These differences of
age and sex between the total urban and rural populations are growing smaller. See also Kiser (1942) on
urban-rural fertility rates in America.

{t It is to be hoped that the Family Limitation Study
of the Royal Commission on Population, published in
January 1950, will be used to throw light on this
question.

reasons which would repay study are the
change in “‘fashion’’ as to family size,
(perhaps more marked in the remoter country
districts, where families used to be the
largest) and the increasing age at marriage.
Further factors which affect the rural birthrate are the difficulties in arranging for the
actual birth and the shortage of help in the
home. There is more neighbourliness in the
rural than in the urban community, but
to-day the village, like the town, is feeling
the shortage of “‘ aunties ’’ who used to be so
freely available in emergencies. Home-help
schemes are beginning in the rural districts,
but so far are merely a drop in the bucket.

To summarize this cursory survey of rural
fertility : Despite the more rapid decrease in
fertility of rural women between 1870 and
1921, so great was their lead in the past that
they remained ahead of the urban women.
In the decade between 1921-31 the rural
birth-rate continued to decline, but less than
half as fast as the decline among miners and
textile workers. There would therefore seem
to be a higher effective fertility among rural
women than among urban.

Mortality

Death-rates might be regarded as a more
reliable index of physical quality than birthrates. Davies* gives a table of death-rates
by which he figures, for 1926, a death-rate
of 10°58 per thousand for urban districts,
and 8-35 per thousand for rural. Martin
(1949) also demonstrates from a ratio of
actual deaths to expected deaths for males
in 1930-2, a ‘‘ progressive increase in mortality with urbanization.” All this would not
seem to point to degeneration in the physical
quality of the rural population. Figures for
deaths from heart diseases, cancer, strokes,
pneumonia and respiratory tuberculosis are
all lower for the agricultural population than
for industrial workers such as fitters and
mechanics, and also clerical workers, as
shown in Table ITI.

 

* Op. cit., p. 107. He has calculated death-rates on a
‘standard population with a fixed age and sex distribution, because country districts contain a larger
proportion of persons of the sex and ages most liable to
fatal disease than the towns.”’
80 | THE EUGENICS REVIEW

TABLE III

MORTALITY OF MALES IN THE PRINCIPAL OCCUPATIONS FROM THE MAIN CAUSES OF DEATH—ENGLAND AND WALES
1930-2

{
| Standardised Mortality Ratio among Males aged 20-65

 

 

from
nati Social Census All | en
Oncupation Gronp Class |Population| Causes Perebral Bron- | RespiraHeart | Cancer Vaseulat chitisand) tory | cuicige
| Diseases |(all sites)| 'ccion, | Paeu- | Tuber- ;

Farmers and their rela- |
II

tives ... wee wee 253,000 73
Agricultural and gardeners’ labourers IV, V 414,000 71

Coal hewers and getters III
Fitters, mechanics, tool
405,000 | I13

makers, etc. ... ...| III 323,000 100
Road transport—moto
drivers eee ..f III 348,000 80
Typists and other clerks,
not in the Civil Service ... wee .-| III 496,000 IOI
100

 

All males ... . IT1,342,000

monia | culosis

‘ | <eeeatary | ance | SS | RENE | OE
ap | a | ear |

76 68 50 35 142
68 59 66 51 84
109 112 128 84 85
95 107 93 102 94
75 66 | 77 78 68
102 112 82 120 107

Ioo I0o Ioo

 

The standardised mortality ratio expresses the mortality in the occupation as a percentage of the mortality of all
males from the same cause
[From figures compiled by the Institute of Social Medicine, Oxford]

In 1924 an important inquiry into the
health of urban and rural school children was
made by the Board of Education. Nearly
10,000 children in twenty-two counties were
inspected, and about one-fifth were found to
“ suffer from impaired physique ’—many of
these being in the almost derelict and deserted
villages in some parts of Devon, Anglesey
and Lincoln ; here the children were definitely
below the physical standard of urban children. The final overall conclusion, however,
was that the rural children are as a whole still
physically ahead of the urban children,
though not so much ahead as was formerly
the case. We must remember that this
inquiry came at a black period in agricultural history.

Stillbirths and Infant Mortality-Rates

The most recent figures on physical health
I have been able to find are compiled from
the Statistical Review of the RegistrarGeneral* (Table IV) and from a study by

* By the kindness of the Institute of Social Medicine,
Oxford. The author’s thanks are due to Dr. Russell
and Dr. Sutherland.

Dr. W. J. Martin (1949) from the records of

the medical examinations of young male

recruits in 1939. The first shows the contrast
TABLE IV

STATISTICAL REVIEW OF THE REGISTRAR-GENERAL FOR
ENGLAND AND WALES, 1945-7 (H.M.S.O.)

Stillbirth- Infant Maternal
Birth-rate rate Mortality Deathper per per rate per
1,000 of 1,000 1,000 I,000 live
population total births live births and stillbirths
County
boroughs 20°84 27°27 50-90 1°37
Urban
districts 19°34 27°03 42°26 150
Rural
districts 18-74 25°72 38-65 1:69

 
 

A

  

 

CEES <uces

ZZ URBAAL

SEE cowry
THE QUALITY OF THE RURAL POPULATION

between county boroughs (the big cities),
urban districts (towns) and rural districts for
stillbirths, infant mortality and maternal
death-rate. The lower stillbirth-rate and
infant mortality-rate for the rural districts
are highly significant ; while the slightly
higher maternal mortality-rate probably
partly reflects the better clinical and hospital
care which urban mothers receive.

In Table V we see what Dr. Martin calls
‘ statistical support for the age-old belief
that the countryman is on the average
superior in health and physique,” and that
the small-town man has an advantage over
the metropolitan citizen. The rural youth of
20-21 is just over 34 lb. heavier than his city
contemporary. Martin suggests that this
may be due to greater height. The rural
average for height is three-tenths of an inch
taller, and the chest circumference threetenths of an inch larger. The town youths
have slightly smaller chests than the city
youths. The most striking contrast is in eyesight. The county boroughs had 10-6 per
cent fewer men with perfect vision than the
rural districts. Another important contrast
is in the percentage of those in medical
Category 1—the normal standard of health
and strength ; 84 per cent of boys from rural
districts attained this standard and only
81-4 per cent from the towns and 80 per cent
from the large cities. (It is encouraging to
compare these figures, even though they deal
with the first call-up, with the “ C3’ results
of medical tests during the I914 war, when

TABLE V
THE PHYSIQUE OF YOUNG ADULT MALES
W. S. Martin. Lonpon (H.M.S.O., 1949)

COUNTY URBAN RURAL
WEIGHT IN POUNDS met o10 |2s9ton | 1374 Log
CHEST CIRCUMFERENCE. |.
asstoor.
WITH 1608

 
 
    
  
     
   

 
 

 
 
  

T
PER

PER CENT A MEDICAL
CATEGORY I

81

only between 31 per cent and 55 per cent

reached Category 1 in the final call-up in
some districts.)

Discussion

I think we are safe in drawing the conclusion that the general health and vitality of
the rural population is certainly equal, and
perhaps superior, to that of urban people.
Except in the poorest rural districts (where
health statistics, taken in isolation, may be
worse than the most congested towns*) the
innate health is perhaps the same. The
countryman’s advantage may be environmental—fresh air, outdoor work, absence of
noise and hurry all playing their part.

As housing and sanitary and working
conditions improve in both town and country
it is reasonable to suppose that the health

‘standards of both will improve and approxi
mate each other. At any rate, the city is still
very close to the country biologically.t It
is probable that during the time of peak
migration from the country around 1880
there was selection in many districts. The
question is whether this continued long
enough to be a lasting influence, and if not
whether rural society is still healthy enough
both to maintain itself and to send some of
its best to the cities. Far more research is
needed, for during this century many new
elements have appeared, such as urban
unemployment in the place of agricultural
unemployment, the transfer of light industry
to country districts, and the changed agricultural and housing policies of the Government.f{

MENTAL QUALITY

If we turn from physical quality—a fairly
straightforward subject—to mental quality
we enter a field where angels fear to tread.

* Cf. Morris and Titmuss (1942). They find that mortality from juvenile rheumatism increases with density
of population and with poverty. The depressed rural
districts returned rates as high as the worst in the large
cities. Rheumatism is known to be high among older
farm people, but this may be due more to the damp walls
of overcrowded cottages than to innate causes.—
B. S. B.

Cf. Ashby (1939), pp. 18 and 19.
Cf. Scotland’s Changing Population (1946), especially articles by J. C. Kyd and T. B. Manson.
82 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

W. H. Hudson wrote in 1910 that the agricultural labourer was the “‘ healthiest and sanest
man in the land, if not also the happiest.’’*
As we have seen, he may well be the healthiest; he is also probably saner than the
industrial labourer. Whether he is happier
is a question we must leave till later.

Mental Disease

To take the least controversial points first,
let us examine the evidence on mental
disease and feeble-mindedness. First, insanity: It is fairly well known that urban
rates of insanity are higher than rural.t
Standards of certification are probably different in cities and in rural areas. Most of
the psychoses among rural patients are
associated with physical conditions, i.e. the
senile psychoses, mental deficiency, Huntington’s chorea and cerebral arteriosclerosis,
and especially the wearing-out process that
comes with old age. Urban psychoses are
associated with alcohol, drugs and syphilitic
infection.{ The high suicide-rate for farmers,
shown in Table III, reveals the strain under
which many of them live. It is doubtful
whether farming selects nervous types,
though this is possible to some extent and
deserves study.

In America in 1910 the commitment-rate
per 100,000 urban population was 86, as
compared with 41-1 for the rural—over
twice as high. In 1933 these rates were 106
and 60-7 for urban and rural males ; and
75:8 and 41-4 for urban and rural females.§
Professor Landis, commenting on _ these
figures, says that the high rates of urban
insanity may be due partly to the age factor
(rural areas having more children, who are
not affected by insanity) and by the fact that
the foreign-born, who generally have a
higher insanity rate than the native Americans, tend to congregate in cities. The
evidence in favour of the sanity of the rural
population, in both America and England, is
fairly clear.

* A Shepherd’s Life, p. 40.

+ See Glass (1935). Mayer-Gross (1948) found a rate
of 19 per 1,000 for neurotics and psychopaths, and
3°5 per 1,000 for psychotics.

{ Cf. Dayton (1940), p. 382.

§ Landis (1948), p. 110, quoting U.S. Bureau of
Census.

Mental Deficiency

When we turn from mental disease to
mental deficiency the balance is on the
other side. I need not describe the investigation by Dr. Lewis, published as the Wood
Report in 1929. He calculated from his
inquiries in three urban and three rural
areas that the incidence of mental deficiency
in England and Wales in 1925 was 6-7 per
1,000 in urban, and 10-5 per 1,000 in rural
areas.* Sir Cyril Burt (1946) estimates, on
the basis of the higher rate of survival due to
better care of defectives in 1927, that this
represents a rough increase of I-2 per 1,000
for urban rates and 3 per 1,000 for rural
rates over the findings of the Royal Commission in 1907. Dr. Lewis in his evidence for
the Royal Commission on Population, commenting on the fact that the incidence of
mental defect was almost 50 per cent higher
in the country than in the town, says :

In each of the six areas we investigated we
found that the mentally defective were very
unevenly distributed. In the rural areas many
small villages had several defectives whilst in
others there were none. In the towns the large
majority of defectives resided in slum areas... .
In parenthesis, I may add that our findings give
a denial to any sweeping generalization that
rusticity is synonymous with mental inferiority.
The level of intelligence in some villages, judged
by results obtained with group tests given to
the school children, compared very favourably
with that of urban populations. In these rural
districts it seems that the more intelligent
members have resisted the attractions of the
towns and that the less intelligent and efficient
members have been forced to seek occupation
elsewhere.—Papers of the Royal Commission on
Population, Vol. V. 1950.

Dr. Lewis stresses the importance of the
borderline cases ; socially and genetically the
marriage of the dull girl to the dull boy is
more significant than the number of idiots
in any community.

In a paper read before the Eugenics Society
almost exactly two years ago Dr. MayerGross (1948) reported a mental health survey
in an agricultural area in the Scottish lowlands towards the end of the war. This was a
district which had suffered heavily from the

* Report of the Mental Deficiency Committee

(1929), Pt. II, p. 82.
THE QUALITY OF THE RURAL POPULATION 83

rural exodus of the past two generations.* I
will recall to you his findings which bear
directly on our subject : Nine per cent of the
total population were found to be “ abnormal,’ under nine diagnostic subdivisions.
The rate of incidence of mental deficiency
was 15°6 per 1,000, which is a third greater
than that found by Dr. Lewis in 1927. Many
in this group were living under bad conditions, but were fairly content and adapted to
their low standard of life. Dr. Mayer-Gross
sounds ‘‘ a sombre note of peaceful gloom ”
when describing the large number of borderline cases, especially among the children, and
he makes an eloquent plea for better
conditions.

In America, also, the evidence points to the
conclusion that rural areas have a higher
proportion of mental defectives than the
cities, despite figures showing higher commitment rates for urban areas. One reason
is again the age factor, mental defect showing
itself in children, and the death-rates among
aments being high. Landis (1948) points out
that rural families are more likely than city
families to let their moron children run at
large, and he cites the moron commitmentrates as evidence. These rates are much
lower for the country than for the cities.f
Evidently the farms shelter their morons at
home better than the cities and provide
simple tasks better suited to their abilities.
More evidence is provided by the percentage
of urban and rural American draftees in the
first world war: 1-5 per cent of the urban
and 3:9 per cent of the rural men were
rejected because of “‘ mental defectiveness.”’

There is not space to discuss other factors
connected with mental quality—alcoholism,
vice and juvenile delinquency. Certainly
indications are that the rates of incidence are
higher in the cities than in the country.

Davies’ (1931) conclusion on the whole
question of mental abnormality is worth
quoting :

It seems that the incidence of mental abnormality tends to increase as population approaches

* Op. cit. In this Scottish district there were in
193I 7,000 more people over 65 and 45,000 less under
20 than there had been in 1871.

¢ Ibid., p. 111. See also Sorokin, Zimmerman and
Galpin, Vol. 3 (1932), p. 240.

either of the two extremes of excessive density
or excessive sparsity, while it is lowest in a mean
or normal population. In this case it would
appear that rural-urban migration has been a
factor of very great importance in the causation
of mental deficiency, both rural and urban, not
necessarily by draining away the best stocks from
the countryside but by depleting it of its normal
proportion of population, while at the same time
overcrowding the towns.—(loc. cit., p. 147).

This question of the interplay between
quantity and quality in a population is one
deserving much study, but is beyond the
scope of this paper. Our conclusion must be
that the rate of mental deficiency is higher in
those rural districts which have been surveyed than in the cities. Studies of other
rural districts are needed before general
conclusions can be drawn.

Intelligence

And now we come to intelligence, the
thorniest problem of all. I will not attempt
to go into the question of definition, or into
the history of the nature-nurture controversy, now nearly two generations old. I
cannot do better than to quote Sir Cyril
Burt (1946) :

... the inheritability of tested intelligence is
remarkably like that of stature. The measurable
height of a child may be reduced by illness or
malnutrition, particularly during infancy; but
that does not obscure the fact that the main
determining influence, especially when all are
brought up in favourable conditions, is still the
individual’s inborn constitution. And the same
holds good of the measurements obtained by
intelligence tests.

Suffice it to say that certain tests are now
accepted as useful tools in skilled hands, for
specific purposes, and for the classification of
children within certain groups. When groups
differ greatly in background the question
arises : does the measuring instrument favour
one group more than the other? For our
purposes, do the tests favour the city
children ?

American Studies of Rural Intelligence

This question has been debated more
frequently in America, with its racial problems, than in Britain. American rural conditions differ widely from British ; if I were

D
84 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

asked to cite some of them I would hazard
the following: First, the American rural
population is far more mobile than the
British ; there is an army if migrant workers,
and even among stable families there is a
habit of “‘ moving on ”’ ; second, the American educational system is more uniform and
democratic even than the British; this
affects test comparisons in the over-14 age
group more than in the primary grades;
third, the class system is more “ open,” both
occupationally and socially, and this affects
the “pull” from the cities; fourth, the
farming structure is different ; for instance,
the landlord-tenant system is hardly comparable to the British system ; land ownership does not have the same traditional
meaning, and tenancy is merely a step in the
farming ladder.* Broadly speaking, it is
easier for an able young man to get land and
set up as a farmer in the United States than
in England. Bearing these differences in
mind let us examine some of the studies that
came in such spate during the ’twenties and
early ‘thirties. Sorokin, Zimmerman and
Galpin (1931 and 1932) summarize the results
of sixty-five such studies—I shall not do
that! In general, the country children were
slower and, therefore, did less well on any
tests dependent on speed. An early school
survey (Works, 1922) found that country
children were equal to city children in arithmetic, but deficient in other subjects. This
brings up the vast and important matter of
rural education, which can only be touched
upon here. Roughly speaking, the American
surveys have shown that the rural schools in
the regions studied are inferior to urban
schools, the city children being approximately one year ahead of the country children. The urban superiority varied in direct
proportion as ‘‘ demands made by the tests
called for special school instruction as
opposed to general powers which the school
can do little to make or mar ’’ (Chapman and
Eby (1920)). To illustrate this, here is a story
quoted by Blackburn (1948) :

* A comparison between the British and American
smallholdings movements would be of great interest ;
also a study of the different types of well-paid farm jobs
in each country.

A Kentucky mountain boy was being given
the Stanford-Binet test. ‘‘ If you bought 6 cents’
worth of candy and gave the storekeeper
to cents, how much change would you receive ? ’’
The boy answered, ‘‘ I never had ro cents, and
if I had I wouldn’t spend it on candy, and
anyway candy is what mother makes.’”’ The
examiner, not to be downed, improvised : ‘‘ If
you had taken ten cows to pasture for your
father, and six of them strayed away, how
many would you have left to drive home? ”’
The answer came quickly : ‘‘ We done’ have ten
cows, but if we did, and I lost six, I wouldn’t
dare go home.’’ The examiner tried again : “‘ If
there were ten children in your school and six
of them were home with measles, how many
would there be in school?” ‘The boy said,
“None, because the rest would be afraid of
catching it too.”

That boy was not stupid, but he might
have been rated as a moron on the Binet
scale.

An interesting American approach is a
study in Iowa on children from birth to
16 years (Baldwin and Fillmore (1928)),
which points up the influence of environment. The authors found that

when matched with city children the rural

infants show no noticeable differences ; the rural

pre-school children show some inferiority at the
upper ages, and the rural school children show

. .. increasing retardation .. . especially in lan
guage ability.... They show superiority on

certain (performance) tests that probably relate
to their experiences, but they have a slower rate
of action.

The fact that the rural babies up to about
three accredited themselves as well as their
city contemporaries leads the authors to suggest that, among other causes, the fewer books
and pictures in rural homes may account for
some of the inferiority of older rural children.

In 1929 Shimberg made an _ investigation to examine the hypothesis of the unfairness of tests. Believing that intelligence
tests are to some extent information tests she
constructed two scales of twenty-five general
information questions, one based on town
experience (Test A), the other on rural
(Test B). Test A ranged in difficulty from
“What are the colours of the American
flag?’ to ‘What is a referendum in government?” Test B began with “ Of what is
butter made? ’”’ and ended with ‘‘ How can
you locate the Pole star?” After careful
THE QUALITY OF THE RURAL POPULATION 85

standardization each scale was given to large
groups of urban and rural school children in
the State of New York. On Test A (the
urban scale) the rural group was found to be
a year retarded, on Test B (the rural questions) the position was reversed, indeed the
urban children were slightly more than a
year retarded. Shimberg concludes, not unnaturally, that ordinary intelligence tests do
not “fit ’’ rural children as well as they do
urban ; that the country children are different, not inferior.*

Jones, Conrad and Blanchard (1932) have
made an important study in which they
“analysed the effect of restricted environment on the separate mental operations in
the Binet test.’’ Space does not permit a full
summary,f but here are their conclusions,
somewhat condensed :

.a rural child moving to the city would
increase his intelligence-test scores, merely as a
result of changed environmental conditions.
The rural child . . . is handicapped . . . in linguistic information . .. in speed ... and in
adaptation to test situations. The handicap is
specific, not general ; . . . sometimes transitory,
but more often cumulative.... It would be

unsafe, however, to infer that the average
retardation of rural children is chiefly due to
environmental factors. The quantitative relations cannot be stated on the basis of the present
evidence, but the most likely estimate would be
that about half of the average difference of
1o points I.Q. is attributable to factors other
than those derived from social and educational
environment... .

Professor Raymond Cattell wrote to the
author in January from Illinois, and said,
with regard to urban-rural migration :

The evidence seems to be that normally the
children of brighter I.Q. tend to migrate to the
really big cities somewhat more than those of
lower I.Q.... The country areas seem to start
with a somewhat lower distribution of I.Q. and
this does not seem to be entirely accountable for
by differences of efficiency of schooling. They
then tend somewhat to lose the brighter I.Q.s.
... On the other hand, there is an opposite
trend of migration during the time of agricultural slump, when it seems that it is the less
successful, and probably, therefore, the less able,
who migrate to the cities. Whether these occa
 

* Shimberg (1929), p. 52; also cf. Smith (1927) and
Shaler (1930).
t For this see Schwesinger (1933), pp. 295-7.

sional heavy migrations through slump are

sufficient to offset the endemic trend in the

opposite direction is anyone’s guess. .

To conclude this brief survey of American
studies may I quote two other opinions :
Frederick Osborn (1940), summarizing a discussion of studies on racial and regional
groups, says:

Differences in hereditary potentials for intelligence are widely scattered in different family
lines throughout the whole population. In order
to sort them out with any accuracy it will be

necessary to equalize or allow for environmental

conditions affecting the development of intel
ligence.—(p. 99).

Professor Landis (1948) ends his discussion
of rural innate ability thus:

The effective intelligence of rural students, as
measured by their ability to make satisfactory
adjustments (in college) is apparently as high
as that of urban students. This would seem to
be a more valid basis for drawing rural-urban
comparisons than performance on psychological tests.... That farm people have almost
universally been placed lower than urban groups
in intelligence testing may be of some significance,
but interpretations must be carefully qualified,
for the tests as ordinarily used are not a safe
method of arriving at an index of population
quality.—(Op. ctt., p. 106).

British Studies of Rural Intelligence

And now we turn to the British rural
population again—so much more homogeneous and stable, and yet just as complicated.
Again the overall picture of past and recent
studies reveals lower average rural scores on
intelligence tests, but some high scores in
remote districts. In 1919 Bickersteth (1919)
tested children in the Yorkshire Dales and
in Leeds. The Dales children were better in
memory tests, the Leeds children in reasoning. This last was tested by the Burt analogy
test (policeman : burglar ; cat: ), and
the answers would presumably be easier
for children with urban background.

Gray and Marsden (1922) also tested a
small group of children in the Yorkshire
Dales in 1923, and concluded, “The country
children examined are, as a group, more
intelligent than some town classes we tested.
... The famous studies with the Northum- berland mental tests by Professor Godfrey

 
86 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Thomson, published in 1921 (Thomson 1921,
Duff and Thomson 1923) found the rural
children more than a year behind those in
the large cities. Some of the children in the
remote Cheviot valleys were found to have
high intelligence, and Professor Thomson
suggests this may be in part due to these
districts being “‘ too remote to be drained by
selection to the cities.”

This is borne out by a study in the West
Riding of Yorkshire under the auspices of
the Board of Education in 1924. “ Mental
tests ’’ were applied in sixteen urban and
rural elementary schools, and the results
showed :

.in the rural schools the most noticeable
feature is the greater range in the distribution
of intelligence.... The villages where a disproportionate number of... backward children
were found were .. . mainly villages near a port
or city—villages, that is to say, from which the
brighter families had already migrated. Other
villages, however, in a similar situation showed a
disproportionate number of bright and average
children ; in such cases it was found that the less
intelligent families had moved to the large
industrial centres owing to the demand for
unskilled labourers ; while on the other hand the
village itself offered a desirable place of resi
TABLE VI
DISTRIBUTION OF INTELLIGENCE IN THE URBAN AREA

   

Perdentages in eactr category
at head of column.
Actual numbers io brackets.

   

40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110120 180 140 150 160 170
t——————— INTELLIGENCE QUOTIENTS, ——————->

 

dence for better families, such as skilled artisans

and professional people.—Psychological Tests of

Educable Capacity, 1924 (p. 156).

In 1937 Dr. Raymond Cattell published
his book The Fight for Our National Intelligence, which did much to rouse public
opinion about the differential birth-rate. He
applied a specially made non-verbal group
test to 3,734 10-year-old school children in
Leicester city and in rural Devonshire, and
obtained figures from which he estimated the
following declines in I.Q. in a generation :
3:1 for the urban area; 3-3 for the rural.
He also estimated “ approximately a 30 per
cent increase in mental deficiency,”’ and that
the very able country children had been cut
down by half. This, not surprisingly, he calls
a “galloping plunge towards intellectual
bankruptcy.” Sir Cyril Burt (1946), com
menting on these estimates, says that this

alleged plunge, if true, would have aroused
comment from school teachers and educational officials (and, I might add, employers
—some of whom, indeed, have complained
of lowered efficiency). Sir Cyril goes on to
explain the divergence between Cattell’s and
his own estimates for the decline of the I.Q.

TABLE VII
DISTRIBUTION OF INTELLIGENCE IN THE RURAL AREA

  
 

Percentages In each category
at head of colymn,

Actyal tiumbers in brackete.

    

“30 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130 140 150 160170 180,
“t-———— INTELLIGENCE QUOTIENTS, ———_—-»>
THE QUALITY OF THE RURAL POPULATION

(1-5 urban, 2-0 rural) by citing differences in
the tests and in the sampling.*

Tables VI and VII show Cattell’s scores
for the rural and urban children, giving the
spread of intelligence in both groups.

The greatest contrasts lie between the
80-90 and the 100-110 I.Q. groups ; but the
rural children show significantly lower scores
in all the I.Q. groups except between 90-100.

By way of comparison, Table VIII gives
curves by Hirsch on Kentucky mountain
children, and by Terman and Merrill on
urban children in America.t The greater
difference in the averages reflects the greater
contrast in environment. Actually the
mountain children appear to have been a
normal group for their environment.

TABLE VIII
DISTRIBUTION OF SCORES IN INTELLIGENCE TESTS

MapDE By AMERICAN URBAN AND EAST KENTUCKY
MOUNTAIN SCHOOL CHILDREN

28
peg a a Sa

_
a
24}—}——|- 4} 4

     
    
 

  

aly] [Ait TY DIN TT
i 2 eS
fp ta tt Na
35- 45 55 65- 75- 85 OS W5- 115- (25- [35-145 K5- WE
44 54 64 74 84 94 104 A [24 BA 14 154 4 174

      

To swing from the Kentucky mountains to
the mountains of Scotland, two studies made
before the war are worthy of notice. Mowat
(1938) studied city and rural schools in Scotland and found that the differences of ability
between schools were less in the country than

* Professor Ashby [(1939) and personal interview]
criticises Cattell’s findings on rural intelligence by maintaining that rural birth-rates have never been sufficient
to account for “‘ the country supplying the cities with
its better men.’”? He asks what evidence Cattell has for
saying that some villages with high intelligence have
been ‘‘ untapped by the towns.” If this were true these
villages would have grown into small towns. Finally
he doubts whether the tests used measure inborn
capacity.

+ Osborn (op. cit., p. 73).

87

in towns. He suggested as an explanation
that in Scotland a greater variety of social
classes go to rural schools ; in the cities the
classes are more segregated. The higher
scores were found in the small (rural) and in
the large (urban) schools rather than in
medium-sized ones. He suggests that the

‘children benefit from more individual atten
tion in the small schools and from the better
organization in the large ones ; or that perhaps the ‘drain to the towns of better
stock ”’ has left remoter districts more or less
untapped, so that the small school “ way
out ” has brighter children. He also raises an
interesting query about occupational intelligence. ‘‘ Intelligence is demanded of
shepherds, small farmers and signalmen,”
and perhaps the parents’ occupations influence the I.Q. of the children. It is well
known that the children of professional
parents score the highest on intelligence
tests ; but do urban, industrial and clerical
occupations really demand higher intelligence than rural work in general ?* Real
evidence on this question could have been
obtained by comparisons of evacuees and
country children in the rural schools during
the war. I have not been able to find a single
such study.

In 1939 Macmeeken studied the intelligence of a representative group of Scottish children with Binet and Performance
tests, and found “no evidence of inferiority of rural to urban children in level
of intelligence .. .”” though “ in interpreting
this we must remember that a remarkable
uniformity has been achieved in Scotland,
where 99°7 per cent of the teachers are
trained.”’ (p. 46).

Evidence from an English education
authority which has done research with
Moray House intelligence tests shows definitely lower scores for its rural children. In
1947 the University of Hull inquiry in two
different counties (Perkins, 1947), one southwest and one north-east, found mean scores
for urban children of :

tor-7 (S.D. 13:1)
105'67 (S.D. 15-04)

* See also Russell (1930) and Macdonald (1925).
88 - THE EUGENICS REVIEW

for semi-rural children of:

too-r (S.D. 13-6)
100°64 (S.D. 14:3)

and for rural children :

97°3 (S.D. 13-1)

98-9 (S.D. 13°76)
Clearly the urban children were fairly superior
to the semi-rural ones, especially in the
north-east county, and very superior to the
rural children. The author comments :

The distributions were similar and seemed to
support the theory that children in rural surroundings develop at a slower rate than in urban
ones. Village children evidently included a
number who were thoroughly well able to follow
a grammar-school curriculum provided they had
been sufficiently well equipped with the two
essential skills. Having reached the desirable
level under less favourable circumstances than
their town-bred fellows their claims should
receive the fullest consideration.

The author adds that war camps and factories had brought an “ infusion of brighter
children ” into rural communities. The proportion of dull children in the rural areas
was more than twice that in the towns. The
proportion of children with scores of 130 or
over was different in the two counties, but
equally small for rural children :

Urban Semi-rural Rural

% % %
S.W. County 27 (18) ro (2-6) 14 (1-1)
N.E. County 35 (5:3) 4 (1°8) 3 (1-1)

And now we come to the latest and most
important of all British intelligence surveys
—that carried out in 1947 by the Scottish
Mental Survey Committee (Scottish Council
for Research in Education, 1949), of which
Professor Sir Godfrey Thomson is chairman.
The comparison with the famous 1932
survey (Scottish Council for Research in
Education, 1932) was described to this
Society last October by Sir Godfrey himself.
Here I will give some unpublished figures,
which he and Mr. James Maxwell have kindly
permitted me to quote: The children from
the four cities (27,422 eleven-year-olds) had a
mean test score of 37-156 (S.D. 16-10). The
children from nineteen other education
authorities, whose areas are almost entirely

rural (12,551 eleven-year-olds) had average
test scores of 35-754 (S.D. 16-22). The difference of 1-4 points is statistically significant.
The average score for all Scotland is 36-688
(S.D. 16-05). Evidently if there were children with high scores from some of the
remote rural districts they could not pull up
the rural average, which is almost a point
below the total average. It would be
interesting to try rural-urban information
scales on these children, such as Shimberg
used.

Sir Godfrey has also allowed me to quote
some results from the English survey, which
is being conducted by Mr. Emmett, and
which shows fairly wide variations in urban
and rural intelligence. As a whole the urban
children are brighter than the rural by
4°07 points of I.Q. Within two very rural
almost pastoral counties the children in the
smaller urban districts are significantly
superior to the rural children. In three
agricultural counties each containing large
urban areas and backgrounds of extensive
mixed farming the children in the smaller
urban districts are significantly superior to
those in the county boroughs (the big cities).
In one of these counties, with many small
family farms specializing in dairying, the
rural children are significantly superior to
those in a dockyard sea-coast town. In
another of these counties, also very rural,
with mixed farming, the country children are
significantly zmferior to those in a large
industrial city. In the third of these counties
there is only a slight and insignificant difference between the rural children and those
of a large industrial and shipping area. The
lowest I.Q.s occurred in another sea-coast
town, and the total rural children were
brighter than these by 1-05 points. The
urban children from the smaller towns (one
an ancient cathedral and market town) were
brighter than the sea-coast town children by
5°12 points.

Discussion of American and British Studies

A summary of this brief survey of the more
important American and British urban-rural
comparisons yields no broad conclusion.
Faced with such a diversity of results, what
THE QUALITY OF THE RURAL POPULATION 89

can we deduce ? The two main questions in
the field of intelligence testing were: “‘ Do
the tests favour the city children?” and
“ Are most of the abler children now living
in the towns due to selective migration by
their forbears? ’’ The answer to the first
question is, I think, a partial yes ; but final
judgment must be reserved until more work
has been done on such matters as “ test
sophistication ’’ and the influence of specific
and general elements in the home and school
environments.* Professor P. E. Vernon, who

coined the term “test sophistication,’ is

engaged on research into the intelligence of
army recruits in various parts of the country.
The results of the Hollerith analysis will give
important information on rural, semi-rural
and urban test performance. His conclusions,
together with those of the Scottish and
English surveys, will be of great interest.

Sir Frederic Bartlett has suggested ways
of minimizing environmental influence, such
as testing the rate of improvement, or finding
a way by which “ significant limits ’”’ of intelligence differences could be equated for
different groups.t (Efforts made in the
twenties to find a ‘‘ universal test,’”’ free of
all environmental influence, have not had
much success. f)

The answer to the second question is more
difficult, as we have seen. If the tests used
in rural-urban comparisons do favour the
city children to some extent, how much does
this account for the lower rural scores which
have been found almost universally in both
England and America? The debate on
selective migration really hangs on the
answer. We have seen that Jones, Conrad
and Blanchard consider that only half the
difference in rural-urban I1.Q:s is attributable
to environment. <A _ similar research in
England would be valuable, as would a study
planned on the same lines as Shimberg’s.

* Cf. Schwesinger (1933, Chapter IV) for an able and
comprehensive discussion of environmental influence.

ft Cf. his introduction to Blackburn (1948). For earlier
discussions of this question, see Schieffelin and
Schwesinger (1930), pp. 42-51.

E.G. Dodd (1926). It has been found again and
again that non-verbal tests, even those with pantomime
instructions, do not eliminate the language element ;
nor do they escape specific culture factors, such as the
child’s reaction to the test situation.

Need for Further Research

The importance of the I.Q. in any assessment of all-round quality may itself be
debated. There must, of course, be a basic
average of general ability, below which no
society is efficient ; but does a difference of
2-4 points on, say, the Moray House intelligence tests constitute a drop below such an
average ? This is a vital question and needs
far more thought than it has received from
the experts in mental testing. It brings upa
whole complex of questions. Should tests be
standardized separately for groups varying
too much in background ? Can temperament
and character be measured? If the social
and biological backgrounds cannot be untwined, can their respective contributions be
estimated ?

Another rich field of inquiry is the
distribution of rural intelligence. The
percentages of bright and dull children,
and the possible connection between family
strains and racial origins, may be more
important than the average scores of
groups. American sociologists seem to have
concluded that intelligence is more diversified
in the cities than in the country,* and this is
at variance with most British findings. It
probably reflects in part the difference
between American and British conditions,
but it would repay study. Last, but not
least, the question of the greater incidence of
mental defect in country districts needs far
more investigation. Is there any connection
between feeble-mindedness and too great or
too little density of population ?

GENERAL CONCLUSIONS

A paper such as this can hardly result in
any one conclusion. We have seen that
standards of health and intelligence vary
with the shift of economic forces in both
town and country. On the physical level the
innate urban quality is probably much the
same as the rural. On the mental level urban
environment seems to make for earlier
development and to call forth different
abilities—alertness and speed, for instance,

* Cf. Davies (1931), p. 167.
go | THE EUGENICS REVIEW

as against persistence and thoroughness.*
The proper comparison between town and
country is in terms of differences, not of
superiorities.

Special Qualities of the Countryman |

The special character of the countryman
has been the subject of many books. At its
simplest it reveals itself in the instinctive
wisdom, stability and balance of the rural
worker. The country boy of 14 who scores
lower than his town contemporary may well,
at 30, become an abler worker, more skilled
and reliable, and with better qualities as
parent and citizen, than the same town boy
turned factory worker. Sir Horace Plunkett
does not hesitate in saying that the countryman’s “intellectual slowness is really...
engendered by the slow processes of nature

.. his thought is larger, nearer to the
realities of life, than that of the city dweller,
his work is more dignified and thorough.’’t
Sir George Stapledon calls the attributes of
a good landsman “ self-reliance, self-sufficiency ... endurance.” { The farm worker
of to-day is in many ways more skilful than
his ancestors. He may not be so good with
animals, but he is learning the intricacies of
tractor engines, of grassland management
and of efficient crop production.§ His
employer the farmer needs, besides these
abilities, inventiveness and foresight. He
must be aware of processes which the townsman can more safely ignore. Such a simple
thing as the placing of a haystack means
weighing the pros and cons of weather and
transport many months ahead. The mating
of a cow to-day will influence milk production four years hence. In forestry the cycle
may be eighty years.

These qualities of the countryman were
recognized during the war in each branch of
the services. Both naval and army officers
have told the writer that they could always

. alertness has
survival value in the city ; but steady persistence may
be equally important in the country. .

7 Cf. Holdenby (19173). Introduction.

} Sunday Times, January 23rd, 1949.

§ This view was forcibly expressed in a letter to the
author by Mr. G. B. Newe, Regional Organiser to the
Northern Ireland Council of Social Service.

* Landis (1948) enlarges on this : ‘

recognize the countryman among the ratings
or recruits, and that after training they were
the ones who usually got the stiff assignments. The villages and small towns provided more officer material, in proportion to
their numbers, than did the big cities. These
traits of stability and leadership seem to be
fostered by a rural or semi-rural environment.* They may depend more on the
home and school than on genetic factors,
true ; but it is the interaction of biological
and social heredity that is important, and
this interaction takes place in the home and
school. As rural housing and education
improve we may see improvement in mental
“quality ’’ which will lay once and for all
the bogey of rural inferiority. Many a
country doctor will testify already to the
improved health and “intelligence” of
village families who have been rehoused.f
And the same could be said of the children
who have had the best type of rural schooling.

Farming, fishing, forestry and the other
rural industries call for great skills, and these
skills are becoming increasingly important
to Britain. Certainly many people capable of
these skills have been driven from the
countryside in the past, but there is evidence
that this is being corrected. As agriculture
becomes more efficient it may need fewer
workers, but it is all the more essential that
those workers be of good quality. The old
association between agriculture and industry
is being restored in a new form, as is shown
by the Government’s attitude toward the
decentralization of industry, the stabilizing
of farm prices and the encouragement of
small holdings; towards rural housing,
transport, water and electricity. There is
ample latent strength and ability among the
rural population and a growing self-confidence. The rural worker is far more apt
than the industrial worker to feel that he is
doing a vital job, that he is not just a cog in
a machine. During the dark days of farming

* Cf. Gee (1937).

+ There could hardly be a more dramatic contrast
than that between the modern Rural District Council
house, with its good kitchen, bathroom, living and
bedrooms, and the “‘ improved cottage ’’ of a century
ago—which was itself such a striking advance over the
hovels of past centuries.
THE QUALITY OF THE RURAL POPULATION gr

the countryman was decidedly not the
“happiest man in the land”; but his
importance to the nation is at last being
recognized, and his belief in his own destiny
is reviving.

AUTHOR’S ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

To the many experts who have given advice and
information I am most grateful, notably Professor
A. W. Ashby, Sir Godfrey Thomson, Dr. C. P.
Blacker and others mentioned in the text. My
thanks are also due to Miss K. Lane and to several
other librarians in London and Oxford, and to Miss
F. B. Schenk, who prepared the charts for use as
slides. B.S. B.

BOOKS AND ARTICLES REFERRED TO IN THE
TEXT AND FOOTNOTES

Addison, Viscount. 1939. A Policy for British Agriculture. London: Gollancz.

Arden-Close, Sir Charles, K.B.E., C.B., C.M.G., F.R.S.
1948. Our Crowded Island. EUGENICS REVIEW,
Vol. 40, No. 1, April.

Ashby, A. W. 1939. The Effects of Urban Growth on
the Countryside. Sociological Review, Vol. XXXI,
No. 4, October.

Ashby, A. W. 1935. The Sociological Background of
Adult Education in Rural Districts, 2nd Ed.
London : British Institute of Adult Education.

Baldwin, B. T., and Fillmore, E. L. 1928. The Mind of

the Rural Child. Psych. Bull, 25, 185-6.

Bickersteth, M. F. 1919. Application of Mental Tests
to Childven of Various Ages. Brit. J. Psych.,
Vol. IX, No. 1.

Blackburn, Julian. 1948. Influence of the Social
Environment on Intelligence Test Scores. British
Social Hygiene Council Inc. Occasional Papers,
No. 4.

Blacker, C. P., M.A., M.D. 1947. Stages in Population
Growth. EUGENICS REvIEW, Vol. 39, No. 3,
October.

Board of Agriculture and Fisheries. 1906. Report on
the Decline in the Agricultural Population of Great
Britain, 1881-1906. (R. H. Rew.) London.

Burt, Sir Cyril, M.A., D.Sc. 1946. Intelligence and
Fertility. The Eugenics Society and Hamish
Hamilton Medical Books. London.

Cattell, R. G. 1937. The Fight for Our National
Intelligence. London: P. S. King.

Chandrasekhar, Dr. S. 1949. The Population Problems
of India and Pakistan. EvUGENICS REVIEW,
Vol. 41, No. 2, July.

Chapman, J. C., and Eby, H. L. 1920. A Comparative
Study, Educational Measurements, of One-room
Rural School Children and City School Children.
J. Educ. Research, 2, 636-46.

Davies, D. J., A., Ph.D. 1931. Unpublished
Dissertation entitled The Condition of the Rural
Population in England and Wales, 1870-1928.
University of Wales, Aberystwyth.

Dayton, N. A., M.D., M.C. 1940. New Facts on Mental
Disorders. Baltimore, Md. : Charles C. Thomas.
Dodd, S. C. 1926. A Statement ‘Concerning Research on
an Intelligence Scale for International Use. Prince
ton Univ. Store, Princeton, N.J.

Duff, James F., and Thomson, Godfrey H. 1923.
The Social and Geographical Distribution of
Intelligence in Northumberland. Brit. J. Psych.,
XIV.

Fordham, M. 1916. A Short History of English Rural
Life. London: Geo. Allen & Unwin Ltd.

Gee, Wilson. 1937. Ruval-Urban Origins of Leaders in
Education. Rural Sociology, Vol. 2, pp. 402-8,
December.

Gist, Noel P., and others. 1943. Selective Factors in
Migration and Occupation; a Study of Soctal
Selection in Rural Missouri. Univ. of Missouri
Studies, Vol. XVIII, No. 2. Columbia, Missouri.

Glass, D. V. 1935. The Town and a Changing Civilisation. London: 2oth Century Lib .

Graunt, J. 1662. Natural and Political Observation
upon the Bills of Mortality. London.

Gray, P. L., and Marsden, R. E. 1922. Intelligence
Tests in Rural Schools. J. Exp. Ped., 6, 224-31.

Hill, Austin B. 1925. Internal Migration and its
Effects upon the Death-Rates : With Special Reference to the County of Essex. Medical Research
Council, Special Report, ser., 95. London.

Hirsch, N. D. M. 1928. An Experimental Study of the
East Kentucky Mountaineers. Genet. Psychol.
Monog., 3, 183-244.

Holdenby, C. 1913. Folk of the Furrow. London:
Smith, Elder & Co.

Innes, J. W. 1941. Milbank Memorial Fund Quarterly
Bulletin, 19, 72.

Jones, H. E., Conrad, H. S., and Blanchard, M. B.

1932. Environmental Handicap in Mental Test
Performance. Univ. Calif. Publ. Psychol., 5,
63-99.

Kiser, Clyde, V. 1942. Group Differences in Urban
Fertility. Baltimore, Md. : Williams & Wilkins Co.

Klineberg, O. 1938. The Intelligence of Migrants.
Amer. Sociol. Rev., 3, 218-24, April.

Landis, Paul H. 1948. Rural Life in Process. New
York ‘and London: Mcgraw Hill Book Co. Inc.
2nd Ed.

Macdonald, Hector. 1925. Social Distribution of Intelligence in the Isle of Wight. Brit. J. of Psychology.
Vol. XVI, 123-8.

Macmeeken, A. M., M.A., B.Ed. 1939. The Intelligence
of a Representative Group of Scottish Children.
Univ. of London Press.

Martin, W. J. 1949. The Physique of Young Adult
Males. Medical Research Council Memorandum
No. 20.

Mayer-Gross, W., M.D., M.R.C.P. 1948. Mental
Health Survey in a Rural Avea. EUGENICS REVIEW,
Vol. 40, No. 3, October.

Morris, J. H., and Titmuss, R. 1942. Epidemiology of
juvenile Rheumatism. The Lancet, vol. 2, July
18th.

Mowat, Alex. S., M.A., B.Ed. 1938. City and Rural
Schools. Publications of the Scottish Council for
Research in Education. Univ. of London Press
Ltd.

Osborn, Frederick H. 1940.
New York : Harper Bros.

Pennecuik, Alexander. 1815. Geographical and Historical Description of the Shire of Tweeddale. Leith :
A. Allardice.

Perkins, A. Lea, M.A. 1947. A Preliminary Enquiry
into the Distribution of Intelligence amongst Urban,
Semi-rural and Rural Schools. Univ. Coll. of Hull,
Institute of Educ. Studies in Education, No. 1,
June.

Preface to Eugenics.
92 | THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Pintner, R. 1917. A Mental Survey of the School
Population of a Village. School and Society, 5,
597-600.

Pyle, W. H., and Collings, P. E. 1918. Mental and
Physical Development of Rural Children. School
and Society, 8, 534-9.

Report of the Committee on Land Utilization in Rural
Aveas. 1942. (Chairman: The Rt. Hon. Lord
Justice Scott, P.C.) H.M.S.O.

Report of the Mental Deficiency Committee. Part IV.
1929. (Medical Investigator, Dr. E. O. Lewis.)
1925-7. London: H.M.S.O.

Russell, J. B. 1930. The Measurement of Intelligence in
a Rural Area. Brit. J. of Psych. Vol. XX, 275-95.

Schieffelin, B., and Schwesinger, G. C. 1930. Mental
Tests and Heredity. New York : Galton Publishing
Co. Inc.

Schwesinger, Gladys C., Ph.D. 1933. Heredity and
Environment. New York: The Macmillan Co. —

Scotland’s Changing Population. 1946. Published for
the Scottish Council of Social Service by the
National Council of Social Service, London.

Scottish Council for Research in Education. 1933. The
Intelligence of Scottish Children. V. London:
Univ. of London Press Ltd.

Scottish Council for Research in Education, and Population Investigation Committee. 1949. The Trend
of Scottish Intelligence. London: Univ. of London
Press Ltd.

Shaler, J. N. 1929. A Study of Mind-set in Rural and
City School Children. J. Educ. Psych. Vol. 21,
256-8.

LU IONAUUNUUUUUAUNUETUUTEUAUT LTA LAAN EAA

 

HUUHOUHERLUAHUUOARRD ULAR

THE WORLD’S GREATEST
BOOKSHOP

a * FOR BOOKS:

FAMED FOR ITS EXCELLENT
MEDICAL BOOKS DEPT.

New and secondhand Books
on every subject.
3 million volumes.

We BUY Books, too!
119-125 CHARING CROSS ROAD,
LONDON, W.C.2

Gerrard 5660 (16 lines)
Open 9-6 (inc. Sats.)

Sau UN UAT

Shimberg, Myra. 1929. An Investigation into the
Validity of Norms with Special Reference to Urban
and Rural Groups. Archives of Psychology,
No. 104.

Smith, W. C. 1927. The Rural Mind. Amer. J. Soc.,
32, 771-86.

Sorokin, P. A., Zimmerman, C. C., and Galpin, C. J.
1931 and 1932. A Systematic Source Book in Rural
Sociology. University of Minnesota Press, Min
neapolis.
Stamp, L. Dudley, C.B.E. 1949. The Planning of
Land Use. (Paper delivered in the Geography

Section of the British Association Meeting.
Extracts printed in The Estates Gazette, September
roth.)

Terman, L. M., and Merrill, M. A. 1937. Measuring
Intelligence. New York: Houghton, Mifflin & Co.

Thomson, Godfrey H. 1921. The Northumberland
Mental Tests. Brit. J. Psych. Vol. XII, No. 3.

Tilley, M. F. 1947. Housing the Rural Worker. London:
Faber & Faber.

Trevelyan, G. M., O.M. 1944. English Social History.
London : Longmans, Green & Co.

Tricart, J. 1949. Exemple d’Evolution d’une Société
Rurale en “‘ Milieu Repulsif.”” Population, JulySeptember, No. 3.

Works, G. A. 1922.
New York.

Zimmerman, C. C., and others. 1927 and 1930. The
Migration to Towns and Cities. Amer. J. Sociology,
July-September 1927 and July 1930.

Rural School Survey. Ithica,

its

INNSUUANUUA AH

Stock of

FUEL AAU

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLII, No 2
