THE TREASURER’S PAGE, No.

AVING shown in the three previous
issues of the REVIEW :

1. The growth in the Society’s
income and expenditure from 1924 to
1935 inclusive ;

2. The financial position of the Society
and the financial reasons for the
urgency for more funds ;

3. The eugenic objectives on which we are
spending money out of capital, and for
which more funds are needed ;

I propose in this issue to discuss the support
given to the Society by its Fellows and Members as shown by its subscription and
donation income, and to compare this with
the support, also in the form of donations
and subscriptions, given by their members
to other societies engaged in work of no
greater urgency and importance.

The facts in the case of our Society are these:
Year Number of Fellows Total Subscription

and Members and Donation Income

Ended Dec. 31st, 659 £528 12s. 3d.
1936 |

which equals a total annual contribution of
16s. o¢d. per eugenics enthusiast! Compare
this with the following table :
FIGURES OF AVERAGE SUPPORT PER PERSON
IN THE CASE OF OTHER SOCIETIES WITH
GENERALLY COMPARABLE ORGANISATIONS

AND AIMS

i: Total — Total of

°(All Donations per» Amount’ per

Categories) iain a “ Paresh 4,
A. Society I3I 287 11 II 2 3 10?
B. » 18 407 4 4 2 4 Of
C. ” 261 458 11 7 115 If
D. 3 167, 795 0 0 415 2¢
E. ” 372 579 8 6 rir Iz
F. 245 1,007 2 6 4 9g 64

I think you will agree with me that the
comparison reveals a shocking state of affairs
and one of which we have reason to be
thoroughly ashamed. But there are mitigating circumstances which should in fairness
be set out:

1. [have no doubt that if the Soczety’s capital reserves were less, the subscription

and donation income would be greater ;

2. Support which in other circumstances
would go direct to the Society now goes
to some of its work and objectives
through other channels ;

3. The Soczety is continually undermining
its own income support by its practice
of creating co-operative bodies with
other societies to develop or achieve
special objectives ;

4. This is a rather curious point. When
the question was raised at a Council
meeting some months ago, I found to
my great astonishment that suggestions
for increasing the subscription income
and for giving publicity to appeals to
this end were not entirely approved.
The objection was based on the ground
that, the Soczety being a scientific body,
members liked to know exactly what
their subscription was and also to know
that all Fellows and all Members paid
the same subscriptions respectively.

There is much to be said for this viewpoint
so long as the progress of eugenics 1s not
hindered. The difficulty is, however, that the
Eugenics Society, though in fact a scientific
body, is something more than that; it is
also a society that can only develop towards
its objectives by engaging in propaganda. It
must educate and carry the people with it if
it is to achieve its objectives.

There are, of course, ways of getting round
the difficulty, such for example as leaving
the subscriptions for Fellows and Members
unaltered but, in addition, establishing
special subscriptions to research and propaganda funds. Any other suggestions for
dealing with the matter and increasing the
subscription income of the Soczety would be
most welcome, and I would invite any reader
of this page who has helpful ideas to send
them to the General Secretary or to me.

The whole problem will without doubt
have to be tackled by the Council, unless the
legacies left to the Soczety, or special donations made by Fellows and Members during
their lifetime should prove to be dependable
sources of supply.

201
