UNCHECKED POPULATIONS:
SOME COMPARISONS OF RAPID GROWTH

By J.G.C.

OST readers of the EUGENICS
Meee will probably be familiar
with the main thesis of the
‘Malthusian theory of population. Malthus,
writing at the end of the eighteenth and the
beginning of the nineteenth centuries, maintained that human populations have a
biological tendency to increase at a rate
faster than that at which it is possible to
increase the means of subsistence. But since
man cannot live without food, this tendency
is restrained ®y a number of “ checks.”
These consist of first, positive checks, which
tend to raise the death-rate—principally war,
famine, and disease; and second, preventive
checks, which tend to reduce the birth-rate—
principally ‘“‘ vice’’ (in which he included
birth control and abortion) and “ moral
restraint ’’ (by which he meant postponement of marriage).
_ Let us suppose, however, said Malthus,
that we have a hypothetical population
which is not subject to any of these checks.
How fast would it increase? Such a population, he admitted, has never existed in
practice:
It will be allowed that no country has hitherto
been known where the manners were so pure

and simple, and the means of subsistence so
abundant, that no check whatever has existed

to early marriages from the difficulty of provid- °

ing for a family, and that no waste of the human
species has been occasioned by vicious customs,
by towns, by unhealthy occupations, or too
severe labour. Consequently in no state that
we have yet known has the power of population
been left to exert itself with perfect freedom.*
Nevertheless, for the sake of the argument,
Malthus maintained that such a population
would increase in a geometrical progression,
doubling itself in at most every twenty-five

years.

* Malthus, T. R., An Essay on Population. Everyman
Edition (7th ed. 1872), Vol. I, p. 7.

235

BLACKER

This conclusion was based on the figures of
population increase in the United States, and
Malthus regarded it as being a conservative
estimate. In some back settlements, he said,
doubling periods of fifteen years had been.
recorded, and he cited the opinions of Euler
and Sir William Petty, the former believing
that an unchecked population would double —

itself in twelve and four-fifth years, the latter

in ten years.

How far, we may ask, were Malthus’ S
deductions of the potential rate of increase of
human populations correct? How long would
it in fact take for an unchecked population to
double itself?

Before attempting to answer these’
questions, however, we.should examine more _
closely what is meant by an “ unchecked ”
population. Dr. G. F. McCleary, in his most’
readable exposé of the Malthusian theory,
defines: it as

a state of society in which war has been abolished

‘ and all preventable diseases prevented; in which
all economic deterrents to early marriage have
been removed, and in which artificial limitation
of the family is not practised.*

In other words, a society in which mortality
is as low, and fertility as high, as are humanly
possible.

On this basis, our questions outlined above
were posed in 1947 by the distinguished
French demographers Paul Vincent and
Louis Henryf in the following terms: how
long would it take for a population with the
maximum possible fertility to double itself if
it were also subjected (a) to the lowest
recorded mortality of modern times, and

* McCleary, G. F. The Malthusian Population Theory.
1953. Faber, p.105.

“ Rythme maxi
+ Henry, Louis and Vincent, Paul.
stable.’’

mum _ d’accroissement d’une population
Population, 1947, 2, 4, pp. 663-680.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, January 1956. 47, 4.
236

(6) to the “ natural’ mortality of Malthus’s
time—i.e. a level of mortality which might
be expected for that era if it were not
artificially raised by famine and want.

For their maximum fertility, Henry and
Vincent took that of the Roman Catholic
population of Quebec in the middle of the
nineteenth century, whose crude birth-rate
for several decades varied between forty-five
and sixty per thousand; for their minimum
mortality by modern standards, that of New
Zealand between 1934 and 1938. The
combination of these two gave a rate of
increase such as to double a population in
sixteen or seventeen years. For their
“natural ”’ mortality of Malthus’s time, they
took the Swedish figures for 1750 and 1820;
the former gave a doubling period of twentyeight years, the latter twenty-three years.

Since Henry and Vincent made these
calculations, however, various fresh developments have occurred. The New Zealand
mortality of the 1930s no longer represents
.the lowest that has been achieved, for with
the widespread use of antibiotics and other
medical advances, mortality in many western
countries has plunged to levels undreamed
of by pre-war demographers. Furthermore
anthropologists and others have collected
data of communities and populations whose
fertilities have surpassed even that of the
nineteenth-century Quebec Catholics.

It is not the purpose of this article, however, to make calculations of doubling
periods for hypothetical populations by
combining different levels of mortality and
fertility. Instead we shall confine ourselves
to describing actual populations, which,
if they do not rigorously fulfil all the conditions of being ‘‘ unchecked,” have nevertheless developed rates of increase which at
least approximate towards those envisaged
by Malthus.

The French Canadian Population in the
_ Eighteenth Century

In the later statements of his theory,
Malthus based his doubling period of twentyfive years primarily on the figures of the
United States censuses of 1790, 1800, 1810and
1820, attempting at the same time to make a

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

generous allowance for immigration.* But
although the annual number of immigrants
may have appeared small in comparison
with the excess of births over deaths, the
continuous influx of people into the United
States tended to distort the age structure
of the population, so that the American rate
of demographic growth is an unsatisfactory
index of the potential power of natural
increase of human populations.

A better example can be found in the
evolution of the French Canadian population
in the first half of the eighteenth century.
The bulk of the migration from France to
Canada took place during the seventeenth
century, especially between 1663 and 1671,
when 2,500 migrants crossed the Atlantic.
But between 1671 and 1740 the number
scarcely averaged more than fifty per
annum, which was probably more than
balanced by the numbers of those leaving the
French settlements on the St. Lawrence for
Louisiana or New England.

The demographic characteristics of the
French Canadian population have recently
been’ the subject of an excellent study by
M. Jacques Henripin of the University of
Montreal.t M. Henripin’s data is based
primarily on the material contained in the
monumental Dictionnaire Généalogique of
Mgr. Cyprien Tanguay, published in seven
volumes between 1871 and 1890. M.
Henripin’s work provides a pioneer example
of the use that can be made of genealogical
material for demographic analysis. His
results give us information about a population living over two centuries ago that can
rarely be obtained for populations alive
to-day.

The French Canadian population at the
beginning of the eighteenth century had few
economic motives to family limitation. They
were sparsely scattered along both banks of
the St. Lawrence, where the needs both for
agricultural development and for defence

* A Summary View of the Principle of Population.
1830. Reprinted in Glass, D. V. (Ep.). Introduction
to Malthus. London, 1953, pp. 124-132.

+ Henripin, J. La Population Canadienne au debut du
A VITIe Siécle. 1954. Presses Universitaires de France
(Institut National d’Etudes Démographiques, Travaux
et Documents, Cahier No. 22). .
UNCHECKED POPULATIONS

against the Iroquois Indians cried out for
more manpower. Furthermore the Roman
Catholic Church maintained a far greater
influence over the lives of the colonists than
it did in France, where the philosophical
attacks upon religion and the social and
political attacks on the temporal power of
the Church are thought to have gone far
towards undermining the religious inhibitions
against family limitation. At all events it is
clear that among the French Canadians
in the eighteenth century both birth control
and abortion were for all practical purposes
unknown, and the only artificial means by
which fertility was kept in check were
celibacy and postponement of marriage,

The average age of first marriages among
women was 22°4 years, which was , substantially younger than the equivalent age of
twenty-six years for women in France fering
the last years before the MRevolution.*
Unfortunately we have no data on the
proportions married in each age group after
1681, and at that time the numbers of men
and women were still unbalanced as a'result
of the excess numbers of males immigtating
during the 1660s. The 1681 figures show that
only five per cent of women reaching the age
of’ thirty were still unmarried, but it is
probable that as the numbers of the sexes
evened out, the proportion of spinsters in
each age group tended to increase. However,
the crude marriage rate was consistently
high throughout the eighteenth century,’ and
when a marriage was broken by the death
of either the husband or the wife, the
surviving partner generally remarried within
a few years.

The net result of these factors was that the
French Canadian population at the beginning
of the eighteenth century achieved a level of
fertility as great as has ever been recorded
for any other population. The crude birthrate, which averaged about fifty annual
births per one thousand of the population
during the second half of the seventeenth
century, rose during the eighteenth, and

*L. H(enry). ‘‘ La Nuptialité a la fin de l’Ancien
Régime.”’ Population, 1954, 9, 3, pp. 542-46. Henripin
cites Bourgeois-Pichat’s figure of twenty-four years
nine months for France, but this was based on the
registered figures for Paris only.

237

reached the astonishing figure of 65:2 per
thousand for the decade 1761-70. Quite why
the birth-rate rose in this way, M. Henripin
never fully explains. Demographers, however, tend to regard the crude birth-rate as an
unsatisfactory index of fertility, since it
varies greatly with the sex and age structure
of the population. They prefer nowadays to
use average family size, or, where fluctuations
of fertility are involved, the gross reproduction rate.* Among M. Henripin’s French
Canadians a sample of seventy-five completed families comprising 629 children gave
an average family size of 8-39 children. This
cannot be regarded as representative of the
whole population, however, since many
families—possibly as many as 64 per cent
—remained “incomplete ’’; that is to say,
the marriage was broken by the death of
either the husband or the wife before the
latter reached her menopause. The gross
reproduction rate calculated by M. Henripin
was 4:4, which must be the highest figure
ever recorded for any population.+ In France
during the same period, the gross reproduction rate is thought to have been in the
neighbourhood of 2-5,{ while in Sweden

during the last quarter of the eighteenth

century, it never exceeded 2-25.§

The fertility data are the most interesting |
part of M. Henripin’s study. He shows,
among other things, that the French
Canadian women bore on the average one
child every two years, which clearly invalidates the view expressed by some writers that
when no artificial restriction of births is

* The gross reproduction rate has been defined as
“the number of givl children born to one average
woman of a community throughout her reproductive
life.”’ Blacker, C. P. and Glass, D. V. Population and
Fertility. 1938. Population Investigation Committee,
p. 19.

+ The reader is left with the impression that there is
an inconsistency in M. Henripin’s figures, since his
gross reproduction rate is more than half his completed
family size, despite the fact that the GRR is derived
from age-specific fertility rates based on all women,
including spinsters and widows.

+ Bourgeois-Pichat, J. ‘“‘ Evolution générale de la
Population Francaise depuis le XVIIIe Siécle.”’
Population, 1951, 6, 4, p. 645.

§ Kuczynski, R. R. The Balance of Births and
Deaths. 1928. Macmillan (New York). Vol. I; p. 39.
238

practised, women would in the normal
course of events bear a child every year. He
also throws light on the controversial subject
of fertility and lactation. He shows that
when the child died before its first birthday—
and the period of lactation was thereby cut
short—the average interval before the next
conception and birth was substantially
reduced.

The principal check to population growth
among the eighteenth - century French
Canadians was mortality. Henripin believes
that plague and other infectious diseases
were less prevalent in Canada than they were
in France at that time. But smallpox made
considerable inroads in the population in a
number of years, principally 1699, 1703, and
1733, while famine and severe cold likewise
took their toll.

The crude death-rate rose during the
eighteenth century from 23-6 per thousand in
1701-10 to 33°8 in 1761-70, reaching a
maximum of 39-6 in 1751-60, partly attributable to the war which culminated in the
capture of Canada by the British. But the
general rise in the death-rate was probably
due, not to a real rise in mortality, but to an
increasing proportion of old people in the
population, since in the second half of
the seventeenth century the younger age
groups had been artificially swelled by
immigration from France. 
The crude death-rate is thus an unsatisfactory index of mortality, as the crude birthrate is of fertility, and unfortunately M.
Henripin’s data do not permit an analysis
of mortality rates by age groups. He has,
however, made an estimate of the infantile
death-rate, which is often regarded as a
sensitive and valuable index of mortality
conditions. The figure M. Henripin arrives at
is 246 deaths under one year per 1,000 live
births, though his method of calculation
must leave a wide margin of possible error.
By modern standards this rate is of course
extremely high, though there are still a few
under-developed countries such as Burma
where the infant mortality rate passes 200.
By eighteenth century standards, however,
it was not unduly excessive. The Swedish

statistics for the second half of the century.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

—the best that are available for any country
during that period—show an average infant
mortality rate of 203-5 per 1,000 live births,
and it is probable that mortality conditions
were better in Sweden than in most European
countries.* .

Between 1700 and 1750 the French
Canadian population increased from about
15,000 to about 50,000—a rate such as to
double their numbers in just under thirty
years. ;

It may be concluded, writes M. Henripin,
that with earlier and more generalized marriage
than were prevalent in Canada at that time, a
doubling every twenty-five years could have been
achieved. Some of the “ checks ”’ to population
increase of which Malthus speaks were little or
non-existent for the Canadians: famine, late
marriage, poverty, life in large towns.

It may be added that mortality conditions
improved substantially between the
beginning of the eighteenth century and
Malthus’s death in 1834. Plague disappeared
from western Europe and smallpox. was
greatly reduced after the publication in 1798
of Jenner’s discovery of vaccination.

Thus we may safely conclude that
Malthus’s doubling period of twenty-five
years was entirely reasonable for his own
era. But that of fifteen years which he cites
for certain “‘ back settlements ’’ could only
have been achieved if their populations had
contained an abnormally low proportion of
old people. Euler’s doubling period of
twelve and four-fifth years, and Sir William
Petty’s of ten, were clearly absurd.

The North American Hutterites

Probably no human community has.
approached more closely to Malthus’s unchecked population than the Hutterites of
North America. The Hutterites are a
religious sect of anabaptists founded in the
first half of the sixteenth century by Jacob
Hutter, an Austrian religious reformer who
who was later burned at the stake in 1536.
After generations of persecution and wanderings, a group of them migrated to America in

* Gille, H. ‘‘ The Demographic History of the
Northern European Countries in the Eighteenth
Century.” Population Studies, 1949, 3, 1, pp. 34-36.
UNCHECKED POPULATIONS

the nineteenth century, where they settled in
South Dakota between 1874 and 1877. Such
has been their rate of increase that from the
four original settlements of 1880, ninetyeight had developed by March 1953, and were
broadly scattered on both sides of the U.S.Canadian frontier in North and South
Dakota, Montana, Alberta, Saskatchewan,
and Manitoba. In these “ colonies,” as they
are called, the Hutterites live a communal
life based on their concepts of fundamental
Christian principles, and as nearly as possible
completely isolated from the outside world.

The demographic characteristics of this
strange people have recently been the subject
of a fascinating study made by two American
sociologists, Joseph W. Eaton and Albert J.
Mayer of Wayne University, in 1950 and
1951.* They provide what is perhaps a
unique example of a population with an
extremely high fertility and at the same time
a high level of living involving not only the
full application of modern medical knowledge, but also abundant nourishment. Their
way of life, though simple and austere, could
scarcely be more healthy.

Two chief factors conduce to high fertility
among the Hutterites. First, their strong
religious opposition to birth control; second,
their communal mode of living and general

prosperity, which relieve the individual of

any economic incentive to family limitation.

Birth control, write Eaton and Mayer,
is a major factor affecting the demographic
pattern of all modern populations. Hutterites
often refer to it as murder. One informant
warned that ‘“ worldly ’’ people who engage in
the practice will have to face on Judgment Day
‘the hundreds of unborn children whom they
have “ killed.’”’ But religious belief alone is no
proof of practice. Catholics have equally strong
theological objections to birth control, but their
fertility in urban areas is becoming more and
more similar to that of persons of equivalent
education, income, and social status, who have
no stated religious objections to - planned
parenthood.

The evidence is good that among Hutterites
religious conviction and nuptial behaviour
correspond closely. The net effect of birth

* Man’s Capacity to Reproduce. The demography of a
unique population. Illinois, 1954. A briefer and less
technical account may be found in the Population
Bulletin (ed. Robert C. Cook), 1954, 10, 8.

239

control practices on fertility during the period
1880-1950 has. probably been close to zero,
except perhaps since 1945.

The only forms of deliberate family
limitation that may possibly be used to any

extent are sterilizing operations on the

women:

In the course of medical examinations by the
physician of the field staff the presence of a
number of abdominal scars among women over
thirty-five years old was noted. It was his
impression that the incidence of hysterectomies
and other sterilizing operations was rather high.
Whether this impression is correct awaits
verification. However, our data does seem to
suggest that there may be some effort to control
natural fertility at this age level.

Second, all the expenses of family life are
shouldered, not by the individual families
themselves, but by the community as a
whole. Housing, food, clothing, and
education are provided by the colony.

The birth of another child in no way lowers the
standard of living. The carpenter just makes
another bed. The family may be given an
apartment with an extra room and if the mother
needs additional household help, a relative
or neighbour comes in to share the work. The
colony pays all medical bills.

One effective check to fertility, however,
does exist: the religious taboo against
marriage before baptism, and since the
Hutterites are not generally baptized until
they are at least nineteen, marriages before
that age are rare. After baptism, marriage
generally follows fairly rapidly, and the
median age of marriage for women was
twenty-two years, and for men 23:5. Out
of a sample of seventy-six women aged
forty-five to forty-nine, only two were still
unmarried.

The net result of these factors is that
between 1946 and 1950 the Hutterites had a
crude birth-rate of 45-9, a gross reproduction
rate of 4:0036, and the median number of
live births to women aged forty-five to
fifty-four was 10-6,

In contrast to their exceptionally high
fertility, the mortality has been generally
low. |

Neither vice, poverty, disease nor war, write

Eaton and Mayer, has been a factor in recent
Hutterite history, during which their phenomenal
240

growth has taken place. Thesect’s means of subsistence has increased more rapidly than their
numbers. When their ancestors arrived in 1830,
there was barely enough money to keep body and
soul together. Contemporary Hutterite colonies
are highly mechanized. The peoplelive in well built
homes. They enjoy excellent credit. Because of
the belief that austerity is a religious virtue, their
furnishings, clothes, and food are simple but they
are adequate. No Hutterite in a colony has ever
applied for or received public welfare assistance,
even during the depression years. The average
colony has about 6,000 acres of land, with a
good water supply, electricity and a telephone.
It has been able to save enough money to
purchase new land and equipment and to build
homes to establish a branch colony every ten to
fifteen years. Hutterites, despite their rapid
growth, are more prosperous to-day than they
have ever been during the seventy-year period
under review.

In addition to their general prosperity, the
Hutterites are a “‘ medically sophisticated
people.” They have no inhibitions about
making full use of the benefits provided by
modern medical science, and the expenses
thus incurred are paid by the community.

The crude death-rate is in fact 4-4 per
thousand, which must be one of the lowest
figures ever recorded. But it provides a good
example of how the crude death-rate may be
a misleading index of mortality. A far
larger proportion of Hutterite population is
concentrated in the younger age groups than
in most western populations, which naturally
produces a lower crude death-rate. Eaton
and Mayer’s figures do not tell us their
average expectation of life at birth, but a
comparison by age groups of Hutterite
mortality rates with those of other western
populations shows that while mortality
among Hutterite adults is slightly lower than
among adults of the United States as a whole,
that for children under fifteen is rather
higher. The average infant mortality rate for
the period 1946 to 1950 was for the Hutterites
forty-five deaths under one year per I,000
live births. Comparable figures for other
western countries during the same period
were: United States 32, Canada 44, England
and Wales 36, Switzerland 36, Netherlands
31, Australia 27, and Sweden 24.

One curious feature of Hutterite mortality
is that the age-specific death-rates for
females between the ages of fifteen and sixty

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

are consistently higher than the equivalent
rates for males, while in most countries the
converse in true. This feature has been
attributed to the exceptionally high fertility
of the Hutterite women, for it has been shown
that the risk of death through childbirth for
the mother increases substantially with each
successive birth after the fourth, and very
markedly so after the eighth. Thus the
experience of the Hutterites illustrates a
point emphasized by Vincent and Henry in
their article cited above; namely, that a
combination of maximum fertility and
minimum mortality is in practice impossible,
since the high level of fertility will itself tend
to raise mortality.

The four Hutterite colonies enumerated in
the United States census of 1880 comprised a
total population of 443 persons; the census
conducted by Eaton, Mayer, and their fellow
workers in 1950 revealed a total population
of 8,542. Thus the numbers of the Hutterites
had increased nearly twenty-fold in seventy
years. Only a very small fraction of this
increase can be attributed to migration. A
few families and individual converts joined
the colonies between 1880 and 1895, but the
movement petered out after the turn of the
century. Since 1918, the colonies have on
balance tended to lose migrants, and the rate
of increase has if anything been retarded.

The rate of natural increase of the
Hutterites—that is the difference between
the birth and the death rates—was 41-5 per
thousand for the decade 1941-50. This figure
is substantially higher than that recorded of
any nation since the second world war. If
the present pattern of Hutterite fertility and
mortality is maintained, they will double
their numbers in approximately sixteen
years, and will reach a total of 64,500 by the
end of this century.

But Eaton and Mayer think that it is
unlikely that their present rate of increase
can be maintained for long. Apart from
economic difficulties, the more the Hutterites
increase, the more difficult will it become for
them to preserve their isolation from the
outside world, and their immunity from
modern cultural and ethical values. which
affect fertility.
UNCHECKED POPULATIONS

Already, they write, there are signs that there
are doubts about some of the fundamental beliefs
of their system of religious values, which is an
essential factor in their high true rate of reproduction. Long before their colonies begin to show
overt signs of disorganization, birth-rates may
be a reliable indicator of the rate of change of
fundamental Hutterite beliefs under the impact
of competing American values.

Venezuela

The North American Hutterites are a
unique people, because the combination of
unlimited fertility within marriage with a
high material standard of living is nowhere
else found.

Yet in many under-developed areas during
the last decade death-rates have been
reduced to levels comparable with those of
western countries, despite the fact that the
level of living of large sections of the population has remained miserably low, and fertility
very high. As a result rates of population
growth of the order envisaged by Malthus are
becoming almost commonplace.

At present, the country with the highest
rate of natural increase in the world is
Venezuela. In 1954 this country had a crude
birth-rate of 46-7 per thousand, and a crude
death-rate of 10-I—giving a rate of natural
increase of 36-6 per thousand.* The present
position has been achieved both through a
rise in the birth-rate and a decline in the
death-rate. During 1935-39 the recorded
birth-rate averaged 32-7 per annum—fourteen points below its present value, while the
crude death-rate averaged 17-9—7-8 points
above its present value. The decline in
infant mortality has been more striking
than that in the crude death-rate. It has
dropped from 135 infant deaths per 1,000
live births in 1935-39 to sixty-seven in 1954.

In 1920 the population of Venezuela was
approximately 2-4 million; in 1950 the
census figures showed a total of just under
5 million. The projections made recently by
the Population Division of the United
Nations indicate that by 1980 it may reach

* Population Index, 1955, 21, 7, pp. 218, 220. These
figures are still provisional.”

241

a total of somewhere between Io and 13
million.*

Like most South American countries,
Venezuela is on the average sparsely
populated. The total surface area is approximately 900,000 square kilometres and with
the present population at about 5-6 million,
the average density works out at between
six and seven persons per square kilometre.
This figure, however, has little relation to
reality, for 60 per cent of the population is
gathered into a coastal region comprising
only about 16 per cent of the land surface.
Of these, 700,000 are in Caracas, the capital, |
and 500,000 in the Zulia petroleum area on
Lake Maracaibo. In contrast, the vast
forest areas to the south cover about 47 per
cent of the surface of the country and
contain about 2:6 per cent of the population. +

Oil is the principal industry of Venezuela,
and is indeed the life-blood of her economy.
In 1954 14:3 per cent of the total world.
output of petroleum came from Venezuela,
and the following table gives an indication of
her position in world production:

1954 PETROLEUM OUTPUT IN MILLIONS OF

CuBic FEET
United States 367
Middle East 162
Venezuela .. 109
Remainder of Latin America 28
Others a5 . .. 92
Total World Production .. 758

Source: United Nations. Economic Survey
of Latin America. 1954. Pp. 105-106.

Between 1947 and 1951 Venezuelan oil.
production increased by 9:3 percent annually,
but the 1952 figure was only 6 per cent above
that of 1951, and in 1953 there was an
absolute decline from 105 to 102 million
cubic feet. In 1954 it was up again to 109
million, but, in the words of the United
Nations Economic Survey of Latin America
(1954), ‘the dynamic impulse of the

* United Nations. The Population of South America
1950-80. 1955. New York.

¢ Grelier, Joseph. “ Venezuela, Terre de Contrastes.”’
Geographia, Oct. 1955, pp. 13-19.
242

petroleum industry appears to have lessened
in recent years; this combined with the
prospects of competition from other producer
regions, raises a serious question for
Venezuela’s economy.”

Agricultural techniques in Venezuela are
backward, and yields are poor. To combat
this situation, the government has embarked
on a policy of “investing petroleum profits
in the diversification of domestic agricultural
production.’ Protective duties, agricultural
credit, subsidies and minimum prices have
served to stimulate home production, as well
as the development of irrigation and the
cultivation of hitherto unexploited land.
Cotton, rice, maize, and sugar cane in
particular have increased, and the total
quantum of agricultural and _ livestock
production has expanded steadily from some
741 million bolivars in 1947-48 to 960 million
in 1952-53 (1948 prices).

But Venezuela is not self-supporting in the
matter of food:

Owing to the present state of agricultural
development as well as environmental difficulties
in producing certain basic ‘dietary elements,
Venezuela is obliged to import increasing quantities of foodstuffs to meet the consumer demand.
The 29 per cent increase in agricultural output

in the last six years has made possible some
reductions in imports of rice, maize, sugar and

vegetable oils, but imports of flour, oats, milk,

butter, eggs and the like have shown a steady

upward trend. Consequently in 1952 the

quantum of imported foodstuffs was 18 per cent

larger than in 1948.*

Cocoa and coffee are exported, but except for
a rise In 1952 and 1953, there has been a
general decline in the volume exported since
1948.

Overall, Venezuela has, since the war,
increased her means of subsistence faster
than her population. There has been a
3-7 per cent annual increase in goods and
services available per capita during the last
ten years. How long this can be maintained
is of course a matter of speculation, but it will
clearly hinge largely on the state of the oil
market. The drop in petroleum output in
1953 was principally due to a temporary
contraction of the market in the United

* U.N. Economic Survey ... (1953), p. 178.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

States, which is the principal purchaser of
Venezuelan oil. The European market is
already beginning to feel the effects of
increased competition from the Middle East
oil fields. Both her food imports and the
development of her domestic agriculture are
dependent on the proceeds from her oil
exports, as is the exploitation of the immensely rich deposits of iron ore in the
mountains east of the Orinoco.

Mauritius

Few words are more abused to-day than
the adjective “‘ under-developed.”’ As one of
the delegates to the 1954 World Population
Conference in Rome remarked to the writer,
if the word were used in its proper sense,
Canada could be regarded as one of the most
under-developed of countries, India as one of
the most developed. The present tendency
is to use it simply as a euphemism for poor
and backward.

Venezuela is an under-developed country
in the fullest sense of the word. If her
resources are to be exploited as they should
be, she will need a substantially larger
population than she has at present. Whether
or not her rate of population increase is too
great to permit the smoothest and most
rapid development is a debatable question.

But the same cannot be said of other
countries, where the foreseeable limits of
economic development have already almost
been reached, but which have nevertheless
extremely high rates of population growth.
The problem has become most starkly
apparent in a number of small islands,
several of which belong to the British
Commonwealth, and perhaps in none of these
has it become more acute than in Mauritius.
A recent report of the Committee on
Population of the Mauritius Legislative
Council, under the able chairmanship of Mr.
M. Herschenroder, the Director of Statistics,
emphasises the urgency of the situation.
The different elements of the problem are
lucidly explained, and the Committee’s
conclusions and recommendations are
courageously and unequivocally stated.

Mauritius has one of the highest fertilities.
in the world. The crude birth-rate for the '
UNCHECKED POPULATIONS

quinquennium 1949-53 averaged 47-5, andthe
gross reproduction rate in 1952 was 3°IQI5.
As in Venezuela, the present high level of
fertility is a comparatively recent development. Between 1933 and 1937 the birth-rate
averaged only 34°6 per thousand, and the
Committee attributes the recent increase
largely to the general prosperity of the island
since the war. Sugar exports in 1952 and
1953 were five or six times as great as in
1938; there has been full employment and
an absence of major cyclonic disturbances.

At the same time mortality has fallen,
principally due to the “ virtual eradication ”
of malaria, the use of antibiotics, and
improved social welfare services. The crude
death-rate, which averaged 26-9 in 1933-37,
dropped to 15-3 in 1949-53. Infant mortality
has been halved from 162°5 in 1938 to 80-8 in
1952, and the average expectation of life at
birth has increased from thirty-five years in
1944 to fifty years in 1952.

Thus the crude rate of natural increase has
jumped from 7-59 per thousand in 1933-37 to
32:2 per thousand in 1949-53. In Ig21, the
total population of Mauritius was 376,485;
in 1952 it was 501,415. If the present pattern
of fertility and mortality are maintained, the
population will have passed the million mark
by 1982.

Such an increase, however, could only be
disastrous, for, the Committee thinks, the
recent increases in production cannot be
maintained for long. The report examines
the potential expansion of sugar, alcohol
and molasses, tea, electricity, potatoes,
livestock, and other minor industries, and
concludes that “ the increase contemplated
will not represent more than 30 per cent of
the present national income of the Colony.”’
If the present standard of living is to be
maintained, this potential increase “ would,
if carried out, raise the permissible maximum
of the population susceptible of finding
subsistence in the island on present standard
to 660,000. This figure of population will in
all probability be reached towards the end of
1962.”

But even this number is very far from
representing the optimum population for
Mauritius, if a suitable proportion of it is to

_ of medicine.

243

be economically active. - The Director of
Statistics concludes that “ a good estimate of
optimum population works out in round
numbers to 400,000 persons. The present
population has accordingly in his opinion
already well outstripped the optimum figure
for the island.” |

Only two possible solutions present themselves; one is emigration, the other family
planning. Of these, the former can only be
regarded as a temporary expedient for
alleviating the pressure of population; if a
permanent solution is to be found, it must be
through the control of fertility.*

Conelusion : Food and Medicine

Some people feel that because no population has ever existed which has_ been
completely “ unchecked,” the whole concept
of an unchecked population is too abstract
to be of any practical consequence. Malthus
clearly disagreed with this view, and so
may others to-day. There is, however, a
significant difference between the present
situation and that which faced Malthus 150
years ago.

Malthus regarded the production of food
as being the chief factor determining the rate
of population growth. In this view he was
probably substantially correct—for that era.
The growth of population in various countries
of western Europe in the eighteenth century
presents many problems which have yet to
be fully explained. But historians now tend
to lay more stress on the increased food
production of that time than on the advances
Unquestionably the most
important development of medical science
was the discovery of vaccination, but, as
already mentioned, Jenner did not publish

his results until 1708.

But if the growth of population was mainly
due to increased food production, it does not
follow that a large section of the community
had been permanently living on the barest
minimum necessary for survival, or that the
chief cause of mortality had been sheer

* The recommendations of the Committee, and the
reaction of the Roman Catholic Church in Mauritius
are further discussed in the Notes of the Quarter.
(p. 209).
244

starvation. Certain diseases were at that
time endemic and when a poor harvest or
total crop failure brought under-nourishment
to part of the community, these diseases
flared up and killed off at least as many
people as died simply because they had
nothing to eat. A recent example of this was
experienced in the Bengal famine of 1943,
when malaria, cholera, and smallpox wrought
terrible havoc among the famine
“ destitutes.’’* These periodic upsurges of
mortality formed one of the major checks to
population growth before the eighteenth
century, and as agricultural production
developed and methods of transport improved, these crises were gradually mitigated.

Thus if the growth of population in the
eighteenth century can be attributed, in part
at least, to an increase in the means of
subsistence, it may also be interpreted as the
result of an expansion of the economy.
The economic revolution of the eighteenth
century preceded the medical revolution of
the nineteenth.

But in many “under-developed ”’ countries
to-day, other causes are at work. Though
temporary periods of prosperity may have
contributed towards the growth of population, the primary cause has been the
application of modern medical science, in
particular the elimination of endemic
malaria.t Thus mortality has first been

* Famine Inquiry Commission (1944-45) Report on
Bengal. Pp. 116-123.

+ According to E. J. Pampana, M.D., Chief of the
malaria section of the W.H.O., the control of malaria

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

reduced without the necessary concomitance
of increased production of food, and the:
governments have then initiated large-scale
development programmes in frenzied efforts
to keep pace with the expanding populations.
Whereas in the eighteenth century population growth spontaneously followed in the
wake of the expanding economy, to-day
economic development is fostered in the
wake of the growing populations.

These generalizations doubtless  oversimplify an extremely complex problem,
and require numerous qualifications and
reservations which cannot be listed here.
But the fact remains that the situation in
many under-developed countries to-day is
fundamentally different from that in western
European countries in the eighteenth
century.* This fact should be borne in mind
by those who draw parallels between the
growth of population in Asian, African,
and South American countries to-day, and
that in western countries in the early stages
of their demographic revolution.

Yet the principal conclusion remains the
same: that if the standard of living is to be
permanently raised, fertility must, sooner or
later, be controlled.

 

could, in countries where ‘‘ malaria transmission is
perennial as in Guiana, Mauritius and Venezuela,’’
serve to raise the birth-rate as well as to reduce the
death-rate. (Cited in the Mauritius Population Report,
p-5)
* For other important differences, see S. Kuznets,
‘‘ Under-developed countries and the pre-industrial
phase in advanced countries: ar attempt at
comparison.’’ Paper presented to the 1954 World
Population Conference in Rome.
