EUGENICS REVIEW

 

Editorial Offices: The Eugenics Society,
69 Eccleston Square, London, S.W.1.
(Telephone—Victoria 2091.)

Editor for the Society—Maurice Newfield.

“Eugenics is the study of agencies under
social control that may improve or impair
the racial qualities of future generations

either physically or mentally.”

 

THE GALTON LUNCHEON, 1941

Discussion on Eugenics in War-time

S in 1940, the Eugenics Society held
an informal luncheon on February
17th instead of the Galton Dinner and

Lecture which normally fall on that date.
Once again, notwithstanding the pressure of
public duties, Lord Horder presided and
opened a discussion on eugenic principles
and policies in war-time.

Welcoming members of the Soczety and
their friends, LorD HorRDER recalled St.
Paul’s injunction, ‘‘ Not forsaking the
assembling of ourselves together.” They
had met that day to honour the memory of
Sir Francis Galton, the founder of eugenics
and of the movement represented by the
Eugenics Soctety.

At the outbreak of war it had been held
by some members that the best course would
be to go into cold storage—both the Soczety
and themselves perhaps—but the Council
had decided otherwise. The Society maintained its activities, through a small Emergency Committee, and full Council Meetings
would be held if and when necessary.

By their nature the principles of eugenics
depended for their operation on a long-term
policy. But both of the means by which the
Society could forward these principles demanded time and opportunity: he referred
to research and education. War, on the
other hand, was entirely an opportune affair,

victory going to him who pursued it
promptly, unremittingly, and with all his
available strength. This state of affairs did
not seem to allow much scope for normal
activities, yet in his view the Soctety was
right not to close down. There were many
things that had to be watched and noted.
The Soczety had to be prepared for, and to
reinforce, any movement arising out of war
conditions which favoured its cause, and to
combat any tendency which might check it.
As a favourable movement, he instanced the
present widely spread propaganda for a
system of family allowances. War was a
great accelerator as well as a great destroyer,
and if the slack due to apathy in peace-time
was taken up in any direction, it was our
duty to avail ourselves of the advance and
to see that it was maintained when the war
was over.

To this attitude Lord Horder applied. the
term vigilant conservatism. It was one
which was not, he said, popular with some
members of the Soczety, who wished to direct
its activities, and its income, into channels
which on analysis scarcely seemed to conform to the constitutional meaning of the
Soctety’s existence. But the officers of the
Society were very willing to consider any
activity consonant with eugenic principles.
He hoped that in the ensuing discussion both

Iii
‘IIz

members and visitors would give their views
on these matters.

Addressing himself to the Press, Lord
Horder said that he felt he ought to offer
them an apology. Had he been consulted
he might have hesitated to invite them,
welcome guests though they were, to what
was essentially a domestic gathering. Nevertheless, the fact that the Eugenics Society
was alive and meeting for this discussion
was, he trusted, an item of news, if not such
a “story ’’ as they were said to desire, and
perhaps they would not feel they had come
on an empty mission.

Mrs. HUBBACK said she was very glad that
the Soczety had decided to carry on during
the war. In such a time people’s thoughts
turned more readily towards fundamental
issues, and she had found an unusual readiness to accept new ideas and to look forward.
All could not help directly in the war effort,
but most people were ready to do what they
could. It was worth recalling what a
number of fine movements were started
during the last war—social insurance, housing, and the emancipation of women.

The question of family allowances was one
in which all members were actively concerned. She believed that there would soon
be some sort of family allowances scheme on
the Statute book ; public opinion was turning towards it. The cost of living had gone
up, and would probably soon be higher, and
this bore most hardly on those who combined
low earnings with several small children.
Several important committees of the Labour
Party had declared themselves in favour of
this system—a State scheme financed out
of taxation. This would have to be on a
flat rate, but the Eugenics Society had
examined schemes for supplementing it,
possibly by mutual insurance, in the higher
income grades.

Family allowances by themselves would
not lead to an immediate reversal of present
population trends, but it was realized that
the possession of a family was now a financial
liability. We would do well to remember
that as an immediate result of the last war
there were half a million fewer births, excluding the estimated loss in population due

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

to the potential fathers who were killed.
Separation, anxiety and fear certainly led
to fewer births, and we should do our best
to see that these inevitable results of war
were minimized as far as possible.

THE Hon. Mrs. GRANT DuFF said that since
the last Galton Luncheon the need for a knowledge of eugenics in this period of crisis had
become increasingly evident. It might perhaps be argued that the facts of heredity were
never more conspicuous ; it was necessary
only to witness the achievements of General
Wavell and his army of highly selected men.
Nevertheless, an efficient Eugenics Soctety
was needed for the fulfilment of Galton’s
purpose, “ the study of agencies under social
control that may improve or impair the
racial qualities of future generations either
physically or mentally.” We needed, as
ever, research on how the laws of human
heredity worked, so that doctors might guide
their patients and society get the best from
its existing human material. But equally
we needed to inform the public of the possible
applications of knowledge already available
—not indeed in the hope of producing genius
at will, but in the reasonable expectation
that we could raise the general level of
intelligence and physical fitness and lessen
the proportion of the hereditarily unfit.
Heredity and environment were the warp
and woof of life, so inextricably woven
together that we were bound to regard not
only the applications of heredity but all
social service as part of our domain. Welldirected social service, while helping to make
the best of our population to-day, would
never lose sight of the welfare of future
generations.

It was impossible, continued the speaker,
to see how we could have any lasting peace,
any true reconstruction of our unhappy
world, unless we learnt the lessons of science,
especially as they concerned human heredity
and capacity. The supreme importance of
these factors had been brought home to
those who had received evacuee children,
many of whom were difficult in character
and subnormal in intelligence and behaviour.
The hosts must have asked themselves how
much of this evil, affecting people of our own
THE GALTON LUNCHEON, 1941

stock, was due to bad housing, bad nutrition
and faulty education, and how much to
inborn defects. It was the business of the
Eugenics Society to try and answer these
questions. Such knowledge was needed to
guide our legislators, our doctors, our
teachers and our children, in the hope that
our grandchildren might yet live to see a
better world.

Mr. Titmuss said that Mrs. Hubback had
referred to the influence of the last war on
social thinking. In this connection it was
interesting to see what the Eugenics Society
had had to say about eugenics in war-time
at the same stage in the last war. In 1916
Professor Thompson gave the Galton Lecture, and said that both materially and
spiritually the world would be a better
place: ‘‘ There will be some compensations.
. . . A new era will have been born.” And
yet we had failed. Perhaps the dysgenic
effects of loss of man-power had led to lack
of leadership. So far, in this war, our losses
had been very much lighter ; and even these
losses might be compensated by using our
man-power more intelligently. We had seen
how the average urban toiler had stood up
to total warfare. Neither the falling birthrate nor the drift from the land had under
mined their powers of resistance or their.

bravery. In his opinion the dysgenic effect
of prolonged unemployment and economic
depression was almost as far-reaching as that
of war. The war had not brought about an
outbreak of neurosis, and this fact alone
could bring some comfort.

Turning to the trend in fertility, Mr.
Titmuss said that the birth-rate was almost
certain to decline if the war went on for a
considerable time. This was a matter about
which we could do little in the midst of war,
but what we could do was to help to guard
and extend measures taken for the health
of children. We should not concentrate
wholly on the replanning of Britain in the
material sense; we also wanted better
citizens and not a social order that was
merely 1914 refurbished.

_ Lorp HorbDeER then congratulated Mrs.
Neville-Rolfe on her recent award of the

113

Snow medal by the American Social Hygiene
Association.*

Mrs. NEVILLE-ROLFE said that the fact
that this was the first time the award had
been made outside America, and to a woman,
was a tribute to social science. There was,
she believed, one point about this war which
was favourable from the eugenic standpoint.
Brutal though it might sound, total war was
far less damaging to the race, for it took a
cross-section of the population, of all ages
and both sexes, whereas in the last war, in
each belligerent nation, the flower of young
manhood was swept away. We were fighting for intellectual as well as material freedom, and she urged that the younger
generation should be equipped mentally
with all the knowledge we had available.
She would like to see a very widespread effort
made to educate the many young people
now gathered together in this country,and
to help them to rebuild Britain on eugenie
lines.

THE Hon. Mrs. Home PEEL gave an
account of the work of the National Council
of Women, and showed that its work was continuing as far as possible during the war.

Mr. BRAMWELL mentioned the doctrine of
equal opportunities for all and discussed its
impracticability. It was, for example, no
use training a colour-blind person to become
a portrait painter. Similarly, it would not
be practical for all young people to receive a
university education, for so many would be
needed to teach them that there would
hardly be enough people left to carry on the
work of the country. The best that could
be hoped for would be that intelligence and
not influence should be the passport for
higher education.

Mr. Gun spoke of the heredity of leadership, instancing Sir Maitland Wilson and
Admiral Cunningham. He said that if none
of the sixteen ancestors of an individual
displayed this quality, one could be certain
that the man, whatever other good qualities
he possessed, would not have it either.

Mrs. Hopson said that although our gross
losses had not yet been so great in this war
as in the last, they had been particularly

* See page 135.
114
great in the Air Force and Navy, and we had
therefore lost many picked men. She appealed to the Press to counteract the feeling
among all ranks of those chivalrous men who
refused to marry because they did not wish
to leave a widow. If they had to leave a
widow, they should also leave a mother.
The young men in the Forces should be
urged to marry as quickly as they could.

Mrs. MITCHELL told of the campaign of
the Incorporated Midwives’ Institute to
obtain State aid to enable mothers to stop
away from work for four weeks before the
birth of a child and eight weeks afterwards.

Lapy CHAMBERS asked if a special film
could be made to be shown throughout the
country, and if the Ministry of Information
would allow this.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

~

Mrs. GRANT DuFF replied that the Ministry of Information had turned down the
Socrety’s film as unsuitable, but said that
they would make one if the Ministry of
Health asked for such a film.

Lorp HorpeER said that the suggestion
was good in principle, and he would try and
see if the new broom at the Ministry of
Health would sweep in this direction. The
luncheon had evoked proof that the
Eugenics Society was alive. The discussion
had brought to light a number of suggestions
about the ways in which the eugenic principle could express itself. He was grateful
to Mrs. Grant Duff for having brought this
scheme into operation, and for the support of
all present.

THE STUDY OF RACIAL MIXTURE IN
THE BRITISH COMMONWEALTH
Some Anthropological Preliminaries

By K. L. LITTLE
(The Duckworth Laboratory, University Museum of Archeology and Ethnology, Cambridge)

N a recently published and noteworthy

symposium entitled ‘‘ Race Relations

and the Race Problem,” eleven prominent American writers reviewed the sociological implications of racial contacts on the
American continent, with special reference
to problems arising out of the very large
racial minority in the U.S.A. of some 13
million American Negroes. One of these
authors, Professor S. J. Holmes, has pointed
out elsewhere that there are three racial
possibilities in view for the United States.
The entire population may become
“white ’’; it may become “black”; or
‘“‘ whites ” and ‘‘ blacks ’’ may fuse together
into a hybrid stock. This last possibility
seems to be fairly well substantiated by the

anthropometric material collected by Professor Melville J. Herskovits, who in his turn
attributes the rise and growth of this new
hybrid ‘‘race” to the effect of social
selection.

Although the interest shown in North
America to problems of racial relations in
particular, and to human genetics in general,
as proved by the articles in such journals as
the American Journal of Physical Anthropology, is readily understandable, it stands
out in very sharp relief to the lukewarm
attention afforded to such matters in the
countries which compose the _ British
Commonwealth. The latter empire comprises practically speaking members of every
major and minor race group in the world, and
