Some Aspects of Race Study.
By H. J. Fievure, D.Sc., F.R.G.S., F.R.A.J.

The frequent appearance of financial ideas in discussions of breed
improvement is a matter for regret as it inevitably stimulates the classwar from which society has suffered perhaps ever since the settled life
began. It is also regrettable because it suggests that we are to be distinguished in grades of one and the same fitness, that we are all on
different rungs of the same ladder. It is still further regrettable
because it always tends to emphasise fitness as measured by worldpower in some form or other. We need to turn away from this habit of
thinking in terms of power and to take up anew the habit of thinking
in terms of life, and of thinking about life qualitatively as well as.
quantitatively. As soon as we do this we are confronted with the
clear fact that, even in our own country, we have several physically
different breeds of man living side by side with only very slight consciousness of kind among themselves, but with a very deep rooted sense
of the gaps between them and certain other breeds in distant lands.

The study of human breeds owes a great deal to plant and animal
biology but it has sometimes been hampered by the notion, rarely made.
explicit, that human breeds are almost as distinct as animal species.
There is need of careful discussion of terminology and method in the
study of breeds or strains which are fertile znter se, and the difficulty is.
specially serious in the case of mankind for the experiments possible
with animal breeds are ruled out here. In fact, until the ideas of
Mendel were broadcasted , the problem seemed almost hopeless and even.
now we have the difficulty of the growing opinion that Mendelian
dominance many be partially inhibited by modifying conditions.

Another difficulty of race discussion has been the implicit idea that
a ‘‘race’’ has a whole set of characters belonging to every part of its
individual representatives. The progress of research makes it ever
clearer that what is important is to know the grouping of characters
and their distribution in past and present. Characters which are probably homologous are found among individuals here and there from the
west of Ireland to Polynesia and also to Tierra del Fuego!* But these
characters have different associated features in various regions and
cannot be used as a basis for any statement about a breed including all
who show the particular inheritance in question. Or again, it seems
that when the rather longheaded fair man cf the Baltic area intermarries with the darker broad-head of Central Europe the broadheadedness of the one parent and the fair colouring of the other are wide
* See early Neanthropic Types and their Modern Representatives. Journ.
Roy. Anth. Inst. Vol. 50. 1920. :
94 EUGENICS REVIEW.

spread amongst the offspring at least on the European plain. Thus
from time immemorial there have been produced on that plain stocks
about which one might argue profitlessly as to whether they belong to
the so-called Nerdic or to the so-called Alpine Race. These race
names are merely convenient abstractions helping us to appreciate
broad facts but it must never be forgotten that we are all mosaics of
inheritances and that a ‘‘race-type’’ exists mainly in our own minds
and should not be used without great reserve in scientific discussions.
The study of human morphology must advance from a discussion of
‘‘races’’ as such to a study of the history and distribution of human
characteristics.

Certain characteristics are found among many of the men of the
Baltic area and another, largely overlapping, group of characteristics
occurs among the men of the Mediterranean region especially in the
west. When we speak of Nordic and Mediterranean races, as-it is
convenient to do, we must guard against unduly emphasising separateness as though each race had sprung independently into existence fullfledged at some time and in some place and had migrated thence to its
present home.

Illustration may be made by reference to three of the best known
features cf mankind. The skin and its pores differ considerably
among mankind, and if we take samples from central Africa, W.
Europe and Mongolia we shall find the results strongly contrasted.
The soft skin with lcose pores and dark pigment in Central Africa,
the delicate pigmentless skin with bloodvessels visible from the
exterior in W. Europe and the skin with strongly constructed pores and
bloodvessels well hidden in Mongolia. The distribution of these skin
characters and their gradations are matters for study, but what little
we know suggests that the characters are responses to environment and
responses brought about quite slowly perhaps by some form of local
biological dominance. The loosest pores give kinky hair and this
seems to abound chiefly in the regions of greatest heat combined with
most continuous moisture, the most constricted pores completely
filled with coarse hair give the lank hair of E. Central and N.E. Asia,
the region of maximum severity of the cold season. We in Europe are
betwixt and between with our hair wavy or curly or sometimes almost
lank. The hair of different types is different in dimensions and the few
measurements that have been taken go to show that here again there is
gradation from region to region, but it is clear that facts of inheritance
have to be considered as well. Broadly the people of black pigmented
‘skin may be said to have woolly hair and the people with the bloodless
yellowish skin lank hair, but the distribution of hair character does not
fit that of skin pigment quite exactly.

The third character is that of head form. Here, speaking for the
moment quite broadly, we have an immense centre of broadheadedness
in area with tungues spreading out along the mountain axis and along
‘the Tundra into Europe while longheadedness is found mostly in the
fringes of the great land mass and is a most marked feature in Australia
and in Africa south of the Sahara. The broadheadedness of certain
pigmy peoples of S.E. Asia, i.e., of a fringing land, must be mentioned ,
Aut it seems to admit of explanation on other lines and the distinctness
SOME ASPECTS OF RACE STUDY. 95

of the pigmy peoples may be allowed to permit the exclusion of their
morphology from the province of this study. Looking upon America
as a fringe of Asia so far as native peoples are concerned we see how
strikingly the breadth of head increases as we go from the parts remote
from Asia (Eskimo Territory, E.. Brazil, Tierra de] Fuego) towards the
regions nearer to the Asiatic contacts.

The distribution of head forms is thus on lines quite different from
those governing distribution of skin or hair features and different
peoples show in the general run of the population differing combinations of these, and of other characters such as the projecting profile of
most Europeans and the features of face so widespread in E. Central
Asia.

Thus the Eskimo in his far off corner is usually longheaded and
rather flat-faced with lank hair and a rich hued skin, the colour of which
is usually interpreted as a protection against snow glare. The men of the
Taimyr peninsula facing the Arctic share many of these characters but,
being nearer Central Asia, are usually less longheaded. The wanderers
of the desert of Gobi for the most part have the flat faces and lank hair
but not the rich hued skin; theirs is the dry vellow type, and they are
among the broadest headed of men. Broadheads are common in W.
and S.W. Asia, but here that character is not associated with the
yellow skin or with scanty lank hair. Around the Baltic and
Mediterranean, both fringing areas, long heads abound, but the
pigmentation features associated therewith are different. We need to
prepare maps of general distribution of physical charactexs of men and
to see how these patterns overlap and give us all the kinds of combinations of physical characters found to abound in the different regions of
the earth.

The suggestion is obvious that the distribution of character is connected with some response of organism to environment, be it a NeoDarwinian or a Neo-Lamarckian or any other, but in the first place we
know very little indeed about the evolution of broadheadedness in
Central Asia though we are reasonably clear that longheadedness is an
older character and that broadheadedness has appeared and evolved
somehow.

The response just mentioned appears to be very slow, at least in
some cases, for migrants and their descendants, even descendants of
very mixed blood, may long retain features brought from another
environment even if those features do get bred out in the end. In
other words inherited characters may persist for untold periods and so
in a complete society with a long history of immigrations and intercourse many alternative inherited characters may be found side by side
in one and the same population, some characters giving clues to immigration of the most varying periods, some probably suggesting to us
features of inhabitants of the regicn in very distant times. This is not
true without limitation for so far as we can tell the black pigment and
broadly open nose of Central Africa would get bred out among us and
the eccnverse seems also to be the case. In other words, in western
Europe we almost all have fairly similar skin characters, but even here
there are gradations and in other characters the gradations are very
marked .
96 EUGENICS REVIEW.

Of the persistence of skull characters much might be said. Thus
one finds in a proportion of the people of Plynlymon and of other remote
corners very large measurements for the skull which is extremely long,
so long that though reasonably wide its proportionate width, which is
called the Cephalic Index, is much less than in most of us. The skull
is often highly ridged along the middle line and the forehead slopes
back from strongly marked brow ridges. The hair and eyes are dark
and sometimesthe skin is dark as well. The skull characters are found
in skulls here and there of almost every period right away back to the
Aurignacean period of Palezolithic time, on de Geer’s estimate about
12,000 B.C. It has been difficult thus far to get evidence about the
inheritance of this group of skull characters, but it seems likely that
the group constitutes a Mendelian Recessive. But are we dealing
merely with the extreme end of a series and unduly emphasising it?
I think not, for, whereas in most regions not more than a stray person,
one in thousands, has this group of characters, in certain very remote
corners the proportion of such people is quite an appreciable one—and
this is true of a number of districts on the fringes of Europe as well as
of other continents.

This remarkable fringing distributicn suggests the hypothesis
that it is a character pushed out in some way from the great centres of
evolution, and thus supports the hint that it may be a Mendelian
recessive persistent with a tolerable degree of completeness in the
remote corners and appearing sporadically elsewhere. Of course
nothing can be said about the colouring, and so on, of the ancient types
and that is a standing difficulty in anthropology.

So far then we have urged that skull characters may be handed
down in a remarkable degree for a very long period of time and we
might take examples of quite a different kind. A certain type of
broadhead and arched forehead sloping back from strong brows, quite
distinct from the above, occurs generation after generation in some of
the well-known families of England, the Darwins and the Cecils are the
clearest examples. This type may be traced back through many periods
in this country to the end of the Stone Age and beginnings of the local
Bronze Age (say 2000 B.C.) when immigrants, who had previously
moved along the Léss belt of the continent, reached the Eastern
shores of Britain and contributed a new element to our population.
Archxologists recognise their settlements by their pottery which
includes drinking cups of special shape to which the name Beakers
has been applied recently, so this type has passed into our jargon as
**Beaker-Makers.’’

These few but outstanding examples must suffice for the moment
to show that in the modern population many strains persist side by
side and have so persisted for long periods of time. Measurements of
large numbersof people in a locality, if averaged, may possibly give aclue
to the probable presence of a type in the above sense but again they may
deal with only one of the characteristics of the type. It seems essential to keep one’s morphological eye very wide open and to reserve
mathematical methods for a rather later stage when the primary
morphological analysis has been made. The racial pecularities of a
district will generally turn out to be the occurrence of certain characters
SOME ASPECTS OF RACE STUDY. 97

there in proportions far exceeding those in which they occur elsewhere.
To take an example, in the course of my work I found in a district of
Merionethshire that certain characters, namely a broad head, dark hair
and stalwart build occurred in 28% of my unselected sample of 110
men whose parents and grandparents belonged to the district i.e. the
sample was really a rather large one. In most other districts of Wales
broad heads with dark hair might be anything from 0—5% of my
sample but there was the same rise of percentage on several other
coastal patches. The same characters occur on coastal patches in
Ireland, a Cornishman has just recorded them independently for
patches of the Cornish coast and a Hebridean observer for Lewis and I
have since happened to find a photograph by the keen Dr. Beddoc
noting the same points in Lewis in his day. Of late years skulls of
this type have been obtained from coastal settlements in the Italian
isles and one or two in France and the characters are described, quite
independently, by French, Spanish and Italian workers from coastal
patches. There is thus a very high degree of probability that we are
dealing with a human deposit from some ancient coastwise migration
and. to judgc from the details of distribution, it would seem to be a
migration of prehistoric date. The finds of skulls suggest that the
period may have been that of the transition from Stone to Bronze in
the Eastern Mediterranean; the relations of these people to the megalithic areas of the west suggests another connection. The possible links
of the western megalithic culture with the AXgean region are much
disputed and it seems advisable not to attempt further precision for
the moment.

But we are not all outstandingly distinct even as regards special
groups of characters—-we do not all possess markedly distinctive
physical features like the above mentioned types and another line
of thought must be followed out. From comparative study of ancient
skulls, and let the small numbers available be freely confessed, we
cannot but infer, as a working hypothesis, that progressive modification has gradually altered characters giving local modifications of type.
It seems likely (v. sup.) that Nordic and Mediterranean groups represent
divergences from mixtures of ancient longheads, and divergences which
are related to Baltic and Mediterranean conditions. We in Britain
are betwixt and between, neither fully the one nor fully the other for
the most part, and few will dispute that the most abundant type in
England is that of a longheaded, fairly dark and rather tall man
though stunting is sadly frequent. This is not to say that we have not
numerous tall fair long-heads and, in some districts, short dark longheads but the general run is neither one nor the other, and, it seems
almost certain, not a mixture of the two. It is rather a case of differentiation which has reached neither the one goal nor the other.

Now that we have some statement of the claim that numerous
different old established inheritances occur within one and the same
group of people probably in every town and village of the land, we
may proceed to discuss some of the socia! bearings of the question.

Some years ago a medical report on school children in a rural
county drew attention to the smallness of the measurements and argued
thence that the children there were poorly nourished, forgetting that
98 EUGENICS REVIEW.

it was a district where the shorter dark slight longheads are very
numerous. There was no doubt a good deal of poor food and so on,
but the report was judging on a standard which was not appropriate
to the type. I mention this not so much for its own sake as because
it illustrates the point that fitness is not the same for all types.
Anthropology is still young and is really Just constructing its
method and so its results have not yet the strength one desires but, so
far as our still very imperfect observations go, it seems that, while
the ancestral homes of the darker longheads of our population are around
the moorlands their forefathers frequented before the valleys were
cleared of their ancient forests, those darker longheads nevertheless
swarm in our cities and especially in their poorer quarters, and they
are typical of our mining areas. They form a large proportion, both
ways, of what a financial classification would call the less fit. In fact
one hears them sometimes discussed as aninferiortype. Surely fitness
is relative to the kind of society under consideration and types of
fitness need to be discriminated. Now cur present society has developed a commercial imperialism which seems to make itself more and
more essential to the continuance of that society as time goes on. It
tries to make money by exporting huge quantites of manufactured goods
the world over and there are, inevitably, enormous fluctuations in
trade, in relation to which the quality cf the population needs very
careful study. At present it entails the existence of a large marginal
population to be employed when trade is brisk. That marginal population seems to include a rather large proportion of our shorter slighter
dark longheads and it is important to try to see how this comes to pass.
So far as the few observers concerned with the work have been able
to ascertain a feature of these people is a tendency to acquiesce in the
conditions of diet, housing and comfort that they meet. Inthe valleys
around their ancient moorlands they have been hard hit in many ways
by the decay of agriculture and the change of diet from oatmeal to tea
and bread and butter. One can frequently follow out a melancholy
sequence of illnesses only too often ending in tuberculosis of the young
adult. The export of men and women from these remote corners is a
constant feature of our social life and it can be watched as a stream to
the poorer quarters of the industrial and mining areas where food of a
sort has been cheap and fairly plentiful except in periods of severe
unemployment. The next point to be made is that the shorter dark
longheads of our population seem to have a considerable ability, given
a supply of food, to resist the diseases connected with overcrowding
and even dirt, so that they survive intheslums. The third point is that
slum life awakens and stimulates the sex instincts early, before the
physique and the mind are at full strength tc cope with them, and
children are often born of immature parents, thus weakening the stock.
And finally under the precarious conditions of slum life with its
inevitable disregard of decencies, with its grave hindrances to sleep,
and its exposure of women, it is but too well known that multiplication
goes on recklessly and with the worst results because parental care is
so often almost impossible and the inheritance of the child is thus left
fearfully incomplete. To sum up on this point an acquiescent element
in our population contributes largely to our slums where our social
SOME ASPECTS OF RACE STUDY. 99

system of commercial imperialism cannot but produce a marginal
population with an increasingly incomplete inheritance, physical,
mental and moral and a consequent drift towards the unemployable
condition. It is true that the acquiescence can be interpreted as carelessness and so on, and, that, under conditions of prosperity in mining
slums, the type has often shown itself fastidious enough in matters of
food and has also proved unable to cope with its own problems. In
this connection it is well to remember the biological hypothesis, for
which there is an immense weight of evidence, that if the adaptation
of any particular type or group becomes so specialised as to involve
a loss of plasticity that type or group is doomed in the long run. It is
greatly to be feared that mining and stil] more industrial specialism
is of this fatal kind and that it works partly by weakening the faculties
of judgment and taste, partly by inciting wild reactions against the
cash nexus and so by absorbing in a hopeless fight energies which
might be diverted elsewhere. The ‘‘shorter bours,’’ ‘‘higher wages,’’
and ‘‘ca canny’’ movements are all very natural reactions against the
scheme of large scale industry with its production cf over specialised
individuals living on the margin, though it must be owned frankly
that all three movements have been clearly discernible in the capitalist
and even in the professional classes for long enough. It is the social
system that is aggravating the weakness of humanity, and, without
proceeding far into social pclitics, it may be urged and will be generally
agreed , that the balance sheets uf our mining, industrial and transport
concerns are false, fcr they do not set off amounts either against the
using up of stored capital of the earth, or against social and personal
deterioration produced by their activities. The call for organization
to reduce the marginal population by proper financial provision within
each group of industries is a very strong cne indeed. But are the
people, like our shorter darker longheads, who drift into the marginal
population merely undesirable types or even necessarily inferior ones?
We must study further characteristics in order to test this if possible.

Here again observation is still too young for us to say much. It
seems hopeless to try to make estimates based on accepted psychological
categories and the only suggestive hints so far are gained from cbservation of tendencies to the segregation of men of different physical characters towards different activities and professions. That this should
occur as it seems to do, even in part, suggests correlations between
physique, temperament and mental make-up which still await much
further exploration on a geographical basis.

Now it may be said that, in gatherings for religious and artistic
purposes of certain kinds, the shorter dark longheads are a notable
element, especially in Wales, and Welsh life would be sadly impoverished without them. I think that their activities in this direction,
and others that might be named, show that they are not necessarily intrinsically inferior but, being acquiescent in certain affairs, they often
do not go so far as others towards selecting and adapting their environment and, in unfortunate environment, they do not shine; but our
present system involves the continuance of a marginal population in a
miserable environment. The mention of religious and artistic gatherings must next be followed up. Does this mean that these folk have
100 EUGENICS REVIEW.

natural gifts for oratory, song, poetry? Perhaps it does, but at present:
it seems more likely that these particular forms of expression are
largely selected for them by circumstances for, in the poverty of the
hill country, they lack the material resources which must be at hand if
painting, sculpture, architecture, orchestration, scholarly prose are
to be the channels of personal expression. Also the people of the poor
hill regions have a long and hard experience of the discipline of life
and of carelessly harsh criticism from people of ampler resources. And
both these facts make them chary of pushing into the arts that are the
special property of the plainsmen and would involve them in an alien
discipline. The qualities the little dark folk display are qualities
they can exercise among themselves, recking little cf the big world’s.
contempt. The activities they favour depend more, in the end, on
innate gifts than on complex schooling which, so far, the people of the
hills have not been able to secure on their own lines.

A study of the works of Fiona Macleod, oz of J. M. Synge, tells us.
of further, to us, strange qualities of mind of the remote corners, qualities which, I am fain to think, might be of great value to the big world
now suffering from a religious and philosophical crisis of the first order.
The workaday world of commerce may eliminate or at any rate repress
qualities that do not make for commerical success and I reflect that the
parasitic worms who have lost so much, as well as the gorgeous birds, are
products of evolutionary adaptation. May not some of our more
luxurious types be becoming parasites on machinery and casual labour
just as noble Romans of old were so largely parasites upon their slaves.

It is impossible to avoid the fear that both among the marginal
population and among the successful commercial men we are evolving
types so highly specialised as to be non-viable in the end and this is
said with full appreciation of the value of the able capitalist and industrial director. It is rather the less responsibly-trained heirs, who
acquire the wealth he has gathered and are free under our present system
to divorce it entirely from the industry and the workers who helped to.
create it, that one cannot but have in mind. But so long as we think
meanly in terms of power we are forced to approve those schemes which
make for bigger trade regardless of the fact that bigger trade involves
too often a bigger marginal population. A consideration of schemes.
based on thinking in terms of life and quality of life would probably
entail the liquidation of commercial imperialism and there are signs.
that this process is beginning; it may well be the only alternative to.
disaster. It is this reconsideration, rather than any political ‘‘ism’’
which seems so desirable, and it is unfortunate that philanthropy seems.
almost as inadequate a line of advance as any of the schemes favoured
by political groups, though it does help to maintain the invaluable idea.
of the sacredness of human life, an idea which has slowly been gained
largely through the downfall and elimination of social and political
organizations which did not possess enough of it.

But though the elements of the marginal population and their
redemption, and a consequent automatic diminution of their numerical
strength, is in a sense the main problem it is by no means the only one.
We need to study other groups of characters and their relation to social

well-being. al ea rei EJ AS
SOME ASPECTS OF RACE STUDY. 101

Let us turn to another set of characters, to the men who are described as tall fair long heads, idealised by sc many writers from antiquity onwards and condemned so bluntly of late as the Blond Beasts.
First we must avoid the assumption that all, or even most, fair children
are young specimens of this breed, they often darken as they grow, and,
in our country, eye colour is not a safe guide, as grey eyes appear in
both fair and dark people. Observation would in all probability
bring out a marked keenness of senses as a feature of this breed and this
is a point that cculd also be argued out on more or less anatomical lines.
Se far as observation has gone, enterprise is a feature here, there is
less of the fear of criticism that holds back the others. The environment of the industrial or mining area is avoided as far as possible by
these people and it is highly probable that our industrial imperialism
has diminished the proportion of this element in the population of late
and has at the same time provided it with at least temporary opportunities in far off lands though its breeding capacity in some of those
lands is not yet a certainty. In studying physical type one cannot but
note in the villages that the little dark man may acquiesce in tea and
bread and butter diet but the big fair man will be likely enough to
enrich his menu with poached fish, flesh and fowl. There are certain
tendencies to degeneration which one seems to find especially among
people of this type whose opportunities are limited by circumstances
and some doctors think them specially liable to certain diseases, at any
rate in towns. Of the value of the breed there can be no doubt at all
and here again our social system seems to work against its maintenance.

We have in Britain comparatively few native folk of the broadheaded Central European type but they seem to offer opportunities for
correlation of mental and physical characters. Whether from innate
quality or, more probably from the experience of millenia, they often
form villages of patient cultivators in Central Europe, absorbed in
detailed effort and working together in close association. As an
alternative or a supplement they take up small woodwork and metal
work, and the growth of certain industries concerned with fine small
machinery is a characteristic feature around the north side of the Alps.
The people of this breed seem to maintain their rural links better than
do the dark longheads previously discussed and they are more tenacious
of their peasant outlook with its thrift and caution.

One other type which should be mentioned is that of the interesting breed of big men with broad heads whose leading characters of
skull and bone can be traced back to the earlier ‘‘Round-Barrow’’
men and who are commonly called ‘‘Beaker’’ people from the pottery
found in their burials. The type is found here and there in small
patches but it occurs more especially in families of intellectuals who
contribute to scientific progress and social organization. It is a breed
which seems unusually able to maintain a rather high level of distinction generation after generation. It entered fairly strongly into
the composition of the ‘‘John Bull’’ type which is now by no means
the characteristic Englishman. But observations are as yet too
fragmentary to say more.

The need for much more morphological anthropological research
is very great. We are only just beginning to recognise seriously the
102 EUGENICS REVIEW.

associated groups of characters which are so important and the mental
concomitants need close analysis free from any prejudice about inevitability of linkages between particular physical and particular psychical

features. It is at any rate a clear gain that there is a growing dissatisfaction with mere contrasts of long head and broad head, fair type and

dark type, and so on. The relation of human types to society, the
modification of social organization so as to secure reasonable conditions.
of maturation for the various breeds, the study of their intercrossings
are work for a Eugenics Education Society and it may be permissible

to suggest that this is a more profitable line of work in the long run

than agitation for artificial measures of legislation interfering with

reproduction. As Pearl has urged, population-growth is a highly self
regulated biological phenomenon, and, while steps may well be taken

to limit breeding by the insane and a few other notoriously and prim
arily inefficient classes, it would seem wise to put thought increasingly

into schemes of vital betterment aiming not so much at large numbers,

huge accumulation of power, and other related ambitions, as at the

raising of a population, it may be, of much reduced size but of improved.

quality, with the possibility of effective and diverse contributions from

the diverse types within it towards the health and the durability of the
commonwealth.
