COMMENTS AND CRITICISMS.

Lunacy Legislation and War. — It seems now within the
range of probability that the War may be indirectly responsible
for a long-delayed but very necessary amendment to the existing
Lunacy Laws. The large number of cases of temporary and
curable mental derangement, of functional nervous disorders
of all kinds among soldiers, due to shell-shock, overstrain, &c., has
made abundantly clear the need for a practical solution of the
question of certification, in order both to avoid the stigma
of insanity for the patient and to remove the obstacles attendant
upon the present system with regard to the early treatment which
is so often an essential factor of recovery.

Birth- Control and the Eugenics Education Society.—
The Saturday Review expresses an opinion that “the War
has’ put the Eugenics Society in a quandary,” on the ground
that “hitherto their policy has been birth-control, but the loss
of life in the War has forced them in the opposite direction
towards birth-assistance.” But such a statement argues a misunderstanding of the position of the Eugenist, who advocates
only, and as earnestly now as in pre-war days, a limited
and discriminating birth-control, that is to say, one which would.
curtail the birth-rate among those unfit for parenthood, such as the
degenerate, the feeble-minded, the insane, &c. On the other
hand, parenthood among the fit he regards as a national duty
and the only “control” he suggests is one which would allow
of sufficient intervals between births to safeguard the health
of both mother and offspring.

War and Peace: Vital Statistics. — The Chicago Medical
Record for December, 1917, notes that in peace over 64 million
die of preventible disease per annum, while less than 7 million have
been killed on all sides during the War. In this connection
it may be noted that the American Medical Army Department
proposes to wage war not only against the Hun, but against
“vice, liquor and germs.” It is not only making adequate
COMMENTS AND CRITICISMS. 43

hospital provision for 10 per cent. of men in the United States
and 20 per cent. abroad, together with special arrangements for
‘mental and nervous disorders, but is also seeing to it that at the
cantonments the recruit wifl be put into “as nearly a sanitary
environment as is found anywhere, either in civil or military life.”

Population Problems in Germany.—The question of health
certificates before marriage was brought up before the Reichstag
last year by the Race Hygiene Society of Berlin, of which
Dr. Ploetz is the president. It was urged that compulsory
medical examination would diagnose, and in many cases lead
to the cure of sterility, and that the certificates should deal only
with diseases or tendencies to diseases transmissible by marriage.

The population question, though serious everywhere, is most
so in the Central Empires, where not only has the birth-rate
decreased far more rapidly than elsewhere, but also the
normal physique of babies born during the War has been shown
by statistics to have suffered considerable deterioration owing
to malnutrition of the mothers. :

A National Survey. — Since the Report of the InterDepartmental Committee on Physical Deterioration was published
in 1904 nothing has been done in the way of carrying out its
recommendations, the first of which was the organisation of an
Anthropometric Survey. Professor Arthur Keith, in his recent
lectures on “Problems in British Anthropology,” has urged that
if formerly such a survey was only of theoretical importance
it is now a matter of practical necessity.

At the time or the South African War three out of every five
recruits were rejected as physically unfit, and before the present
war Germany had to reject 16 per cent. of her young men. Though
the problem of population is one of numbers as well as quality, the
latter is the more vital question, and since a systematic survey
would furnish us with a reliable index of our physical status as a
nation, it is much to be hoped that the representations of the
Conjoint Board of Scientific “Societies, and their offer to prepare
a scheme of survey, may meet with the co-operation and support
of the Government. N. A.
