THE EUGENICS REVIEW

enumerated; it seems likely that all, to some
extent, will be found to be genetically determined.
The environmental component may be considerably larger than for intelligence, this will
necessarily reduce the efficiency of attempts at
genetic improvement and may well suggest that
attention would better be concentrated on environmental bettering of phenotypes.

(3) This is, I suspect, a somewhat easier question to answer than the first two; nevertheless
it is clear that an objective rating of a number
of the characteristics given in Muller’s list would
be quite difficult. |

One final point I want to make is this. Who
decides for whom? It is suggested that participation both by donors and recipients be entirely
voluntary. There are, I suggest, two potential
dangers, the first is perhaps minor, but we should
be aware that such a system may well lead to
selection for over-representation of qualities
such as egotism and conceit in the treasury.
Secondly and more importantly the chance of
formation of castes which may be increasingly
genetically differentiated from each other (because of so to speak “‘insemination of the converted’) seems to me not wildly improbable.
For a democratic society this could pose a
problem of principle of the first magnitude.

J. A. BEARDMORE
Genetical Institute,
Rijksstraatweg 76,
Haren (Gr),
The Netherlands.

DR. H. J. MULLER writes: There is much
that I agree with in Dr. Beardmore’s letter. If
he will look up my article in The Control of
Human Heredity and Evolution, referred to in
my previous letter, or my chapter in The Population Crisis and the Use of World Resources
(The Hague: W. Junk, 1964; Bloomington:
Indiana University Press, 1965) he will find that
I emphasized virtually the same aims as he did.
The space limitations of a letter caused my list
there to be shorter, but I believe the very general
faculties there mentioned do, when taken in
conjunction, encompass or result in the more
specific ones detailed by him.

However, I do not agree that those more
general characteristics often conflict. Rather,
they tend to reinforce one another’s action. They
also help to guard against the selection of
paranoid personalities, that I warned against in
these articles. Likewise protective should be the
long period following the donor’s death, and

also the counselling, especially since such a considerable part of the judgement must in “the
foreseeable future” be formed on subjective
grounds and on grounds of over-all performance.

Yet even personality is proving increasingly
analysable. Moreover, the important share of
inheritance in it is becoming clearer (see for
instance James Shields, Monozygotic Twins
(London, 1962; Oxford University Press)). As
for castes, the very personality traits here aimed
at work against their existence, and a gradual
percolation of these traits, genetic and cultural,
both outward and “downward”, would ipso
facto be encouraged by their intensification at
the levels of the more fortunately endowed
individuals.

ABORTION
To the Editor, Eugenics Review

Sir,—Mr. Herbert Brewer’s logic is hard to
fathom. He argues that abortion ought not to
be permitted in cases of rape, for the singular
reason that rape does not always result in
pregnancy. Is it not sufficient to know that it
sometimes does? (As it did in the case of Rex v.
Bourne that altered English common law on
abortion in 1938.)

Perhaps sensing his shaky ground, Mr.
Brewer passes hastily to the supposed ‘‘formidable judicial and administrative problems’ that
legislation on grounds of rape would involve.
I am happy to inform him that these have been
successfully overcome in such .countries as
Denmark, Norway and Sweden, and that nobody
now seriously supposes they could not be
overcome here, too.

Mr. Brewer seems anxious to maintain the
Ultimate Deterrent of the Unwanted Baby for
those “females”, to quote his words, who
acquiesce “‘in sexual liberties up to the point of
no return’. This attitude is not of course unfamiliar to many of us.

Much ill-health, as Mr. Brewer rightly suggests,
results from repeated and unnecessary abortion,
as it does of course also from excessive childbearing. The answer to this is inevitably to be
found in much improved contraceptive facilities
combined with a more realistic and humane
abortion law aimed at reducing unskilled
practice—a solution that the Abortion Law
Reform Association has been advocating these
many long years. MADELEINE SIMMS

Abortion Law Reform Association,
68 Uphill Grove, London, NW7

55
