THE EUGENICS EDUCATION SOCIETY
AND SOCIAL RECONSTRUCTION.

THE General Council of the Society has devoted its attention
during the last quarter to the consideration of the eugenic
aspect of certain problems of social reconstruction as a preliminary definition of its policy, and with regard to them the
following resolutions have been passed :—

RESOLUTIONS.

That income-tax should be assessed in a manner
dependent on the number of persons in the family to a
far greater extent than at present, and that the same principle should be held in view in any reforms of the death
duties.

Example of the above to be given in the Handbook :—

That the cost of education should be allowed to be
deducted from the income-tax assessments.

That in the interest of eugenics the immigration of
undesirable aliens (i.e., mental or physical defectives) to
this country should be prohibited.

That the possibility of making practical measures
of social reform useful in regard to the discouragement
of parenthood among degenerates should always be held
in view.

Examples :—

(a) Examination of criminals, especially of
juvenile offenders, in regard to their mental
capacity in order to decide on the best
methods of dealing with them.

(b) Diminution in the number of recurrent short
sentences by the substitution, when possible,
of preventive detention.

(c) More effective administration of the Inebriates
Acts.

(2) In connection with all measures regarding the
insane, the mentally defective, the immoral
and unemployables (when their incapacity
is due to congenital defects of a heritable
THE EUG. EDUC. SOCIETY AND SOCIAL RECONSTRUCTION. 317

nature), the discouragement or prohibition
of parenthood to be considered.

That teachers should be instructed in sex hygiene and
eugenics at training colleges.

That secondary education (1.e., technical, commercial,
and university) should be further assisted for the benefit of
those able to profit by it.

That all existing arrangements which tend to
discourage parenthood amongst selected groups of the
community should as far as possible be modified so as to
lessen their dysgenic results.

Examples :—

(2) Employment under the State barred or terminated on account of children in the family.

(b) Supply of quarters by Government Departments, central or local, inadequate for growing family.

(c) Similar conditions existing under private
employers.

That in determining the scale of naval and military

~ pensions the birth of post-war children of men disabled by
wounds should be held in view.

That the re-establishment of members of the fighting
forces in positions of economic independence should be
encouraged in order to facilitate family life.

That the Mental Deficiency Act should be vigorously
administered.

That certificates of health before marriage should be
made compulsory. |

That both parents should be made equally responsible
for the maintenance of the children—

(a) By facilitating a parent in charge of a child
in obtaining adequate support for that child
from an absent parent, this being especially
needful in the case of separated wives and

) mothers of illegitimate children.
HOUuSING.
_ That without intervening in political discussions con
cerning the advantages and disadvantages of State as com318 EUGENICS REVIEW.

pared with private expenditure on the housing of the

people, it should be the aim of the Society to indicate such

disadvantages as arise from inadequate accommodation at

economic rents being available for growing families.
DIVORCE.

That in regard to the reforms connected with
the marriage laws, the aim of the Society should be to
increase the sense of parental responsibility and thus to
promote care in selection in marriage.

. That the proposals in reference to insanity in
the Majority Report of the Royal Commission on Divorce,
and with regard to divorce in the Royal Commission on
Venereal Diseases should be endorsed by the Society.

EMIGRATION.

That the aim of the Society should be to promote the
creation of a responsible body consisting of representatives
of the Home Government and the Dominions to co-ordinate
and supervise emigration.

(a) That this body should keep in view the
desirability of promoting parenthood among
the best types;

(6) And of securing in as far as possible that
equality in the proportion of the sexes should
be maintained in the various parts of the
Empire.

(c) That in all emigration schemes efforts should
be made to secure that the family be taken
as the unit for emigration.

MATERNITY ASSISTANCE.

That an effort should be made to reduce the financial
burden of maternity in the classes not covered in that
respect by the Insurance Acts.

That in presenting the recommendations for an assessment of income-tax in proportion to the size of the family,
the recommendation should also be added that maternity
expenses should be exempt from income-tax in the same way
as are insurance premiums.
