FITNESS AND SURVIVAL"
By CEDRIC A. B. SMITH, M.A., Ph.D.

HE Eugenics Society has for the past
two years very kindly invited members
of the Galton Laboratory to contribute
a paper on the work of the Laboratory.
Although Professor Penrose, Dr. Bell, Miss
Karn and Dr. McArthur all have mathematical degrees, while Professor Haldane,
the head of the Department of Eugenics,
Biometry and Genetics, could, of course, be
considered as a first class mathematician in
his own right, my work is specifically concerned with the mathematical aspect of
investigations undertaken in the Galton
Laboratory.

Now, when people ask me what my work
is, and I reply that I am a mathematician, I
almost always get one of two answers, either
“‘ T never was any good at maths.” or “ Well,
that must be very interesting,’ so that
rather than indulging in long and intricate
formulae, I propose to give some simple
examples of the sort of calculations with
which I am concerned.

Mathematics and Genetics

As I see it, there are three ways in which
mathematics is useful in the study of genetics. The first is in checking the accuracy of
the data. We are apt to say, when we come
across a case in which, for example, both a
father and his son are diabetics, ‘“ this
shows that diabetes is hereditary.” Of
course, it does nothing of the sort. It may be
no more than a fluke. It will fairly often
happen by chance that two members of one
family will both have diabetes ; and it may
be that we happen to know just one such
family, or even perhaps two, when, at first
sight, the evidence will seem fairly convincing. What we have to do, before coming
to a definite conclusion, is to gather as much
data as we can in an unbiased manner,
taking into account not only those cases

* A paper read before the Eugenics Society on
January 24th, 1950.

16

which sound interesting but also those which
look unpromising. Only in that way can we
really arrive at the truth. However, this,
unfortunately, is usually more easily said
than done. .

The second important job of a mathematician is that of interpreting the data,
when they have been collected. Do they
obey Mendel’s laws? For example, to take
a problem which I had to deal with some time
ago, consider what happens when we have
both colour-blindness and hemophilia in the
same pedigrees. (Figures 1, 2, and 3.)* In

2 2

C) ©) SO

‘ee seal
Fig. 1 Fig. 2

these pedigrees hemophilia is represented by
a black symbol (as in the grandfather at the
top of Figure 1), colour-blindness by a circle
(as in the last two grandsons at the foot of
Figure 1), and vision tested and found normal
by a line crossing the symbol (as in the last
member of the middle generation and the
hemophilic grandson in Figure 1). In Figures
I and 2 we notice therefore that hemophilia
and colour-blindness never go together, as
far as the evidence indicates. Since colourblindness and hemophilia do not pass from
father to son, the hemophilic grandfather in
Figure 1 could not have been responsible for
the colour-blindness in the second generation,
and presumably not for that in the third.
(Females can carry the gene for colourblindness, or that for hemophilia, and still

* These figures have been taken from a paper by
Haldane and Smith in the Annals of Eugenics (14, p. 10)
by kind permission of Professor Penrose. They are
simplified versions of pedigrees published elsewhere, by
Hoogvliet, Birch and Riddell.
FITNESS AND SURVIVAL 1

remain apparently normal.) In Figure 2 the
colour-blindness evidently comes from the
grandmother, and the hemophilia from the
affected grandfather ; again they never show

Q

Q

of

S
Fig. 3

together. In Figure 3 the situation is reversed ; the only colour-blind individual is
also hemophilic. A number of pedigrees
of this sort are known, and all but one fall
into one of the two classes: either none or
only very few of the hemophilics in the
pedigree are colour-blind, or else all or almost
all of them are. This can be shown to be a
genuine division of the pedigrees, and not
merely a chance effect. It can be explained
by supposing that the genes which cause
hemophilia and colour-blindness are linked.
That is to say, they are on the same chromosome. But to make quite sure that this is
so, and to calculate how closely they are
linked, or, roughly speaking, how near they
are to one another on the chromosome, is
a much more difficult matter.

Fundamental Genetic Laws

It might be appropriate here to summarize
the fundamentals of genetics. Let us take
a simple example, the usual A-B-O blood
groups. We know that everyone has one of
four blood groups, A, B, AB, or O. These
groups can be further divided, but I shall
not go into such complications. It is almost
certain that these groups are produced by
the action of three genes called A, B, and O.
Every person has two of these genes, getting
one from the father and one from the mother.
So the possible gene combinations are AA,
AB, BB, AO, BO, OO. A person who has

the gene A responds to the tests for blood
group A, so that the combinations AA and
AO will produce group A. In the same way
the gene combinations BB and BO produce
blood group B.

Those of kind AB will respond to the tests
for both A and B groups and are of group AB.
Those of kind OO are usually detected by
their responding to neither test and are of
blood group O.

Blood group Genotype
O OO

A AA, AO

B BB, BO
AB AB

You will notice that the gene for O is usually
detected by the absence of both genes A and
B ; in the presence of gene A we cannot tell
whether gene O is present or not. We say
that O is recessive to A and to B or that A
and B are dominant to O.

These facts together with the fact that
each parent gives one, and only one, of his
or her two genes to the child are, of course,
the basis of the use of blood groups in testing
for parentage. |

Another simple case is that of phenylketonuria. It is reasonable to suppose that we
have two genes, P and p, so that everyone
will be either PP, Pp or pp, having again two
of these genes, one got from the father and one
from the mother. The P gene causes a certain
essential chemical process to take place in
the body, so that individuals of kinds PP and
Pp are quite normal, but in individuals
of kind pp this process does not take place.
A number of consequences follow, including
as a rule severe mental defect. The condition
is known as phenylketonuria. Since a
phenylketonuric must have got a p gene from
each of its parents and since phenylketonurics
themselves are for all practical purposes infertile it follows that both the parents must
be of kind Pp and so perfectly normal. So
phenylketonuria comes out of the blue from
a marriage of normal parents, who probably
have no known defective relatives. (Other
recessive defects behave in a similar way : I
have chosen phenylketonura as a typical
and well-established case.)

Cc
18 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Genetics and Population Changes

I come now to the third function of a
mathematician and the one which seems to
me to be the most interesting. That is the
study of population changes. Consider, for
example, the population of England. This
is a very heterogeneous mixture—so much so
that, apart from twins, it is very rare indeed
to come across two people who are apparently
exactly alike. We have already mentioned
the existence of different blood groups due
to the genes A B O and others, and also that
some people have the genes PP or Pp and
are normal, while others have the genes pp
and are phenylketonurics. Other differences
are more difficult to deal with—such as the
more obvious ones of differences in height,
weight, hair colour and intelligence. Differences in height and weight are relatively
easy to measure, but, unfortunately, they are
more dependent on environment than blood
groups are, and are probably dependent not
on one but on a large number of different
genes. The same applies to hair colour and
intelligence, and, furthermore, these are more
difficult to measure accurately. All the same,
these variations are present in the population and some day we shall have to find a
reliable method of dealing with them.

We can ask ourselves what changes are
likely to take place in this population ?
And how did it come to its present state ?
Since we do not yet know all the genetics
of human population we cannot expect to
give an answer to any specific question, and
we cannot, of course, state exactly what will
happen in the sense of knowing the exact
figures for the population at a future date.
But what we are able to do is to state certain
general principles concerning the most probable line of development, and we can do so
with some exactness because the calculations will be based on Mendel’s laws, which
hold with considerable accuracy. Here the
mathematician has some advantage over the
experimentalist, since by applying the known
rules by which the genetic constitution of one
generation can be deduced from that of the
previous generation we can predict what will
follow after many generations. An experimenter would find this difficult to verify, and

like moths elsewhere.

it would take a long time. But the mathematician is no magician ; he merely takes the
laws which the experimenter has discovered
and uses them to make further predictions.
These predictions are not merely of theoretical interest ; they are of first-rate practical
importance to the animal and plant breeder,
who wants to know how to get a given type
as quickly as possible and how long it is
likely to take him to achieve his aim.

Fitness and Survival

It is said that the moths in the Black
Country are now mostly black, whereas not
very long ago they were quite light in colour,
Looked at from a
general point of view this is quite easy to
understand. Obviously, in the smoky and
dirty districts of industrial towns a dark
coloured moth would be much less conspicuous than the usual light variety and will be
much less likely to be caught by its enemies.
So more of the dark moths will survive and
will pass on this colour to the next generation ; in this generation again more dark ones
will survive and so on until finally the whole
population is dark coloured.

We can take this as an example of the
“ survival of the fittest.”” The dark moths,
we say, are better fitted to survive in the
environment of the Black Country and so
they increase in numbers at the expense of
the light coloured ones. But “ the survival
of the fittest ’’ has become rather a catchphrase and it will not do any harm to
examine its true meaning. :

The important property which distinguishes the dark from the light is simply
that the dark moths are more likely to
have offspring to carry on their colour into
the next generation. I think this is worth
pointing out because we are accustomed to
use the word “ fitness’? in many other
ways. In the sense in which I am using it,
it means nothing more or less than the likely
number of offspring, and probably some other
word, such as “fertility,” would better
express this biological sense of the word.
Obviously, to be killed off by a disease in
childhood will reduce one’s “ fitness’ or
fertility to zero ; so also will being born an
FITNESS AND SURVIVAL 19

idiot. But fertility is not entirely a matter of
mental and bodily health. It is also largely
determined by social circumstances. Probably a person who is of a somewhat unusual
type would have lower fertility ; this applies
equally well to people of unusual opinions ;
those blessed with an odd appearance or
who live in a foreign country, or even, for
that matter, someone living outside his own
class. Despite Cinderella, we rarely find
marriages between people of widely differing
social status. At least this seems plausible ;
I do not know if there is any statistical
evidence to confirm it. Nowadays, too,
fertility is also influenced by the number of
children one can afford ; but I do not want
to trespass on the ground of the Royal
Commission on Population, only to point
out that the phrase “‘ survival of the fittest ”
really means nothing more than that it is the
most fertile who are most likely to pass on
their qualities to the next generation, and
“fertility” in this context means all influences
regulating the number of children, such as
death before child-bearing age, and not
merely the medical aspects of fertility.

But this idea of fertility may explain
why there is such a high death rate after the
age of 60. We tend to accept this as an
absolute and inevitable fact, but all the same
we often find people of 90 of good health
even though not so strong as in youth. Now,
if a gene causes the death of a man or
woman after the age of 60 it will not affect
fertility, because their families have been
completed and what children there have been
will be old enough to look after themselves.
So illness after this age will not be selected
against, and genes causing such illnesses can
accumulate in the population practically
without resistance.

Now, to take a practical example of what
may happen, let us suppose that we have a
population containing a number of genes for
phenylketonuria. This is illustrated in
Figure 4. Each circle in this figure represents
an individual in the population and the two
semi-circles into which it is divided represent
the two genes carried by that individual, a
white semicircle for a normal gene, P, and a
black semicircle for the gene p for pheny]l
 

Fig. 4

ketonuria. Most of the population will be
PP and will be completely normal, a small
part will be Pp, also normal, and a very much
smaller part will be pp and will be phenylketonuric. (Actually the numbers of Pp and
pp’s will be much smaller than those shown in
the figure, which is greatly exaggerated for
the purpose of illustration.) The reason for
this is roughly that, since the p genes are rare,
it will only be by very bad luck that two of
them will come together to give the recessive
condition. Now phenylketonurics normally
are infertile so that whenever a phenylketonuric is produced two p genes are eliminated from the population and not handed
down to future generations. But since these
form only a very small part of all the p genes
in the population the infertility of phenylketonurics will eliminate the p genes very
slowly indeed, only a few in each generation.

This conclusion is true for all recessive
abnormalities, that is, those in which the
presence of two genes is necessary for the
abnormality to show. We know that most
severe abnormalities are of this type. When
the abnormality is dominant, such as in
the case of epiloia, the situation is very
different. Here only one gene is necessary
for the abnormality to show. Using Figure 4,
all individuals with either half or all the
circle blacked out will now be affected ; more
exactly, in the case of epiloia, not all, but a
20 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

substantial proportion, of them will be of
lowered fertility. The result will be that the
number of epiloiacs will be substantially
reduced in the next generation ; and since
this reduction will proceed from generation
to generation in geometrical progression the
gene should be quickly wiped out.

Mutation

Now if there is this constant selection
against unfavourable genes, whether it is
very slow, as in the case of recessives like
phenylketonuria, or very rapid as in the
case of dominants like epiloia, the ultimate
result would seem to be the complete extinction of the unfavourable gene and a completely normal and uniform population. We
have, therefore, to explain why there are any
phenylketonurics still in existence : why have
they not all disappeared long ago ? The most
probable answer is that these genes are constantly being reintroduced by the process of
mutation. One of the clearest examples of
this is the case of hemophilia. Many
descendants of Queen Victoria have been
unfortunate enough to suffer from hzmo
philia, or bleeding disease. But I think that.

there is no recorded case among the ancestors

of the queen—at least, not for a long way.

back. It seems almost certain that one of the
genes inherited by Queen Victoria must have
changed of its own accord from the normal
type to the type causing hemophilia, and
has been passed on to many of her descendants in the royal houses of Europe, though
fortunately not to our own royal family.
In cases of hemophilia and epiloia it is
quite common, to find that the disease has
suddenly appeared in the family as if from
nowhere. But owing to the loss of fertility
it will be eliminated quite quickly in the
next few generations. In this way a state of
equilibrium will be set up, in which the gene
will be continually appearing in the population (though only in very small numbers) as
a result of mutation, and will be very
quickly wiped out again by infertility, or as
we may say, by natural selection.

In the case of a recessive disease the situation is slightly more complicated, because the
appearance of a single p gene by mutation

will not usually cause any visible change :
the bearers of the gene will be completely
normal. It will only be many generations
later that it will meet with a second p gene,
and then both of them will be eliminated.
But it is quite easy to see roughly what will
happen, without going into complicated
calculations. For the sake of simplicity we
shall suppose throughout that the population
is a steady one, neither increasing nor decreasing in size. This is the easiest case to
deal with, though it is not difficult to make
allowance for a changing population.
Suppose further that this population is of
such a size that 100 recessive p genes are
produced each year by mutation. Now the
only way in which such genes can be eliminated is by two of them coming together to
make a pp individual: and it follows that
sooner or later 50 pp individuals must
be produced, after which these roo genes
will have been eliminated. So in a population in which 100 new recessive genes are
produced each year we must have on an
average 50 cases each year of the disease they
produce. On the other hand, if they are
dominant genes causing complete loss of
fertility, Ioo genes a year must produce 100
cases of the disease a year.

This holds even where there has been an
artificial disturbance of the population. The
rays from the atom bomb at Hiroshima
must have caused many new mutations to
appear, most of which were unfavourable,
and will cause mutilations and deformities in
future generations. Let us suppose first, for
the sake of argument, that 100 mutations of
some special dominant type have been
produced, each of which will cause complete
loss of fertility. Then there will be 100
sufferers from this disease in the next
generation, after which the genes will have
been completely eliminated, and the population will be just as it was before. On the
other hand, if we suppose that there were
100 mutations of a recessive type, then sooner
or later there will be 50 sufferers from the
disease, after which the genes will again
have been eliminated, and the population
restored to its former state. But it may be
quite a long time before this happens, and
FITNESS AND SURVIVAL 21

it may well be that the recessive genes
produced by the bomb will in time produce
disease and mutilation all over the world.
However, all this is, perhaps, rather academic
speculation, since it seems only too likely
that we shall all have our fertility reduced to
zero by the atomic bomb. And there really
does not seem much point in worrying about
the fate of future generations if there are not
going to be any future generations at
all.

Another point is that, with our present
knowledge, there is very little we can do
about these rare conditions. There will be a
certain number of mutant genes p coming
into the world in each generation, and we
have no way of detecting them until two of
them come together to produce a phenylketonuriac, after which the genes have been
eliminated anyway. If the reduction of
fertility is not complete, they may not be
eliminated the first time they appear, but
they will not appear many times. These
severe inherited conditions are in fact kept
rare by natural selection, and human interference can at present have only a slight
effect. We can of course warn a married
couple who have given birth to one pheny!lketonuric that each subsequent child stands
a risk of 1 in 4 of being affected: this will
slightly increase the selection, but that is
about the most that we can hope to do. On
the whole, natural selection is doing all that
is necessary in a highly eugenic manner. It
has been suggested that since rare recessives
are more common among the children of
first cousin marriages, the prohibition of
marriage between near relatives might have
a eugenic effect. But our argument shows
quite clearly that the number of recessives
appearing is determined solely by the mutation rate. So we must conclude that the
regulation of marriage cannot have any effect.
This apparent paradox is quite easy to
explain. The effect of marriage of near
relatives is simply to speed up the appearance
and elimination of rare genes. If a law was
passed to-morrow compelling near relatives
to marry there would be an immediate and
considerable increase in the number of rare
diseases due to recessive genes : not because

the number of genes would be increased
but simply because similar genes would be
brought together more quickly. But this
would also result in the elimination of many
of these genes, and the effect would only
be a temporary one ; after a few generations
the number of patients would fall off again
rapidly, and would soon reach a state in
which it was again balancing out mutation.
Taking the contrary case, there is reason to
believe that the number of marriages of near
relatives is steadily falling at present,
probably owing to the greater ease of movement nowadays, and so the rate of elimination of recessives is falling, that is, the genes
will have to wait longer before they appear.
As a result, there will be temporarily fewer
recessive diseases, but the number of genes
in the population will steadily increase until
once again the rate of elimination balances
out the appearance by mutation. In neither
case do we produce any change in the long
run: all the regulation of marriage does is
either to face us with the problem now, or
to put it off to a somewhat later date.

It should be pointed out that there seems
to be little reason to fear that the advance of
medical science will cause the spread of
harmful genes through the population. To
take an extreme case, supposing that we discover a complete cure for hemophilia : what
will then happen? Since we have now made
hemophiliacs as fertile as normal people
there will be no selection against the gene.
This means that mutations will not be eliminated, and will gradually spread throughout
the population. But since most mutation
rates are of the order of I in 100,000
generations, or 2,000,000 years, this spread
will be exceedingly slow. Our descendants in
a few hundreds of thousands of years will
be called upon to decide whether a disease
which can be completely cured is really a
menace ; it hardly seems to be a problem
which need worry us greatly.* If, on the
other hand we can achieve only an alleviation, and not a complete cure, then although
the numbers will be a little increased

* Professor Haldane has estimated the mutation rate
for hemophilia to be 1 in 30,000 generations, which
still gives us 600,000 years.
22 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

natural selection will still effectively keep
the disease in check, and it will still be very
rare.

Now if this were all that is to be said on
the question of selection, the inevitable
result would be the reduction of the population to complete uniformity, broken only
by the appearance of a few rare mutations,
by possible variation due to a few genes
which have no appreciable effect on fertility, and by variations due to differing
environments. But that is very far from the
case in human populations. It must be
remembered that there are many characters
in which almost complete uniformity does
occur, fact which is apt to be taken for
granted as a natural occurrence which does
not call for explanation. We have two eyes,
two ears and two legs, and would be very
surprised to meet someone with three eyes
and one ear. But probably this is just
another instance of natural selection. We
do ‘find considerable variations in qualities
such as appearance, strength and _intelligence, these variations are certainly partly
inherited, and at least some of them have
quite a considerable influence on the fertility of the individual. For example, we
know that very intelligent people and low
grade mental defectives are alike in usually
having few children or none, and there is some
evidence that in other cases the extremes
are relatively infertile. Why, we may ask,
are these characters not reduced to uniformity in a few generations? Perhaps an
even more puzzling case is that of homosexuals, who rarely have any children, and
who on the face of it should have been
eliminated long ago.

Causes of Variability

It seems to me that variability may arise
for three reasons, though I would not be so
bold as to say that they are the only possible
ones. Firstly, we may have the mixing of
populations by migration. The populations
of most tropical countries are dark, and those
of temperate countries light, but now that
there is a certain amount of interchange
between these regions we shall expect to
find some dark men living in temperate

climates and light ones in the tropics. This
sort of effect may explain some of the variability we observe, though it still leaves quite
a lot to be explained. In any case such a
mixture will usually be unstable, and
natural selection will again tend to make for
uniformity unless the migration is continuously kept up.

The second possible case of variability is
where the co-operation of unlike individuals
is necessary for the continuation of the
species. We have a most striking example
of this in human and other populations in
the existence of two sexes. A population of
men only would be unable to reproduce
itself, and so would one of women : so long as
humanity continues we must have the two
different sexes. Bees have an even more
elaborate system, with their division into
males, females and workers. Here both
males and females are necessary for the
breeding of new females and workers, while
the workers are needed for the construction
of the hive and the feeding of the colony.
Actually the difference between workers and
females is environmental and not genetical,
but that does not affect the fact that all
three types are essential to the continuance
of the species.

The third and probably most important
possible cause of variation consists in a type
of selection which I have not mentioned so
far. If we have a pair of genes, which we
will call for convenience A and a, then we
know that we have three possible types of
individuals, AA, Aa, aa. So far we have
considered the cases in which the type aa
is either more or less fertile than the other
two types. But plant and animal breeders
sometimes find that the most fertile type
is the heterozygote Aa. This type does not
breed true: if we mate two heterozygotes
Aa X Aa, since the children get one gene
from each parent they may be of any of the
three types AA, Aa, aa. This phenomenon,
by which the hybrid Aa is sometimes more
fertile and fitter than the pure breeding lines
AA and aa, is of practical importance, and
may partly explain heterosis, or hybrid
vigour. Now when in a natural population it
happens that the most favoured type is the
A SATISFACTORY POPULATION FOR BRITAIN ? 23

heterozygote, it follows that the population
can never be reduced to uniformity. It is
mainly the fertile heterozygotes who are
responsible for producing the next generation, and being a type which never breeds
entirely true to itself it will necessarily
always produce a mixed population. If
the types AA and aa were quite infertile,
and never produced any children, they would
still be constantly renewed in each generation
as offspring of the fertile Aa type. If these
types have only partially reduced fertility,
they will contribute a certain amount to
the next generation, and a state of equilibrium will be set up in which all three types
will be represented, their proportions depending on their relative fertilities. The
study of this type of population is not yet

far advanced, but it is of interest to note
that it is stable and adaptable. A change in
conditions, altering the fertilities of the three
types, will produce a fairly rapid change in
their relative proportions until the new
equilibrium position is reached. If the
conditions go back to their former ones the
population will also change back to its
original state. Perhaps this quality of
adaptability is of value to a population as
well as to an individual.

I should emphasize again that parts of
this paper are rather speculative. If observation and theory advance sufficiently, no
doubt in 50 years’ time much of it will seem
naive. Nevertheless, I think that even what
we now know sheds some light on the
problems of eugenics.

A SATISFACTORY POPULATION FOR
BRITAIN?

By SIR CHARLES ARDEN-CLOSE, K.B.E., C.B., F.R.S5.

are well aware that there is no generally

accepted or infallible test for the number
of people in any country which will provide
an all-round optimum of well-being, however
that may be expressed. But in this country
we have at least one simple condition which
must be fulfilled before all else, and that is,
we must be fed. And that is a condition
which it is becoming increasingly difficult to
ensure.

To simplify the issue, let us assume—and
the assumption is not an unreasonable one—
that it is not necessary for a country to be
entirely self-supporting in the matter of food,
and that a margin can be allowed, differing in
each case, which will permit of a satisfactory
and legitimate risk which may be taken in
peace or in war. It may also be assumed that
such a risk might, in certain circumstances,

Sem of demographic problems

involve the reduction of the standard of
nutrition down to a rather low level. —

That this country does face a problem of
the kind is evident from the reports which
are published, from time to time, in the
newspapers. These give us facts and opinions
about numbers, food and agriculture, about
migration and employment, about imports of
food and the payment for them; varied
information and varied opinions. Let us
take examples from The Times of a single
date, January 24th, 1950. A leading article
in that issue dealt with the question of the
size of the average family in Great Britain,
which now, according to the Royal Commission on Population is 2:2, and is somewhat
below the replacement figure.

The writer of the article stated that, ‘“‘ The
crux of any population policy for Britain is
not to promote large families but to enhance
