THE EUGENICS REVIEW

As may be suspected, we are brought finally
towards “this view of love as the individual
expression of the unity of all things in God”
(p. 138) and the scientific ideal of “‘integrity’’. In
this aspect Teilhard de Chardin naturally
receives full recognition: “Convergent Integration” is the subject of the last eight pages of the
book and we are told “The Bible may still be
pregnant with unsuspected lessons’. Teilhard,
with his vision of the future of man, is restating
the theology of St. Paul. Continuing evolution is
the expression of God’s will.

Dr. Matthews, Dean of St. Paul’s, recently
wrote * “. . . the sceptics allege that, when
thought out, religious doctrines are not mysterious but nonsensical’? but whether this observation is to be considered apposite or irrelevant
must be left to the individual taste of the reader.

C. W. USHER

SEX

Schur, Edwin (Editor). The Family and the Sexual
Revolution. London, 1966. Allen and Unwin.
Pp. xv +427. Price 40s.

Fromme, Allan. The Ability to Love. London,
1966. Allan and Unwin. Pp. x+366. Price 30s.

THE SEXUAL REVOLUTION seems to be
proceeding well but usually any review of the
situation is written either strongly for or
strongly against its continued success—as if the
pundits could affect the result. However, a book
which is able to juxtapose, as two of its contributors, Bertrand Russell and Pius XI is rather
unusual.

The aim of the sociologist editor of The
Family and the Sexual Revolution is not to be
didactic but to present opposing views with an
emphasis on unconventional ones since, as he
rightly states, conventional views are fully
publicized already.

This book consists of twenty-nine extracts
from contemporary writers on three main

* Daily Telegraph, 26th March 1966.

106

subjects: Changing Sex Standards; The Woman
Problem (sic!); and Birth Control. It includes
within a comparatively small compass a representative cross-section of (Western) public
opinion and can be recommended to those who
still have an open mind on controversial subjects
of this sort and would like to have further
information on which to form an opinion.

There is no index but otherwise the book is
well presented.

The author of The Ability to Love is a psychologist and marriage counsellor and no doubt one
of his reasons for writing this book was a desire
to make help available for those who need it. It
is a pity that while his motives are of the highest
he has adopted rather a breathless approach to
the subject and unfortunately no definition of
love is given. Perhaps he feels that a definition
would literally define it. The preface consists of
thirty-one lines and the word “love’’, one of its
derivatives, or a pronoun referring to it occur no
less than fifteen times in contexts that make it
clear that Dr. Fromme does not limit its
meaning. A whole chapter is devoted to ‘““What
is love ?”’ without anywhere specifying what love
is, although it includes a long diversion about
the use of hypnosis. ,

However, one must not be too critical about
this since the author has drawn on his obviously
wide professional experience to describe the
various forms of love, to enable those who seek
advice to clarify their own feelings and requirements, and thus benefit from the advice offered.

These two books can usefully be read in
conjunction and can be recommended as
prescribing tolerance and understanding of
others—which one could suppose to be as useful
a basis of love as can be found.

Unfortunately again there is no index. The
absence of an index even in the presence of
copious references diminishes the value of a
book, and it is to be hoped that, as time goes on,
fewer books will be presented without one.

D. R.-R.
