EUGENICS ABROAD

VIL—IN HOLLAND, by DR.

HE event of greatest interest to

eugenists and students of human

heredity in Holland has been the foundation, in June 1933, of a Netherlands Institute of Human Heredity and Race-biology.
The first plans for this Institution were drawn
up by the Netherlands Eugenic Federation
in 1930, but the actual foundation cannot
be compared with the projects that were
cherished in the days before the financial
crisis. Yet the conviction that a centralization in this field of scientific work was
urgent, and the opportunity of establishing
three immediately useful departments (two
of them with small endowments of their
own), decided us to found the Institution.
Professor J. F. van Bemmelen will direct
the bio-genealogical section, Dr. J. Sanders
the medico-statistical section, and Dr.
H. J. T. Bylmer the section for race
biology. The directorate has amongst its
members representatives of the Royal Academy of Sciences, the National Bureau of
Anthropology, the Netherlands Genetics
Society, and the Eugenic Federation. The
lack of means to construct a central building
for the Institution has to be compensated for
by a constant personal co-operation between
the directorate and the heads of the three
departments. Dr. M. J. Sirks, the geneticist,
is the chairman, and Dr. M. A. van Herwerden is the secretary of the directorate. It
is expected that the Institution will stimulate
among physicians all over the country
interest in the problems connected with the
distribution of hereditary characters in
different groups of the population. We have
started work in an unfavourable time, but
with sufficient enthusiasm and steadiness to
be hopeful for the future.

A remarkable development during the past
year has been the growing interest among
lawyers in the sterilization problem. This
culminated in a discussion held in March,
under the auspices of the Society of Forensic

175

M. A. VAN HERWERDEN

Psychiatry, at Rotterdam, where Dr. G. P.
Frets gave an introductory lecture, followed
by a paper by Professor J. N. van Bemmelen,*
professor of criminology at Leiden University. From the Roman Catholic side, a
professor of the Roman Catholic University
of Nymvegen and a Roman Catholic physician gave their opinions.

A month previously (February 26th) a
meeting had been held in Amsterdam by the
Mental Hygiene Society, which, in contrast
to the one mentioned above, proved to be
more a protest against than a propaganda for
eugenics. The subject for discussion, to which
a whole day was devoted, was the “‘ problem
child,” his background (genetical, social,
and psychological) and treatment: and
the opening papers by five of the foremost
leaders in this field were printed beforehand
and circulated in advance. At this meeting
of several hundred social workers, amongst
whom were representatives of the legal profession and psychiatrists, there was a certain
amount of opposition to the eugenic standpoint, which was expounded by Drs. J
Sanders and G. P. Frets. The latter dealt
mainly with his own experience during a
visit to hospitals in California last summer.
Dr. Sanders tried to prove the uselessness of
spending money on the delinquent child as
long as eugenics was neglected. The opposition was specially directed against this
latter statement—which is perhaps understandable from an audience which consisted
for the greater part of persons who had
devoted themselves to bettering the individual lot of the unsocial, feeble-minded, or
delinquent child. This meeting was useful,
however, in showing how important it is in
eugenic propaganda to find exactly the right
approach to the audience to which it is
directed; indeed, how urgently necessary

*Son of the above-named Professor J. F. van
Bemmelen.
176

such an approach is to secure a proper understanding of the subject.

Too much weight need not be given to this
experience of the failure of an intelligent
civilized public to understand our principles.
In private conversation with the younger
generation of psychiatrists—in so far as they
have not been captured by Adler’s principles
—one discovers in Holland a growing interest
in human heredity, the natural consequence
of personal experience in the mental hospitals. And there really is some hope that
in the future one will not witness the event—
as one may now—of the management of a
mental hospital occasionally allowing its
feeble-minded male patients to visit their
feeble-minded wives in Amsterdam, with the
consequence, to be expected from long experience, that new mentally deficient children
are added to the already large defective
families.

The economic crisis is not favourable for
the furthering of practical eugenics in Holland. This winter a new law was proposed,
urging the courts of justice to restrict the
number of psychopathic persons that might
be placed under institutional control. This
means that the opportunity of segregating
delinquent psychopathic persons for periods
of some years (psychopathic laws 1929) will
be very much reduced. Last year a large
asylum was built in the north of the country
where such persons could be treated under
excellent psychiatric care—a step of possible
eugenic value if the above-mentioned restriction does not prevent the new Institution
from fulfilling its function.

Lectures on heredity and eugenics have
been given this year in different parts of the
country at the special invitation of (among
other organizations) the Netherlands Society
for Preventive Medicine and the Society for
Child Study. The Batavian Scientific Society
at Rotterdam organized an extensive course
of lectures on heredity and eugenics, starting
with general genetics, and invited several
Dutch geneticists and physicians to participate. The annual course on heredity and
eugenics for instructors in the schools for
feeble-minded children has been continued
as in former years.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

The Netherlands Eugenic Federation took
an active part in these events. Dr. Bylmer,
who is an anthropologist, represents the
Fast-Indian Eugenic Society in our Federation. He has been invited to give lectures on
anthropology and human heredity at the
University of Amsterdam, so it may be
expected that before long physicians leaving
the different Dutch universities will be better
equipped than formerly for understanding
the value of eugenics. Though human heredity is not an obligatory branch of study in
any of our universities, there is a growing
interest among students in following lectures
on the subject. At Utrecht University a
practical course on general genetics is given
to medical students at the end of the annual
lectures.

The Genetics Society, which counts
amongst its members a number of practical
breeders, arranged in its human heredity
section three meetings specially designed to
arouse the interest of physicians. One of
them, held at Utrecht in February, included
an interesting programme on _ genetical
research in cancer. Dr. W. F. Wassink, one
of the first investigators in this field (1923),
has continued these investigations during
the last few years, making use of the valuable
material of the Cancer Institute at Amsterdam, and comparing his results with those of
Waaler in Norway. In an excellent paper,
Wassink concluded that there is evidence of
the incidence of cancer of the same organic
system in families. Dr. J. Versluys, who is
the author of a monograph on heredity of
twins, has started an inquiry into the
occurrence of cancer in twins. Dr. J. Sanders
gave a review on cancer research. The same
evening a lantern slide was shown of a provisional new pedigree chart for use in investigating heredity in Man, this being the result
of a questionnary that had been sent to
European geneticists after the meeting of
the International Federation of Eugenic
Organizations which was held in Dorset in
1930. The Human Heredity Commission
of the Federation will consider this scheme
fully before we recommend it for general
use.

At the annual meeting of the National
EUGENICS IN HOLLAND

Committee for the Scientific Study of Population Problems a discussion was held on the
eugenic side of this problem, the economic
side having been treated the previous year.
The Committee (chairman, Dr. Methorst) is
continuing its investigation of 135 NetherJands communities with regard to the relation
between the annual income and the number
of children in the family, taking the marriages
during the years 1907-11 (for a period
ending in 1927). The results will be compared with those of an identical investigation that had been made previously upon the

177

marriages during the years 1877-81 (for a
period ending in 1897). The report of the
preliminary work was published in the
Proceedings of the International Population
Union, 1931.

Amongst the Netherlands literature on
human heredity and eugenics of last year I
have to mention the very valuable book by
Dr. P. J. Waardenburg on the heredity of
the eye. This work (which is in the German
language) appeared just after my survey on
eugenics in Holland in this REVIEW a year
ago.

THE EUGENICS SOCIETY

CHANGE OF ADDRESS

Will readers kindly note the new address of the EUGENICS
SOCIETY, to which all communications should be sent.

69 ECCLESTON SQUARE,
LONDON, 5.W.1

Telephone Number: Victoria 7302

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXV, No. 3
