THE GALTON LECTURE, 1948

HE 1948 Galton Lecture, under the

title ‘‘Some Reflections on Genius,”

was delivered by Dr. Russell Brain at
Manson House, Portland Place, on February
16th, to a large and appreciative audience.
In the absence of Lord Horder, the Chair
was taken by Mr. B. S. Bramwell.

The text of the Galton Lecture is published
in full elsewhere in this issue. At its conclusion Mr. Bramwell said that he found it
rather difficult to add anything of value.
He remembered in one of the “ Ego ”’ books
the author saying that many people went
through life without ever having had a
thought of their own ; such people could not
be looked upon as approaching genius !
Robert Louis Stevenson gave in one of his
books a description of how he roughly
worked out what he was going to write and
let it simmer for a few days, then lifted off
the lid and there it was. In complete contrast, it was the work of a journalist to
write down what he had to say straight
away.

Bidder, Q.C., son of the “ Calculating
Boy” and a great friend of Galton, had
played a large part in the litigation entailed
in the making of the railways; this ability
had gone down to the third generation. This
was not abnormal. It was quite a common
thing, when a man of ability sprang from
unlikely surroundings, for the ability to be
passed on to his posterity, as if it were a
mutation.

As regards madness, people of special
ability not only got the reputation of being
mad, but also of being wizards or witches.
One case was that of John Napier, the
inventor of logarithms; he was much
annoyed by his neighbour’s pigeons and
declared he would bewitch them. He put
out bread soaked in alcohol and the subsequent antics of the pigeons earned him the
reputation of being a wizard. On another
occasion he lost a ring. He paraded his
servants and told them to stroke the back of
his favourite black bantam, and when the
guilty person stroked it, the bantam would

31

crow. The bantam did not crow, but he told
the suspects to hold up their hands, which
were found to be covered with soot, except
the hand of the guilty person.

His ability was passed on to the famous
Napier brothers, one the Peninsular War
historian, the other the Napier of India who
sent the famous “‘ Peccavi’”’ message after
he had captured the Kingdom of Scinde, and
to their cousin the admiral who took his
sailors ashore and made himself a general
and as such was quite invincible, ending the
Portuguese civil war. The great Clark
Maxwell came of this stock.

Genius needed a high level of verbal
ability to allow for the interchange of
thought, but in ordinary people thought far
outstripped words. For instance, we saw a
car approaching and apprehended its type,
size, colour, speed, direction and whether it
was safe for us to cross the road, in far less
time that it would have taken to formulate
the words describing it. In small children
thoughts preceded words, and in old age we
lost the memory for words, and particularly
for names. How often we found that we
could not recall a person’s name, though we
could visualise them perfectly. He remembered during the 1914-18 war, when in a
paratyphoid and enteric hospital at Bombay,
that all the patients found they had lost the
faculty for remembering names; he even
found that he could not remember his wife’s
maiden name. But this faculty gradually
returned after recovery.

Another aspect of verbal ability was
exemplified by Siegfried Sassoon, who said
that he studied the technique of poetry and
considered that he had mastered it and then
found he had nothing that he wanted to
express.

Mathematicians got away from the tyranny
of words. Whittaker had said that mathematics was a form of logic which had been
much more highly developed. It was to some
extent above the need for words. Artists, too,
did not need words to express their message.
But in the professions verbal ability was a
32 — . THE EUGENICS REVIEW

great stimulation not only to learning but to
one’s own thoughts by interchange of ideas
with one’s fellows.

Mr. Bramwell concluded by saying that he
was looking forward with great pleasure to

reading Dr. Russell Brain’s paper and moved
a vote of thanks, which was received with
acclamation, for one of the most interesting
Galton Lectures the Eugenics Society had
ever heard.

NOTES AND MEMORANDA

Annual General Meeting

THE Annual General Meeting will be held
at The Rooms of the Royal Society, Burlington House, Piccadilly, London, W.1, on
Tuesday, May 25th, at 4.30 p.m.

Members’ Meetings
On Tuesday, April 2oth, 1948, at 5.30 p.m.
To be announced later.

On Tuesday, May 25th, 1948, at 5.30 p.m.
A paper on migration. Speaker: Professor
Brinley Thomas, M.A., Ph.D.

The meetings will take place at The Rooms
of the Royal Society, Burlington House,
Piccadilly, London, W.1.

Family Relations Group

SOME 150 delegates, representing local health
and education authorities, voluntary organisations, colleges and departments of education, etc., took part in the conference on Education for Family Life, held under the
auspices of the Family Relations Group, at
King’s College, London, on January 5th and
6th. The first session, under the chairmanship of Lord Horder, examined the different
ways in which parents, public health nurses
and children’s officers could contribute to
the education of young children. The second
session, with Sir Martin Roseveare in the
chair, studied each stage of the formal
education system, working out ways in
which throughout the individual’s development education could contribute towards a
healthy and rich family life. Professor
Hamley took the chair at the third session,
which considered the réle of juvenile and

youth organisations and of the informal
education of adults. In the final session,
under Sir Wilson Jameson, attention was
paid to the great influences of the Press,
radio, cinema and the Church. The many
suggestions made during the conference will
now be studied by the Family Relations
Group, which hopes to produce a report on
this important aspect of education.

Miss Holland
WE regret to record the death of Miss Hester
Holland on December 18th, 1947.

Miss Holland was Headquarters Organizer
of the Family Planning Association (formerly
the National Birth Control Association) since
1933, and gave herself wholeheartedly to her
work, acting as General Secretary during the
war. The Family Planning Association owes
much to her untiring energy and enthusiasm
for the birth control movement.

Scientific Information Conference
THE Council of the Royal Society has
arranged a Conference on Scientific Information Services to take place from June 21st to
July 2nd, 1948, in London; it will be
attended by representatives of countries
providing information services in English,
namely the countries of the British Commonwealth and the United States of America.

The Conference, which will consider information services from the point of view of the
scientific user, will meet in four sections :

1. Publication and Distribution of Papers
reporting on Original Work.  Editor-inchief—Professor J. D. Bernal, F.RS.;
