A. JAMES GREGOR

Washington College, Maryland

On the Nature of Prejudice

h NY DISCUSSION OF “race prejudice’’ is
afflicted, at the outset, with a number of
difficulties not the least of which is the
that there is no generally accepted anthropoogical definition of “‘race.’’ This particular perMexity need not long detain us. Our concern,
sere, is with sociological responses and so our
mquiry will not commence with a consideration
of those entities physical anthropologists take to
fe races, but rather, with those groups which any
iven society is ready to accept as racial.! Such
definition, which seems, at first glance, inblerably inexact, actually provides considerable
sight into the problem of race relations which
ould most certainly be lost without it.
f What passes as “‘race prejudice”’ is actually but
‘single variety of a whole class of related reponses? rooted in normal human behaviour. To
istrict our inquiry to a study of relations beween strictly defined anthropological races
ould unnecessarily obscure that fact.

I

‘Man is a gregarious creature and as such
ares in many of the behavioural charactertics of social animals.* The one characteristic
hich, to our study, is of most significance is the
cial animal’s disposition to identify with only
Hect members of its own species.
[The most singular feature of this identification
the exclusiveness which is its natural corolry.4 Social insects, for example, will defend
eir hive from trespass by different groups; they
ill behave differently toward creatures which
fe of their own species but which originate in
es or hills other than their own.® A similar
lusiveness characterizes all social creatures
roughout the animal kingdom.®
‘Such behaviour is particularly characteristic of
thropoids, man’s nearest relatives among the
mates. Intruding strangers are forcibly driven
pm established communities.’

  
  
 
  
  
   
  

Man as a Social Animal

Among men such behaviour manifests itself as
tribal, class, caste, national or racial exclusiveness, the explicit form of preference being determined largely by the historic, social and political
circumstances in which the particular human
group finds itself. 
Among primitives, whose range of activity is
generally limited to contacts with members of
their own physical type, exclusiveness is tribal,
distinctions are drawn along cultural lines. Each
tribe in distinguishing itself from its neighbours
arrogates to itself the appellation “men,” designating others “‘non-men.’’8 Each community
conceives of itself, with an a priori conviction of
the most categorical sort, as somehow unique,
superior and favoured of the gods. The members
of the community are attracted to each other and
abstract from the observed similarity among
themselves an ideal beauty—and find in their
common customs and usages the self-evident
laws of proper behaviour. Honour, value, aesthetic and moral worth become attached in varying
degrees to now one and now another of the
collective cultural and physical attributes of the
community.

Among the natives of Mexico, for example,
there existed a tendency to congenital albinism.
Since these albinos departed from the accepted
physical norm they were sacrificed to the gods.®
Among the Papuans a child born of lighter hue
than the average of the tribe was held assiduously
over a fire of green branches until it was tinted
the proper colour.’

The aesthetic and moral justification which
sustains this behaviour is a rationalization of
attitudes which man shares with all social
animals. For the attitudes characterize man’s
primary social disposition: each association of
men is animated by a consciousness of kind, an
identification of like members, a_ preferred

217

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, January 1961, 52. 4
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

association! whose common attributes are conceived of, somehow, as superior.

Human communities can distinguish themselves by physical disparity, different territorial
origins, varying speech, diverse political, moral
and religious allegiances as well as different
economic functions, modes of dress and adornment.”

Generally, social distance is measured by a
constellation of differences varying in their
degree of permanence. These differences are
never looked upon philosophically, they are one
or the other or all together, made the ground for
discrimination or preference. At best, in highly
sophisticated communities, they are tolerated—
but even then, under the least pressure, they
become the focal point of group antagonism.

One does not have to be particularly astute to
recognize here, the source of what passes, in our
own time as “race prejudice.”

What is important to note is the fact that
exclusiveness and preference centre around differences. These differences can reside, as we have
seen, in attitudes, religious opinions, speech,
aesthetic judgments, technical achievements or
observable physical differences.1* In varying
context, in different areas of competition, one or
the other or several in combination will be of
primary importance.

The Ancient Greeks

For the ancient Greeks of the Classical period,
whose principal contacts were with people of
essentially similar physical type, the primary
distinction upon which group identification fixed
itself was cultural. The Greeks identified themselves as “‘Hellenes’ (by nature superior) and
deprecated the rest of mankind as “barbarian”
(by nature slaves).1* The original distinction was
applicable to persons of non-hellenic speech*®
and dress.16

Why the Greeks should have selected these
criteria for distinction is understood once we
appreciate the fact that their principal line of
contact was political and territorial and the most
obvious differences between themselves and other
identifiable groups were cultural.

This is not to say that the Greeks were not
“conscious” of racial distinctiveness, in the
anthropological sense—it is simply a matter of

218

fact that they had few occasions to express this
latent consciousness since their contacts were,
by and large, limited to peoples of their own
general physical type. Correspondingly, cultural
differences occupied the focal point of their
awareness.

Nonetheless, when the first contacts were made
between intruding Indo-Europeans and the indigenous population of what was to become Greece,
physical differences (in pigmentation primarily)
did not pass unnoticed. Rather, these specifically
physical differences appear to have been made
the basis (along with cultural differences) for
social and political preferences.1” Furthermore,
by the time of Aristotle, after the two stocks had
amalgamated to form the Greek People, the
Hellenes had stabilized, as evidenced by their
literature and art, a composite physical ideal, the
elements of which were strictly European.
Deviations from this established norm were considered, at best, strange or curious, at worse, they
were despised.

Thus whenever the Greeks represented people
of little consequence, barbarians, demons or
comic figures, they were almost invariably small,
very dark and possessed of prominent fleshy or
broad noses characteristic of non-European
races.18 Thus the pseudo-Aristotle’s ideal man
was a man of medium pigmentation, of medium
stature, of thick, slightly curly hair, straight
forehead—that is, the composite European.’
Non-European, non-Greek physical types were
deplored: a very dark complexion, black eyes,
woolly hair, excessive or diminutive stature,”
low or sloping forehead, everted lips and prognathous jaws”! were all held to be hallmarks of
inferiority. In this connection the pseudoAristotle deprecated the Ethiopians and Egyptians, the only negroid peoples with whom the
Greeks had contact.

This time has been spent with the specifically
racial consciousness of the Greeks because contemporary sociologists often contend (using the
Greeks as illustration) that race awareness per se
is a by-product of modern capitalism.” Our contention is, rather, that it is a function of group
consciousness, a corollary of the native consciousness of kind characteristic of all gregarious
animals.?? The nature of the specific criteria for
preference (cultural, national or racial) will be
ON THE NATURE OF PREJUDICE

influenced or determined, in some cases, by
objective social forces as well as by the degree of
permanence to which each distinguishable difference is subject. But the instinctive seeking out
of kind is the primary, generic social fact.

The Early Egyptians

This same consciousness of kind led the
ancient Egyptians (of predominantly Mediterranean race** before their admixture with the
Negroes) to select brunette curly hair®> and
brown skin as the epitome of the highest type of
humanity which they designated Rot, the human
race par excellence.** Departure from this select
physical type was a manifest sign of inferiority.
Thus the blond, fair skinned Tamhu (Mashausha)
were always represented as barbarians,”’ and the
black, woolly haired Nahsu (Kesh) were appraised a “perverse race.”28 The Negro visage
was carefully painted under the soles of sandals
to be trod upon by the lowliest Egyptian.”® In
the reign of Sesostris III the entire Negro race
was proscribed from ever entering the confines of
Egypt. While at the other extreme an Egyptian
unfortunate enough to be graced with fair hair
carefully concealed it under a dark wig.

II
The Basis of Prejudice

This disposition, on the part of human groups,
to identify with an ideal physical type is the
psycho-social basis for race prejudice. As we have
indicated, group identification can be made on the
basis of language, dress, mannerisms, religious
or political affiliation (such identifications are the
substance of the daily lives of all peoples). We
have here dwelt upon racial distinctions because
they are of permament duration and of high
social visibility. We can generalize (bearing in
mind exceptions which can conceivably result
from singular socio-political circumstances) that
where two peoples, marked by gross physical
dissimilarities, make contact, the attempt at assimilation is invariably met with tensions and
disharmonies which it is almost beyond the
power of men to resolve. Gross physical dissimilarity provides a broad and sure base for
group identification. The racial livery of an
individual indelibly marks him a member of a
specific community. Group identity crystallizes

around these hard and fast physical dissimilarities.*1 So persistent are such identifications
that they move men to act in a way they would.
not were they motivated solely by utilitarian
considerations. Thus they are of primary social
concern. On the other hand, economic, social or
political circumstance can influence the strength
or weakness of the specific reaction.

In contact areas where groups of widely
differing stocks encounter each other, the contact
is not truly social, for by virtue of the disposition
of the members of each group the physical
singularities of the other mark them as beings of
an entirely different moral order.*? The classic
consequence of such contact is the enslavement
of the one group by the other. Any subsequent
attempt to organize association on a more organic
basis leads to the elimination of slavery and the
introduction of moreor less formal caste relationships.

One can say that the degree of association and
the ease with which the groups are integrated
varies in inverse proportion to the degree of
physical dissimilarity.®*

We can illustrate such a generalization (which
would have been qualified by more careful
analysis had space permitted) by a number of
historic examples.

Ill

There is considerable evidence to indicate that
both the Hellenic and Roman civilizations originated in the contact of peoples sufficiently
diverse to promote class and caste lines marked
by physical distinctions.** The original ruling
classes of Homeric Greece and Post-Tarquinian
Rome seem to have been more fair, in general,
than the indigenous population of Italy and
Greece.** These distinctions originally characterized the social castes and classes (Patricians
and Plebians, Helots, Perioikoi, Aristocracy and
so forth).

Since the differences between the orders were,
on the whole, negligible, these distinctions were
modified (Sparta was the principal exception) in
a relatively short time to produce the physical
and cultural synthesis of Northern and Southern
Europeans which we know of as Classical
Antiquity.

Opposed to this more common pattern we.

219.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

have the historic examples of aggregations of
people of markedly different physical type which
never seem to synthesize completely; the most
tragic illustration of which is Ancient India.

India and the Caste System

' Several millennia before the birth of Christ,
Indo-European peoples invaded the Asiatic subcontinent of India, coming into contact with an
indigenous population composed of protonegroid, veddoid and archaic caucasoid stocks.*®
The conquerors, who designated themselves
“Aryans,” that is, “‘nobles,’”’ “equals,” characterized the aborigines “‘Dasas’”’ or “Dasyas,”’
ie., Slaves or robbers.*’ The invaders identified
themselves as “‘fair’’*® compared to the indigenous population which they distinguished as
““‘black-skinned”’ and “‘noseless.’’®°

Slavery was the first consequence of this contact*—later the slave—master relationship was
modified to become a strict caste system with the
original dark-skinned population occupying the
lowest Sudra caste or remaining Pariahs, Outcastes.“
' India never succeeded in synthesizing these
disparate elements and to-day over 50,000,000
Indians remain outside the organic body of
Hindu society in what has been called ‘“‘the
largest subordinate racial group in the world.”
How persistently this form of group identification, consequent upon the contact of two widely
divergent physical types has plagued India from
that day to this (about four millennia) is exemplified by the fact that a contemporary high caste
Hindu will continue to refer to a man of low
caste as a “very black fellow.”** Honour and
value still attach to fair skin.“
' Through thousands of years of contact the
original racial distinctiveness has persisted, and
even to-day the nasal index provides a rough
guide to social status. Noses grow broader as
one proceeds down the social scale with
negroids composing the vast majority of casteless Untouchables.**

American Immigrants

: The caste relationship, which arose originally
out of the contact of peoples vastly different in
physical type,*’ was early formalized by provid
220

ing it with a religious rationale. The Laws of
Manu* ascribe the origin of caste to the creative
acts of God. Essentially the same process followed the bringing together of two races of
manifest dissimilarity in North America. The
original contacts between white and black
resulted in a slave—master relationship later
modified into what can legitimately be spoken of
as a caste relationship.*® Similarly, in the
Southern States of the United States caste was
formalized by appealing to a religious rationale.
The Negroes were conceived of as the descendants of Ham, who cursed with negritude, and
proscribed to multiply only after their own kind,
were to serve their fairer skinned brethren in
perpetuity.

In the United States, where immigrant populations composed of all the European sub-races
basically akin to the native stock have been, by
and large, absorbed, the Negro and the Asiatic
remain in caste isolation.

This is true in spite of the fact that the Negro is
one with the majority of Americans with respect
to language, religion, customs and general
allegiance. None the less, their subordinate status,
with its attendant disabilities, shows but little
susceptibility to change.*! The retention of social
distance seems a function of high social visibility.

It is not necessary, here, to review the disabilities suffered by the Negro in the United
States and the Negroid in India—the point to
be made is that gross physical differences provide a convenient and permanent core about
which group distinctions collect themselves. This
felt difference provides the latent source of prejudice and preference wherever two divergent
races come into contact. In areas where distinctions are not formalized by religious or legislative precept they are none the less real.

In Brazil, where amalgamation of races
markedly dissimilar has gone on since the first
European colonization, a six-way caste system
(Negro, Indian and White and their hybrids) was
the first accommodation subsequent to the
original slave—master relationship. The formal
caste distinctions disappeared with the increased
demographic strength of the mixed bloods.
To-day, where legally no race distinctions can be
made, preferences and prejudices are still manifest along race lines. Lighter pigmentation and
ON THE NATURE OF PREJUDICE

European features are still considered natural
marks of superiority. Economic, social and
political dominance is still exercised by the
European, the broad base of Brazilian society
supporting a small social aristocracy which is of
unmixed European descent. The metis, or
mixed bloods, form an intermediate group,
holding correspondingly high social and economic status when compared to the unmixed Negro
and Indian mass which forms the lowest stratum
of the population.®? The same is true of all Latin
American countries where races (in appreciable
numbers) or singular physical dissimilarities have
tried to merge into a single organic society. It is
equally true in North Africa where the Europeanoid Tuareg upper class rules slave castes predominantly Negroid.4 Again social status
diminishes as the nasal index increases. In
Northern Nigeria the Fula (Fulani) form a caste
of non-Negroid Hamites ruling over a NegroHamitic Hausa caste.*® In Ethiopia caste lines
are colour lines with the full-blooded Negroes
held in virtual (and sometimes real) slavery.*®
The term “Negro” is one of opprobrium and
pronounced Negro features are a mark of
inferiority.®’

Racial Dominance

We could trace similar relationships throughout the world wherever peoples of disparate
physical appearance have come into contact
(Chinese and Malays, Asiatics and Europeans)
but the point to be established here is that
wherever Europeans have come into protracted
contact with organized groups of markedly
distinct racial livery the result invariably has been
either:

(1) extermination, as was the case with the
Tasmanians and almost the case with the
Australian Blackfellows and the American
Indian (in New Zealand, South Africa and
Ancient India®* the natives were hunted like
animals by organized hunting parties®®), or as
has been more commonly the case:

(2) slavery or formal or informal caste subordination as in India, the ancient world,” Latin
America, North America, South Africa, North
Africa and, as appears to be the case, in Britain.

While under special circumstances it appears
possible for a people to absorb biologically a

markedly alien group (Portugal and its Negro
slaves) nowhere have two diverse races been able
to unite into one organic society while maintaining their identity. In every instance of EuropeanNegro racial contact the Negroes or Negroid
people have been forced into a subordinate slave
or caste relationship. The universality of this fact
leaves one the choice of but two alternative
explanations: (1) the Negro is_ biologically
inferior and succumbs in direct competition with
Europeans, or—as seems to be more likely—(2)
the non-White is discriminated against systematically (covertly or overtly) by a dominant group
consciously or unconsciously motivated by a
preference for its own kind.

That these traits are not restricted to Europeans nor to the era of imperialism is sufficiently
obvious. In the first instance, the same or similar
relations exist between the Chinese and the
Malays, the Japanese and the Ainu, the Bantu
and the Bushman, the Forest Negro and the
Pygmy and the Mulattoes and the Negroes of
Haiti. Secondly, the race attitudes of antiquity,
similar in all respects to those of our own time
should establish them as extra-capitalistic.

Anything more than a casual or temporary
contact between widely diverse races, in precapitalistic as well as capitalistic times, provokes
prejudice and discrimination and a subsequent
rationalization for felt preferences.

In epochs of strong religious conviction alien
races have been proscribed as “‘accursed of God”’
—this is as true of the ancient as it is of the
modern world. The ancient rabbis had formalized their preference by advancing the thesis that
Negroes were the “accursed descendants of
Ham.”*! The external stigmas of this curse being
“black skin, misshapen lips and twisted hair.”
So impressed were the earliest Europeans by the
physical differences between the primary races
that by the first century a doctrine of separate
creation of blacks and whites was advanced and
supported by both the Babylonian Talmudists
and the Emperor Julian. By the beginning of the
fifth century A.D. this notion had become so
prevalent that St. Augustine inveighed against it
at considerable length as heretical.** Heretical or
not, similar notions continued to find support
and were entertained by Paracelsus (1520) and

221
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Bruno (1591)—certainly no apologists for
capitalism.

Even the Mohammedans, long known for their
liberality in racial matters, concocted a similar
rationalization for discrimination. A woman, so
the account goes, concealing a child from the
Prophet, brought down a curse upon it and its
descendants: they wete to be for ever black as
*‘darkness,”’ to be sold as cattle to those of fair
skin.

We have seen similar arguments formulated in
areas so widely separated as India and the United
States.

Even the argument of the Emperor Julian,
favouring the polygenetic origin of the primary
races, was revived in relatively recent times
(where a more “‘scientific’”? disposition obtained). Still more recently, in the West, all the
paraphernalia of science has been employed, at
one time or another, to establish the biological
inferiority of the Negro on scientific grounds—to
provide support for exclusion or for white
preference.

It cannot be our concern here to discuss the
merits or demerits of this last endeavour, to
consider the adequacy of the evidence for or
against Negro biological inferiority. The point
here is that discriminatory practices and preferential treatment are almost universal concomitants of the contact of two widely different
races whether such practices are supported by a
religious or a “‘scientific’? rationale, or no
rationale at all. The preference for one’s kind is
an elementary social fact, the forms it will
assume will be conditioned and modified by
circumstances—but where the differences between peoples are so great as to be immediately
perceptible, and where organized groups of
appreciable numbers maintain sustained contact,
characteristic forms of race prejudice manifest
themselves.

IV

History records no greater tragedy than the
attempt by a number of societies to accommodate peoples of visibly divergent race. Rabindranath Tagore, the Indian Nobel Prize winner,
wrote :®5

[India’s] history began with [race-prejudice] and
though India desperately tried some kind of
mechanical race adjustment she has failed in giving

222

  
  
   
   
   
  
  
 
 
  
  
   
  
 
  
    
  
 
 
  
  
 
   
  
    
  
   
 
 
   
    
   

birth to a living political organism owing to ¢

abnormal caste consciousness that obstructs

strain of human sympathy and spirit of mug

co-operation. This is the reason why, in spite

the fact that India had produced a series of g

minds, she had not produced a great orgi

history; and it has yet to be seen if such a hisg

is in the making in which people of diffeg

colours can have a perfect bond of life. . ‘

American and South African circumstag
are too well known to warrant comment hg
The prospects for those of colour are conting
discrimination, poverty, a painful awareness
not belonging—an inability to identify with.
race, culture and historic tradition of the ca
munity in which they find themselves unwang

members and in which they will serve as \
pirates in times of affluence and as revolutiong
fodder in times of stress. d

Prejudice is the obverse image of prefereng
association. Preferential association is char
teristic of all social animals, and while hum
beings can base their preference on a number,
factors: nationality, class, religion, intellecty
interest or race, race has been one of the m@
persistent of the criteria considered, conscioug
or unconsciously in preferential association, sig
the visible trappings of race are permane
stable and transmissible in accountable fashig

Sanguine hopes that the disposition to pg
ferential association will be eliminated 4
education,® by legislation or by time itself seg
belied by historic experience. Only a sensit®
awareness of the complexity of the probleq
which face our world in the increasingly freque
contact of races and cultures can assist us,
avoiding the tragedy that has attended su
contacts in the past. That men are capable
meeting those problems and resolving tha
equitably is admittedly something of an artig
of faith—an article of faith, however, supporti
by some compelling instances of contempora
racial accommodation. But is it an article 4
faith we must entertain if we are not disposg
supinely to submit ourselves to tragedy.

  

REFERENCES 3
1. Conf O. Caste, Class and Race. 1948. Garden Cit
2. Park, R. Race and Culture. 1950. Glencoe. 232. |

3. Gini, C. Corso di Sociologia. 1957. Rome. 554 f.
4. Park, op. cit. 321 f.
ON THE NATURE OF PREJUDICE

. Keith A. A New Theory of Human Evolution. 1949.

New York. 61.

. “Thus we find that every species of social animal is

divided into independent groups; that each group is
dominated by a separatist, self-regarding group
spirit; that competition, selection, and survival
involve a struggle, not between species, but between groups of the same species.”’ Ibid. 39.

. 7. Forbes, H. Handbook to the Primates. 1897. London.

. Gini, C. Le rilevazioni .
. Gini, C. El problema de la asimilacion cultural.

B. Nott, J. Types..

 

II, 157.

. Fairchild, H. Race and Nationality. 1947. New York.

4 f.; Park, op. cit., 87; Gini, C. Le rilevazioni
Statistiche tra le popolazioni primitive. 1942. Rome.

270 f.

. Brinton. The Nation as an Element in Anthropology.

July, 1893. Smithsonian Institute. 592.

. Ibid.
. Giddings, F. Principles of Sociology. 1903. New York.

Vv; Bonner, H. Social Psychology. 1953. New York.
358 f.
, 276.

Revista de la Facultad de Ciencias Economicas de
la Universidad Nacional de Cuyo, May—August,
September—December, 1955.

. Aristotle. Politica. I, 2, 1252b, 1-8.
. Hettich, E. A Study in Ancient Nationalism: The

Testimony of Euripides. 1933. Williamsport. 48.

. Euripides. Rhesus. 294. Orestes. 1396 f.
. Guenther,

H. Lebensgeschichte der Hellenischen
Volkes. 1956. Paehl. 85 f.; Rassengeschichte des
Hellenischen und des Roemischen Volkes. 1929.
Munich. 18 f.

Guenther. Rassengeschichte ..., 27 f.; Myres, J. Who
were the Greeks ? 1938. Berkeley. 73 f.; Beardsley,
G. The Negro in Greek and Roman Civilization.
1929. Baltimore. 113 f.

. Aristotle. Physiognomonica. 3, 807a 32, 807b 19,

36, 812b 1-6; Myres, op. cit. 75 ff.

. Aristotle. Physiognomonica. 812a 13-15, 812b 31.
. Ibid. 811-12.

Ashley Montagu, M. Man’s Most Dangerous Myth.
1952. New York. chap. 1; Cox, op. cit., passim.
Giddings, F. Elements of Society. 1915. New York.
66 f.; Studies in the Theory of Society. 1922. New

York. 163 ff.; Principles .. ., v f.

Dixon, R. The Racial History of Man. 1923. New
York. 186 f.; Smith, G. The Ancient Egyptians and
the Origin of Civilization. 1923. New York. 25;
Sergi, G. Le prime e le piu antiche civitd. 1926.
Turin; 135. Mosso, A. Origini della civilté mediterranea. 1910. Milan. 321 f.

Smith, op. cit., 58.

. Nott, J. Types of Mankind. 1865. Philadelphia. 85.

Coon, C. Races of Europe. 1954. New York. 464.
., 255, 269; Rogers, J. Nature
Knows No Colour Line. 1952. New York. 8.

). Nott, J. and Gliddon G. Indigenous Races of the

Earth. 1857. Philadelphia. 188.

. Seligman, C. Races of Africa. 1957. London. 97 f.

Hooton, E. Up From the Ape. 1931. New York. 584;
Reuter, E. Race Mixture. 1931. New York.

“The first phase of race and culture contacts is
characterized by contacts that are not truly social,
in the sense that persons with different racial and
cultural backgrounds who are brought together are
not members of the same moral order... they
hardly regard each other as completely human.”

33.
34.
35.

36.
37.
38.
39.

45.
46.

47.

Frazier, E. Race and Culture Contacts in the
Modern World. 1957. New York. 32; Gini. Le
rilevazioni ... , 270 ff.

Warner, W. The ‘Social Systems of American Ethnic
Groups. 1945. New Haven. 285 f.

Oberziner, G. Origine della Plebe Romana. 1901.
Genoa; Patriziato e Plebe. 1912. Milan.

cf. Park, op. cit., 93; Guenther. Racial Elements of
European History. 1927. London; Adel und Rasse.
1927. Munich; Lebensgeschichte des Roemischen
Volkes. 76 ff.

Sen. The Pageant of India’s History. 1948. New York.
14, 35; Horrwitz, E. Veda and Vedanta. 1937.
Mayavati. 8 f.; 11.

Majumdar, R. The Vedic Age. 1951. London. 156.

cf. Rig Veda 10, 96; Guenther. Die nordische Rasse
bei den indogermanischen Asiens. 1934. Munich. 23.

Wallbank, T. A Short History Of India and Pakistan.
1958. New York. 36; Horrwitz, op. cit., 11.

. Dange, S. India from Primitive Communism to Slavery.
41.
42.

. Spectator. May 28, 1931. 501.
- In 1949 Prattis wrote: “‘I talked with the editor of the

1955. New Delhi.
Ouwerkerk, L. The Untouchables of India. 1945.
pondon. 3.
Ibid.

Hindustani Times about matrimonial advertisements in which girls mention their fair and white
complexions as desirable attributes in seeking a
husband. It was my impression that this disposition was a carry over from the long British occupation. The editor said this was not true, that it has
long been the tradition of Indians to place a premium on a fair skin and that fairness has been a
sort of ideal . . .”’ ““Seventeen Days in Independent
India.” Pittsburg Courier. August and September,
1949, as cited Rogers, op. cit., 9.

Dixon, op. cit., 258 f.

**... it is scarcely a paradox to lay down as a law
from the caste organization in Eastern India, that
a man’s social status varies in inverse ratio to the
width of his nose.”’ Risley, as cited Haddon, A.
The Study of Man. 1898. New York. 81.

““The existence of a permanent caste system in India
seems to have had its origin in the obvious diversity
of racial types in the Indian population. It is a
well-recognized fact that visibility is an important
factor in maintaining social distances and incidentally making class distinction hereditary.” Park,
op. cit., 92.

48. Chap. 1, 87-93.

51.
52.

- Dollard, J. Caste and Class in a Southern Town. 1957.

New York.

. Murray, W. The Negro’s Place in Call of Race. 1948.

Tishomingo.

Kinzer, R., Sagarin, E. The Negro in American
Business. 1950. New York.

The fact that biological amalgamation began seems to
have been a consequence of the fact that the
original Europeans failed to bring with them
women of their own fraternity—as the English, in
North America, had done. A similar process
resulted in New France when the French came as
trappers and fishermen without their women.
The Dutch in South Africa evinced the same
behaviour until women of their own joined them
to rea group life. cf. Keith, A New Theory

°°

223
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

ar cf. Frazier, op. ot A eaten, op. cit., 34. . 62. Augustine. City of God. Bk. xvi, 8.
- Coon, op. cit., -; Dixon, op. cit., 203. 63. Speke. What Led to the Di the Blue Nile,
55. Haddon, A. Races of Man. 1925. New York. MCited Rogers, op. cit, 13. of the Blue Nile,
36. vulma, A. Haile Selassie, as cited Rogers, op. cit. 64. cf. Nott, op. cit

. , op. cit., 19; Coon, op. cit., 453. a 2 Ree .
58. Danse, op cit. 11S. 65. Spectator. May 9, 1931. 739, as cited Rogers, op. city
59. Frazier, op. cit., 51. 9.
60. Beardsley, op. cit., 111, n. 1. 66. cf. Bonner, op. cit., 373 f.; Samelson, B. Does Educg
61. cf. Topinard, ““De la notion de Race en anthropo- tion Diminish Prejudice? Journal of Social

logie.” Revue de Anthropologie (2nd Series), I, (1). 1945. 11-13.

224
