JAMES SHIELDS
B.A., Genetics Unit, Institute of Psychiatry,

Maudsley Hospital, London, SEs

Twins Brought up Apart

HE PRESENT PAPER, based on a talk

given at a symposium on Genetics in

Psychiatry, held at the Maudsley Hospital
in October 1956, takes the form of an informal
discussion of the provisional findings in an
investigation at present in progress into uniovular
(i.e. genetically identical) twins brought up in
different homes. At that time the series consisted of thirty-eight pairs.*

The literature

Up till now the largest single series of such twins
to have been investigated is exactly half the size
of the present material. The results of the classical investigation of Newman, Freeman and
Holzinger™ are well known. Briefly, they found
that their nineteen pairs of separated identical
twins (mostly adults) resembled one another in
intelligence rather more closely than fraternal
twins, but not quite so closely as identical twins
brought up together and still attending school.
Their findings as regards personality were inconclusive, though the case histories when they
touch on this subject are of interest still. When
expressing themselves separately on the significance of their findings, it is interesting that
the three authors differ somewhat in their
emphasis. According to Woodworth,’ the
psychologist (Freeman) considers the study
showed that “human nature may be improved
or debased to a degree that many have thought
impossible”. The statistician (Holzinger) points
out that “‘relatively great environmental differences must be present to produce a noticeable
effect’’;- while the biologist (Newman) confesses
to have been “much more impressed with the
very great intra-pair similarities after the twins

* In December 1957 forty-one uniovular twins brought
up apart have been investigated, and there is some further
relevant information on another five uniovular and ten
binovular pairs. The separated uniovular pairs are now
being compared with a matched control series of
uniovular twins brought up together.

had been exposed to all sorts of environmental
differences’, than he was with the differences
between them.

Barbara Burks,” * whose work on foster
children is well known, has investigated five
pairs of twins brought up apart: one of them is
probably binovular. Only one case has been
reported fully, the others having been left incomplete when she died. In the first pair she
brings out clearly the nature both of the similarities and of the differences, and in most of them
she is able to show plausible relationships
between minor personality traits and differences
in the twins’ experiences. One of Burks’s twins
was for a while in a State Mental Hospital, her
twin partner not requiring psychiatric treatment.
Unfortunately, the nature of her complaint is
unclear.

Cases of schizophrenia occurring in both
members of a pair of uniovular twins brought up
apart have been reported, together with the
evidence on which the diagnosis is based, by
Kallmann® and by Craike and Slater.“* An
instance of concordance for manic-depressive
psychosis in uniovular twins brought up apart
is given by Stenstedt.1*° There have been other
single case reports, mostly on psychological
lines, of twins brought up apart, for example,
those of Muller,° Saudek,™* Gardner and
Newman,’ Schwesinger’*® and Yoshimasu.!®
One of Lange’s® concordant criminal twin pairs
was separated, but not till the age of eight.
Gladys Schwesinger’s Mexican pair is interesting, not only for its story but for the different
interpretations that can be put on it. Very
briefly, these girls, last observed when one of
them died at eighteen, had for some four years
shown pretty severe behaviour problems of a
similar kind. They were institutionalized, first

* Since this talk was given, another such case has come
to light at the Maudsley Hospital and has been investigated in this Unit.

11g

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, July 1958, 50, 2.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

separately, then together. One was a little more
tense than the other. This one got in with a
group of adolescents who took drugs, and she
was found dead one day from morphine
injections. The surviving twin, who had remained
out of trouble for a few months after this, had
the kinder mother. The author’s conclusion,
apparently underestimating the four years of
instability of this twin, is to stress the importance
for temperamental stability of “‘love, permissiveness, relaxation and emotional security in
mother-child relationships”, as exemplified by
the mother of this twin.

An opposite danger in interpretation is seen
in Yoshimasu’s case. Here one of the twins,
brought up by neglectful foster-parents, becomes
a persistent criminal; the other, brought up by
a good mother and later by a religious stepmother, leads a blameless life as a parson. The
author draws the obvious moral; but when it
comes to psychiatric classification both twins,
are put down as weak-willed psychopaths!

We shall look forward with interest to the
contribution which Scandinavian workers are
making to the study of twins brought up apart.
Dr. Juel-Nielsen*:’ of Copenhagen is making an
intensive investigation of about a dozen pairs,
and a small series is also under investigation by
Professor Husén’s department in Stockholm.®

The present twins and how they were separated
Our present material consists of twins brought
up apart who sent their names in to the B.B.C.
following a television programme in 1953, in
which a special appeal was made for such twins
to come forward. Up to the present thirty-eight
uniovular pairs, including two from other
sources, have been investigated, most of them
completely.

I ought perhaps to say briefly how I have
investigated the twins. The great majority I have
interviewed personally, but we have asked
colleagues to investigate twins in Scotland,
Germany and Chile. Ovularity diagnosis includes
full blood grouping, finger prints and P.T.C.
testing. I was prepared when need be to see the
twins in their homes, but the majority came—
mostly together—to the Maudsley Hospital.
Before being seen, the twins were asked to
complete a booklet giving some information

116

about themselves and including a personality
test kindly devised for us by Professor H. J.
Eysenck who also advised on intelligence
testing. In cases where the twins came together
one twin could be interviewed on his own while
the other did an intelligence test. The main
object was of course to obtain a history and an
assessment of the personality of each twin,
supplementing information obtained from the
twins on interview with that from outside
sources where necessary. Several pairs spent the
best part of a day here.

Women appear to volunteer for this kind of
research more readily than men; we have twentyfive female and only thirteen male pairs, a
number of the men indeed having been induced
to participate by their wives or parents. (We
cannot afford to be too particular about obtaining a completely random sample of twins
brought up apart.) We have only four pairs
under the age of twenty. The remainder are in
their thirties, forties or fifties and are on the
whole older than Newman’s twins. They come
from all parts of the country.

Twenty-five were separated during the first
year of life, most of them soon after birth—
indeed one was taken from his mother before his
twin brother had been born; six were separated
during the second year, and four between the
ages of two and four years. The proportion of
early separations is as high as in Newman’s
series. I thought it worth while also to include
three pairs that were not separated till seven,
eight or nine years of age to see how significant
age at separation might be. For similar reasons I
included two pairs that had been parted for the
supposedly all-important first five years and
then reunited. There were a few others who
were reunited shortly before leaving school. Our
series includes two pairs that have never met,
and one where we were able to bring the twins
together for the first time at the age of thirty-six;
one of these women had had no idea she was a
twin until she heard from us; the other had no
idea whether her twin was a brother or a sister
and whether alive or dead. This pair was
remarkably alike in personality and I am glad
to say they were overjoyed at meeting. Five
other pairs did not meet till their late teens or
mid-twenties. The others had varying degrees
TWINS BROUGHT UP APART

of contact during childhood. They all, however,
came from different homes.

The reasons for these twins being parted were
various. Illegitimacy accounts for six pairs, the
death of the mother for eight. The most frequent
reason was that the mother was ill, pregnant
again or considered unable to look after both
twins, one of whom might have been particularly
delicate. There were eighteen such cases; often
a grandmother who was maternal in both senses
of the word, or a childless aunt, was an important factor here in addition to the mother’s
indisposition, or—as happened in a further
three cases—to father’s unemployment. In two
cases the children were removed from home by
the Poor Law authorities. In one case the father
sold one twin to settle his debts. This twin has
lived in Chile all her life where she has married
a Frenchman; her sister came to Denmark
during childhood, and has now married an
Englishman. Geographical separation ranges
from this pair down to a pair of boys who live
next door to one another, brought up by aunts
who are sisters.

In twelve cases the twins were brought up in
families that were unrelated to one other. In the
remainder they were brought up by different
branches of the same family, in twenty cases one
twin staying with his own mother. Their families
differed widely in family structure and in
personality of the foster parents.

There are advantages in having a varied
material like this because of the possibility it
offers for making internal comparisons. The less
extreme separations are as interesting in their
way as the others, since here a greater number
of environmental variables are controlled. Cases
involving a wide degree of social and cultural
separation are, of course, extremely valuable. If
in spite of many differences of this kind the
twins are nevertheless alike in some respects we
may have enough evidence to convince even the
biggest sceptic of the importance of heredity;
but they would undoubtedly show major differences in other respects, and how could we tell
which factors in the environment had caused
them?

The separation of these particular twins
worked out fairly well in most cases. The
children accepted their respective homes as their

own, though a twin who was brought up as an
only child was apt to feel lonely when he knew
he had brothers and sisters; their respective
families (when known to one another) generally
accepted the situation too. This was particularly
so when one twin was brought up by the mother,
the other by a maternal grandmother or maternal
aunt. There were, however, seven or eight cases
where there was disagreement over the custody
or upbringing of the child, for instance, between
a paternal relative and the mother or between a
stepmother and a maternal aunt. The influence
of these differences of view was generally
reflected in some aspect of the twins’ behaviour.
Judging by later mental health, the separation of
one twin from the mother does not appear to
have been a traumatic experience for that twin,
either by reason of deprivation of breast-feeding
or by the change of mother-figure in later infancy
or very early childhood. Reunion with the
family when it occurred during childhood sometimes gave rise to difficulties in adjustment,
mostly temporary ones. Attachment between the
twins in adult life varied considerably in
closeness.

Intelligence

Two short tests of intelligence were administered
to the twins, the Dominoes, which is a nonverbal test somewhat similar to the Matrices,
and the Synonyms section of the Mill Hill
Vocabulary Scale. On the Dominoes the intraclass correlation coefficient between the twins
was 0-77; on the Mill Hill Vocabulary it was
0-74. This is very slightly higher than the correlation of 0-64 found by Newman for Binet
I.Q. The difference, if reliable, is possibly due
to the fact that some of Newman’s pairs had
widely different educations. Thus, even when
brought up apart, identical twins tend to
resemble one another in intelligence more
closely than ordinary siblings brought up
together (r—=0-5). Identical twins reared together
have been reported in some investigations to
have a correlation for intelligence as high as 0:9.
However, Blewett! who tested a series of twin
school-children, which we also investigated in
the Genetics Unit here,‘ found a correlation
between identical twins of only 0-76 on the factor
score derived from a battery of intelligence tests.

117
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

In five of the present pairs one twin had a
moderate educational advantage and did a good
deal better on both intelligence tests. The size of
family in which the twins were brought up did
not seem to have any direct bearing on intelligence. There was a tendency for the more
intelligent twin to be the one who volunteered
for the research.

Personality

Our main interest was in personality resemblances and differences. How much alike were
these twins, brought up as they were by different
mothers and with no, or relatively little, contact
with their twin partners? And how are differences between the twins related to their respective
environments ?

In order to answer these questions we have to
make some attempt to assess the overall resemblance of each pair. Judging from their histories
and from the impression they made on interview,
there were some pairs who showed a very close
similarity in important respects—for example,
in one pair both twins were of superior intelligence, were active as teachers and writers and
possessed a considerable degree of organizing
ability; in another, both members of the pair
had been advised to enter mental hospital for
symptoms of anxiety and depression; another
pair was strikingly alike in the twins’ liability
to tempers, another in their lack of energy, and
so on. I have classified the material into four
groups. In the group showing the closest resemblance I have included pairs where there were
striking resemblances such as these and differences only of a very minor kind. Into this group
there fall six of the thirty-eight pairs. I do not
recall ever having come across any pair of
binovular twins brought up together who were
as alike as any of these six pairs.

My next group consists of pairs with striking
resemblances as above but with fairly important
differences too, the differences not (on my
assessment) as marked as the similarities.
Binovular pairs as alike as this are not very
common. Among our separated uniovular twins
I classified fifteen as belonging to this
group.

In the third group are pairs where the similarities and differences are about evenly balanced

118

in importance and often relate to very ordinary
qualities. There were ten such pairs.

Lastly, there are seven pairs where differences are very marked and similarities relatively
minor. Some of these I shall mention later.

In addition to history and personal observation, we have the objective results of the
self-rating questionnaire. This gives two scores,
derived from factor analysis, the one showing
the degree of extraversion-introversion and the
other the degree of neuroticism. The inter-twin
correlation for extraversion of 0-60, that for
neuroticism 0-52. Thus, the clinical findings and
the psychometric tests give one another some
support in their claims that twins brought up
apart show significant personality resemblances.

How do these results compare with our
findings concerning uniovular twins brought up
together ? It is difficult to answer this definitely,
for no comparable study has yet been made of
normal adult twins. It is possible we shall
eventually be able to investigate a matched
control group of such twins who responded to
the same B.B.C. programme from which we
obtained most of our present material. However, to judge by experience gained with twins
where one has had a neurotic illness and with
normal twin school-children,* I do not think
there is a very great deal of difference. Thus, in
his paper read to the British Association, Dr.
Slater!® found seven out of thirty-two uniovular
pairs showing very marked differences in degree
of neurosis.

Nature of resemblance

An important point, and one on which the study
of twins should be able to throw some light, is
whether some aspects of personality are more
determined genetically than others. Our material
can no doubt be analysed more carefully from
this point of view than I have so far been able
to do but my impression is that the question is
a difficult one to answer definitely. It is understandable that, since persons differ widely in
their genes, they should also differ in the particular aspects of personality that for them seem
to be genetically determined. If one asks the
twins themselves in what way they are most
alike they will often say something like this:
“In our mannerisms, our voices, the way we
TWINS BROUGHT UP APART

think, in our tastes and interests”. From personal
observation I would agree that similarities in
gesture and mannerisms are often striking, even
in twins who have had little or no contact. One
pair of male twins aged forty-nine who did not
meet till they were ten or eleven, and saw each
other only about once a fortnight during
adolescence, have met only very rarely since the
age of twenty-four when Jim left Durham to
come to London during the depression. They
have the same way of tapping the table to
emphasise a point, of flicking their fingers when
stuck for a word and of nodding their heads
energetically in approval. Sometimes similarity
in speech related not only to tone of voice but
to the kind of thing the twins thought it important to say and the way they said it. Twins are
also generally much alike in their degree of
shyness and sociability. The following case
illustrates some of these points. These women
of thirty-five were parted at birth and have not
met since the age of three. I interviewed both in
their homes. Both were awkward in manner at
first, remaining standing for quite a few minutes.
Both were talkative on the subject of their
shyness. They both mentioned spontaneously
their interest in sport as children and the fact
that they still like watching football matches.
They are fond of reading and music. When
asked what music they liked the one said she
was very fond of Tchaikovsky’s first piano
concerto but liked the Messiah best of all. Her
twin sister said she liked Rachmaninov’s second
piano concerto. A copy of the Messiah was on
the top of her pile of music.

Similarity in interests and in sociability also
show themselves in three pairs where a twin who
was active in an organization such as the Townswomen’s Guild or the Women’s Rural Institute
had volunteered for the research. It was found
that her twin partner had practically the same
social interests and abilities. Conversely there
are two or three pairs where both twins described their bashfulness or their dislike of
company or their lack of confidence in very
similar terms. There are two pairs where both
are liable to outbursts of temper and two where
an extreme placidity of temperament is outstanding.

These similarities often lead twins into rather

similar social careers. One pair of men gravitated
independently to jobs as checkers of stock in a
motor factory—they thought this work suited
them best. It was not an unusual occupation for
the twin to take up who lived in the industrial
Midlands, but more surprising in his twin
brother who was brought up in the country by
the village hairdresser. In another pair each
showed a decline in social status, though they
differed initially quite a lot in this respect.
Before the war the one twin was a head porter
of a big hotel. His twin brother owned a
jewellery shop employing four assistants. The
one is now night porter earning less than he
used to collect in tips, the other has sold his shop
and repairs watches with no assistance other
than his wife’s. The decline was partly due to
the similarity of their natures, which were
perhaps somewhat rigid and schizoid.

Sometimes one is tempted to see a basic
similarity manifesting itself in different ways. In
one pair each twin reports a change in personality: “‘All of a sudden” (writes one twin from
Canada) “I began to get confidence in myself. I
became a leader in church work and worked
hard and enjoyed myself... . She also dyed
her hair and gave her age as eight years younger.
Her twin sister from Lancashire writes: “It has
been somewhat difficult to give a true analysis
of my character due to the fact that I have
considerably slowed down in every way during
the last two years....” She has also been
troubled greatly by sleeplessness. It may well be
that these twins share a cyclothymic constitution.

In another pair, both twins are troubled by
considerable anxiety and restlessness. The one
is excessively houseproud, does not like to go
out more than she can help, and smokes thirty
or more cigarettes a day. Her twin sister is
slap-dash in manner. Anxiety drives her from
the house, generally to the pub where she says
she spends all the money she can get. Early
training and the contrasted personalities of their
husbands may have had something to do with
the opposite direction their anxiety took.

Personality differences and the environment

This leads us on to differences. The extent of the
environmental differences between the twins’
homes varied rather widely from pair to pair.

119
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

So I thought it worth while to see how degree
and kind of separation might be related to the
extent of personality resemblance. I rated
environmental differences on a points system,
adding up all scorable data for each pair,
including age at separation, amount of contact,
and sociological and psychological differences
between the homes. The total scores ranged from
five to nineteen points’ difference. These overall
scores seemed to be related to the extent of
personality resemblance in only a random way:
all four personality groups averaged between
10 and 114 points of difference on the environmental scale. Taking age at separation and
degree of contact only, there certainly appeared
to be no relation between separation and
personality resemblance. The most similar group
contained pairs who did not meet till seventeen,
twenty-four and thirty-six. The pairs brought
up together for the first five years showed quite
as marked differences as those who were parted
at birth. However, taking sociological and psychological differences only, there is at least a
suggestion that the more unlike the environment,
the more unlike the personality. The strikingly
similar pairs averaged 4-3 points of difference,
the most unlike pairs 6 points. In other words,
kind of separation mattered more than degree of
separation. Further analysis of the case histories
seems to bear this out.

Poorness of home and neurotic traits
In twenty-two pairs it was possible to say that
one home was poorer than the other psychologically. In twelve of these pairs one twin could
be regarded as having been more neurotic as a
child; in nine of these it was the child from the
poorer home who was more neurotic. In some
of them the neurotic tendencies may have been
only slight and temporary, but in others, though
minor, they persisted into adult life. Thus, Janet
was brought up by an obsessional father and
a mother who was a demanding invalid. She bit
her nails as a child while her twin did not, and
as an adult she is more anxious and obsessional.
But in others the neurotic tendencies are very
marked. Alf was neglected till he was two and
then brought up by a cruel and nagging stepmother. As a boy he had many fears, used to
sulk, tried to run away and eventually did so.

120

Soon after, he was discharged from the Army
on what were probably psychiatric grounds;
and at the age of thirty-seven he was treated in
a neurosis centre for hysteria. He is chronically
more anxious and sensitive than his twin who
was not subjected to these unfortunate
experiences.

Another case is that of a girl whose mother
was unreliable and inconsistent and probably
preferred Doris’s younger brother. Doris sucked
a dummy till she was five, was unhappy at
school and walked in her sleep till fifteen. At
twenty-seven she attended a psychiatrist who
diagnosed a neurotic depression. Her uniovular
twin has manifested no obvious neurotic
tendencies.

The three cases where the twin from the
poorer home was actually less “‘neurotic” than
the other in a way go to prove the point. Two
of them were cases where the twins were not
separated till seven and eight, and by that time
one was already more anxious or hysterical
than the other. The other case is of a lad whose
slowness, awkwardness, obstinacy and inability
to hold a jobwere attributable to his epileptic fits.

There were a further three cases where childhood experiences seemed to be related to
psychiatric troubles in later life, though there
was no clear evidence that one twin was the
more neurotic child. One of these is the Danish
twin mentioned earlier. She had a psychopathic
father and her early life was very unsettled. She
was thrown on her own resources in Denmark
while her twin lived a protected existence in
Chile. Though happily settled in England now,
the Danish twin led a troubled life when
younger, and was at one time treated in hospital
where a diagnosis of neurosis was made. Both
twins have cyclothymic and hysterical traits, but
these have not led the Chilean twin into so much
difficulty.

These cases appear to lend some support to
views relating certain psychiatric troubles to
poor early home life. However, to preserve our
perspective we must not forget the seven pairs
where factors predisposing to neurosis were
present in the home of one twin but where there
were no associated differences between the twins
in neurotic behaviour, either as a child or an
adult.
TWINS BROUGHT UP APART

Social and multiple factors

Early background can be presumed to have
influenced other traits besides neurotic ones,
for example those of a social kind.

One twin was brought up in a country district
by a schoolmaster who was a local Justice of the
Peace. She in turn married a schoolmaster and
has been active in local Red Cross and other
voluntary work. Her twin sister who was brought
up in a London working-class home shows a
number of resemblances in personality, but she
has not devoted herself in the same way to
public affairs. She married a meat salesman.

Social class differences were not marked in
our series, but even so there was a tendency for
the twins who were brought up in slightly better
off circumstances to marry someone who was
correspondingly better off. The character of the
spouse was also a factor which could sometimes
be seen to influence the lives of the twins.

Where the twins were brought up or came
later on to live in different parts of the country,
one could generally notice corresponding differences in behaviour. Jim, referred to earlier as
having left Durham as a young man, has more
difficulty in making friends in the South than
has twin brother, Walter, who has remained in
the mining village where he was brought up.
Jim also has a duodenal ulcer, but Walter has
one of these too.

Another case shows the interaction of social
with other factors. Allegedly as the consequence
of an accident in which he had concussion, Joe
suffered throughout childhood and early adult
life from a severe stammer. He took readily to
the agricultural work which was found for him
by the Children’s Home in which he was brought
up. He married a woman who had taken pity
on him, and she, and perhaps the relatively
isolated rural life he has led, have protected
him from developing some of the characteristics
of his twin, Ted. The latter was brought up in a
different Children’s Home. He had no stammer
and readily fell in with a gang of youths. He ran
away to the town and was involved in some
minor delinquencies. His sex life has been
irregular. In manner he is very different from
Joe. He tells tall stories in an exaggerated way,
and in an effort to impress he boasted he had
been in prison—which was not in fact true.

As in this case so in others, it seems to be a
combination of factors, not all operating from
early childhood, which leads to differences
between twins. Except in the case of the epileptic
lads, physical factors did not seem to be very
important on their own. But in at least three of
the pairs showing the biggest psychiatric differences the more neurotic twin, in addition to
having to deal with greater psychological stress,
was the weaker of the pair at birth and had more
severe illnesses in childhood. Unless I am just
reading my own opinions into the material, it
seems to me that it supports a multi-dimensional
approach to the problems of personality.

Methods of upbringing

One of the most commonly observed differences
between the families of these twins occurs where
one of them is brought up by a grandmother or
a much older aunt, as an only child, often in
slightly better financial circumstances and
perhaps in the country, while the other is
brought up in a town as one of a larger family.
Parallel with these differences in age of parent
and family structure are quite marked differences
in methods of bringing up children—differences in
strictness and leniency of discipline, for example,
or in the extent to which the child is protected
from the environment or encouraged to be independent. It might be thought that these differences would make for differences between the
twins in such traits as reserve and anxiety. So far,
the material has not shown any very clear-cut
tendencies of this kind. The strongest suggestion
is that where greater protectiveness is combined
with being an only child (and perhaps at the same
time with having a much more old-fashioned
person as a mother) the result is the rather greater
quietness or reserve of that twin. This was so in
seven cases. In one case the twin subjected to
these influences was the less reserved, while in
five cases twins with this difference in background did not seem to differ in quietness or
reserve at all.

From the material as a whole one gains the
impression that the personality of the mother
and her methods of child rearing can vary quite
a considerable degree without fundamentally
altering the personality of the child.

A good example of this is the case of Jill D.

12!
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

and Veronica S. These twins were adopted when
they were three months old by unrelated women
of similar social status in the same town. Both
were brought up to all intents as only children,
though Jill had a much older foster brother.
The girls are now 84 and by quite a long way
the youngest in the series. It was possible in this
case to interview and test the parents and to
observe the twins in their home settings. Mrs. D.
describes herself as being a noisy type. She has
many social interests, including political ones.
She is a more dominant woman than Mrs. S.
and Jill has come in for more spankings. She
believes that children should be treated as
puppies right from the beginning to know who
is boss. Jill was taught her letters before she
went to school and has been sent to ballet
classes. She has also been taught to fend more
for herself. Attempts were made to prevent her
from becoming friendly with Veronica by
sending her to a different school, and in order
to stress the differences between them Mrs. D.
has had jJill’s hair permed. Mr. D., a steel
worker, is quiet and patient.

The S. family is very different from the D’s.
Mr. S. is lively but inclined to be irritable, while
Mrs. S. presents a marked contrast to Mrs. D.
She is quiet, very placid and with no social
interests. She has no decided views on the upbringing of children and is perhaps rather too
much inclined to let events take their own
course. She thinks she may have spoiled
Veronica by letting her have too much of her
own way; and there has not been so much
educational or cultural stimulation in Veronica’s
home. These twins came to our notice through
the school teacher who saw them when they
first went to the same school at the age of five.
They did not at this time know that they were
twins, but they immediately gravitated towards
one another, were never apart, wanted to sit at
the same desk and progressed at the same rate.
One is reminded of the findings with identical
twin cattle who are reported to be able to find
each other after they have been reared apart and
to like to drink together. From observation and
from independent accounts from their parents,
the girls are very much alike in personality, and
are certainly not at all cow-like! They are lacking
in shyness, are active in social activities both in

122

and out of school. They have lively gestures, are
inquisitive and rather crave excitement. They
are perhaps inclined to bully other children and
are determined to get their own way, but seem
happy and present no serious problem. They
show an equal fondness for reading and music.
Many similarities in mannerisms and gestures
were noted. When together Jill takes the lead and
Veronica lacks confidence compared with her
twin. This is the sort of difference often found
in twins brought up together, though it is
certainly tempting to say in this case that Jill is
the leader because she has been given more
encouragement. Veronica’s lack of confidence,
for example in doing the tests, may partly be
due to the fact that she happens to be in a higher
class at school where perhaps too much is being
demanded of her. Both twins however, are of
above average intelligence. Basically, I think all
observers would agree, they are very much alike
in personality. It can perhaps be said that the
parents, who are very fond of the girls, have in
their own ways given them a chance to develop
normally and happily, and that being identical
twins they have developed along similar lines.

Conclusions

I have tried to give you a general survey of these
thirty-eight pairs of twins that I have been
fortunate enough to be able to investigate, concentrating particularly on their personality
resemblance and on some of the presumptive
causes of difference between them. As I pointed
out at the beginning, the study is not quite
complete and the conclusions so far must be
regarded as tentative. Moreover, without more
detailed exposition of the case histories than I
have been able to give in the course of a talk,
I would not expect you necessarily to accept my
deductions from them as being correct—in my
discussion of earlier work on the subject I
showed how easily the investigator’s own bias
can influence the interpretation he puts on his
results. I will, however, be bold enough to risk one
conclusion. I think I shall be able to show with
reasonable objectivity that uniovular twins fairly
often show quite striking similarity in important
aspects of personality, even when they have been
brought up from an early age apart from each
other, and by mothers of different character.
TWINS BROUGHT UP APART

The traditional method of twin research,
where uniovular pairs brought up together are
compared with binovular pairs brought up
together, has been criticized on the grounds that
uniovular twins are too much of a special case
for this method of genetical investigation to be
of much value, at any rate so far as psychology
is concerned. These critics incline to the view
that if identical twins are alike in personality, it
is probably because they have been treated alike
in a number of subtle ways by the same mother,
both on account of her particular psychological
make-up and because of social attitudes towards
twins; further—so this view goes—the twins will
for various reasons have influenced one another
in their behaviour, they will have ‘“‘identified”’
with one another. Our material shows that
uniovular twins can be alike without the
operation of these subtle intra-familial or intertwin relationships. If nothing else, it goes some
way towards vindicating some of the presuppositions of twin research.

Those critics who say that environmental
differences between binovular twins brought up
together are too large for them to be of any
use for genetical research are generally the very
ones who also say that the environmental
differences between identical twins brought up
apart are not as a rule extreme or their separation early enough for any deductions to be
justifiably drawn from them concerning heredity.
If my analysis of these separated twins is correct,
early age of separation is not always such a vital
point as those critics have sometimes suggested.
However, it must be agreed that in some respects
the social differences between the families in
which most of our twins were brought up were
not very large. It would, therefore, be unwise
when we come to evaluate the final results, to
claim that genetical factors would show up as
clearly if the environments of the twins were
radically different.

Acknowledgments
I should like to thank the producers of the
B.B.C. television programme, Science in the

Making, for access to their list of twins; all those
colleagues, whether at the Maudsley, elsewhere
in Great Britain, or overseas, who have assisted
me in collecting information about the twins;
and the twins themselves for their generous
co-operation in the research.

REFERENCES

1 Blewett, D. B. An experimental study of the inheritance of intelligence. 1954. J. ment. Sci. 100, 922-933.

2 Burks, Barbara S. A study of twins reared apart
under different types of family relationship. In:
Studies in Personality contributed in Honour of Lewis
M mm New York, 1942. McGraw-Hill (pp.

3 Burks, Barbara S. and Roe, Anne. Studies of identical
twins reared apart. 1949. Psychological Monographs,
general and applied. 63 (5),1-62.

4 Craike, W. H. and Slater, E. Folie 4 deux in uniovular
twins reared apart. 1945. Brain, 68, 213-221.

5 Gardner, Ivy C. and Newman, H. H. Mental and
physical traits of identical twins reared apart: Twins
Lois and Louise. 1940. J. Hered., 31, 119-126.

6 Juel-Nielsen, N. 1957. Personal communication.

7 Juel-Nielsen, N. and Mogensen, A. Uniovular twins
brought up apart: Preliminary report of a psychiatric-psychological study. 1957. Acta. genet. et Stat
med., 7, 430-433.

8 Kallmann, F. J. The Genetics of Schizophrenia. New
York, 1938. Augustin.

9 Lange, J. Crime as Destiny. London, 1929. Allen and
Unwin.

10 Muller, H. J. Mental traits and heredity. 1925. J.
Hered. 16, 433-448.

11 Newman, H. H., Freeman, F. N. and Holzinger, K. J.
Twins: a Study of Heredity and Environment.
Chicago, 1937. University of Chicago Press.

12 Saudek, R. A British pair of identical twins reared
apart. 1934. Character and Personality, 3, 17-39.

13 Schwesinger, Gladys. The effect of differential parentchild relation on identical twin resemblance in
personality. 1952. Acta. genet. med. et gemellol., 1,
40-47

14 Shields, J. Personality differences and neurotic traits
in normal twin school-children. 1954. Eugen. Rev.,
45, 213-245. . ;

15 Slater, E. and Shields, J. Twins in psychological medicine. 1955. Paper read to the British Association
and reported in: Nature, 176, 532-533. .

16 Stenstedt, A. A Study in manic-depressive Psychosis.
1952. Acta. Psychiat. Kbh. Suppl. 79.

17 Woodworth, R. S. Heredity and Environment. 1941.
Bulletin 47, Social Science Research Council, New
York.

18 Yoshimasu, S. Psychopathie und Kriminalitat, 1941.
Psychiatria et Neurologia Japonica, 45, 455-531. (in
Japanese with German Summary.)

123
