COURTSHIP AND MATING IN AN URBAN
COMMUNITY *

By MOYA WOODSIDE

“It is this intimate interrelation between the
objective and the subjective aspects of culture,
the relation between the inner life of the person
-and the traditions and current standards of society,
that demands further research.”’

E. W. BURGESS.

HIS paper describes some findings in

| the first field-work study on marriage

to be undertaken in this country. It
was originally planned as a genetic and
psychiatric research on assortative mating.
But as material accumulated it became
obvious that certain findings had unexpected
sociological and psychological significance,
presenting as they did a composite picture
of behaviour patterns on one level of urban
culture. This systematic collection of life
histories, while providing much novel statistical material, has also revealed in cross
section how economic and social pressures
mould the individual and determine mental
attitudes.

Other Studies of Marriage

Research up till now has mainly been confined to North America. A certain amount
took place in pre-Nazi Germany and in
Austria before the Anschluss ; but this work
was later suppressed, and little information
is now available. In America the favourite
method, of approach has been the questionnaire, completed, under supervision, or sent
through the post with a covering letter.
Questionnaires used have varied greatly in
scope, length, and complexity.

The work of Terman in this field is well
known. His monumental study (1938) of
the psychological factors in marital happiness is based upon questionmaires filled in
separately by husband and wife. Couples
taking part were.drawn from the professional
and business classes. Investigations on simi
*A paper read before the Eugenics Society on
January 15th, 1946.

lar lines were conducted by Kirkpatrick and
by Buttenwieser, the aim being to discover
the temperamental compatibility or otherwise of spouses. Davis (1929) studied the
sex life of 2,200 women, mainly college
graduates, again using a questionnaire.
Slightly different in approach is the study
of 1,000 marriages made by Dickinson and
Beam (1932). This was based on consultingroom records, and represents the experience
of a group of upper-class patients.

Perhaps the most interesting research is
that of Hamilton (1929). Using a combination of the written question and the personal
interview, he obtained exhaustive information from married couples on all aspects of
sex behaviour, psychological attitudes, effect
of environment and upbringing, etc. Burgess and Cottrell have published a study
(1939) on the prediction of success or failure
in marriage, worked out from the rating of
couples after ‘completion of a “‘ background
information ”’ questionnaire.

29

Due to war-time difficulties, a number of
important references are not available to the
student in England, so an _ up-to-date
account of American work cannot be reliably given. It is known that a large-scale
field-work investigation of sex behaviour is
in progress in one city, under the direction
of Alfred Kinsey, but no details have
reached, this country.

In his cultural and psychological study of
the family, Folsom (1943) describes and discusses the American investigations of marital
happiness, homogamy, etc., and gives an
extensive bibliography. Methods and techniques of this type of research are reviewed
and criticized in a symposium on prediction
edited by Horst (1941).

The outstanding limitation of all these
studies is that they have been confined to
the educated and better off, and little or
30

nothing has been done to investigate habits
and attitudes of low-income groups. A
further limitation is the proven inadequacy
of the questionnaire, if not supplemented
and checked by personalinterview. Burgess
and Horst both point out the need for combination of statistical and case study
methods, and Hamilton also stresses: the
importance of collecting subjective data
within an easily comparable statistical
framework.

Our present research goes a considerable
way in meeting these requirements; and
though it is on a limited scale this is compensated by uniformity of approach to the
material, by the use of the double interviewplus-questionnaire technique, and by its
pioneer nature in this country.

Method of the Study

All subjects were individually interviewed,
husbands at hospital and wives in their
homes. Information asked for covered a
brief family history, personal history including health, school and work record,
social interests, circumstances of courtship,
marital and sexual adjustment, contraceptive methods, attitude to family limitation. The questionnaire of 48 Yes or No
items, designed to elicit neurotic traits, was
presented as a “ personality test.’”’ No intelligence tests were given, but a rough
assessment was made at interview. Care
was taken to avoid possible sources of bias
in selection and to preserve the random
nature of the sample ; but no strict approximation can be achieved in this type of research, dependent as it is on the voluntary
co-operation of those approached. For

example, the findings relative to happiness .

are obviously influenced by the self-exclusion
of couples on the point of divorce.

In civilian life our subjects had belonged
to the artisan and working classes. Representative pre-war occupations for men were
labourer, transport worker, mechanic,
plumber, carpenter, with an occasional
clerk, commercial traveller or shopkeeper.
Women had worked before marriage as
factory operative, domestic servant, shop
assistant, waitress, dressmaker or typist.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

What follows is an account of generai impressions, valid for “control” and “ neurotic”’ group alike. At the time of writing,
data were available from 125 couples and
from a further 26 husbands whose wives
refused to co-operate. Subsequent experience, now amounting to over 400 controlledsituation interviews, has confirmed rather
than altered these impressions.

How Partners Meet

In general, meetings are completely haphazard, and the one recurrent factor is that
of residential propinquity. This however
has been modified since the war by the
“ shuffle-up ” of evacuation, industrial transfer, and service away from home. Many
have known their future mates at school, or
have played together as neighbours. Others
have met “outside’”’ or ‘‘at the top of the
road,’’ and discovered they belonged to the
same district. The street offers most opportunities for making acquaintance with the
opposite sex, and formal introductions are
the éxception. “We just started talking.”

““ We passed the time of day.” “I crashed
into her and apologized’”’ typify many
beginnings.

Places of entertainment such as dance
halls, ice-rinks, pubs, come next, and then
parties arranged by friends. A fair number
meet through work in the same factory,
shop or business. Clubs and similar mixed
activities are rarely mentioned, perhaps
because they are little patronized by lowincome groups. The few who did cite
tennis clubs or other societies were signfiicantly among the better educated and
“white collar’? members of the sample.
This also applies to the one or two who met
through common work for a_ political
organization. No one mentioned any Church
activity as a place of meeting ; and though
no specific questions were asked on this
point, organized religion seems to play small
part in the everyday life of the sample.

Yet in spite of the fortuitous nature of
most meetings, a study of the life histories
of the partners shows that selection has in
fact occurred within a very limited range.
Husbands and wives resemble each other
COURTSHIP AND MATING IN AN URBAN COMMUNITY 31

closely in respect of background, social
standing, outlook, interests, even degree of
intelligence. Chances of unselective mating,
as depicted in the “ shopgirl-marries-boss ”’
wish dreams of the cinema, are negligible.

Why. They are Attracted

Most striking here is the apparent irrelevancy and triviality of reasons given for
attraction. But allowance must be made
for lapse of time and memory, for having to
produce an immediate answer, and (this
applies throughout) the difficulty most subjects find in expressing themselves when
descriptions of feeling and abstract concepts are called for. Typical of this is the
summing up of all personality characteristics
under the oft-repeated ‘‘ His/her ways.”

Generally some factor of appearance or
behaviour is selected. ‘“‘He played the
piano lovely.” ‘‘ Her voice—it was sort of
hoarse.”’ “‘ He had good manners—helped
you off the bus and all that.’ ‘She was
‘the Hedy Lamarr type.” ‘He knew all
the nice things to do like buying flowers.”
Even (cryptically) “the hairs on her legs.”’
These remarks may or may not be amplified
‘by mention of other qualities such as good
nature, kind-heartedness, common sense,
being “ interesting ”’ or “‘ intelligent.”

A few men recognize sexual feeling as
primarily responsible for attraction, but on
the whole the value placed on sex during
courtship is negative. ‘“‘ She’s not that sort
of girl.” ‘She wasn’t the flirtin’ type.”
“You could tell from her ways she was. a
decent girl.” “She was clean living.”
Such comments are from men irrespective of
their own sexual experience. And from
women: “ He didn’t try to muck about
like other chaps.” ‘‘ He was restrained
about sex.” ‘‘ He was very decent and not
sexy—didn’t try to put his hands where he
shouldn’t.”” ‘‘ He wasn’t the average young

fellow who makes crude propositions to a.

gir rl. 33

A favourite reason given by both sexes
is: “‘ He/she was different.” Variants are:
“Something told me it was her.” “ He
wasn’t like other boys.” Yet to the objective eye both individuals are perfectly

the wives admitting it ;

ordinary ; indistinguishable from the great
mass of their fellows ; and often lacking in
looks, charm, or intelligence. Hence it is
evident that “‘romance’”’ and the subjective
approach perform a biological function in
bringing together many who otherwise might
remain unmated. This can be well seen in
the following account of his courtship given
by a 23-year-old labourer. (The account was
subsequently corroborated by his wife.)
Both partners were physically unattractive,
and below average in intelligence.

He met his wife in the cook-house in the
barracks at Colchester. She was in the
A.T.S. and also stationed there. He was
scrubbing the floor when she came in and

_ asked for “‘ a strong man ”’ to help press down
cabbage in a boiler. He volunteered to do.
it, but she laughed at him, so he seized hold

of her and held her in his arms to show that
he was strong. Immediately after this
encounter he thought “that’s just the girl
would make me happy. I wonder if I’ll ever
get her?”’

He was attracted by the way she looked at
him and “ the way she déne her hair.” “It
was love at first sight.” Two evenings later
he took her to the pictures and they saw A
Desert Song. He felt ‘it drew us together.”
He told her how he felt about her, and after
another two days he proposed and she
accepted. They then had sex relations in a
park. He said to her: “If you’re good
enough to let me do it now, you're good
enough to m ’’ It was their first experience, and “ both of us were frightened, but
passions got the better of us.’

Next day he was transferred to another
unit ; they corresponded for a month, writing
two or three times to one another every day.
Then he came on leave and they got married.

Pre-Marital Sexual Experience

Figures available at the time of writing
were as follows: Of the 151 husbands, 79
admit pre-marital sex relations, either with
their wives or with other women. Only 26
of the 125 wives make a similar admission.
4 husbands deny relations with their wives,
by contrast, I1
wives denied relations when. already admitted by their husbands. No information
was obtained from 22 wives, due chiefly to
32 _ THE EUGENICS REVIEW

lack of privacy at interview (children or
other adults present). The remaining 62
wives say they had no sex experience before
marriage.

To those unfamiliar with methods of
psychiatric interview, such findings will have
questionable validity. (“ You don’t suppose people are going to tell you the truth
about that sort of thing” is a usual criticism.) But the setting of the interview is
such that individuals who elect to take part
do so in a sincere and serious manner, and
in only a small percentage is there reason
to suspect falsehood or suppression. Furthermore, a matter-of-fact and unemotional
approach to the “‘ taboo’ subjects tends to
elicit a corresponding response. It is noticeable that people are less inhibited than
formerly, and most can discuss sexual topics
without salaciousness or excessive embarrassment. |

Several comments on the data can be
made. First, the fact that more than three
times as many men as women admit to premarital relations should not necessarily be
taken as indication of greater truthfulness ;
but rather that the “‘ double standard ”’ of
morality is still accepted by both sexes.
This makes it easier for men to be frank, as
they have only to admit condoned, but
women condemned, behaviour. One man
expressed the prevailing outlook when he
said: ‘‘ I divide girls into two classes: the
homely type and the -others.” And a
woman: ‘‘ We sort of got near the mark
sometimes, but he respected me too much.”
It was my impression that most of she
women who denied pre-marital relations had
not in fact had them, and similarly with
many of the younger men. ‘‘ We were both
amateurs when we got married” was the
apologetic remark of one young wife. But
pressure of conformity remains strong enough
to cause the contradictory statements of II
wives and 4 husbands.

Many women are frank that they were
only deterred by fear of consequences, lack
of opportunity, or parental attitudes. “I
was always afraid of being ‘ caught’.” “I
was too scared.” ‘‘ It was always drummed
into me by my parents.” ‘Dad was

narrow-minded and would have put me out
the door if I’d been caught.” ‘‘ We never
had the chance: mother was always in the
next room.”

Among the younger and more intelligent
couples there are signs of a swing away
from unthinking acceptance of the traditional
code. Either they made frank admission of
pre-marital experience, or explained their
continence as the result of individual decision. This rational attitude is exemplified in :
‘““We talked it over and decided not to.”
“We were glad afterwards we’d decided to
wait.” ‘‘ We had quite heated discussions
about it. But we waited because we felt if
we didn’t there wouldn’t be anything new
when we got married.”

It is too soon to judge of the success of
the Government’s anti-V.D. campaign, with
its appeals for ‘‘ clean living”’ based upon
fear. None of the sample who married
during the last two years and who might
have been expected to have been influenced |
mentioned possible venereal infection as a
reason for continence. Only two of all the
276 subjects specifically referred to V.D. in
this connection, and both were middle-aged
and married over 10 years. These findings,
incidental though they are, suggest that
propaganda should be on other lines.

Marriage

At this level of society, the practical advantages of marriage weigh more with most
people than subtler considerations of temperamental compatibility. For women,
marriage means an escape from competitive
wage-earning and from the dominance and
supervision of parents. For men, it means
comfort, personal attention, escape from
lodgings or the parental home; and provides one sphere in an increasingly mechanized and impersonal existence where the
individual can still exercise sovereign power,
even if only over wife and children.

The struggle for security and economic
independence is such that once these are in
some measure achieved, ambition goes no
farther and contentment is found in the
simple facts of family life—home, children,
small pleasures, just being together. These
COURTSHIP AND MATING IN AN URBAN COMMUNITY 33

sources of satisfaction, taken for granted
in higher social strata, are differently
valued by those who grew up, as did most
of the sample, with hardship and unemployment for background. Hence the tendency
for ‘‘marriage’’ and “home” to become
synonymous in many people’s minds. ‘“ It’s
somewhere to come home to.” ‘ My attitude to life is my wife and home and boy.”
“Avin’ your own ’ome to come ’ome to.”
“ All I want is a little home of my own with
a garden.” ‘‘ You’re in your own home.
You’ve got what you wanted all your life ”’
are typical appreciations of the married
state. .

I. HaAppmiNness

Most say they are happy. But in this
respect the sample is selective, as those on
bad terms with each other were usually unwilling to co-operate in the study. It was
possible to interview both partners in a
small number of such cases, providing
material of great psychological interest.

It must also be remembered that war
conditions have had a distorting effect, and
the study can only represent what people
feel and experience in abnormal circumstances. Many subjects pointed this out
themselves. Prolonged separation, perhaps
with the husband overseas ; evacuation and
disruption of the home ; the fact that when
interviewed the couples were living apart,
husbands being in hospital, all tend to postpone the time when, in David Gascoyne’s
words, ‘‘ imperfections of substance: dross
of the day by day: banality, unlove and
disappointment ”’ become increasingly manifest.

A further qualification to be borne in mind
is the well-known ‘“‘ halo” effect (Terman’s
‘generosity factor ’’) whereby the subject,
rather than face reality, views his or her
marriage in the light of wishful thinking.
The double interview technique used gave
ample opportunity for observing this psychological mechanism at work, and the idealized
picture presented by husband or wife was
often found to be far from fact.

The difficulty of expressing abstract conceptions, referred to under Altraction, is

probably responsible for most subjects
attributing their happiness to some practical
characteristic in the partner. ‘‘ He always
helps you in the house.” “He does anything I want him to do.” “ She’s ever such
a good mother.” ‘‘She’s a good cook.”
‘“‘ She’s very houseproud and saving.” “‘ Give
and take,”’ “ trust,” ‘‘ pulling together ”’ and
‘understanding each other” are thought
essential for success.

II. THE NEGATIVE CONCEPTION

Much of married happiness is defined in
negative terms, especially by women. This
is so common as to be universal. “’E’s
not abully.” ‘‘ Henever treats mecoarsely.”’
“He doesn’t drink or order me about.”
‘‘ He’s never lied to me.”” From men: “ She
never argues.” ‘‘ She doesn’t keep bad company.” “She isn’t the nagging sort.”
Appreciation of more positive values is shown
by younger couples ; but this again may be
disillusion deferred, rather than fundamental
change of attitude.

III. CausEs OF DISCORD

The sample shows no direct correlation
between neurosis and unhappiness, as of the
18 seriously unhappy couples 12 were in
the “control” group and only 6 in the
“ neurotic.”

Infidelity, known or suspected, is the
major cause ; and linked with it is jealousy.
Although the number of cases is small, they
are worth analyzing in some detail, as the
attitudes disclosed are probably representative.

Distributed evenly between both groups
there were 12 instances of actual infidelity
and 8 others where it was suspected. Of
these, 8 husbands and 4 wives were unfaithful. In one case both husband and wife
had been unfaithful, each with several
different partners, and still lived together.
7 husbands suspect their wives, but only 1
wife suspects her husband.

Men have two main types of reaction to
this situation: the traditional and the
reasonable. About half were obsessional,
suspicious, jealous to a pathological degree,
regarded their wives as “ property.”” The
34 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

others adopted a “forgive and forget”
attitude; tried to understand; believed
that other qualities in their wives were of
greater importance.
of reaction is conditioned not so much by
circumstance as by individual temperament.
Some of the most exaggerated jealousy was
exhibited by men who had least reason ;
and in these cases it was obvious that
sooner or later, serious friction would arise.

Women, perhaps because of the lingering
influence of the ‘‘ double standard,”’ tend to
accept infidelity with resignation. They
ignore it; are indifferent; or helplessly
make the best of it. A few are understanding
and regard their husbands’ extra-marital
adventures with sympathy and tolerance.
Childless wives were predominant in this
group.

After infidelity and jealousy, “nerves ”
and ill-health. But as half the husbands

interviewed were under treatment for neéu- 
rotic illness, the sample is imevitably
weighted. 14 wives complained of their
husbands’ “nerves,” irritability, unreliability, lack of self-control, loss of interest, etc.
(3 of these were among the “controls’’) ;
2 husbands made similar complaints about
their wives. Sometimes the trouble was due
to personality change ;
deep-seated constitutional traits.

No positive link was found between
neurosis and sexual maladjustment, another
frequent cause of discord. Frigidity among
women is so common as to be the norm (see
under next section), and added to this for
many is fear of pregnancy, or psychological
inhibitions arising either from upbringing
or from traumatic personal experience.
Excessive demands from husbands amounting to actual cruelty occurred in a small
number of cases, and amongst these appeared
the most tragic individual life stories (interestingly enough, all from the “ control ”
group).

“ Money ” is a common source of trouble.
The effects, both economic and psychological,
of prolonged unemployment were often
mentioned as spoiling a previous good relationship. Poor wages caused similar stress
in the home. Some wives accused their

Without doubt, choice:

sometimes to more |

husbands of meanness ; husbands their wives
of bad management. Drink was cited in
only 2 cases, but in both these it was a
major cause of unhappiness.

Interference of relatives, much exacerbated by housing shortage, is commonly
mentioned ; and many otherwise promising
relationships are spoiled by the daily friction
and compromise involved in having to live
with “‘ her/his people.”’ A fair number of
husbands were disappointed with their wives’
intellectual equipment or lack of outside
interests ; and though most of them loyally
refrained from criticism it was obvious that
no real companionship could exist on anything higher than the ‘‘ bedvand board ’’
level.

The remainder of the unhappy or potentially unhappy made less specific complaints
about ‘“‘ he/she doesn’t understand me,”’ or
spoke of “ selfishness ’’ or “‘ drifting apart.”
In cases of this sort one felt there was
genuine temperamental incompatibility, and
that the couples remained together through
habit, inertia, or neurotic dependency.

IV. WoMEN SUFFER MosT

On the social level of the sample, women
incontestably shoulder the main burden of
adjustment. If things go wrong, it is the
woman who puts up, gives in, makes the best
of it. This is less due to fundamental
difference between the sexes than to economic
and social pressures. The man is free to go
or stay as he chooses; the woman, who
usually has children to care for, faces
problems of maintenance, court orders,
home and job finding, etc. It is not surprising that few women are either courageous
or desperate enough to overcome both the
practical difficulties and the cultural disapproval which are entailed in leaving home.

One young wife described the neglect and
indifference she endured from her husband
in the early stages of marriage. She left
him, intending to return to her people, but
her mother refused to take her in, saying
“‘ 'You’ve made your bed,” etc., and she had
to go back. ‘I cried my eyes out, but I
knew I’d got to stick it.’””’ Wives who reported such past misdemeanours of their
COURTSHIP AND MATING IN AN URBAN COMMUNITY 35

husbands usually affirmed ‘ He’s better
now ” or ‘‘ He’s learnt his lesson,”’ but often
it seemed with more optimism than conviction.

V. Tue NEUROTIC IN MARRIAGE

The neurotic goes through life with many
handicaps, and tends to be an unhappy
person in himself. Whatever he undertakes
is accordingly more difficult and complicated than for the non-neurotic, and chances
of success less favourable. Where neurotic
and non-neurotic mate, the more stable
partner, after initial bewilderment, usually
bears the brunt of adjustment and the
marriage is held together by the degree of
patience and understanding he or she is able
to show.

Yet in other cases it seemed as if the very
necessity for taking thought had produced

a better and richer relationship. Many’

neurotic subjects. who had grown up in an
atmosphere of parental disharmony were
explicit as to how this had made them
realize that happiness was no automatic byproduct of the marriage vows, but something
requiring conscious effort.

' When both spouses were genuinely neurotic, the picture was sometimes that of a
tortured dependency. However unhappy
and ill-suited they might be, they were incapable of breaking away and through habit
endured behaviour which appeared quite intolerable to objective observation. Though
often articulate enough about their diffculties and prone to indulge in endless
emotional analysis, suffering with and
through another person was preferred to
even the smallest step towards independence
and freedom.

Subjects in this situation tended to agree
with interpretations and suggestions, would
admit their misery and the improbability
of improvement ; but when it came to the
point where some active decision was required, they retreated with a defence of
“ But I love him/her.”’ “I couldn’t leave
him /her.”’

‘‘ Fresh starts ’’ are another characteristic
of this sort of relationship. One marriage
in the Sample (the only case where prolonged

contact was kept for general social work
reasons) provided an interesting demonstration. Here both husband and wife were
neurotic with bad family histories and in both
cases a record of pre- and extra-marital
sexuality. The husband was unstable and
violent ; the wife, though unusually intelligent, a definite hysterical personality.

When first interviewed, soon after the
husband’s return from service abroad, they
had just decided following lengthy confessions, recriminations, repentances, to
“start all over again,’ “forget the past,”
try for a baby, and have the existing illegitimate child adopted. During the next
14 months, Mrs. X. appeared twice in
desperation. She couldn’t go on; _ her
husband was (variously) unfaithful, irresponsible, brutal, mean. Could some job be
found for her; the new baby (legitimate)
be placed in a nursery; a separation order
obtained ?. But as soon as concrete proposals were placed before her there was
always some reason why they couldn't be
carried through.

Each time the phase of resolution worked
up through “ scenes,” tears and violence to
reconciliation, sexual reunion, and exhausted
calm. ‘‘ Everything’s changed.” “I know
he’s difficult. But I’d never be happy
without him.” This precarious “ happiness ’’ would last a few weeks or months till
emotional tension accumulated again.

A similar cycle, though in less acute form,
was recognized in a number of other marriages. In psycho-analytic literature it has
been clearly described by Fromm (cf. p. 125),
Horney, and Lazarsfeld. Fromm believes
the dependency to arise from the interaction
of sado-masochistic trends, and the striving
of the neurotic for security through domination which masquerades as love. Hence
any suffering is better than loss of the love
object. Whatever the psychopathology, the
outward result is frustration and waste of
lives.

Sexual Intercourse in Marriage

Average frequency is twice a week, a
figure coincident with American findings ;
but information on this point could only
36 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

be obtained from those, chiefly in the upper
age group, who had experience of marital
normality. The majority of the younger
subjects who married since the war have
had no opportunity of living together except
during the husbands’ periods of leave, and
many have no homes of their own. However, there is enough evidence to suggest
that the bi-weekly figure does represent
common practice. |

Men find their sex lives satisfactory. If
any complaint is made, it is usually on the
score of ‘‘ coldness ”’ or lack of interest of
their partners. Not so women. Here all
shades of dissatisfaction are expressed,
ranging from indifference and distaste to
actual dyspareunia. Some have never
experienced complete orgasm ; and for most
it is “‘ sometimes,” “ occasionally,” ‘‘ now
and again,’ ‘Only if I’m in the mood,”
etc. This state of affairs is regarded as
normal, and the resultant attitude of most
women towards sex in marriage is that of
boredom or resignation.

Husbands are commonly valued in inverse ratio to their sexuality. ‘‘sHe’s very
good—he doesn’t bother me much.”
“We're lucky—we’re not terribly passionate.” ‘He never touches me without he
asks me.” ‘‘ He’s not at all lustful.” ‘ The
one part of marriage I could do without.”
‘““He’s pretty bad that way.” “It was a
sort of nightmare at first.” The following
extract from a letter written by one of the
subjects to the psychiatrist about her
husband, a miner before call-up, is both
human and revealing :

‘‘ Also impress on him that instead of being
proud of the fact that he’s got two children
and only 22 he ought to be sorry and that
he shouldn’t have any more for a few years,
at anyrate. Apart from the fact that he is
ruining my health; I’ve got a job to keep
my teeth now and my legs are very painful
now with bad veins. I’ve no guarantee that
his children will be of much use to the
country.

“* You have diagnosed my husband’s trouble
as Anxiety Neurosis to me it seems more like
a case of excessive sexual indulgence, dishonesty and lies. He’s. home nearly all day
long and if he leaves me alone for a day he

thinks it’s wonderful but he wants twice as

much the next day, whether I want attentions

or not. I hope you will understand what

I’m trying to say to you but it’s very awk
ward to find the right words. I don’t know

what you can do to help me but I would
be very grateful if it was possible to keep
him away from me for a time at least.”’

Since few, if any, of the subjects had ever
been given specific sex education, and
entered marriage equipped only with what
knowledge they had picked up for themselves, often from inaccurate sources, it is
not surprising that sexual maladjustment is
widespread. Ignorance, far from ensuring
bliss, has meant embarrassment, fear and
misery. Men are lacking in the rudiments
of erotic technique, and have been brought
up to think that frankness in such matters
is improper. This inhibition is well illustrated by the response of a middle-aged
brewer’s drayman in answer to a question
about his wife’s feelings: “‘I respect my
wife. I would never talk intimate to her.”
And a wages clerk of 38, 17 years married,
father of five children, said he “ didn’t
know ”’ if his wife enjoyed intercourse or
not. “It’s very embarrassing He
even found it ‘“‘embarrassing” if she
chanced to see him in his bath.

But among younger married couples it is
noticeable that the more intelligent are
aware of sex as a source of mutual satisfaction, and are able to discuss it with each
other. “‘It took us a long time to get
adjusted ; but we’re all right now”’ (wife,
24). ‘‘ We aren’t afraid to talk about it.
I always get what I want” (wife, 27).
Some husbands are concerned about the
failure of their wives to achieve orgasm
frequently enough ; many ask for advice on
this or on sterility or contraceptive methods.
Without doubt, those who have this franker
attitude derive greater enjoyment from the
sexual side of marriage. ;

 

Contraception
Frequency of mention of different methods
(125 couples plus 26 husbands) :

Cottus Interruptus
or Withdrawal Condom “ Rendell’s”’ Cap
65 54 34 12
COURTSHIP AND MATING IN AN URBAN COMMUNITY 37

Unspecified or .
“Chemical” “‘ Wife takes precautions’’ Douche Volpar
8 6 2

“ None ”
16
Some couples mentioned more than one

method ; others had used different methods

at different times. Those under the heading

“none ”’ probably practised withdrawal, but

clear information was not obtainable. Simi
larly, some who said “‘ chemical ”’ are likely
to have meant “ Rendell’s.”” In a small
number of cases (14) sterility of one or other

_partner obviated the need for contraception.
These figures, and the experience of the

research, suggest that some method of family

limitation is probably practised by all.

Furthermore, even the most stupid and un
intelligent realize the possibility of control,

however unsuccessful or indifferent they may
be in practice. As attempted control of
fertility by means of withdrawal is historic,
and common to all countries and civilizations, the high figure for its use in the sample
indicates that population decline cannot be
directly attributed to wider knowledge of
contraceptives. Another conclusion to be
drawn is that the birth control clinics have

a small sphere of influence, and their clients

are selected. (Subjects who relied on cap

plus chemical method of protection had
almost all been referred to a clinic or fitted
by their own doctor for reasons of health.)

It is hoped to deal more fully with this
subject and that of attitudes to family
limitation in a later article, when the case
material is complete.

DISCUSSION

Urgent Need for Sex Education

This was one of the unexpected findings,
yet it was emphasized over and over again
in psychological or physiological context.
There is no doubt that the desire for accurate
knowledge is widespread ; but unfortunately
by the time the need for this is realized,
faulty emotional attitudes have already been
formed and the mere imparting of information has limited value. Most parents, when
asked, thought that sex education should be
part of the school curriculum, and regretted
the unsatisfactory ways in which they had

II
Sponge Safe Period Wife Holds Back
I I I

picked up their own knowledge. Requests
for suitable books were often made, either
for adults or children. It was not uncommon
for husbands to ask the interviewer to talk
to their wives, and advise, explain or reassure. ;

Lack of a sexual vocabulary presents great
difficulties. People don’t know, or don’t
know how to pronounce, the correct terms
for their sexual anatomy or the reproductive processes, and hesitate to use
common equivalents, hence their inability
to discuss the subject without connotations
of obscenity. For this reason alone, many
working-class parents are deterred from instructing their children, and the vicious
circle continues. In this connection, it is
interesting to read Margaret Mead’s account
of the sexual education of Samoan children
and its effect on adult attitudes.

Frigidity and dyspareunia are other products of ignorance, in its widest sense.
Stekel considers that the apparent sexual
anzesthesia of women is in large measure due
to the inexperience and maladroitness of
their partner; and to this must be added
the mental “set”? of the woman herself,
which is often that of fear or disgust. Much
of the resistance to scientific contraception
arises from ignorance, both about its nature
and about the structure of the female genital
organs. Confusion with abortion is common.

If biology could be taught in all schools,
and children and adolescents given sex
education by teachers who were themselves
well adjusted and had some positive ethical
approach, there would be a great increase in
personal happiness.

What Do Men Want From Their Wives ?

Very little, it seems, beyond comfort,
unstimulating companionship, and the satisfaction of physical needs. This was a disappointing but inevitable conclusion to be
drawn from the study. The majority of the
average or below average in intelligence
were well enough matched in respect to
mental capacity and interests; but in the
case of the more intelligent, a wide discrepancy was nearly always evident.

A man would be seen who impressed by
38 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

his quick understanding, thoughtfulness,
grasp of abstract ideas, broad outlook,
obvious potentialities—these qualities in relation to a background of nine years’ elementary education and, usually, some manual
occupation since. Yet more often than not
his wife was found far behind him in intelligence, incapable of sustaining conversation
on anything but personal issues, her horizon
limited to home, children, and relatives.
Such women could not offer real understanding or bring out the best in their
husbands.
wives ?”’ one reflected again and again.
“Why are domesticity and intelligence incompatible ? ”’

The answer to these questions (if indeed
they are considered as questions at all) will
vary according to individual valuations and
Weltanschauung. Many would say, often with
considerable justice, that the routine of
household drudgery within a narrow sphere
leaves neither time, energy nor inclination
to develop inherent intellectual capacities.
But this cannot be more than a partial
explanation. To me, it appears that one of
the most important factors in the situation
is the changed, economic status of women,
and the revolution this has brought about
in their attitude to marriage.

Women have always worked, it is true,
but rarely for an adequate living wage ; and
marriage offered a haven of relative security.
Higher in the social scale, a woman who
worked was regarded with somewhat con
temptuous pity, the implication being that —

she did so only because she had failed to
attract a mate. Again, if a married woman
worked, this was considered a reflection on
her husband’s earning capacity. (These
attitudes are by no means extinct, though
temporarily obscured by war-time conscription.)

But now that most occupations and professions are open to women, to some extent
on equal terms with men, it follows that
many women are dissatisfied with the
traditional réle assigned to them. Consciously or unconsciously, they weigh up the
sacrifice which will be required of their independence, interests and individuality

“Why do men pick such dull:

against the security and biological fulfilment
which in this society can only be found
within the framework of marriage.

Another factor in the situation is that
men do not appear to have kept pace with
women’s new ways of thinking. They may
respect the independent woman and enjoy
her company ; but they still tend to choose
as their life’s partner someone who approximates to former idedls of wife, mother,
homemaker. (Significantly, the highest
praise given by many subjects to their wives
was: “‘ She’s all for the home.’’) —

This ambivalence of attitude and its social
results have been interestingly discussed by
Folsom. Psychological motivation, according to Harding and Lazarsfeld, is thought to
be related to underlying insecurity and the
need of many men to feel themselves superior
to their partner. It could be argued that
mate selection on this basis is dysgenic for
intelligence. Whether one agrees with these
views or not, it seems certain that.a different
set of attitudes must be developed if marriage is to meet the needs of a changed and
changing society.

Conclusion

Nothing final can be said. The sample is

too small; material is incomplete ; the war

has produced an abnormal social situation.
Many findings of eugenic and sociological
interest have not yet been analyzed, e.g.
education, jobs, “‘ We-They”’ attitude, etc.
But even within these limitations, the
study has given some picture of the part
played by sex and marriage in the lives of
working-class men and women. As an
experiment in social research, it ‘brings out
possibilities for a new. integration of the
techniques of psychiatry and sociology.

REFERENCES

ADLER, H. M. (1927) Am. J. Psychiat., 6.

Brissy, C. (1945) Sex Education.

BLackKER, C. P. (1933) Human Values in Psychological Medicine. —

BurcGEss, E. W. (1933) Ment. Hyg., 14.

— and CoTTRELL (1939) Predicting Success or
Failure in Marriage.

CHAPMAN, G. (1940) Culture and Survival. .

Davis, K. B. (1929) Factors in the Sex Life of
2,200 Women.
THE GALTON LECTURE, 1946 39

Dickinson, R. L. (1938) Control of Conception.

— and Beam, L. (1932) A Thousand Marriages.

DOLLARD, J. (1935) Criteria for the Life History.

Ex.is, H. (1933) The Psychology of Sex.

EXNER, M. J. (1932) The Sexual Side of Marriage.

FLUGEL, J. C. (1934) Men and Theiy Motives.

— (1935) ‘“‘ Psychological Aspects of Marriage
and the Family,’ in Psychology and Modern
Problems.

. Fotsom, J. K. (1942) The Family and Democratic
Society.

Fromm, E. (1942) The Fear of Freedom.

HamILTon, G. V. (1929) A Research in Marriage.

HarDInG, E. (1933) The Way of All Women.

Horney, K. (1937) The Neurotic Personality of
Our Time.

Horst, P. et alia (1941) The Prediction of Personality Adjustment.

KIRKPATRICK, C. (1937) Am.J. Sociol., 43.

LAZARSFELD, S. (1940) Woman’s Experience of the
Male.

LONDON SCHOOL OF ECONomICcs (1935) New Survey
of London Life and Labour. .

LUNDBERG, G. A. (1942) Social Research.

Lynp, R. and S. (1929) Middletown. _

MANNHEIM, K. (1943) Diagnosis of Our Time.

MEAD, M. (1938) Coming of Age in Samoa.

Mowrer, H. (1935) Personality Adjustment and
Domestic Discord.

Myrpat, A. (1941) Nation and Family.

OsBorN, F. (1940) Preface to Eugenics.

POPENOE, P. (1938) J. Soc. Psych., 8.

PRATT, G. K. (1930) Am.]. Psychiat., 9.

STEKEL, W. (1926) Frigidity in Women.

TAWNEY, R. H. (1921) The Acquisitive Society.

TEeRMAN, L. M. (1938) Psychological Factors in
Martial Happiness.

— and BUTTENWIESER (1935) J. Soc. Psych., 6.

THURSTONE, L. and T. G. (1930) J. Soc. Psych., 1.

WALKER, K. (1935) Sex and a Changing Civilization.

WILLOUGHBY, R. R. (1934) J. Soc. Psych., 5 and 6.

 

THE GALTON LECTURE, 1946

Presentation of the Society’s Gold Medal

N February 14th, 1946, before a

large gathering of Fellows, Members

and guests at Manson House,
London, Lord Keynes, on behalf of the
Eugenics Society, presented the first Galton
Medal to Sir Alexander Carr-Saunders “ in
recognition of outstanding contributions to
the study of eugenics and unremitting service to the Society extending over thirtyfive years”’; and following this agreeable
ceremony Professor Godfrey Thomson delivered the Galton lecture under the title
“ The Trend of National Intelligence.”

Award of Galton Medal
Opening the proceedings, Lord Keynes
said :

It is a satisfaction to take part in the
presentation of the first Galton Gold Medal,
both in piety to the memory of the great

Galton and in recognition of a worthy and
appropriate recipient of a medal established
in his name.

‘I say ‘‘ appropriate,’ because the virtue
of Carr-Saunders as of Galton lies in his
belonging to, and overlapping, several
branches of relevant knowledge instead of
over-specializing in one, and having, in
particular, reached sociology anf eugenics,
not from the economic side, but from the
side of biology and Darwinianism.

It is, I think, suitable to preface the
presentation of this medal by a few words
of piety and remembrance to Francis Galton.
His various and peculiar genius—so different
from that of his kinsman Charles Darwin—.
lay, not in continuous concentration of mind,
but in continuous diffusion ; not following
a single inspired idea to its logical and
experimental conclusion, but striking out
sparks in every direction, many of which
