NEWS FROM THE U.S.A."
By NORMAN E. HIMES, Pho.

A * BIOLOGICAL NEW DEAL ”’

HILE the progress of eugenical
opinion in the United States, as
indeed in Continental countries, is
necessarily slow, there is evidence of a slowly
awakening consciousness on the part of our
people that all is not well with present trends.
For example, at the last annual meeting of
the American Association for the Advancement of Science, Professor E. A. Hooton of
Harvard, a distinguished physical anthropologist, declared that what the United
States needed was a “ biological new deal.”’
Professor Hooton insisted that ‘‘ intelligent
artificial selection should replace natural
selection.”” ‘‘ What we must avoid,’’ he
declared, ‘‘ is a progressive deterioration of
mankind as a result of the reckless and
copious breeding of protected inferiors. We
have not the knowledge to breed supermen,
but we can limit the reproduction of criminals and mental defectives. Let us cease to
delude ourselves that education, religion or
other measures of social amelioration can
transform base metal into gold. Public
enemies must be destroyed—not reformed.”
The sentiment expressed in the last sentence
should not be misunderstood. It does not
propose the lethal chamber for defectives ;
but that every feasible and legitimate
resource should be employed to prevent their
birth. |

A CRIMINOLOGIST’S VIEWS

United States criminologists are gradually
coming to the view that the old faith in the

* This article by Dr. Norman Himes is the first of a
series dealing with the progress of eugenics in the
United States. It is inevitable that there should exist
some conflicts of opinion between English and American
eugenists, but it may be hoped that this series will both
define these differences and show them to be reconcilable. The REviEw is very fortunate in obtaining
the co-operation of Dr. Himes to this end. He is well
known to our readers as an eminent sociologist and as
an—one may almost say ‘he—historian of the eugenics
and birth-control movements.

reformation of criminals needs qualification
in the light of recent researches. Professor
Sheldon Glueck, of the Harvard Law School,
showed in his 500 Criminal Careers that while
many Boards of Control and many superintendents of institutions for the defective and
criminal classes had given the impression that
80 per cent. of the inmates of such institutions
were reformed, actually the reverse was the
case. Glueck showed that, far from being
reformed, 80 per cent. of the inmates of the
Concord reformatory returned to criminal
careers. When your correspondent reviewed
that book shortly after its appearance, he
hailed it as an important contribution to
modern literature in the field; but was
forced to admit that Professor Glueck,
following too closely in the footsteps of
American sociologists who, as a group, are
excessively environmentalistic in their viewpoint, had weakened his case by an unwillingness to face the hereditary implications of
defect.

It is gratifying to observe, however, that
in recent months Professor Glueck, in
addresses delivered in various parts of the
U.S.A., has come out frankly for the sterilization of defectives. This is a great step forward. (It is not suggested that criminality,
as such, is inherited ; nor do I wish to convey
that Professor Glueck’s ‘“‘ conversion ’’ was
connected with my review!)

STERILIZATION OF CRIMINALS ?

At a meeting of the State Association of
Elementary Principals held last December in
New York State the following resolution was
passed urging a study of sterilization by the
Legislature and Congress :

Whereas, we, as principals endeavour to bring
about a closer union between schools and local
social agencies and we study the effects of welfare
work on the indigent child and do all within our
power to preserve in him a healthy attitude of
mind ;

Be it resolved, that the secretary write our State
and Federal legislators, urging them to give serious

aI 22 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

study to the matter of sterilization of criminals and
low mentality classes with a view to future action.

Some of those present at the meeting felt
that it would be wiser to stress the sterilization of aments than of criminals, since the
hereditary transmission of criminality is not
so clear as that of mental defect. Such a view
certainly deserves weight ; but, on the other
hand, we need to ask ourselves whether the
future stabilization of population in the
United States so threatens our demographic
future as to necessitate encouraging the
reproduction of those of much less than
average genetic endowment.

The problem is, of course, to identify the
carriers of such defects. At present this seems
practically impossible, or at least extremely
difficult. Would it not be well to earmark a
small percentage of our funds for research
along these lines? But even if there is no
hereditary diathesis in this case, criminals do
not, as a rule, make normal and healthy
parents. This being the case, their reproduction should be interdicted ; put this should
be done only after careful study and the
classification of cases.

THE DEYO-BUSH BILL

A new sterilization bill, known as the DeyoBush Bill has been introduced into the New
York State Legislature at Albany for the
eugenic sterilization of ‘‘men and women
in institutions, afflicted with hereditary
forms of insanity that are recurrent, idiocy,
imbecility, feeble-mindedness or epilepsy.”’
New York had a sterilization statute passed
in 1912. But this was held unconstitutional
in 1918 after approximately fifty patients had
been treated. The new bill is modelled on the
Virginia statute upheld in the U.S. Supreme
Court in the now famous case of Buck v. Bell.

New York State will spend $30,000,000
during the coming fiscal year for mental
hygiene. The cost of such work has tripled
in fifteen years, while the number of patients
has doubled in ten years.

BIRTH-CONTROL LEGISLATION

The National Committee for Federal
Legislation on Birth Control, ably led by
Mrs. Margaret Sanger, has temporarily failed

again in its attempts to liberalize the federal
birth-control statutes. Early in February
the House Judiciary Committee voted 15 to 8
against reporting favourably the Pierce Bill,
which would have legalized the dissemination
of contraceptive information through physicians and medical clinics. This is a conservative ‘‘ doctors-enabling’”’ Bill, and is not in
any way to be confused with much broader,
earlier legislative attempts. Though Mrs.
Sanger is reported to have been discouraged,
she knows that time and social trends are
on her side. Hence she took the decision
stoically. The fight is being continued.

Representative Pierce, a Democrat from
Oregon, referred to the setback as “ only an
incident in a long fight,” adding that the
measure “had gained ground decidedly all
over the country and in Congress too.’”’ Mrs.
Sanger attributed the failure to Catholic.
influences. Those who are inclined to doubt
the power of such pressure need to be
informed that America’s entry into the
World Court was undoubtedly prevented by
the flood of telegrams and letters which
descended upon Senators immediately following a demogogical plea over the radio by the
Detroit priest, Father Coughlin, who always
seems to have some ready panacea for curing
the world’s ills.

* * * a

On February 21st the birth-control movement, led by Mrs. Margaret Sanger, held its
twenty-fifth anniversary with a public dinner
at the Mayflower Hotel in Washington. It
was sponsored by a group of approximately
500 civic leaders representing every State in
the union. An announcement of the dinner
read that ‘‘ With 4,000,000 families on relief
and over 233,000 children born into these
homes during the past year, the need for
making birth-control information accessible
to all classes is obvious.”

BERMUDA BIRTH-CONTROL CLINICS
According to the New York Times, the
Government of Bermuda has decided to
sponsor two free contraceptive clinics as an
experiment for one year. The problem of
NEWS FROM THE U.S.A. 23

over-population has lately occupied Bermuda’s legislators considerably. In the
middle of February Sir Thomas Astley
Cubitt, the Governor, transmitted to the
chairman of the Board of Health a report of
a special committee which has recently been
studying the advisability of birth-control
measures. The result was the plan mentioned
above. Compulsory sterilization, for the time
being at least, is disapproved. If the report
of the committee is accepted by the House
and Assembly, the free contraceptive clinics
will be opened in January 1936.

THE JEWISH TRADITION

For a number of years the Rabbinical
Assembly of America has been giving earnest
thought to the subject of birth-control and
especially to the effect of the present restrictive legislation upon public welfare. A resolution has recently been passed by the
Assembly urging Congress and State Legislatures “‘to permit the dissemination of
contraceptive information by responsible
medical agencies.” The resolutions continue :

We maintain that proper education in contraception and birth-control will not destroy, but
rather enhance, the spiritual values inherent in the
family and will make for the advancement of
human happiness and welfare.

As Rabbis, we are deeply concerned with the
preservation and extension of the human values
inherent in the institution of the monogamous
family. Careful study and observation have convinced us that birth-control is a valuable method
for overcoming some obstacles that prevent the
proper functioning of the family under present
conditions.

Jewish tradition explicitly recognizes the desirability of the use of contraceptives when the health
of the mother or the children is involved. It is
obvious that there is an intimate connection
between the economic status of the family and the
physical and psychic health of its members.

We, therefore, regard it as a legitimate extension
of this principle, completely in consonance with the
spirit of Jewish tradition, to permit the use of
contraceptives, on economic grounds as well,
where the earning capacity of the family makes the
postponement of child bearing or the limitation of
the number of children socially wise and necessary.

AMERICAN BIRTH CONTROL LEAGUE
CONFERENCE

The fourteenth annual meeting of the
American Birth Control League was held in

Chicago on January 16th and 17th.* The
fact that this is the first time an annual
meeting has ever been held outside of New
York City is symbolical of the growing
national strength of the organization. The
League now has eighteen affiliated State
leagues and over 150 clinics, many of them
founded and maintained by State organizations.

There were addresses by Dr. Henry Pratt
Fairchild, Mrs. F. Robertson Jones, the
Reverend Curtis W. Reese and others, as
well as a medical conference for physicians.

It was affirmed at the conference that
approximately a quarter of a million babies
had been born to mothers on Federal relief
in one year. Hence the following resolution
was unanimously adopted :

Whereas, the cost of public relief in the U.S., is
now over 125 million dollars a month; and
whereas, scientific research has shown that families
on relief have about 50 per cent. more children than
similar families not on relief, and whereas, these
children add to the burdens both of their already
over-burdened parents, and of the taxpayers;
therefore be it resolved that the American Birth
Control League unite with the American Eugenics
Society in formulating and securing the adoption
of the most effective plans for providing that, as a
matter of routine, all families on relief shall be
informed where they may best obtain medical
advice in a strictly legal fashion, as to the limitation
of families by methods in accordance with their
religious convictions.

Many of the State leagues presented
interesting reports, but space forbids our
recording more than a few highlights. The
Illinois League, which sponsors six clinics,
and which maintains in addition services in
other institutions, cared for 2,206 patients
during the past year (1933). Of these, 643
were unable to pay for the services received:
Kentucky reports that one-half its Louisville
clinic patients are on the relief rolls. Maine
reported on the difficulties the workers in that
State have encountered in founding a clinic.

* A fuller report of the conference will be published in
the May number of Marriage Hygiene. The report is by
Mrs. Stella Hanau, formerly publications director of
the American Birth Control League, now engaged in
publicity work for Mrs. Sanger with the National
Committee on Federal Legislation for Birth Control.
24

Despite the fact that Pennsylvania has one
of the most reactionary laws on birth-control
of any of the American States, it has, I
believe, the most clinics. At all events, there
are twenty in that State, and 4,000 patients
have been cared for. In little Rhode Island,
which has two clinics, 32 per cent. of the

—<

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

patients are on public relief, and 50 per cent.
are advised free. New Jersey has cared for
Over 9,000 patients in its Newark centre
alone, the State being well organized by
counties. New York State boasts of ten
mothers’ health clinics housed in welfare
centres.

 

THE WISTAR INSTITUTE BIBLIOGRAPHIC SERVICE

AUTHORS’ ABSTRACTS

insure accuracy, advance information, and a saving of time and costs. Since the

of The Wistar Institute Bibliographic

Service in 1917, each contributor to the journals included in this service has supplied an abstract of his own manuscript. This brief

summary is printed and mailed without the delay necessary to the publishing o
receive advance information from those best qualified to give it.

ADVANCE ABSTRACT SHEETS

the complete article. Subscribers to the service thus

bearing ten or more abstracts without bibliographic references, are sent, for the present, to members of the American Association of
Anatomists, to members of the American Society of Zodlogists and to members of the American Institute of Nutrition, without cost,
and sold to others at $3.00 per annum for all abstract sheets issued. This is a convenient means of selecting such articles as may be
desired in reprint form. Prices of reprints are given on each Advance Abstract Sheet.

BIBLIOGRAPHIC SERVICE CARDS

bearing authors’ abstracts with complete bibliographic references for all articles appearing in The Wistar Institute journals and those

co-operating, $5.00 per year.
Abstract cards ma
Each abstract is issued to subscribers before

ABSTRACTS IN BOOK FORM

be obtained from the beginning of the series, June 1, 1917.
e complete paper appears in a journal.

Abstracts with authors’ and analytical subject indices are brought together periodically in book form. Volumes 1 to 7 covering the

abstracts issued from June 1, 1917, to December 31, 1933, $5.00 each

ibera] discount to subscribers to the Bibliographic Service

The Wistar Institute Bibliographic Service covers the publications listed below :

Journal of Morphology
The Journal of Comparative Neurology
The American Journal of Anatomy
The Anatomical Record
The Journal of Experimental Zodlogy
American Journal of Physical Anthropology
EARLY SERIES

Journal of Cellular and Comparative Physiology
The Journal of Nutrition

American Anatomical Memoirs

Biological Survey of the Mount Desert Region
Folio Anatomica Japonica (Tokyo, Japan)

In addition to the above, bibliographic reference cards, without abstracts, may be secured for articles whi have © appeared in the
Journal of Morphology, from vol. 1 (1887) to ‘June I, 1927
The Journal of Comparative Neurology, from vol. 1 (1891) to June 1, 1917 "
The American Journal of Anatomy, vol. 1 (rg01) to June x, 1917 *

The Anatomical Record, val. 1 (1906) to June 1, 1917
The Journal of Experimental
The American Anatomical Memoirs

ted

Zoology, vol. x (1904) to June 1, 1917 ”

These cards, containing full bibliographic references, enable a subscriber to have a) complete record of authors and titles with their

subject headings for all articles which have appeared in the above journals from

eir beginning to current issues.

The price for these Bibliographic Reference Cards is two cents for the first card of each title. Additional cards for each title may

be had at one-half cent per card when ordered at the same

time.

THE WISTAR INSTITUTE OF ANATOMY AND BIOLOGY, Philadelphia, Pa., U.S.A.

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVIII, No. 1.
