HEREDITY AND INSANITY

By F. W. Mott, M.D., F.R.S., F.R.C.P., Phystctan to
Charing Cross Hospital and Pathologist to the London County
Asylums.

THE causes of insanity are intrinsic and extrinsic—Nature
and Nurture. A study of these causes in an individual resolves
itself into an enquiry of what the individual was born with, and
what has happened after birth. We can arrive at a satisfactory
answer to the question of what the individual was born with
only by careful enquiry concerning the pedigrees of the stocks
from which the individual was derived.

As physician to Charing Cross Hospital for the past
twenty-five years I have had the opportunity of studying the
effects of infective diseases, of constitutional diseases, of pauperism, of worry and anxiety, of head injuries, of poisons (for
example lead), and especially of alcohol. I have noticed that
these causes of disease, separately or combined, may affect a vast
number of individuals without making them lunatics. I have
made a special study of the effects of alcohol in my hospital as
compared with my asylum practice, and to this I shall allude
more fully later on. For the past fifteen years I have acted as
pathologist to the London County Asylums, and in this capacity
I have enjoyed an unexampled opportunity of studying the
effects of these extrinsic causes in the production of insanity.

The conclusion I have arrived at from a comparison of my
hospital and asylum experience is, that leaving out of account
those cases which are admitted to the asylum on account of (1)
general paralysis of the insane, which is an acquired disease due
to the late effects of infection by a specific organism, (2) organic
brain disease from old age, arterial disease, softening and tumour
258 F. W. Mott:

formations, and (3) true alcoholic insanity with dementia, the
main cause of the admissions to the asylums is an innate
predisposition to insanity.

I have based this conclusion not only on clinical observations but on a comparative study of the records of 2,900
post-mortem examinations of patients, practically speaking all
sane people, dying in Charing Cross Hospital from various diseases, with the records of 2,000 post-mortems on lunatics dying
in Claybury Asylum. The result of this comparative study is
very interesting as regards the question of alcohol and insanity.
In the hospital cases there were 110 cases of advanced cirrhosis
of the liver, 66 per cent. with dropsy, indicating a very advanced
condition of disease ; in my asylum experience there were relatively
very few cases of cirrhosis of the liver and only one so far advanced
as to produce dropsy, and that was in a celebrated police court
character who was convicted nearly 400 times for drunkenness
before she was found incapable of taking care of herself, yet her
brain showed no apparent change. She had a small hobnailed
liver and marked dropsy, but this is the only case I have seen
in my asylum experience. Again there were thirty cases
diagnosed as alcoholic insanity among the 2,000 deaths, and in
only five of these did the post-mortem examination with microscopic investigation prove that alcohol was the principal cause;
these five were true alcoholic dementia cases. The remaining
cases showed no certain signs of prolonged abuse of alcohol; some
of the cases were general paralysis of the insane, in some there was
a history of previous attacks of insanity, in others there was a
marked hereditary history of insanity. The conclusion I came
to was that a person who could drink intoxicating liquor for ten
to thirty years like the 110 hospital patients and die with
advanced cirrhosis of the liver, and during that time have kept
out of prison, a lunatic asylum or a hospital, must have inherited
something that the patients I saw in the asylum did not inherit,
vtz, a stable mental organisation. In fact, cases of advanced
cirrhosis of the liver which I have had under my personal care,
and they are not a few in number, have been sane; the only
mental defect being that they have become slaves to a vicious
habit. Moreover, I have frequently taken the opportunity of
tah wo

HEREDITY AND INSANITY 259

seeing the children of some of these patients and in a few
instances the grandchildren. I have not infrequently found
that children of an alcoholic parent, especially when the father
is the drunkard, are total abstainers. The children and the
grandchildren of some of these chronic alcoholics I have
found perfectly healthy. Not that I would say that the germ cells
are sequestered in the body, and therefore uninfluenced by the biochemical changes brought about by chronic intoxication, but the
facts seem to show that a man who can drink to this extent has
inherited a stable physical and mental organisation and he
transmits this; although in all probability his children would
have been stronger and better mentally and physically had he
lived a sober life and not abused his constitution. Of course it
might be argued that these men procreated only in early days
before they had become chronic drunkards, and I have notes of
several cases where no children were born after the man took to
drink, but this was far from being always the case. Iam of opinion
that chronic drunkenness in several generations will of itself
lead to degeneracy in the offspring, but it depends largely upon
the characters of the two stocks. The following pedigree of
insanity I attributed to drink, but since I established the system
of enquiry regarding relatives in the London County Asylums, I
found collateral insanity. The insane paternal uncles were
drunkards also.

-®-©-@
of 0 >C)
o® 0 V&

Fie. I.

Key to figures:
. Insane. 6. Brilliant.
. Physically 7. Died young.
unsound. 8. Drunkard.
. Suicidal. 9. Drunkard and 7
. Healthy Insane. Fic. If.
. Nervous Disease. Drink and Insanity in three generations; for dercription see text.

»

 
260 F. W. Mott:

My experience points to the fact (upon which I hope to
have specific data at a future period) that the combination of a
drunken father and a mentally feeble mother is a fertile source
of feeble-mindedness and degeneracy in the offspring. The offspring may in such case derive from the father a weak will power
and low moral sense, and from the mother intellectual deficiency ;
a wastrel, imbecile or criminal is a likely result.

A number of such pedigrees as the one I now show (Fig. III.)
—which is almost of the nature of an experiment—would definitely settle whether alcoholism in several generations may not
canse defects in the vitality and specific energy of the germ

cells.

haGEGS
¥ | ‘ i T
- ‘© @

 

 

Fia. III.

Pedigree of a woman with two husbands. By a temperate first husband a
healthy stock ; by her second drunken husband only one of them sound.

The proposition that alcohol is the principal extrinsic cause
of admissions to asylums I would not dispute, but there are
many facts which show that the high percentage (20-30 per cent.)
given by some authorities and by the Lunacy Commissioners
based upon collected statistics of alcohol as the effective cause of
insanity, is erroneous. Alcohol in the majority of the cases is
HEREDITY AND INSANITY 261

only a coefficient, and an inherited predisposition to insanity in
these cases is the efficient cause. In support of my argument I
would refer (1) to the results of my post-mortem investigations
already alluded to; (2) to the fact that Dr. Bevan Lewis, Dr.
Macdonald and Dr. Sullivan have each independently shown that
there is more insanity, more pauperism, less crime, and less drink
in rural districts than in industrial centres and maritime populations where there is more drunkenness, more crime (60 per cent.
due to drink), less pauperism and less insanity. This is due to
the migration of the mentally fit to the industrial centres,
leaving the poorer stocks behind to propagate. (3) Insanity is
prevalent among such abstemious and clean-living people as
Quakers and Jews. In fact my statistics show a higher percentage of relatives in the Jewish population of Colney Hatch
Asylum than among the Christians. (4) Repeatedly have I
observed that a quantity of alcohol which may be consumed
daily by a man of inherited sound mind without apparent
harm is sufficient to make a potential lunatic anti-social and
certifiable.

For the past two years I have been engaged in studying the
innate factor of insanity. I have attempted to do this by comparing pedigrees of at least three generations obtained from my
hospital patients with those obtained from the friends who visit
the patients in the asylums. I have collected forty pedigrees
at the hospital, most of which were very carefully investigated by
my late house physician, Dr. Rees Thomas. I may say at once
that several patients suffering with neuroses furnished practically
all the insane and epileptic individuals that appear in these
pedigrees. In the forty pedigrees of three generations, maternal
and paternal, there were only eight in which there was insanity,
epilepsy or idiocy and imbecility, and not in one instance were
the parents insane. One in particular is so instructive that I
will show it, for it illustrates the truth of the law that “‘ like tends
to beget like,” not ‘like begets like”; it is not necessarily
insanity that is inherited, but a neuropathic tendency in the
stock which manifests itself in many forms, ¢.g., epilepsy,
asthma, migraine, diabetes, exophthalmic goitre, insanity,
eccentricity, criminality, neurasthenia, hysteria, etc.
262

 

{ ) |
A a . c 7
> € QA DG 2 @ @
| LL gSads om Soda
ae “ve A Q® Q' ed 20 4 s =

Fig. IV

This pedigree is of a hospital patient. P. suffering with neurasthenia and
mental symptoms. It will be observed that nervous disease and insanity affect a
number of members, especially on the maternal side.

Again through the kindness of Dr. Elkins, I have had the
opportunity of obtaining a large number of pedigrees from a
chronic imbecile asylum and comparing these with the pedigrees
obtained at the hospital and the London County Asylums. The
principal facts, however, which I wish to bring before you relate
to statistics obtained by the collective investigation of relatives
who are at present or have been in the London County Asylums.

Statistical Data Relating to Inheritance and Insanity :

Before proceeding to give further details of the inquiry, I wish to express
my indebtedness to the Clerk of the Asylum Committee and the superintendents and assistant medical officers of the asylums for the valuable assistance
they have afforded me in obtaining information.

The 1,834 cases which have been collected are made up from 854
families, as follows:

2 instances of 6 of a family.

3 99 5 99
12 99 4 99
85 " 3 "

752 9% 2 99

Of the 752 instances of two of a family, making in all 1,504 cases, it will be
observed that the vast majority are directly and not collaterally related.
Another fact stands out prominently in an analysis of the 752 instances of
two of a family, and that is, the much greater incidence of transmission
from parents to offspring through the female side, as the following figures
show:
HEREDITY AND INSANITY 263

Parental Heredity

 

Instances Males Females
Father and son 44 88 —
Mother and son 51 51 51
Father and daughter 58 58 58
Mother and daughter 104 —_ 208
257 197 317

 

It will be observed that the mother transmits to the offspring in the
proportion of 60°7 per cent., the father 39°3 per cent. This is not accounted
for wholly by the fact that there are more females in the asylums insane
than males, for the ratio of females to males in the asylums is rather less
than 11 tog. Sir William Gowers, in his statistics regarding insanity in the
parents and epilepsy in the offspring, observed that in cases with parental
insanity, the father was insane in 37 per cent., and the mother in 63 per
cent. This, he says, is partly due to the fact that inheritance is more
frequently from the mother’s side by 17 per cent., and that the females are in
excess by 18 percent. It will be observed that these figures of mine closely
correspond with his on the transmission of insanity from mother and father
to offspring.

Co-fraternal Heredity in Two of a Family

 

 

Instances Males Females
Two sisters 130 — 260
Two brothers 87 174 —
Brother and sister 136 136 136
353 310 396

The above table shows when pairs of offspring of the two sexes are
affected, the proportion of males to females is 43°9 per cent. to 56'1 per cent.,
a difference of 12°2 per cent., but the percentage in which the mother
transmits insanity to the offspring as compared with the father is as 67°7
per cent. to 39°3 per cent., a difference of 26°4 per cent., and this increase
264 7 FF. W. Mott:

of 14°2 per cent. is mainly due to the fact that she transmits to the
daughter nearly twice as often as the father does. It may well be
asked whether this may not partly be due to the fact that the daughter
at the time of life when insanity is manifested, is more at home than
the son, and therefore has more to do with her insane mother. It
may, however, be explained by the fact that the insane tendency is
transmitted to offspring equally but the female sex is more unstable
mentally and the conditions of that sex are more likely to lead to a potential
insanity forming an active insanity. |

Grandparents’ Heredity

Female with insane grandfather ee 1 instance.
Male » oo” - _ I»
Females with insane grandmother ei 6 instances.
Males 99 9 33 eee 5 9

This is undoubtedly very much below the proper ratio; it is due to the
fact that there is far more difficulty in obtaining records. The hereditary
transmission from females, however, markedly preponderates.

Collateral Insanity

Instances Instances
Female with uncle ..- 12 Male with uncle wwe «=I
Female with aunt os 33 Male with aunt wo. «IL
45 22

There is here a more marked preponderance of females affected than
males than in direct heredity, but the numbers are too few to draw any very
decided conclusions, except the fact that the females with aunt affected are
as numerous as all the rest combined.

The proportion of collateral relatives discovered in the London County
Asylums is comparatively small for several reasons; the information is not
so readily obtainable, and they are less likely to come into the same asylum
as their residence is not nearly so likely to be in the same district as that of
parent and offspring.

I have analysed the above figures, only taking into account
the near blood relations (parents and offspring, brothers, sisters,
or brothers and sisters), where two or more representatives of the
family ave now resident in the London County Asylums. The
following figures show that of an average insane population of
approximately 20,000, 717 cases are thus related, representing
342 families. We may ask the question, should we find in
20,000 adults, living in the County of London, which some
random non-inheritable cause had collected together, this
proportion of direct relationship? I think not.
HEREDITY AND INSANITY 265

The figures to my mind are in a broad way eloquent in
favour of the importance of heredity asa cause of insanity, and
the numbers being great, the data indisputable facts (independent
of the personal equation of the enquirer), satisfactory statistics
can be made and inferences drawn in regard to certain points
relating to the hereditary aspects of mental disease.

Analysis of Instances where Two of a Family (near Blood Relations) are now
Resident in the London County Asylums:

Father and son ... ‘ine 34 cases.
Father and daughter eee 58 yy
Mother and son -~ 44 55
Mother and daughter eee 102 5;
Two sisters wa aes 144 4,
Two brothers ... wei 80__—C,,
Brother and sister oom 160

making a total of 622 cases, representing 311 families. In addition to the above there are ninety-five cases, in which three (and
in two instances four) members of the same family ave now insane
residents in the London County Asylums—thirty-one families.
Thus the grand total is 717 cases, representing 342 families.

Racial Inheritance

It has always struck me that the Jews were, on account of
their neurotic temperament, more liable to insanity than
Christians. The following statistics, kindly obtained for me by
Dr. Seward, the Medical Superintendent of Colney Hatch
Asylum, seem to support this inference. A comparison is made
between the number of relatives among the total Jewish and
total Christian population of this asylum.

The number of cards belonging to the Jews is eighty; the
number belonging to non-Jewish inmates is 254. The total
number of inmates is 2,450, and of these 459 are Jews, so that
less than one-fifth of the total population is Jewish. A little
more than one-fourth of the relative cards belong to Jews, so
that the incidence of ascertained relationship among the Jewish
inmates is considerably more than among the non-Jewish. No
doubt the temperament of the Jews renders them as a race more
liable to the neuropathic tendency, but the greater incidence of
ascertained relationship among the Jews is partly due to the
266 F. W. Mott:

following acts: They are more often visited by their friends ;
they have more pride of family, and, as a rule, are more intelligent and anxious to afford information. But to counterbalance
this it must be remembered that the greater number of these
Jews are aliens who have come from Russia and know nothing
about their relatives who may be there or who have emigrated
to the United States. Probably, therefore, this rather underestimates than over-estimates the proportion of Jews with insane
relatives as compared with Christians.

Tendency to Inheritance of the same Type of Insanity

Statistics are often distrusted when an enquirer sets out to find
something. I was, therefore, fortunate in having the co-operation of such
an unbiassed statistician, skilled in biometrics, like Mr. Edgar Schuster.
The cards were all sent to him for an independent and unbiassed investigation. His valuable report is published in the annual report of the Asylums
Committee. But I will summarise his resultsin great part in his own words:

There were 319 pairs of parents and children; of these, the children in
69 cases suffered from periodic insanity. Of the 69 so afflicted, 28, or 40°6
per cent., had parents similarly affected, while in 59°4 per cent. the nature of
the parents’ disease was different. Of the remaining 250 children, only 41,
or 16°4 per cent., had parents suffering from periodic insanity. Bratz,
working at Wuhlgarten Asylum, Berlin, on similar lines, has obtained
similar results, but as yet has not published any statistics. He speaks of
this similarity of insane inheritance as a Vererbung’s krets.

There was even greater similarity of insane inheritance between brother
and brother, between sister and sister, or between brother and sister when
suffering from this form of insanity than between father and mother and son
and daughter. Thus there were 200 pairs in which the first brother or
sister was periodically insane, and in 92, or 46 per cent., of these pairs the
second member also suffered with manic-depressive insanity, while in the
remaining 108, or 54 per cent., the two members differed in the nature of
their disease.

Where the first brother and sister suffered from some other form of
insanity, in only 13°8 per cent., as compared with 46 per cent., was the other
member afflicted with periodic insanity, while in 86:2 per cent. were other
forms associated together. This indicates similar cofraternal inheritance
more than three times as frequent in recurrent insanity as in other forms.
Allowing that the term “recurrent” may have been used sometimes for a
second attack of mania or melancholia which was not truly a manicdepressive insanity—still it would not account for this vast difference when
dealing with such a number of cases.
HEREDITY AND INSANITY 267

Delusional Insanity.—Although the numbers dealt with are many fewer,
yet Mr. Schuster’s statistics show that the tendency of this disease to run in
families is more strongly marked than between parents and offspring. The
tables he gives show that delusional insanity occurs with almost four times
as great a frequency (33°3 per cent. instead of g per cent.) than among the
insane parents of other insane people, while among the brothers and sisters
the frequency is just six times as great (43°2 per cent. instead of 7:2 per
cent.). There is a decided tendency for the brothers and sisters of imbeciles
to be also imbecile.

In dementia praecox there is a strong correlation between members of
the same confraternity (vide fig. vii.) ; seeing, however, that quite 80 per cent.
of the cases of this form of insanity occur before the age of 25, it is not surprising to find Schuster “had no available material for statistics on parents
and offspring.” Perhaps the term “ insanity of adolescence ” is a better one
than “dementia praecox.” The report also shows a strong correlation
between brothers and sisters when affected with chronic mania or
melancholia, but the numbers are perhaps too small to draw any very
definite conclusions.

With regard to general paralysis, he found no indication of this disease
running in families. The brothers and sisters of general paralytics seem no
more likely than anybody else to be themselves general paralytics, and the
same may be said about their children. Of the very few cases of juvenile
general paralysis recorded, only one is the son of a general paralytic. ‘Seeing
that general paralysis is now regarded as a late effect of a constitutional
disease caused by a specific contagion this is not surprising.

The second problem enunciated was, “Is there any tendency for
members of the same family (as in some hereditary nérvous diseases) to
become insane at similar periods of their lives?” Seeing that adolescence
is the period in which stress is likely to affect the individual with an insane
inheritance, it is not surprising that Schuster in his report states that ‘a
strong tendency exists for brothers and sisters of the same family to become
insane at similar periods in their lives, and only a very slight one between
parents and children.” I shall presently show what an important fact this
is that in dementia praecox there are no relationships between parents and
offspring.

In the Huxley lecture which I gave a short time ago I referred to the fact that in the pedigrees I had studied there was a
general tendency for insanity not to proceed beyond three
generations. “As a rule there is either a regression to the
normal type or the stock dies out. Not infrequently the stock
dies out by the inborn tendency to insanity manifesting itself in
the form of congenital imbecility or the insanity of adolescence.

Vide Figs. V., VI., VII.) Such patients are especially prone to
268 F. W. Mott:

 

Fic. V.

Illustrating a marriage of first cousins, who were sane but had presumably
hereditary taint. The effect of consanguinity is shown by two of the three
offspring becoming affected early in life with epilepsy, and the other with imbecility,
the result being termination of that stock, as none of them were married. The
pedigree also shows the effect of marrying into a healthy stock (fig. VI.), whereby
the hereditary tendency in generations has disappeared.

 

Fic. VI.

A large healthy stock, showing fertility and longevity, with mental and physical
soundness of constitution. There is one instance of acute insanity which occurred
as the result of an emotional shock at the age of 20, but this individual became a
most prosperous man, and lived to the age of 88. This pedigree also shows th

connection with Fig V.
HEREDITY AND INSANITY 269

 

 

@? (
~” . \ Ps
sr en ap sie aoe r——
l | = |
OOOSeBQ C y( Y (
« s I NY =a - l :
CH Ss TY )
ON | \ AQ ®
enn ite i .
tp | f F l. | I J
OOQR}MRSOQECOLH OC @
Es | i _—* |
‘ “Ne "4 ol vm?
N. _
_
aes
QS SC 8 € @ 6
, TT. A ‘
SSE SRS as
Fic. VII.

_ Pedigree showing maternal and paternal hereditary taint, the inborn tendency
to insanity manifesting itself in the form of insanity of adolescence in their offspring.

die of tuberculosis; thus rotten twigs are continually breaking
off the tree of life.”’

Morel (Des Caractéres de l Heredité dans les Maladtes nerveuses,
Archives générales de Med., 1859), pointed out that progressive
uninterrupted transmission leads finally to the special degeneration forms, to imbecility and idiocy, and with the diminished
capability of propagation of individuals of the latter kind the
stock gradually becomes extinct. (Figs. VIII. and IX.) Mr.

. ©
/

| Yl. @ @ SB oO

a J A : e 1 .
“7 y \ < all GZ
f I pI \ A - J fH ah
3) .¢ /
00.9 C ~ / , #

>.

}
[
i ,
.
J
J
an
e
y,

  

 

b aeaee
WO O oD QO @ &
P fonity 2 family
Fie. VIII. Fig. IX.

This pedigree shows the end of a degenerate Two generations of
stock. A woman of an insane stock marries twice ; drunken mothers and the
by her first husband there is one child living; by stock of a great man is
her second husband, presumably syphilitic, there ended,

are two born dead and two others in the asylum,
one being a juvenile paralytic.
270 F. W. Mott:

Nettleship observed what I had said, and he has sent me an
interesting paper of his own on heredity; in this he points out
that eye diseases and diabetes when transmitted occur at am
earlier age in each successive generation; this fact had been
observed by others and termed anticipation; thus owing to an
interference with sexual selection or the disease killing off the
patient before the age of procreation, the tainted stock tends to
die out, and therefore it is not often that diabetes (Fig. X.), or
these eye diseases (glaucoma, Fig. XI., senile and presenile

ij [Asltd »& *
APROPPNQOOQOO L& I .@ =
Ln +e)
r SEE: | 1:0 @ 0 40
n 0 ,08¢ S68 z «6 Cie
ed . ‘ . 1 x r tw
mw Oo YO gC e ae =
Fic. X. Fic. XI.
; Showing heredity in diabetes. The * anticipa- Showing heredity in
tion " is shown by the age numbers (Nettleship). glaucoma. The “ antici
pation ’’ is shown by the
age numbers (Nettleship).

cataract, for example), are transmitted beyond three generations. I show two pedigrees, copied from Mr. Nettleship’s most
interesting paper, ‘‘ Some points in Relation to the Heredity of
Disease.” (St. Thomas’ Hospital Gazettes, March, IgIo.)
Moreover, he remarks: “ Anticipation or ante-dating of
onset or of completion, in a family disease might be taken to show
the transmission of an acquired character. But it may be explained as well or better by assuming that certain defects, taints
or vices of the system, say of the blood, are not only hereditary
in the true or germinal sense, but able to produce toxic agents in
the embryo which have an evil influence on all its cells, and thus
so lower their power of resistance that the innate hereditary
factor has freer play and is likely to manifest itself earlier,
There may also be toxic agents in the embryo that have no
relation to the hereditary vice, but yet may, and probably do, act
HEREDITY AND INSANITY 271

in a similar manner as excitant of the hereditary disease.”
Before giving the striking results I have obtained, hitherto
unpublished, I should like to say that I think this “‘ anticipation”
orante-dating does lend some support tothe theory of transmission
of acquired characters. (Figs. XII., XIII., XIV.)

‘OQ

 

\
O 8 0:@ 6
=~ A ON ae
QOQGOeese
ye
Cnce wecacrny inaratee
Fig. XII.

Marriage of first cousins ; two living offspring insane; stock tends to revert to
mormal in case of sons, dies out in case of daughter (manic-depressive insanity—
alcoholic), whose only child developed dementia praecox at 20; showing ‘‘ anticipation”’ and increased depth of mental degeneracy.

@
| i WIFE
g
| | ONE 0F22.,ALLDIED Young NO INSANTTY IN Famicy: |

(J \ Tusercurosis
SU
a See

ZEWIFE

 

  

CONGENITAL

Fic. XIII.

Four generations of insanity, by first (tuberculous) wife both children insane;
‘anticipation '’ and increased depth of mental degeneracy ; by second healthy wife

four children, one suffered with temporary nervous breakdown at 22, recovered after
one year.
272 F. W. Mott:

 

 

   

 

 

a ~
OQ CO
arg a
“7
i
' a ae ea oo .
| i i hie |
Lé e a a J
¢ 6 OQ CO C) O ry
mi oir :
™“— ScHiprey/ 86
Pe €" Covsims i,
a i
“~
La os Sx Husaanp
Sl, sy ( ) 3b > or O
r (S 4™ HuspaND =
———T — “—T eoneetenee } Le aa
Fan A r 7 if re i 1
\ , Re } ©) () i i
+ DEMENTIA Praccox
Fic. XIV.

Three generations of insanity, tendency in one instance to revert to normal.
In the offspring ‘‘ anticipation "’ and increased depth of mental degeneracy.

I will now refer to some preliminary results of an enquiry
relating to the age at the time of first attack of insanity in the
parent and offspring. I have so far investigated 506 cases made
up of parents with their offspriny who are now or have been in
the London County Asylums, but this does not complete the

numbers at my disposal. These afforded :
103 instances! of mother and daughter insane.

57 99 99 99 99 son 9
67 » » father ,, daughter ,,
49 ” 9 99 » son ”

eS

Total 276 ” »» parent and offspring »

I found that insanity in the parents coincided with or
preceded the birth of the insane offspring in the following

percentages.
24 instances of mothers and daughters 23°3 per cen t.
7 oo» ” ” » sons 126 5
8 ” » fathers ,, daughters 12°0 4 ” ” ” » SONS 8°1 ”

The relatively high percentage in instances of mother and
daughter is striking. This may be due to the first attack of
insanity in the mother being associated with the puerperal state,
it also accords with the fact that there are nearly twice as many
instances of mother and daughter as mother and son. Doubtless
the much greater incidence of daughters being affected than sons
is due to several causes: 1. Sons are more likely to leave their

1 A case=r1 patient, and instance=two patients, one parent, one offspring.
HEREDITY AND INSANITY 273

homes, and go out of the County of London. 2. The female is
potentially more unstable mentally; social conditions impose
restrictions on the satisfaction of the instinct of procreation and
maternity, in which are rooted the highest moral virtues and
altruistic sentiments.

PRELIMINARY STATISTICS RELATING To ANTICIPATION

The offspring was 25 years of age, or under, at the time of
the first attack in the following percentages :

55 instances of mother and daughter 53°4 per cent.

24 39 9 ” 9 son 42°1 9
33 ” » father ,, daughter 49°2 »
25 9 99 +} 99 son §r°o 39

It will thus be observed that there is a great tendency for
the offspring, should it not revert to the normal, to become insane
before or at the period of adolescence, for the above figures show
that on an average in about 50 per cent. of the instances of parent
and offspring, the offspring became insane at or before the age
of 25.

I was struck with the frequency with which the mother
whose first attack occurred about the climacteric period was
associated with an offspring (especially with a daughter) whose
first attack came on in adolescence, and on investigation I
found that this combination occurred in 28 per cent. of the
instances of insane mother and daughter, and 10°5 per cent. of
the instances of insane mother and son. I further investigated
the age on first attack in the remaining parents and offspring ;
these inquiries I am extending, and will publish in full at a later
date, but the figures I have before me at the present enable me
to state briefly that “anticipation” or ‘‘ante-dating” almost
invariably occurs. Speaking generally the offspring is affected
at a much earlier age than the parent—on an average approximately to half the age of the parent. In some instances the ages
on first attack of the parents and offspring were about the same,
especially in those cases where the first attack in the mother and
the daughter was associated with the puerperal state, but in only
one instance was the offspring affected at a much later period of
life than the parent, and in this case the offspring suffered with
general paralysis, an acquired disease.
274 F. W. Mott:

IE have not had the opportunity of seeing on a large scale
the ante-dating to imbecility, because congenital imbeciles
are sent to the Asylums of the Metropolitan Asylums Board,
but the pedigrees I have received from Dr. Elkins show this
fact; also these pedigrees show that there is no lack of fertility
in the stocks whence imbeciles and idiots are derived, but that
fortunately with this high fertility there is a high mortality from
tuberculosis and other diseases which would destroy these mental
defectives even to a greater extent if we were not solicitous
of keeping them alive. We Eugenists say, let these rotten twigs
drop off the tree of life, the sooner the better ; we even go further
and suggest that the State should prevent dry and cankered
branches from budding forth with new branches and spoiling the
tree by sapping its life and infecting the healthy branches and
stem. How can it be done in these days? The time ts
apparently not ripe for social surgery.

I think I have demonstrated the fact that Nature is doing
its best by ‘‘ anticipation.”” Now it appears to me that the most
dangerous breeders of the unfit are not the insane, because they
are recognised and we have the opportunity by retaining them in
asylums of denying them the social privileges required for procreation,—it is the higher grade imbecile with weak intellect and
weaker moral sense, the offspring of insane, criminal, drunken,
and feeble-minded parents, as distinguished from the congenital
obviously low grade imbecile, whose procreation should be
limited. At present the defective schools impart sufficient education to this type of degenerate to make their departure from
the ordinary standard less obvious and thus render it possible
for them to start in life in menial occupations, ¢g., as van boys
or in some form of work requiring little or no intelligence; they
frequently marry and reproduce their like ; being unable to obtain
a living this class of individual swells the ranks of the unemployed because they are unemployable, and they and their
offspring are maintained at the expense of the State in the
prisons, infirmaries, and asylums. These defectives should in
my judgment be notified like an infective disease is, and if found
unfit for civil rights and privileges, segregated in childhood or
adolescence.
HEREDITY AND INSANITY 275
Pedigrees tllustrating Heredity and Insanity

The causes of insanity are seldom simple; they are in varied degrees
inborn tendencies combined with some form of mental or bodily stress. I
use the word “stress” in its widest sense as implying a strain on the
important organs and functions of the body. But it is not within the
province of this lecture to deal with these causes of insanity, for my object is
to dwell upon the elucidation of what were probably the inborn tendencies.
The construction of a pedigree will often answer the question, Did the
patient come from a good stock on both sides, or was there physical or
mental defect, or both, on maternal or paternal or on both sides? The fact
that a cousin was insane, or even several members of a large stock, does
not show a bad heredity ; often, indeed, with several insane members there
will be found men of genius and men and women of great civic worth
(Fig. XV.). A bad stock is where we find degeneracy, insanity, drunkenness,

 

Fic. XV.

This pedigree shows a marriage of first cousins. The son possessed brilliant
talents, likewise a grandson, but of two other grandsons, one was insane, another a
suicide, The fourth generation are all sound.

and criminality in the pedigree, or a general low standard, mental and
physical, in both stem and branches of the family tree.

A study of pedigrees teaches us the truth of the conclusions
of Maudsley (Pathology of the Mind). First, that a person does not
inherit insanity, but a tendency or predisposition ; and secondly,
that the tendency is inherited from the stock. Nor need the
unsound strain in the stock show itself in any form of actual
insanity; it may appear in (1) an extreme exaggeration of the
nervous temperament which manifests itself in hysteria, neuras276 F. W. Mott:

thenia, epilepsy, migraine and insanity, and (2) the disorder may
manifest itself by evil desires, eccentricities, and perversions of
every kind, the intelligience being well preserved or even in some
notable cases of an extraordinary and brilliant character, the
taint showing itself by anti-social conduct tolerated by society
for long periods of time; (3) the feeble-minded, in which there
may be not only mental deficiency but a low moral sense ; these
are the ordinary imbecile type of the defective schools, taken
as a class one of the most dangerous and useless of all; (4)
the idiot and lowest grade imbecile; these individuals for
OD -—) =
7 x « \. J
4. wll ‘
OO 5S ote |
a a ail ¢ \ ‘ . ‘ t. (
A “Nn.  @ OF @O0€
Cy O-O-O " |
Ny g y¥ ~* ; La ' pi
> i \
moot
E 0) ( \ 7% i

ry | ai t —
La \ Le | 5 i ia A
SQEQQCAQ CAG

C60 TT TTQTES

Fie. XVI.

This pedigree of four generations is interesting on account of its completeness,
and the large number of members of the stock on the maternal side which are
affected with insanity, nervous diseases, and suicide; but there is not a single
alcoholic on either the paternal or maternal side. The paternal stock is not free
from taint, but the three cases of insanity and the suicide of the fourth generation,
making up nearly half the living members, have for their parents a healthy father
and mother with nervous disease. It shows how necessary it is to study the
maternal and paternal pedigrees in coming to any just conclusion about hereditary
transmission.

tunately often have rudimentary genital organs and are usually
physically unable to reproduce their species.

The insane predisposition may disappear by marriage into
perfectly healthy stocks (Figs. V. and VI.), but of course there is
a danger of infecting a good stock with a bad. Still some of the
most brilliant men in arts, science and literature have either
been insane themselves or have come from parents who were
HEREDITY AND INSANITY 277

insane. Men who have made the world’s history have been
epileptics, and in our own times we have reason to thank a
mad king for the discovery of the musical genius of Wagner
and for having made Munich the Mecca of musicians. It is true,
therefore, that ‘‘ Great genius and madness are often close akin,”
but it is also true, as Maudsley affirms, that often ‘‘The genius
which is thus closely allied to insanity is of an inferior order—
intense, narrow, hysterical, explosive, not calm, large, whole, and
constructive. Between veritable madmen who exhibit fitful
flashes of genius—madness streaked with genius—and persons of
real genius who display eccentricities of thought, feeling and
conduct that speak of madness—there are a number and variety of
persons who are clever but flighty, talented but unstable, intense
but narrow, earnest but fanatical, all sorts of persons, who,
plunging into new movements, good or bad, and pursuing them
with intemperate, perhaps distempered zeal, lack the just
balance of the faculties, the calm equilibrium of a stable mental
organisation, the true perception or mean of nature which is the
highest sanity.” Maudsley further asks:

‘‘ What comparison is possible between Chateaubriand and
Shakespeare, between Jean Jaques Rousseau and Goethe ?”’

‘‘ Mental deformities and obliquities of mind falling short of
actual insanity mostly lack as a basis of their being, a good sound
animality to hold in salutary check the vagaries of an oversensitive and unstable nervous system, a wholesome solidarity of
body and mind, and they are prone to develope pathologically
into positive insanity in the individual or in the next generation.”

Consanguinity in Relation to Insanity

Consanguinity does not appear to produce insanity or nervous disease
provided both stocks are free from taint; but if there is insanity or epilepsy
{not necessarily in the first ascendants, but even in the collaterals), then
intermarriage of first cousins from these two stocks with collateral insanity
will tend to insanity, in some cases very marked, in the offspring of the two
sane related parents (Figs. V., XII. and XV.). .

Suicide and Insanity

I have observed in many of these pedigrees, but have not as
yet compiled precise data, that recurrent or manic-depressive
278 F. W. Mott:

insanity in a stock is frequently associated with suicide in the
members so affected, and even in others not affected. The
tendency to suicide often runs in families, and some remarkable pedigrees have been published in which members of
families in successive generations have taken their lives in a particular way, and sometimes even at a particular age; there is a
suicidal obsession. Morel mentions an instance where seven
brothers destroyed themselves, though in good positions and
suffering no misfortune. Mudge, in the first number of the Mendel
Journal, has published a remarkable pedigree of two families that
were united by marriage. In one the members committed suicide
by drowning, the other by shooting. I would explain this by imitative suggestion acting on a neuropathic stock. A member of a
family of four generations of suicides, of which two were inmates
of London County Asylums—namely, Colney Hatch and Cane
Hill—and the pedigree of which I will now show you (Fig. XVII),

   
  

Admitted to Cane Hill for
attempted suicide by poison
Patient [V
An er attempted
suicide in 1874 by cutting Mother Lil Father sane
her left arm: was taken
to Colney Hatch, where
she still remains
Committed ae Mother dicd irsmenm
by cutting his le
arm and dying Father Il
from hemorrhage
Four children (three mules
and one femile)- all con- Mother died
fined in lunatic asylums insane ~~
Father I Mother committed suicide: cut her
left arm and died from hemorrhuge
Fie. XVII.

affords a striking example of suicide and insanity in successive
generations. It will be observed that in three successive
generations suicide was attempted or committed by cutting the
left arm.
HEREDITY AND INSANITY 279

Another interesting case of a suicidal family in which a
member developed impulsive obsessions of suicide and automutilation occurred at Cane Hill Asylum and was publishedjby Dr.
Devine, accompanied by interesting observations upon this sub
Q 9
= seieeeeenniy
Pm > @ / af t ls
3 ®) OQ ®

a

 

Fie. XVIII.

The patient P., was a murderer, a brother committed suicide, and two sisters
were insane ; although there was a suicide on the maternal side the insane tendency
eame mainly from the father’s stock.

ject. The development of the obsessions in the patient dated
from the aunt’s suicide, which is a proof that suggestion was the
cause, acting in conjunction with insane inheritance.

Conclustons

1. Hereditary predisposition is the most important factor
in the production of insanity, imbecility and epilepsy. It is the
tendency to nervous and mental disease, generally speaking, which
is inherited. This may be termed the neuropathic taint.

2. Education, sanitation and the rest, as Bateman has
stated, are only the giving or withholding of opportunity for
good or ill.

3. Alcohol is a powerful coefficient, but not of itself the
main cause in the production of insanity, except in the rather
infrequent cases of alcoholic dementia.

4. Certain types of insanity may be transmitted with
greater frequency than others. This has been termed similar
heredity. The types are: Periodic insanity (also termed manic280 F. W. Mott:

depressive), delusional insanity and epilepsy. The general rule,
however, is for a different type to appear.

5. Mothers transmit insanity and epilepsy with much
greater frequency than fathers, and the transmission is especially to the daughters.

6. Anticipation or antedating is the rule, whereby the
offspring suffers at a much earlier age than the parent; more
than one half of the insane offspring of insane parents have their
first attack in the period of adolescence. This may take an
incurable form of dementia in a large number of cases; in others
it is usually mania, melancholia or periodic insanity and not
infrequently epilepsy with or without imbecility. Rarely does
the parent become insane before the offspring. This is a strong
argument of hereditary transmission, possibly hereditary transmission of an acquired character.

7. Regression tothe normal average may be (1) by marriage
into sound stocks, or (2) by anticipation or antedating leading
to congenital or adolescent mental disease terminating the
perpetuation of the unsound elements of the stock.

8. High grade imbeciles who are not at present in any way
checked in procreating owing to social conditions interfering
with the survival of the fittest, together with chronic drunkards,
neurasthenics and neuropaths are continually reinforcing and
providing fresh tainted stocks.

Mr. E. J. Lidbetter’s carefully collected pedigrees of pauper
families are of great interest, and show that in many instances not
only do the descendants of the insane poor become inmates of
our asylums, but also the remainder who are not deemed antisocial help to swell the large number of paupers that fill our
workhouses and infirmaries. The insane instances he has investigated are well known to me, and so far the pedigrees he has
obtained, although not numerous enough to base conclusions
thereon, tend to support my opinion that the recurrent types of
insanity during lucid intervals breed a stock of potential lunatics
and paupers.

It is time that we had notification of the feeble-minded and
a State Register of Lunatics as advocated by that great authority
on heredity—Professor Karl Pearson. We ought to assist
HEREDITY AND INSANITY 281

nature in its endeavours to return to the normal average, and we
should remember the warning of Prof. Pearson: ‘‘ Bear in mind
that one-quarter only of the married people of this country—say
a sixth to one-eighth of the adult population—produce 50 per
cent. of the next generation. You will then see how essential it
is for the maintenance of a physically and mentally fit race, that
this one-sixth to one-eighth of the population should be drawn
from the best and not the worst stocks. There has been scarcely
any check on the multiplication of inferior stock; only in the
middle ranks among the more substantial workers with the hand
and the head have men regarded the number of their offspring,
and made success in life’s struggle to some extent a condition of
their multiplication.”

I cannot go quite so far as Prof. Pearson when he says that
“‘the care of the insane is idle in the sense that their offspring
will no longer be of tainted stock.”” Nature is always striving to
go back to the normal average and only relatively few of a stock
are insane. A stock with a streak of insanity when combined
with genius is not bad, and the same may be applied toa nation;
but we only want a streak of genius and insanity, the great body
of the nation should be of good normal average, for I believe that
nation will possess the greatest potential virility in the struggle
for existence that can breed from the greatest number of men
and women with good bodily health and sound minds who possess
a large measure of the three attributes of civic worth, vsz., courage,
honesty, and common sense.
