THE DYSGENIC EFFECTS OF VENEREAL
DISEASES.

In the October number of last year of this REVIEW, a short
account was given of the part which the Eugenics Education
Society had played in assisting in the campaign against venereal
disease, and this may have led some of our readers to enquire
as to the extent to which these diseases do in fact produce
dysgenic effects. Before discussing this subject, it may be as
well to point out that some reforms, though they would unquestionably benefit the individuals composing our own generation,
would nevertheless injuriously affect ‘‘ the racial qualities of
future generations,’’ and would therefore not be eugenic in their
tendencies. There may, in fact, in some cases be a conflict
between those who are demanding reforms without reference to
eugenic considerations and those who are striving solely for
eugenic benefits. As regards venereal diseases, however, no
such conflict can arise; for the immediate evils which they produce are immense and unquestioned, whilst as to the future, no
one, not even a lunatic, has yet been found to suggest that our
descendants in the distant future will benefit by the harm and
suffering thus caused to-day. We have no need to seek for
eugenic arguments in order to strengthen us in our determination to combat the spread of venereal diseases with our utmost
vigour ; and we should, moreover, always bear in mind that, of
all the many sources of error in the past, there have been none
more fruitful than the search for arguments in order to further
a predetermined policy.

We must, therefore, enquire into the eugenic consequences
of venereal diseases without any ulterior motives in our minds.
Now it is in the first place to be noted that whether or not we
should include certain evil results of venereal diseases within
the scope of an enquiry having reference solely to their eugenic
results, will depend on the meaning which we choose to attach
to the words we use, and consequently that we may be embarking in such an enquiry on a controversy which is to a consider118 EUGENICS REVIEW.

able extent verbal or academic in its character. If the phrase
“the racial qualities of future generations ”’ is held to cover the
harmful results in the next generation of congenital syphilis,
then the stamping out of the cause of these evils, namely,
acquired syphilis in this generation, is ex hypothesi a eugenic
problem of the highest importance. Both for practical and
sentimental reasons, many of us would, however, prefer to make
the word “‘ eugenics ’’ cover no more than that particular science
or practice which Sir Francis Galton had in his mind when he
coined that term; and no careful student of his works can doubt
for a moment that what he was striving to attain was the legitimate utilisation of all those forces, whatever they may be, which
have been the cause in the past of evolutionary progress in the
animal world. Every individual is the result of the action of
his surroundings during his life on a certain inborn
foundation with which he was originally endowed; this
inherent basis, which was transmitted to him from _ his
remote simian ancestry by natural inheritance through
countless generations, was subject to slow progressive
changes in one direction or another as the generations
succeeded each other; and it was these slow changes
which Galton had in his mind when he spoke of evolution.
Hence in order to decide as to the purely ‘‘ eugenic’”’ effects of
venereal diseases in the Galtonian meaning of that word, we
must leave out of account all the transient and acquired effects
of these diseases, and merely have regard to any progressive
changes in the inborn character of the people which may be
due to this scourge. Adopting this view of the meaning which
should be attached to the word “‘ eugenics,’’ then it should be
frankly admitted that differences of opinion do exist as to the
eugenic effects of venereal diseases ; though they are not of such
a nature as in the slightest degree to shake our common determination to attack this grave national evil with all our forces.
Though it is now generally admitted that selection has been
the most potent factor in evolution, yet we must never overlook
the possible effects of other factors, amongst which must be
included those many influences which have been described as
racial poisons. There are many authorities, whose opinions
THE DYSGENIC EFFECTS OF VENEREAL DISEASES. 11g

are worthy of respect, who believe that the venereally diseased
parent not only produces terribly damaged offspring, but also
passes on by means of natural inheritance a stream of life in a
damaged condition to his descendants for an indefinite number
of generations, or in other words, that venereal disease is a
racial poison of the worst type. Now as to syphilis, according
to the Report of the Royal Commission, more than 10 per cent.
of the inhabitants of our great towns suffer from this disease
either in its acquired or congenital form; and if this disease is
acting as a racial poison, it is therefore a poison which is now
being widely spread throughout the nation. If one in ten of all
our ancestry had in truth suffered from this disease, then
(assuming no correlation) not more than about one in seventy of
the individuals composing this generation could claim not to
have had a syphilitic ancestor in the course of the last five
generations, a ratio which would increase rapidly as the more
remote ancestry were taken into consideration. The fact that
syphilis both kills and sterilises, however, makes this calculation
afford a greatly exaggerated view of the frequency of this ancestral taint; and those who believe that venereal diseases may injuriously affect the inborn qualities of all the descendants of the
diseased for an indefinite number of generations must hold that
these lethal and sterilising effects are a blessing in disguise on
account of their influence in stamping out such harmful hereditary effects. The point to which attention is here drawn is, however, that since syphilis seldom kills and often does not sterilise,
it follows that if the taint of this disease does not die out in time,
it has already spread through practically the whole nation, and
that we are here face to face with a eugenic problem of enormous
but unknown dimensions.

Since it is only the utterly ignorant who doubt the disastrous
effects of venereal diseases, and especially of syphilis, on the
children of the diseased, it becomes therefore a matter of considerable eugenic importance to enquire whether the congenitally
diseased syphilitic parent does also pass his troubles to the
third and following generations. According to the Report of
the Royal Commission, few such ‘‘ instances have been
recorded ; but there is reason to believe that fuller investigation
120 EUGENICS REVIEW.

might prove that the third generation may not invariably escape
from congenital taint’’ (Report, p. 30); a singularly guarded
statement the truth of which very few will wish to controvert if
taken literally. What we want to know in the first place, in
order to decide the point at issue, is whether the percentage of
cases of congenital syphilitic symptoms appearing in the third
generation is greater than can be accounted for by unrecognised
fresh syphilitic infection having occurred in the second generation; and no such systematic enquiry has, as far as I know, ever
been made. Any attempt to estimate the probability of congenital syphilitic patients being infected again with this disease
would, it must be admitted, be rendered very difficult by the
fact, as I understand it is generally held to be, that patients in
whom the spirochete, the germ of syphilis, is actually existing
in a living condition, are free from the risks of infection. In, at
all events, nearly all cases of congenital syphilis, the spirochzte
is found in great numbers inhabiting the body of the patient if
he be examined when young, though later in life all these living
germs may be exterminated and infection may become possible. What we want to know is, therefore, whether the congenital syphilitic patient is ever wholly free from the presence of
the living spirochzte during all his life, natal and pre-natal ;
for in all cases where this living intruder originally existed in
the body of the patient, its presence in the past forms the most
probable explanation of the syphilitic symptoms even when it is
no longer present. Until it is proved that congenital syphilitic
patients may have been always free from the presence of the
living spirochete, will not the transfer of the living germ from
the mother to the child remain as the most probable explanation
of the ‘‘ inheritance ’’ of the symptoms of this disease beyond
the first generation? If this transfer of the germ should prove
to be the true explanation of the symptoms of congenital syphilis
appearing in the second and third generations, should we not
expect that the extermination of the spirochete in the body of
the mother would result in these symptoms being no longer
““ heritable ’’? In fact, all that we are now justified in concluding, I hold, is that, as far as facts are concerned, the problem of
venereal disease as a racial poison is unsolved.
THE DYSGENIC EFFECTS OF VENEREAL DISEASES. I2I

In the absence of facts it becomes, therefore, both legitimate
and interesting to consider this question in a purely theoretical
manner, or to enquire what are the probabilities of the case if it
be judged by analogy with conclusions already generally
accepted in other fields of research. When the racial poison of
syphilis is spoken of, two somewhat distinct conceptions may be
intended to be conveyed. It may be held that the symptoms of
syphilis, acquired and congenital (which in some degree
resemble each other), are passed on to subsequent generations
for an indefinite period; or, on the other hand, it may be held
that the disease produces a tendency to general racial
degeneracy, or.to an indefinable deterioration in the nation in
the future. Putting aside these indefinable tendencies for later
consideration, and dealing only with definite syphilitic
symptoms, we have, in the first place, to enquire whether the
unquestionable transmission of defects from diseased parents to
their offspring is a process akin to natural inheritance, or
whether it should be described as,or likened to a diseased ovum
passing on its disease to the product of that ovum.

If the transmission of the evil effects of syphilis to the offspring of the diseased were a process akin to natural inheritance,
then we should expect to find that it was transmitted from the
father exactly as often as from the mother; for sex-limited
inheritance need hardly be considered. But, according to the
Report of the Royal Commission, the disease ‘‘ may possibly
be inherited from a diseased father directly ’’ without the mother
being obviously diseased, though this ‘‘ is a point which is disputed by some authorities ’’; and from this it may at all events
be inferred that though the origin of the trouble is doubtless
more often traceable to the father, yet the actual transmission of
the taint more often comes through the mother. Then again, if
this transmission was really a case of true natural inheritance,
we should expect to find that the children of a diseased parent
would show the symptoms of the disease to about half the
extent on an average to which they were visible in that parent ;
that is, if we judge by analogy with the statistical results
obtained by Professor Pearson in his numerous enquiries into
the facts of natural inheritance. No such quantitative relation122 EUGENICS REVIEW.

ship, however, exists between the visible signs of acquired and
congenital syphilis (Report, p. 29). Lastly, if the disease is
cured, before parenthood, in the parent, it appears to be
universally held that it will not reappear in the offspring, and
to such a change in results there is no counterpart in natural
inheritance. In fact, the analogy between the transmission of
this disease from parent to child and the transmission of human
characteristics by natural inheritance breaks down all along the
line, and this analogy cannot therefore be adduced as giving
any ground whatever for believing that the symptoms of this
disease will be inherited from a congenitally diseased parent.
The process of the transmission of this disease to the offspring
is, In fact, more akin to pathological infection than to natural
inheritance.

It may be urged in reply that though no one supposes that
we are here dealing with ordinary natural inheritance, yet,
whatever the process of transmission may be, the mere fact that
the symptoms are passed on from the first to the second generation affords grounds for believing that they will also be passed
on from the second generation to subsequent generations. But
it is generally held, as has been already remarked, that if the
disease is cured before the period of parenthood, it will not
reappear in the offspring, and if we are to judge of what is
likely to occur in subsequent generations merely by analogy
with this primary transmission, this fact must not be overlooked.
Amongst the congenitally diseased offspring who survive, the
tendency on the whole seems to be for the symptoms to die out
or to become less acute after the fifteenth or the twentieth year
(Report, p. 30), and therefore, judging by analogy, we should
expect to find that these symptoms would either not be passed
on at all to the third generation, or, if passed on, that they
would become less and less acute as the generations succeeded
each other and thus would die out in time. In any case, judging
by this anaiogy, those of us who have no congenital syphilitic
symptoms, although we are almost certain to have had
venereally diseased ancestors, have no reason to fear that the
sins of our distant progenitors will be visited on our immediate
or remote descendants. In fact, we again come to the conclusion
THE DYSGENIC EFFECTS OF VENEREAL DISEASES. 123

that if syphilis does act as a racial poison, the process by which
this poison is transmitted to posterity must be different from the
process by which the congenitally diseased child receives this
accursed infliction from its parent.

This question may also be regarded from the theoretical
Mendelian point of view, and a racial poison may be defined as
any factor which injuriously affects the germ-plasm in such a
manner as to cause a harmful ‘‘ mutation,’’ a mutation being a
change in the characters or qualities of the offspring as compared with those of its ancestors, a change which is passed on to
subsequent generations through the agency of natural inheritance. But where and when does this change originate—in the
germ-plasm of the parent who has acquired the disease, or after
the formation of the offspring destined to be congenitally
diseased ? If it takes place in the diseased parent, then, in order
to account for the, at all events, more frequent inheritance of
congenital disease from the mother, we must assume that mutations rarely, if ever, take place in the paternal germ-plasm ;
whereas there seems to be no reason to suppose that the maternal.
germ-plasm is the less stable of the two. Again, whether this
change originates in a parent suffering from acquired syphilis,
or in his congenital syphilitic offspring, we must assume that a
cause which produced certain symptoms in the body acting as
the host of the germ-plasm might also produce such a change in
the nature of that germ-plasm itself that out of it would spring
an individual exhibiting the same symptoms as those independently produced in the parent; and this is an assumption
that those who disbelieve in the inheritance of acquired characters will not readily admit to be possible. Lastly, in order to
account for the fact that congenital syphilitic symptoms are at
all events rarely passed on to the next generation, it must be
assumed that the mutation is recessive in character. But if
venereal disease does cause such mutations, the number of
individuals carrying this hidden but enduring evil factor must
have been continually increasing during the 500 years or so in
which the nation has been subject to the scourge, and there
should, therefore, have been a steadily increasing number of
cases of congenital syphilitic symptoms showing themselves
124 EUGENICS REVIEW.

without any apparent cause; and of such a national deterioration
we have no proof. In fact, in view of all the facts of the case,
it is difficult to make the Mendelian theory of inheritance give
support to the belief that venereal diseases act as racial poison
in the sense in which the term is here used.

Possibly it may be said that the belief in the inheritance of
acquired characters is by no means an extinct creed, and that at
all events its adherents must admit that venereal diseases have
harmful racial effects. No one would, however, I imagine, claim
that the appearance of congenital syphilitic symptoms in a child
is due to the inheritance of the actual symptoms as they appeared
in the diseased parent; for if this were the case, whilst the
disease would be recognised in both generations by the ordinary
methods of diagnosis, there would also be some correlation
between the peculiarities in the:syphilitic symptoms as visible in
the parents and in the children; and of this there is no proof.
It must, therefore, be admitted that any belief that congenital
syphilitic symptoms are transmitted to future generations by
this method of inheritance must be founded, as far as facts are
concerned, on the exceedingly slender array of the instances of
transmissions to the third generation now on record. As to any
theoretical basis on which to found a belief in the inheritance of
the symptoms acquired by syphilis, it seems to me that it would
be precisely equally valid as regards the transmission to posterity of the pathological effects of all other diseases. It can, in
my opinion, only now be said that since certain facts are still
best explained by the inheritance of acquired characters, the
possibility that slow injurious racial effects do thus result from
ailments of various kinds, must not be wholly neglected, and
that the cure of every disease, venereal diseases included, may
possibly be eugenic in its tendencies.

Finally, we have to consider the possibility of these diseases
causing a general but indefinable deterioration of the race. But
are we not completely in the dark as regards such speculations,
at all events, beyond the third generation, whether we look to
facts or to theory? Are not such blind gropings as likely to
be harmful as useful? May not even those who are pursuing
that objectionable sport, the pursuit of arguments to bolster up
THE DYSGENIC EFFECTS OF VENEREAL DISEASES. 125

preconceived opinions, be disappointed in their captures? For
example, we have no grounds, as far as I can see, for presuming
that mutations showing themselves in such unrecognisable
effects in future generations, would be of such a nature that the
cure in the parents, before parenthood, of the disease likely to
cause them would prevent them from ever taking place; and the
eugenist, who had succeeded in persuading himself on insufficient grounds that venereal diseases are slowly deteriorating the
race, might be discouraged from joining in the campaign to
stamp them out by the doubts he might in consequence be led
to feel as to whether by curing them, and by thus increasing the
number of the progeny of those who had suffered from them, he
might not be injuring his race.

In short, in view of all these considerations, and until we
have further facts to guide us, ought we not to regard it as an
entirely open question whether in attacking venereal disease
merely as-a racial poison, we are dealing with a ‘‘ eugenic’”’
question in the Galtonian sense of the word? Anyhow, whatever we do we must not try to force facts into a mould of a
particular shape in order to make them useful in building up a
propaganda for a cause, however good.

Passing on to consider the racial selective effects of venereal
diseases, what we want to know is whether they affect the rate
of multiplication of the fit and the unfit indiscriminately or
selectively. Looking to the population as a whole, these diseases
seem to affect the thoughtless and the immoral to a somewhat
greater extent than the prudent and the wise; whilst their
sterilising effects on prostitutes, especially in view of the very
high proportion of the feeble-minded in their ranks, probably
have eugenic results. Then as to the different classes of the
community, judging by the recorded death-rates—not a very
reliable indication—unskilled labour is more affected than
skilled labour, whilst the upper and middle classes, and those
below them but more highly paid than the skilled labourer, are
more affected than skilled labour, textile workers, miners, and
agricultural labourers. It is, indeed, now almost impossible to
estimate the combined racial effect of all these conflicting influences, and I can only give my own hesitating impression that
126 EUGENICS REVIEW.

venereal diseases are now on the whole producing harmful selective effects.

Even if it should prove to be true that the direct harmful
results of these diseases do die out in the course of three or more
generations, yet certain eugenic advantages, beside those
dependent on their harmful selective effect, would be likely to
result from the campaign against them. In the first place, congenital syphilis appears to manifest itself in many ways, including lunacy, feeble-mindedness, epilepsy, blindness, deafness,
etc. Now as to deafness, to take that as an example, if an
increase in a natural tendency to deafness is not passed on to
posterity by natural inheritance as the result of syphilitic deafness, aS we are now assuming, then the effect of the existence
of deafness as a form of congenital syphilis is to make the
disease as a whole appear less heritable than the ordinary
disease really is. If we could altogether destroy the spirochete,
or extirpate the disease entirely in some other way, and thus
stamp out the resulting deafness in the next generation, we
should then in future more readily realise the necessity for endeavouring to eradicate true inherited deafness by the discouragement of parenthood amongst congenitally deaf patients.
This is but an example of the general law that to prevent environment from having immediate harmful effects on the nation
generally makes the task of the eugenic reformer easier by causing harmful hereditary influences to become more easily recognisable.

Another beneficial effect of the campaign against venereal
diseases will be the habit of mind thus engendered of considering the responsibilities incurred by parents with regard to the
defects likely to be transmitted to their offspring. Not one
person in a thousand will appreciate the distinction between
undesirable qualities passed on to future generations by natural
inheritance and pathological defects transmitted to subsequent
generations by a process akin to infection; and the efforts now
being made to safeguard the unborn against all the grievous
congenital ailments, including blindness, which result from
existing venereal diseases, are likely to direct popular attention
to many undeniably eugenic problems in spite of the wide
THE DYSGENIC EFFECTS OF VENEREAL DISEASES. 127

theoretical differences which may exist between the problems
involved. We have, therefore, good reason to hope that definite
eugenic advantages will result from this movement, whatever
may be the verdict of the future in regard to the racial poison
problem ; and there is, indeed, only one note of warning which
the eugenist feels compelled to sound in connection with this
campaign. Those who share in the doubts here expressed as to
the enduring harmful effects of existing venereal diseases on the
generations of the more distant future must agree that we have
no certaih proof that the campaign against these diseases will
produce any beneficial evolutionary changes in the race; and,
as the aim of the eugenist as such is to promote progress of
this type, he ought not to rest content unless coincidently with
his attack on venereal diseases, he is directing his main eugenic
efforts towards the introduction of many other reforms with
definite eugenic objects in view. Those who believe that syphilis
does act as a racial poison will, from their point of view, rightly
regard this campaign as an integral part of the eugenic programme, and it should be clearly understood that the doubts
here expressed as to the truth of that view are uttered with the
object of stimulating discussion as the only means of ensuring
that the truth will ultimately emerge and certainly not as indicating a fixed or dogmatic disbelief in the harmful racial effects
of these diseases. In conclusion, let it be once again asserted
that whatever may be the results of such a discussion, we may
be sure that nothing will arise out of it which will in the least
shake our determination to fight against these accursed diseases

with every weapon at our command.
LEONARD Darwin.
