THE PRESS AND EUGENICS: A REVIEW
OF REVIEWS

By C. P. BLACKER

extracts from reviews which have

appeared in the Press of Heredity and
the Social Problem Group and The Chances of
Morbid Inheritance, two books for the production of which the Society made itself
responsible. I have not followed the usual
practice of publishers of quoting only favourable comment ; on the contrary, I have tried
to give a fair impression of the reception that
was given to these books by the Press. In
connection with reviews of The Chances of
Morbid Inheritance, which I edited myself, I
have drawn attention to comments made
by reviewers on the separate contributions
which make up the book, in the hope that
these may be of interest to contributors
themselves, all of whom are members of the
Consultative Council of the Society.

| ‘HE following pages consist mainly of

Heredity and the Social Problem Group

The reviewers of Mr. Lidbetter’s book all
pay eloquent and appreciative tribute to
the thoroughness of his investigation. Many
quote extracts from Major Darwin’s introduction and several have drawn attention to
the fact that in this volume Mr. Lidbetter
has confined himself to presenting the facts
and to pointing out that the interpretations
placed upon these facts are destined to appear
in subsequent volumes.

Birmingham Post: ‘‘ The publication
bears the imprimatur of a Research Committee of the Eugenics Society, and is therefore assured in advance of the unfriendly
criticism of some who, paying little heed to
the actual pleadings of eugenists, remain
satisfied that by no manner of means can the
policy of sterilization free this country from
the burden of responsibility for the unfortunate, falsely labelled the unfit. Yet it
contains a mass of laboriously collected
information, worthy of the closest study.
And in the few and general conclusions

which (at this stage) Mr. Lidbetter draws
from his materials, there is very little to
provoke dissent.’

New Statesman: The reviewer, Mr.
Harry Roberts, an unfriendly critic of
eugenics, says: ‘‘ The family histories that
take up the greater part of the volume represent much care and labour. The investigations on which they are based were carried
on in a particular area in the East End of
London, where Mr. Lidbetter was, from 1898
to 1930, engaged in the organization and
administration of relief services. Further
volumes are promised, and Mr. Lidbetter |
reserves his final summing-up and conclusions
until the end of the work. Those who are
interested in the relation of poverty to biological inheritance should study these facts
and figures; but they should study them
critically and impartially.”

Week-End Review: ‘‘ A good deal of the
prejudice against the organized eugenic
movement is due to a suspicion that many of
its leaders are actuated by smugness rather
than by science. Rich people are apt to think
that they owe their material privilege to the
possession of superior qualities of mind and
character ; and, consequently, that poverty
is but a symptom of mental and social inadequacy. Many observers who, though
themselves socially privileged, have had long
and intimate experience of working men and
women, have come to a different conclusion.
. . . In spite of suggestions implicit in the
introductory chapters, it should not be
assumed that the collector and compiler of
these interesting statistics has any class or
economic bias. He specifically states that the
present work ‘ aims at putting into the hands
of those interested some facts from which inferencesandconclusions may later bedrawn.’”’

The Spectator: ‘‘ Mr. Lidbetter has had
exceptional opportunity for carrying out the
investigations he has undertaken, seeing that

207
208

he was for many years an official of an East
End Poor Law Authority and his industry
equals his opportunity. But figures and
‘ plain facts’ can be very deceptive things ;
and in looking through these genealogical
trees and author’s notes, the critical reader
finds himself again and again wondering if
the influence of heredity and that of environment are quite so dissociate as would here
appear to be assumed.”’

Western Mail: The reviewer, Dr. P. K.
McCowan, the Medical Superintendent of the
Cardiff Mental Hospital, and a well-known
psychiatrist, writes: ‘‘ That heredity plays
an important part in mental disease and
mental deficiency is well known, but the
author’s pedigrees cannot be regarded as
being a serious contribution to this subject.
In fact, if the pedigrees were regarded as
accurate pictures, far from supporting the
thesis of the author they would be strong
evidence against the importance of heredity
in mental disease. . . . While it is essential to
study this work in a critical manner, nothing
can detract from the importance of the facts
submitted, and it is certain that we have here
a valuable contribution to sociology. Its
counterpart does not exist elsewhere, and the
evidence it provides renders it of importance
to everyone concerned with the various
social services and the study of population
in general.”

Newcastle Journal: The reviewer, Mr.
Henry A. Mess, writes: ‘‘ Pronounced
physical or mental defect leads very naturally
to chargeability on the rates. But how far is
chargeability in general due to poorness of
stock, and how far is it due to circumstances,
especially to repetition over several generations of similar bad environment? .. .
Nervous instability may be, and probably
is, part of the hereditary make-up, but its
manifestations can be greatly aggravated
in a new generation by a childhood spent in
a home where explosions of temper and other
forms of defective self-control are frequent
and contagious. It is hard to disentangle
family heredity and family tradition. Yet it
is important to do so, if possible ; for in the
former case the entail cannot be broken,
whilst it may be, though not easily, in the

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

latter case. In several of the pedigrees given
in this book it is shown that parents who
have been dependent to a considerable extent
upon public maintenance have produced
children, many or all of whom have grown up
to be in their turn dependent upon public
funds. Bad stock or bad start? Or both?
In this preliminary volume no attempt is
made to assess the relative parts played by
heredity and by environment. In later
volumes, we gather, an attempt will be made
to do so.”’

Municipal Review: “ No conclusions are
drawn in this book, but the facts collected
from the history of generations of certain
families are given with elaborate charts, and
should be of incalculable value to all who are
interested in such questions as the connection
between public assistance and mental disability and the problems associated with
fertility in these groups.”

The Lancet: ‘‘ The pedigrees here presented form only an instalment of the work,
and for the discussion of the many problems,
which the investigation raises, we are rightly
bidden to wait for its completion. For the
present Mr. Lidbetter is content to present a
sample of his material and to direct some
attention to its high lights. This sample
is, however, sufficient to demonstrate the
patience and industry which he has brought
to bear on a most formidable task, and to
give promise of the development of a rich
source of information.”’

Journal of Education : “‘ These pedigrees,
notwithstanding that cautious exclusion of
doubtful cases obviously produces an understatement, show unmistakably that every
now existing defective in them has defectives
among his or her ancestry ; and the mode of
occurrence of these “‘ blots ’’’ in the pedigree
charts is sufficiently in accord with genetical
theory to justify the belief that heredity is
responsible, that the defects are innate and
not due to environmental conditions.”’

The Times Literary Supplement: ‘Tf we accept the repeated asseverations of the author,
and of the editor of this book, that it is to be
regarded as a collection of data, ‘ from which
no attempt to draw general conclusions ’ has
been made, the title is a little unfortunate.
THE PRESS AND EUGENICS: A REVIEW OF REVIEWS

It will certainly prejudice many readers, who
will naturally be led to assume that, in the
opinion of the writer, it is to inherited defects
of mind or body we should look for the chief
explanation of that mass of poverty with
which the Poor Law has hitherto been concerned. Mr. Lidbetter’s volume is nevertheless of very high value, presenting us as it
does with a large body of relevant facts,
evidently collected with great care, and at the
price of great labour.”’

Church Times: ‘‘ The book is not likely
to appeal to the general reader because of its
technical character, but it is a valuable work
of reference for students of sociology and
eugenics.”

The Chances of Morbid Inheritance

The Times Literary Supplement: ‘‘ There
has been much loose and _ ill-informed
speculation about the whole subject [of
eugenics] and all sorts of drastic proposals
for racial improvement have been advanced
on this basis of comparative ignorance. The
reputation of eugenics has thereby been
Seriously injured; and many by no means
complacent or narrow-minded people have
come to suspect all proposals put forward by
professed eugenists. This book should do
a good deal to put the science and the sociological speculation based on it on a much
more secure footing.”’ Professor Hogben’s
appendix is specially commended.

Cambridge University Medical Society Magazine : “‘ The book is absorbingly interesting
and should prove of great value to medical
men. The paper, printing and charts are
excellent, and the volume can be strongly
recommended.” .

Queen’s Medical Magazine : “‘ Altogethera
very complete work on a subject whose importance has considerably increased during
the last few years.” The reviewer also says :
“Neoplastic diseases which have always
commanded a considerable degree of investigation with regard to inheritance are discussed in a most convincing style.”

Post Magazine: The book “ will be of
interest to the student of life assurance who
has passed beyond the elementary stages.”

Magazine of the London (R.F.H.) School of

209

Medicine for Women : “‘ A remarkably interesting symposium . . . the various chapters
cover a very wide field.”’

University of Durham College of Medicine
Gazette : ‘‘ Heredity in disease is becoming of
increasing importance. This book will prove
of the greatest importance to those doctors
who are asked for a prognosis as to the.
chances of a disease being inherited.”’

The Student: Referring to the questions
which the book is designed to answer, the
reviewer says : ‘‘ Under a somewhat depressing title, and interrupted by many almost
unintelligible charts (for so they seem until
the pages of explanation are consulted) this
book contrives to answer the above questions.
Taken all over, it is a book for the older man,
who has had a good deal of experience in
practice, and who can correlate his own notes
with the findings expressed in the book rather
than for the student whose mind is already
overburdened with ‘ essentials.’ ’’

King’s College Hospital Gazette: “‘ As the
only authoritativeandcomprehensive work on
the subject, this book is undoubtedly admirable and should be in every medical library for
purposes of reference. But our one criticism
is that while the subject obviously does not
lend itself to brief and dogmatic statement,
it seems a pity that such knowledge as has
been gained would not have been presented
in simpler and cheaper form, more suitable
for the study of the general practitioner,
whose time for reading is often limited, and
upon whose co-operation depends largely the
advance in our knowledge of the subject.”

London Hospital Gazette: “‘ It is unfortunate that the subjects of tuberculosis and
malignant disease are not more fully treated,
for they are the things about the inheritance
of which the general practitioner may most
often be asked.” The reviewer praises Prof.

Ruggles Gates’s chapter on “ Genetic
Principles.”
Manchester University Medical School

Gazette: ‘“‘ There is a very interesting chapter on Tuberculosis and Heredity, wherein
the author discusses the question of inheritance of susceptibility. .. . It [the book] contains much valuable information but above
all it stimulates the doctor to take an interest
210

in diseases and defects of an hereditary
nature. . . . A book which is well worth
reading.”

The Lancet: “‘ As placing before the practitioner a readable and useful account of the
subject, the book must be warmly commended.”’ But the reviewer draws attention
to differences of opinion between contributors (notably in connection with the “law
of anticipation ’’), and to the loose usage of
such terms as “‘ positive family history.’’ He
also makes two small criticisms of the chapter on Genetic Principles. Critical comments
are further made of the articles on hereditary
diseases of the thyroid, and on hereditary
gastro-intestinal diseases on the grounds
that : “ although Gates and Hogben make it
perfectly clear that Mendelian inheritance is
to be the basis of discussion, the views of
some of the later contributors on the nature
of heredity seem to be somewhat confused.”
The confusion seems to reside in the fact that
they discuss heredity without reference to
Mendelism. The review ends with the
words: “‘ To those who are prepared to work
warily, the volume provides a mass of interesting and useful information. It should do
much to stimulate the interest of medical
practitioners in the problem of heredity.”
Dr. Witts’s article on hereditary diseases of
the blood is especially singled out for warm
praise.

The Medical Press: ‘The publication of
this book is most opportune at the present
time, when the whole question of eugenics is
interesting the public at large. . . . Genetic
Principles are discussed at length by Professor Ruggles Gates, and no one in this
world could have dealt with these in a more
masterly fashion. . . . An excellent appendix
and a glossary of genetic and psychiatric
terms are included at the end of the book.
This is a book of which the Eugenics Society
may well be proud.” The chapters by Drs.
Russell Brain, G. Bray and R. D. Lawrence
are singled out for praise.

Charing Cross Hospital Gazette: ‘It is
unfortunate that disagreement is so pronounced between various contributors on
points of similarity. Nevertheless, apart
from this, the practitioner, for whom the

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

book is intended, will be thankful for a most
useful addition to medical literature.’’ Professor Ruggles Gates’s ‘‘ chapter ”’ is praised.

Nursing Notes and Midwives’ Chronicle :
The review is mainly devoted to a series of
favourable comments on Dr. Henry Herd’s
article on the inheritance of mental deficiency.

University of Leeds Medical Society Magazine: ‘‘ It was with pleasurable anticipation
that we commenced this book and with
appreciation and few disappointments that
we perused it. Among much which is excellent, we would specially commend the opening chapter on genetic principles and those
dealing with the nervous system, mental
disease, diseases of the blood and skeleton.
... That there should be some disagreement
between different writers upon a subject so
complicated is not to be wondered at. Fortunately, this does not materially affect the
authority of the book, which is a mine of information presented for the most part in an
extremely readable and simple form. The

. authors are to be congratulated upon
this work.”’

Nature: The review is signed with the
initials of Professor J. B. S. Haldane, who
selects for special commendation the article
on hereditary cardio-vascular disease by Dr.
Maurice Campbell. But criticisms are made
of the articles on genetic principles, hereditary diseases of the eye, skin and skeleton,
and of that on the inheritance of tuberculosis. Professor Haldane says: ‘‘ When
all criticisms are made, those chapters whose
authors, instead of writing essays on heredity
and environment, devoted themselves to
giving facts on which a prognosis can be
based, are a valuable collection of data,
enormously superior to that of Bauer,
Fischer and Lenz. . . . If a second edition is
called for, we may hope that some of the
mistakes will be corrected and the deficiencies
made up, in which case the value of the book
will be very greatly increased.”

Bulletin of Hygiene: The review 1s
signed by Professor F. A. E. Crew, who
writes : ‘‘ The book is undoubtedly the best
of its kind. It may be looked upon as the
first of a long series of editions, each one of
which in turn will mark the advance of the
THE PRESS AND EUGENICS: A REVIEW OF REVIEWS

science of human genetics, a science that is
bound to grow as its importance becomes
increasingly recognized. It would be quite
impossible at the present time to improve
upon it.” (While deeply appreciating the
judgment contained in the last sentence, I
would be a happy man indeed if I could
agree with it!)

The Journal of the American Medical
Association : ‘‘ This compilation, by eighteen
English writers, is a distinctly valuable condensed reference book which should be highly
useful to physicians confronted with problems in genetics and faced with the necessity
for giving advice as to marriage and procreation under circumstances that may well
prove disastrous for adviser and advised
alike if the advice is not based on demonstrated scientific facts as well as on common
sense. ... The book is well written. The
judicial approach of the writers to disputed
or obscure questions is notable throughout.
Excellent bibliographies follow the several
chapters. It is a serviceable and constructive
contribution to the literature of applied
genetics.”

The Canadian Medical Association Journal:
“This book aims to give the physician a
basis for understanding the laws of heredity,
and for dealing with the questions of his
patients as to the chance of transmitting
defects to their offspring. The section dealing with hereditary diseases of the nervous
system is excellent, as is the section on the
theoretical considerations of inheritance. The
chapters on mental disease, mental defect,
and tuberculosis handle very fairly the controversial matter involved in a discussion
as to the relative merits of environment and
heredity in causing these conditions.”

The reviewer criticizes the book for
omitting an account of anomalies of metabolism and of blood-grouping. He criticizes
the chapters upon the inheritance of skeletal
defects and of neoplasms.

The New Zealand Medical Journal: ‘‘ The
aim of this book is to place in the hands of
the practitioner a study of the inheritance of
the more common hereditary diseases. No
one can read the book without appreciating
the enormous amount of work, study and

2Ir

laborious research which have been expended
in its making. It is freely admitted that there
still remains many gaps in our knowledge,
and some of the authors’ conclusions and
deductions are perhaps not beyond cavil.
With the increase in our knowledge of
genetic principles, it is only natural to expect
in future that the practitioner will be called
upon more frequently to give a genetic
prognosis—to advise regarding marriage
and procreation, and in this book he will
find an excellent guide. The difficulties in
obtaining an accurate pedigree will be
accentuated in this country, where such a
large proportion of the population have
distant and often quite unknown relatives.
The pedigree schedule is simple and easily
understood. Asa work of reference this book
should be in every modern medical library.”

Glasgow Medical Journal especially praises
articles by Professor Ruggles Gates, Dr.
Lewis and Dr. Herd. It ends by saying that
“every doctor, be he General Practitioner,
Public Health Worker or Consultant, will
read this book with profit and not a little
interest.”

Edinburgh Medical Journal : ‘“‘ The réle of
genetics in racial betterment is one of the
most important questions of the day, and to
have all the information at present available
made so easily accessible is a great boon.
The swing of the pendulum is towards a
more intensive consideration of hereditary
principles from a practical rather than from
an academic angle; we cannot afford to
accept heredity in a fatalistic deterministic
spirit, but must develop a wider viewpoint
and a constructive programme. A book such
as this is educative and will be of inestimable
value in stimulating interest in a subject
which for far too long has been neglected.
It should be read and carefully studied by
every member of the medical profession.”

Bristol Medico-Chirurgical Journal : ‘‘ This
appears to be the first serious attempt, by a
series of specialists, to put before the general
practitioner a synopsis of the knowledge
necessary to deal with the not infrequent
requests made by the public for eugenic
prognosis. The intelligent layman is definitely beginning seriously to consider the effect
212

of sound and unsound mating, and his appeal
is to the medical profession ; the time has
come when the latter can no longer consider
a knowledge of eugenics as relatively unimportant, instead of being, as it is, the keystone to the ultimate success of medicine in
its prevention and handling of disease and
hereditary defects.’

Journal of the Royal Naval Medical
Service especially praises Dr. Lewis’s contribution on “ Heredity in Mental Diseases,”
which it describes as ‘‘ a peculiarly thoughtful and attractive article. He never abandons his sound clinical instincts—the results
of actual experience, for statistical conclusions and calculations, no matter how
impressive these may be in theory. But he
knows well enough when Mendelian principles
are applicable, and he applies them very
convincingly.” The reviewer also praises Dr.
Witts’s article on blood-pressures and articles
by Dr. Gardiner-Hill and Dr. Lawrence.

The Medical Officer : “‘ Until quite recently,
the practitioner had but little assistance in
providing his answers, and he was probably
almost as much influenced by tradition and
“old wives’ tales’ as were his patients.
Vague dogmatism was nourished by partial
evidence ; masses of statistics were collected
and most carelessly handled, without the
employment of any criticism. There is now
no excuse for this position. In this most
valuable book the practitioner is provided
with a guide which should be of enormous
assistance to him in his dealings with
intelligent patients. We use the word
‘intelligent’ advisedly. For the answers
which are given to the indicated questions
depend very largely upon the available
information as to family history. And the
value of family histories is liable to be
vitiated by ignorance and especially in the
the case of relations by marriage, by prejudice.”

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Articles by Dr. Lewis, Dr. Herd and Dr.
Boland are especially commended.

The Observer: ‘‘ The word ‘ Eugenics’ is
apt to conjure up the idea of compulsory
mating of carefully selected individuals combined with sterilization of the remainder of
the population as ‘ unfit.” Nothing could be
further from the intentions of the scientists
who introduced the word, and there is a real
need for some clear explanation of what can
to-day be regarded as the practical policy
of those who want to see something done for
the human race. This need has been met by
the publication last week of an important
book entitled The Chances of Morbid Inhentance (H. K. Lewis and Co. Ltd.).”

The Liverpool Medico-Chirurgical Journal :
‘““ These seventeen chapters, plentifully illustrated with pedigrees, are well and carefully
composed, those on abnormalities of the
skeleton and on diseases of the blood being
among the best. The chapter on mental
disorders is a piece of clear and brilliant
writing, and in a discussion on tuberculosis,
which might be more condensed, the points
of importance in the ‘ nature and nurture ’
dispute are sufficiently brought out.”’

The reviewer also praises Professor Ruggles
Gates’s introduction, but he draws attention
to certain inconsistences and omissions in
the book.

Mental Welfare: After especially praising
the articles by Dr. Russell Brain, Dr. Lewis
and Dr. Herd, the reviewer says: ‘“ The
potential value of the book is tremendous,
covering as it does wide fields in medicine
and biology. It is to be hoped that its
essentially practical nature will be appreciated and made use of by those for whom it
has mainly been compiled, and that it will
mark the beginning of another phase in our
national history when we, as citizens, have
become eugenically self-conscious in the
interests of humanity as a whole.”

\ =e ey”

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVI, No. 8.
