NATURE AND NURTURE IN MENTAL
HYGIENE*

By H. CRICHTON-MILLER, F.R.C.P.

HE subject of our discussion to-day is

| both difficult and important. My

natural qualifications to open the dis
cussion are admittedly inadequate. But my

experience in life has been such as to qualify

even a dull observer to express serious views
on the subject, and that for two reasons.

First of all I am professionally engaged in
assessing the sources of maladjustment,
neurotic or psychotic, and endeavouring
thereby to assess how much of the patient’s
trouble is inherited and irremediable and
how much is acquired and perhaps curable.

In the second place I have had the unusual
advantage of studying at very close quarters
the interplay of nature and nurture, of
heredity and environment, of breeding and
rearing in six healthy members of the race.
Their ages are 24 to 34 and they have all
survived the process.

Now we all know how hard it frequently
is to differentiate between inherited and
acquired characteristics. I suggest that in no
field is this differentiation more difficult than
in matters of thought, feeling and behaviour.
We may accept the blood type and hair
section as invariably inherited, but eye
colour would seem in some cases to be
modified by environment. An ear for music
is rarely acquired, though there are enthusiasts who claim that they can train the tonedeaf to recognize pitch. But in behaviour,
normal and abnormal, the frontier is fre
quently open to dispute. Take memory, for |

example. We are constantly confronted in
the advertisement columns of the weekly
press with the assertions of grateful pupils
that their memories have been miraculously
improved by this or that system of memory
training. Yet the academic psychologists

*The substance of a paper read at an informal
luncheon of the Eugenics Society on November 25th,

1941.

T2I

seem to have proved beyond a doubt that
memory is a congenital faculty incapable of
genuine modification. I can accept that
scientific claim because I have suffered from
an unreliable memory all my life. When I
was an undergraduate I put myself through
a course of so-called memory training. Asa
result I was able to recite in 9} minutes
without a single mistake the value of x to
750 places of decimals. But for ordinary
purposes my memory remained as it was. In
short, heredity defied education, nature was
stronger than nurture. Or to take an example
from my own field of work ; how often has
a patient claimed that his insomnia was
inherited from his father—or, more likely,
from his mother. In most cases it emerges
that, of the many complex factors that can
contribute to the disturbance of the sleep
function, hereditary factors counted for
little or nothing, whereas identification, or
other morbid emotional cause, accounted
entirely for the symptom. Or let us take
asthma : I remember a well-known authoress
who suffered from this distressing complaint.
When it was suggested that she should resort
to psychological treatment she said naively,
‘““ That would be no good because I inherited
it from my mother.’’ Now while it was true
that the mother had been a life-long sufferer
from asthma it was also true that her
daughter had nursed her for many years and
had only developed her own asthma on the
mother’s death. It was difficult to escape
from the inference that powerful emotional
factors, rather than heredity, were accountable for the condition.

So much for the complexity of our problem.
Now let us turn to the hereditary side of
mental health, in other words, mate-selection.
Man’s unique distinction from all sub-human
species lies in his ability to control his
instinctive behaviour in accordance with a
I22

chosen purpose. In other words, mating for
man can be a conceptual as opposed to a
purely perceptual issue. Or to make it
simpler still we may say that the ape bases
his choice of a mate purely on the relative
attraction of the available specimens and
that without any consideration of the probable resultant progeny. Man on the other
hand can, if he will, bring reason, science and
imagination to bear on the choice. Jack may,
for instance, resist Gertie’s blandishments
because he has seen Gertie’s mentally defective brother. If he does so he will be showing
a perfectly understandable concern for the
future generation. And for this he deserves
credit. But if Jack were a really informed
man he would not terminate his suit at that
point. He would recognize that mental
defect may be attributable to causes other
than heredity, and that a scientific investigation of the brother’s condition should be the
only basis for a final decision. But what
would Gertie’s parents say if the attentions
he had paid to Gertie were to cease abruptly ?
Maybe they would despise Jack as a laggard
in love ; or else they would blame themselves
for not having buried the brother in an
appropriate institution instead of exposing
the skeleton in the domestic cupboard.

In short the desirable attitude to marriage
should be dominated by the spirit of progressive adventure, the spirit in which a
great enterprise in the unknown is undertaken with every rational precaution and
yet with burning enthusiasm. Instead of
that the average marriage partakes of the
nature of an irresponsible speculation intended to serve as an escape from frustration
and boredom. What would we say of a
stock-breeder who acquired his bull and his
heifers on a basis of appearance only without
troubling to investigate pedigrees? What
would we say of a man who invested all his
capital in a business without stopping to
examine the firm’s books? For years an
eminent psychiatrist—Colonel Goodall—has
been advocating the necessity for pedigrees
on a nation-wide scale. But what is the use
of pedigrees if no one is disposed to use them ?
At present they are only used, as far as I

know, in Germany and there the use made.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of them is blind and ruthless. But in a
Utopian community mate-selection would be
based upon spontaneous attraction controlled by scientific records. We. are so
accustomed in this country to grant to every
individual complete freedom of choice that
we hesitate even to discuss any procedure for
limiting that freedom. Then we hotly discuss
voluntary sterilization of the unfit, a measure
so partial in its possibilities as to be almost
negligible. We don’t want mate-selection to
be shorn of its individual and romantic
qualities, but we do need to inspire the
youths of our land with a parental, that is a
eugenic, outlook. Such an outlook should
ideally induce a young man not merely to
eschew the mate of doubtful pedigree. It
should have its positive aspect as well. The
highly artistic should realize that it is
dangerous for two of them to mate, just as
the progeny of the profoundly repetitive
type are liable to be repetitive to the point
of dullness. Two people who have epilepsy
in their families, though not in the immediate
ancestry, should know that their progeny
would stand a poor chance, not necessarily
of developing epilepsy, but of inheriting the
psychasthenic temperament, which always
reacts. badly to the difficulties of this exacting world.

In short, the youth in my Utopia would be
inspired by an informed idealism that
resulted in a sort of genetic longsightedness
to take the place of the narrow vision: and
false ideals that enter into mate-selection in
so many cases to-day. |

Now let us pass from nature to nurture.
I have referred to the difficulty of estimating
the relative factors of temperament and
experience that go to produce abnormalities
of function and behaviour. Medical psychology has in the last thirty years enabled us to
revise our views on these matters. We know
now that distortions of branch or bough
formerly attributed to heredity are but the
logical development of the bent twig. We
know now that character formation at the.
university is a highly limited process compared to what goes on in the school, and that
development at school is negligible compared
to the paramount importance of the first five
NATURE AND NURTURE IN MENTAL HYGIENE

years. We realize to-day that the only. child
of well-mated parents is handicapped for life ;
that the child who recognizes that it is unwanted has to cope with such a burden of
devaluation as to make normal development
hardly attainable ; that the psychology of
the orphanage can outweigh hereditary
advantages and disadvantages,.and that the
witnessing of parental strife in early years
never fails to leave a permanent scar.

Let us then think of environment as
related to mental health, in terms of these
highly important first five years. And let us
be assured that if the child reaches his first
school with a sound heredity and a sound
home development he is likely to become a
good citizen even if his subsequent school
environment and experience are only
mediocre.

First of all then, what is our rough idea of
the good citizen and his character equip
ment? I suggest for the purposes of brevity _

two main criteria.

1. He should be able to adjust his passions
and desires to reality.

z. He should be willing to face the
intolerable burden of consecutive
thought.

By the first of these I mean to indicate that
every escape from reality is a weakness. And
in this connection I have but to indicate the
tone of the press, not in this country only but
in all countries where the press is free. The
uncongenial and the depressing however
true are omitted or glossed over. Why?
Because the mass of newspaper readers
cannot face stark reality but must have news,
and particularly headlines, that coincide with
their hopes and wishes.

And as for the burden of consecutive
thought I ask you. what evidence have we
that the mass of the people display any
readiness to make the necessary effort ? The
average cinema programme is presumably
adjusted to the demands of the average
citizen. Can anyone claim that it represents
anything but an escape from the effort of
thinking? Ask the B.B.C. authorities if the
items that demand thought are popular in
relation to those that are a mere escape. I
think I know what their answer would be.

123

Well now, what have these first five years
to do with the mental health of the adult
citizen? Believe it or not, a great deal.
Schooling no doubt counts for a lot but the
habit of facing reality or escaping from it,
and the habit of making effort or running
away from it—these habits are formed to a
great extent before the alphabet has been
mastered. Therefore I say that in the first
five years a child should learn that life in
general is trustworthy and that effort is
worthwhile. Without the first of these
lessons he will never achieve complete
independence, he will never stand up to
reality in its more painful or exacting aspects,
he will never be at ease with truth, he will
never develop a spirit of true adventure.
And unless he learns early that effort is
worthwhile he will never make his peace with
the school’s demand for learning, nor with
the world’s demand for honest contribution,
still less with life’s stern demand for clear
thinking. After all suggestibility in the
individual and in the mass is the greatest
enemy of social evolution. And it is before
he reaches school much more than later that
the child develops a bias towards mental
dependence or mental independence.

And what are the main conditions of a
child learning these lessons? I think there
are three: security, valuation and freedom,
and in that order.

The sense of security more than any other
factor conditions all development towards
reality. Insecurity begets fear, distrust,
suspicion, evasion. The child who has
learned to make himself scarce when he
hears father’s step on the stair is the child
that only learns his lessons to escape punishment, only works to earn wages, only
refrains from crime to avoid the police.

Valuation comes next to security inimportance. A child that learns that it is
illegitimate 1s devalued for life. No legislation can erase that feeling. It is usual to
conceal the fact of illegitimacy by false
explanations. That is all very well till the
falsehood is discovered. Then the double
affront bursts on the child: ‘‘ They never
wanted me and mother has been lying to me
all this time.’’ I need not stress this point.
124

But there are minor degrees of unwantedness
that are very important. I remember the
passionate exclamation of a woman who had
attempted suicide: ‘‘ How could they have
wamted a seventh daughter and a ninth
child? ”’ Then there is the not unusual
attitude of otherwise well-meaning parents
represented by the familiar clichés: “‘ If you
knew what I went through before you were
born .. .’—‘‘ You don’t remember how
much it costs to feed and clothe you ”’—
“ You’re a proper nuisance and you wouldn’t
be here if J had had my way,” and so on.
Trivial, did I hear you say? Not really
meant in earnest? But these. and similar
remarks are quoted in our clinics and consulting rooms by grown-up people who have
failed to live down the’ crushing sense of
devaluation. And in this connection I would
like to direct your consideration to the following problem. We hear a lot nowadays of
the “‘ Old School Tie.’ According to the
view of the speaker the class thus designated
is either winning the war for us or in process

of losing it. I am going to suggest that the

class referred to, with all its virtues and
failures, is in a position of leadership not
because of the playing fields of Eton nor the
public school tradition but because it began
life in a nursery. Now this probably sounds
to most of you arrant nonsense, but I am not
speaking without considerable opportunities
of observation. The child in a servantless
house is the child of a busy woman. The
more children the busier the mother is. From
birth his life is subordinated to the exigencies
of adult life in the home. He is either competing with brothers and sisters or else he is

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

vainly trying to command mother’s attention. In the nursery the child feels that he
is in a safe sort of haven and unless the nanny
is much worse than most of her breed, he has
additional valuation from her, he has less
necessity to make his presence felt, he has
more freedom to follow his own interests.
But the British nursery is disappearing and
the population of our public schools will
undergo a radical change in the quality of
their boys, and the old school tie will stand
for a different class of citizens, a class whose
early years have been far less favourably
conditioned than those most of us remember.
I commend this line of thought to your
consideration.

The time is far spent and I cannot discuss
the value of freedom to the child; let me but
repeat that it is well-nigh worthless where
there is neither security nor valuation.

And in conclusion let me return to my
original thesis. If we are to achieve a higher
level of mental health in our citizens we must
have long-sighted parents—parents who have
come together not merely to give each other
a good time, not merely to breed a child or
two from good stock, but parents who realize
that the business of parenthood can be the
most exacting as it can be the most rewarding of human enterprises, parents who will
realize that education outside the home,
whether provided by the State or acquired
at a great cost, can never make up for the
deficiencies of home life. In short we want
to see a change in the centre of gravity in all
breeding and rearing, a change of emphasis
from the individual that is seen and temporal
to the race that is unseen and eternal.
