Expanding Frontiers of Genetics

A REVIEW

ENETICSIS BECOMING a Subject which is
(; gradually pervading the conscious and the
subconscious of modern science. We see a
repetition of the impact of chemistry sixty years
ago when it changed from a separate discipline
to a part of virtually all scientific endeavours,
so much so that it has almost lost a strict definition of its own. Here are discussed three recently
published books on genetics which each, in its
own way, enters a wider field of thought.
Professor Penrose! has written a book on
human genetics for the average person. It is clear
that the mechanism of human inheritance is involved in very many everyday problems. Professor Penrose refers specifically to the effect of
ionising radiation on hereditary changes by
mutation, but genetics equally enters South
African politics, the public school problem, or
malaria eradication in areas where genes such as
the sickle-cell trait afford some protection to the
population. Technical terms which present “an
unnecessarily forbidding aspect to the uninitiated’’ are either not used or are explained when
their use is unavoidable. Professor Penrose
states that it is inevitable that in the future,
human genetics will more and more be reduced
to problems of chemistry. Indeed, this year’s
Nobel prizes in Medicine and in Chemistry have
been awarded to workers on the chemical and
physical structure of the material which transfers genetical information and on the relation of
human proteins to these agents of inheritance.
Professor C. H. Waddington’s book? attempts
to turn the thought of geneticists back from polypeptide chains and protein molecules to the form
of living matter. He discusses the types of morphogenetic process. There are the unit-generated
forms of which the prime example is a crystal of
an inorganic compound. From these he proceeds
to particle systems to which the crystals of
globular molecules belong. There are monomers
such as myoglobin, dimers such as insulin and

II!

tetramers such as certain abnormal haemoglobins. Other unit-generated systems result in
fibres, and in sheets or membranes. There is only
a short step from membranes to tubes; double
membranes named “didermic’” (two-skinned)
can be arranged parallel to one another and from
these one can easily proceed to flattened vesicles.
Midway in complexity between these simple
forms and the cell are instruction-generated
forms where a number of units are assembled in
the immediate neighbourhood of some preexisting structure whose pattern, like a template,
determines their orderly arrangement. These
templates may act by coming into operation
gradually and letting the final pattern build
itself up in stages or they may act with all their
parts at once. The latter, the “‘synchronic” templates, are the most important in biology.
Another type of instruction is not by templates
but from spatially distributed environmental influences. Here is a book which combines morphology, as one knew it in the 1920s, with
present-day chemical genetics.

Professor F. J. Kallmann has edited the proceedings of a Symposium held at the New York
State Psychiatric Institute in 1961.2 There are
excellent contributions on basic genetics and on
behavioural and psychiatric genetics, as well as
genetic studies of mental deficiency and neurological disorders. Of particular importance is the
break-through of medical genetics into the field
of mental health with contributions on the role
of genetics in a medical school curriculum, and
reports on trends in psychiatric genetics in
England, Scandinavia, South Africa and the
United States. There is an extremely useful and
exhaustive bibliography. Eliot Slater (who is
one of the contributors to this volume) recently
remarked in THE EUGENICS REVIEW that one has
the feeling that a break-through is ‘‘just around
the corner” in the combined research on
chemistry and psychiatry. This volume leads one
THE EUGENICS REVIEW
2. Waddington, C. H. New Patterns in Genetics and

to expect this leap ahead where chemistry,
psychiatry and genetics meet.

H. LEHMANN
1. Penrose, L. S. Outline of Human Genetics. Second

Edition. London, Melbourne, Toronto 1963. Heinemann. Pp. xiv + 166. Price 15s.

3.

Development. New York and London, 1962. Columbia
University Press. Pp. xv + 271. Price 80s.

Kallmann, F. J. (Editor). Expanding Goals of Genetics
in Psychiatry. New York and London, 1962. Grune
and Stratton. Pp. x + 275. Price $6.75.

 

 

POPULATION STUDIES

A Journal of Demography
Edited by D. V. GLASS and E. GREBENIK

Vol. XVI. No. 3. CONTENTS March 1963
C. M. STEWART Family Allowance Statistics in Great Britain.
R. FREEDMAN, J. Y. PENG,
Y. TAKESHITA and Fertility Trends in Taiwan: Tradition and Change.
T. H. SUN
K. G. BASAVARAJAPPA Effect of Improvements in Mortality on the Birth Rate and Related Measures.
J. MAYONE STYCOS Culture and Differential Fertility in Peru.
J. W. LEASURE Factors Involved in the Decline of Fertility in Spain.
L. T. BADENHORST Family Limitation and Methods of Contraception in an Urban Population.

Book Reviews

Subscription price per volume of 3 parts £2 15s. net., post free (or American currency $8.50).
Single parts £1 5s. each (American $4) post free.

Published by the POPULATION INVESTIGATION COMMITTEE, at the LONDON SCHOOL OF
ECONOMICS AND POLITICAL SCIENCE, HOUGHTON STREET, LONDON, W.C.2

112
