LEGAL ASPECTS OF STERILIZATION
By CECIL BINNEY

Brock Committee, unanimously in favour

of eugenic sterilization, will be the precursor of legislation to put its recommendations into effect; for although, as the
Committee had the courage to point out,
operations for eugenic sterilization are even
now occasionally performed, and can be
secured by those in a position to pay for them,
it is obvious that only new legislation could
make possible the general application of such
measures for the purposes approved in the
report. Eugenic sterilization is bound to be
largely a poor-law matter since the most
dysgenic elements tend to sink to the lowest
ranks of society. Even, therefore, if there
were no other difficulty it would be impossible
to effect sterilization on a useful scale without legislative provision of the necessary

ds.

| T may be hoped that the Report of the

AMBIGUITIES IN PRESENT LAW

There is, of course, the more formidable
objection that the present law does not countenance even if it does not forbid eugenic
sterilization—and this not because the law
is prejudiced against eugenics, but simply
because, eugenics being new and the law
being old, there is absolutely no provision
made for it. It would not be possible to give
a satisfactory answer to the question whether
the law distinguishes between sterilization
for eugenic reasons and the same operation
for a less reputable purpose. That a sterilizing operation, Jike any other surgical
operation, is lawful when performed for
the health of the patient admits of no doubt ;
but there is clearly a wide difference between
operating to save a patient’s life or to cure
him of illness and operating in the interests
of posterity, a matter on which the operating
surgeon may not have adequate information.
Nor is it illogical, the law being what it is,
that even an adult in possession of his
faculties should not be entitled to authorize
his own sterilization.

27

This has a bearing on the practical but difficult question as to the law applicable to a case
of eugenic sterilization ; for it is clear that a
prosecution might be launched against those
performing a sterilizing operation on the
ground that it constituted a public mischief,
and in this case almost any considerations as
to the effects of the operation might influence the Court. On the other hand, if a prosecution were to be brought under the Offences
Against the Person Act, whether it succeeded
or failed would largely depend on a minute
inquiry as to the details of the operation,
the statute having been passed with quite
other objects and before eugenic sterilization
had been thought of.

This being so, it is not surprising that to
the question whether eugenic sterilization is
illegal, the Committee gives the guarded
answer that “‘ the legal position in regard to
the eugenic sterilization of persons of normal
mentality is less certain, but most authorities
take the view that it is illegal.”” The same
is true of sterilization when performed for
other than medical or eugenic reasons.

NO DRASTIC CHANGES IN LAW

The recommendations of the Brock Committee, if put into effect, will not make any
far-reaching alterations in the general law.
The question whether the sterilization of an
adult for other than eugenic reasons is unlawful will remain an open question, providing a subject of discussion for theoretical
and, it may well be, employment for practical lawyers if the question should arise (as
it well might) in some cause célébre. But in
respect of certain classes of individuals
sterilization will be permissible, and among
these individuals will be many whose sterilization would now almost certainly constitute
a crime, since as mental defectives they are
not held to be capable of giving to the operation that consent without which the sterilizing of a human being is against the law.

Such an alteration in the law inevitably
28 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

raises the practical problem: who is to
decide whether a particular subject falls into
the category of those whose sterilization is
permissible ? To obviate the difficulty that
the legality of an operation performed in
good faith might subsequently be called in
question, some authority must be established
to give or refuse its consent in every suggested case for sterilization brought before
it. The exact nature of this authority
is not important subject to the question
whether there is to be some decision by a
judicial authority or merely ministerial
sanction. The former procedure was suggested in the Bill introduced in the House of
Commons by Major Church and no doubt
responds to a popular appeal for “ protection ’’ against doctors and civil servants. It
is doubtful, however, whether the sanction
of the judiciary amounts to very much,
except where a case has been seriously contested—as may be seen illustrated in the case
of undefended divorces, the granting of
which, but for the possible intervention of
the King’s Proctor, would long ago have
become a merely formal matter : moreover,
the application for sterilization would come
in any case only before the magistrates’
court. It is probable, therefore, that no
serious objection will be raised to the Committee’s recommendation that sterilization
be performed on the authorization of the
Minister of Health who, though empowered
to hold a special examination, would normally

act on the recommendation of two doctors,
one of these a practitioner specially appointed
by the ministry.

SAFEGUARDS FOR MEDICAL
PRACTITIONERS

The absence of any judicial authorization
puts the doctors concerned in a different
position from that which they would occupy
if carrying out an order of the Court ; and
the Committee therefore proposes that they
should receive the same protection as is
granted in the case of proceedings under the
Lunacy and Mental Deficiency Acts by
section 16 of the Mental Treatment Act, 1930,
a section enacted in view of the number of
protracted and difficult actions previously
brought against doctors by persons claiming
to have been wrongfully certified. It is less
easy to imagine such an action being launched
by a person sterilized under the Committee’s
proposals, since the plaintiff would probably
have consented to the operation complained
of, but no doubt the Committee is right in
saying that the doctors under the scheme
proposed will not accept less protection,
though they cannot reasonably expect more.

It may be said, therefore, without fear of
contradiction, that whatever other criticism
may be levelled at the findings and recommendations of the Committee, they have at
least put forward a scheme which is easily
workable and involves no serious alterations
in the general law.

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVI, No. 1
