   

“INTELLIGENCE AND FAMILY SIZE*
FRASER ROBERTS, ™.A., MB., DSc. ERSE.

: nol ‘ey i ee .
‘ , x as Re S . roar es Pe a
eo Tt ARERR AB ig Oe ge i
a ve . . . .
aa? cd * *
Gy z oa a
toe : . . _s 8
3) SBE : e :
’ \

(Principal Investigato

ways, for example according to occupa
tion, or to intelligence, it. is found that
the rate.of reproduction is. very different in
different groups. This whole question of
differential fertility occupies, probably, more
space in the EuGENIcs Review than any
other topic ; and it is not very long since
Dr. Cattell gave a lecture to the Society
describing ‘an investigation he had carried
out on fertility and intelligence. However,
I don’t think that I need apologize for
directing your attention once again to this
familiar subject, for, if we, as members of the
Eugenics Society, are apprehensive about the
future, here is the reason ; if we are anxious
to learn the results of scientific investigations, to initiate researches, and to make
that knowledge available to as wide an
audience as possible, this is the main consideration we have in‘mind. In a word, the
existence of differential fertility and the way
it is operating at present, is, above all else,
the reason for the existence of our Society.
The need for vigilance is particularly great
at the present time, for the perils of a
declining population to this country and the
Dominions are becoming widely realized.
There will be an agitation for remedies, and
it is to be feared that easy, politically
popular methods will be advocated. For
example, family allowances on a flat-rate
basis, or something like a flat-rate basis, will
probably be suggested, although the result
of sich measures, when they are not ineffective, and therefore wasted, will undoubtedly
be to hasten the decline in the population of
those qualities which are universally valued,
a decline that is taking place around us at
the present time, and at no inconsiderable
rate.

I do not propose to give a general account
in this paper, but to present the results of a
particular investigation. As it is a familiar
Octnus Peon : oes. petore the Eugenics Society on

[: the population is. classified in various

Y

r to the Burden Mental Research Trust, Stoke Park C olony, Bristol)

subject, it will be possible to present the
results as a commentary upon some of the
aspects of a thesis well known to you, without it being necessary to attempt the task,
impossible in a single lecture, of dealing with
the whole of that thesis.

Ascertainment of a Representative S ample of

School Children

For several years the Burden Mental
Research Trust, an organization that owes
its existence to the generosity of Mrs. Burden
of Clevedon Hall, Somerset, has been conducting an investigation on school children
at the city of Bath. I am going to mention
at once the feature that makes this series
of studies different from most others—the
attempt to secure a complete cross-section
of the population. After a good deal of
preliminary consideration and experiment
we decided to try to ascertain, and give
mental tests to, all the children whose homes
were within the boundaries of the city of
Bath on July 27th, 1934, and whose dates of
birth fell between September 1st, Ig2I, and
August 31st, 1925, inclusive. This gave us a
group of about 3,400 children.

The criteria were simple, but completing
the list was far from simple. I doubt whether
anyone who has not attempted a survey of
this kind can imagine the troubles encountered: and this in spite of the most willing
co-operation of all concerned. At each school
lists of children of the appropriate age were
prepared from the registers, and a scheme
of checking was applied to eliminate mistakes in age as far as possible. Children
whose homes were outside the city boundary
had then to be omitted. And, of course, the
corresponding fraction whose homes were
within the city, but who attended schools
in the surrounding county of Somerset, had
to be discovered and included. Public and
private schools. also co-operated with only
three exceptions. Finally, other small groups
of children ‘had to be added, for example

237
23° THE EUG

cases in deciding whether a child was a Bath
child or not, for example in the case of
children at residential institutions. Almost
up to the present time our index has shown
slight changes in totals and classification as
further information has been obtained.. Had
anyone examined our index a few months
ago and again to-day, they would have had
to conclude that one child had not only come
to life after having died, but that it had also
mysteriously vanished. A child in the register at one school was reported to us~as
having died. It is true that at another school
a child of the same name was tested, but the
dates of birth were different, and the names
were common ones. Years later it was discovered that the date of birth of the supposed
dead child was really the same as the living
tested one. Investigation showed that there
was only one child. The mother, to escape
temporary embarrassment, had informed the
first school that the child was dead and had
then sent it to another school. But I will not
take up any more of your time with the
details of this ascertainment.

The first results I want to show you were
published early this year, in conjunction
with my colleagues Dr. Norman and Miss
Griffiths, in the Annals of Eugenics (Studies
on a Child Population: III. Intelligence
and Family Size. Vol. 8. Pp. 178-215. 1938).
The presentation was, however, detailed and
statistical, and it was thought that a less
technical summary of the conclusions would
be useful. The second part of this lecture
gives additional results that have only just
been worked out.

Completeness of the Ascertainment and Mental
Testing
The completeness of the ascertainment is
indicated by the following figures :

Children at schools co-operating, etc. eee 3,387

Children at school permitting’ ent | .
only see 4
Estimate for two schools not ‘co-operating 8°
| 35399

ee : ee eee gen z
* 1 & .
: . EG >
a . 3 zl € z «
e % : a
: -“ 8?
e .
’

those at the. orthagiedic. hospital, and. |
physical and mental defectives. Naturally :
all sorts of difficulties arose in individual ‘omitted ‘because mistakes in date. of birth:

   
  
    
    
  
  
  
   
   
    
  
 
  
   
 
 
 
  
   
 
  

Apart froin: this niall loss, t two-other smal}
groups of children’ have’ been ‘unavoidaby!
omitted. The ‘first.consists of afew childrey;

would have led us to suppose that they did
not fall into the group ; actually an indireg.
test showed that there were extremely fey
of these, and it is, in any.case,:a more. or lesy
random loss. The other group omitted i
children attending schools remote fron
Bath. It.is a small group, and was furthe
reduced, because, at the relevant ages, many
of these children were at the numerous pre.
paratory schools at Bath, subsequently pro.
ceeding to public. ‘schools elsewhere. Also,
we approached a number of schools at
Bristol, and in the Bath district generally,
and so ‘secured: some more of this fraction.
Of the 3,387. children ascertained anj
available, all except twenty-five received ,
mental test. The number of absentees wa;

of the four age-groups were too young for th:
verbal group test, which was’ according)
postponed for a year. “During the intervd
a number of children left Bath and it prove
impossible to trace and test all of them. Th:
numbers tested and the number of absentee
were as 3 follows :

Tested Absentess Tot
9

 

First three age-groups 2,590
Fourth age-group ... a 16
Total ost 3,362 25

 

A considerable part of the loss, therefor:
may be regarded as random.

The reasons for the failure to test th
twenty-five absentees were as follows :

Left Bath , 16
. Long absences from school till idaving’age was
attained a ,
Deaths...
Revisit to private school refused
Went to non-co-operating school |

the city of Bath might not have given
sample of children that would not be representative of the country generally.. Actually
: . . ’ oe , . . “
‘ , § : a . *
‘ . . ie. ; yo . : is
’ . ‘ = .
- . . . % ¥ ,
t * i
. 2 . - 2 : @
smi, ve < Pe a ; . Tre tive
LY ve ' ; 2
‘ * ‘ x .
AGN 8 \ ‘ : rr) . ‘

99, Which is exactly
would-be expected,*and. the range of
ental ability..(a’ standard deviation of just
ver 15) is again exactly what it should be.

ctermination of Famtly Size

There was an navoldable, and consider

ble, interval between the intelligence testing
d the ascertairiment of the family particu
rs. This meant ‘that a number of children

d. “Of the 3,362 ‘children tested
ily particulars could not be obtained in
6 cases.. The reasons for this were :
Left Bath and not traced... ves wee 5
Deaths ... 4.

Went to non-co-operating school _...

   

Ww &

56

HOP
igs.

6
*

 

Otis I.B.

oO 1 2-3 4 3 6

  

  
   
    
   
 
   

SAMILY SIZE 239
In. -addition one child was tested upon
another scale and has been omitted from the
calculations... There is left a group for
analysis. of: 3,305 children. a

The mean intelligence (I.B.) of the missing
56 children was 114 upon the Advanced Otis
Scale, compared’ with 100 for the whole
group. There doés seem to be a tendency for
migrants to show somewhat higher results
upon the average. In any event the loss of
these 56 children, largely a random one,
could not affect the results. _.

The figure taken for family size was the
number of living full sibs-(a sib, of course,
means either a brother or a sister). Step-sibs
were thus omitted.

The intelligence test used was the
Advanced Otis, and the figures used were
those for the Index of Brightness, or I.B.
The norms at various ages were determined,
using our own group, as was fully explained

7 8 9 W215

ee. oi, Sibmumber
“Fig. 1. Regression of Otis I.B. on sib number

uced from the Annals of Eugenics, VIII, 2)
240

in the first paper in the series in the Annals
of Eugenics (Vol. 6. Pp. 319-38.

may be helpful to those who are accustomed
to thinking in terms of Binet I.Q. to point
out that a difference from roo in I.B. corresponds roughly to half that difference in
Binet I.Q. Thus an Otis I.B. of 120 corresponds roughly to a Binet I.Q. of r10, and an
1.B. of 70 to an I.Q. of 85.

Relationship between Intelligence and Family
Size for the Whole Group

Fig. 1 shows along the horizontal line the

4-0 7 ed
~\ _ |
~ ©
~
| ‘
34 ‘
: e
“
e*
30 @ ‘e
\.@
*,
te e
~
F 25 ~
8 “..
un
“ 8
eo.
' “e.
| ‘
®&
~®’
se
®
I-¢ | | eo.
0-19 40-59 80-99 . 120-139 160-179 &§ 200-219 |
20-39 60-79 | 100-119 140-159 180—199 220-239
Otis I.B.

Fig. 2. Regression of sib number on Otis I.B.
(Reproduced from the Annals of Eugenics, VIII, 2)

number of living full sibs from o to 13 and
corresponding to each group of specified sib
number is shown the average I.B.

There is a steady decline in intelligence as
the number of sibs rises. The figures corresponding to 12 and 13 sibs appear to be relatively high, but they are based on very few

- . < leg “a Bee ‘ Be ty gh TN ee Be weet oe

ne Ey SEN Om Ww: Ke / eT i x °F ee , yen aye ay
oe CB BBS BR Ce BNE SS RCE VEE WV tg eh
. . a, ~ 8 , - : g z

9-38. 1935).
The mean I.B. for the population is roo. It

on the average, about 3} sibs, and there is,

sed | y tew course some very bright children come from
children, only 6 and 1 respectively. Actually .

 
     
   
  
     
   

accurate curve fitting shows that the ra,
tioriship .can. be. adequately: expressed by ,.
straight line, and the best-fitting. straip),
line is shown in the figure. As far as 9,
numbers go, average intelligence falls evenly
and steadily as the number of sibs increasy

for each group. The dullest children hay

steady even fall as intelligence increases, th,
brightest children having only about 1} sib;

Once again, as far as our results go, a straigh
line fits the results adequately. Expresse
as a correlation coefficient the figure for t
association is —0°224.

_ I am sure that it is hardly necessary t
‘point out that the figures are averages. O

very. large. families and some very dul
INTELLIGENCE’ AND FAMILY SIZE

ep NG
e @ \ {~~
tT - _ [i Se _
20 PN. If 1 \ nes
JN
| \f 1 /\
Sop Gf OM Of |
| 2 ; | if / \
s | iF \
j fof
10 i : /
| of,
| : /
é /
° ws
7
0-19 ~ 20-39 239 60-79 80-99

 
   
   
   
  
   
    
 
 
 

hildren are onthe children, but the opposite
nding is more usual. Fig. 3 illustrates this
oint.

The curve é represented by the solid line
hows the -percentages of only children
alling within different limits of intelligence.

ase of children having 3, 6,.and 9 or 10 sibs.

Ithough children with 9 and with 10 sibs
ave been added together, this group is a
mall one, so the curve is rather irregular.

he shift to the left as number of sibs
creases is unmistakable, but there is, of
ourse, much‘ overlapping.

_ Here ate “some «figures for two special

omposed of the brightest children, 25 per
ent. were only children ; but in.a group of

he other curves show the percentages in the |

241

7

OO @ weneensr Sins

—e——e— 9- to SUES

. XA

e
Se, XS
a
eeee 2 ae tse
a

100-119 120-139 140-159 160-179 180-199 ©
| Otis I.B.
Fig: 3. The scatter of # intelligence amongst children with various numbers of sibs.

the dullest children only 7 per cent. were
only children. Thirty-three per cent. of
the dullest children had six or more
brothers and sisters. Only 4 per cent. of
the brightest children had as many as
this.

The marked association between intelligence and infertility revealed in this investigation is rather greater than has been found

in most previous studies. We may conclude

therefore that special precautions to secure
a good sample shows that the association is,

if anything, bigger than has usually been
thought. So far from imperfect selection of
groups having magnified unduly the rapidity
of the decline in intelligence in the population, such imperfections have obscured its
full extent. |
242

Posstble Efe ef on thé Result of the Nature of

the Test Employed

Let us turn to another criticism of some
previous results. Verbal group tests have
nearly always been used. Might this have
introduced an extra social bias and so
exaggerated the association? We have a
result that meets this criticism also. 1,271
of the children were retested upon the
individual Binet Scale ; this sub-sample was
neither representative nor random, but
examination of the figures shows that it can
safely be used for a comparison of the two
kinds of tests. I have not time to give the
justification for this ; it is fully explained in
the detailed paper in ‘the Annals of Eugenics.

The correlation coefficients, using the two
tests on the same group of children, were as
follows :

Otis I.B. and No. of sibs —o-213
Binet I.Q. and No. of sibs —o- 234

The closer association with Binet I.Q. is
amply significant, so it may be concluded
that so far from group tests artificially
magnifying the estimates for the association,
their lower accuracy as measures of general
intelligence yield estimates that are slightly
too low. So, once again, it is likely that
criticisms of previous results are only valid
in the sense that the association between
intelligence and infertility may have been
underestimated.

Later in this lecture I will give some
results showing that there is another con
sideration making it certain that the real.

association is considerably greater than can
be revealed in any studies of the type so far
discussed.

A point of interest in passing is that
American studies show that in the United
States differential fertility is more marked
than in this country. Here the correlation is
found to be o-2 or rather higher, there 0-3 or
rather higher, so that the decline in fertility
as intelligence iricreases is even more marked
under American conditions.

Sub-division of the Group according to Type
of School
A sub-division according to type of school
shows the results given in Table I.

THE EUGENICS. REVIEW | Oo \

TABLE. I }
‘Sup-pivision ACCORDING TO TYPE oF  ScHtoot J

OO | “Mean "Mean ——
No. | Otis | No. of Correlatiy

     
 
 

  

   
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
   
    
  
  
   
 
   
   
 
  
 

I. B. sibs Coefficient

Secondary school

(epecia ple . 6 |

Special place 39 144 —0°0
Central sc — 307 | 126 | 0:07 |
_ Private school 292 | 118 —0- 096.
Senior school, ote. 2,292 86 =O 139
Unclassified m3] — co

* Total ee 31395 too | 2°58 | : 07234

 

The general trend is unmistakable. It y
be noted that all the smaller sub-groy :
show far smaller correlations than the gro,
as a whole ; im fact the first three coefficiey
are not significant. This illustrates in anoth
way the fact that unrepresentative sampmm
would almost certainly indicate too low;
association ; imperfect sampling could eag
lead to too low an estimate for the assoy
tion, but could hardly, in any conceiva
case, yield too high an estimate.  —_
It is easy to see that a teacher at a seng
elementary school might well conclude tk
the association was not particularly strikiy
but a teacher at a junior elementary schog
containing children of all grades of inte
gence, would have no illusions. Teachers @
secondary schools, who were thinking ¢
their own pupils only, might well concli
that there was no association at all. In}
same way the personal contacts of m
people are limited and reflection about t
small circle only would be misleading ;§
would be very unlikely to give anything |
a true picture of the variation in the whi
population, or what is happening to {
population owing to differential fertility.

The private school group shown in Ti
I is rather heterogeneous, so Table II show
further division.

The numbers are very : small and could oF
justify tentative conclusions. The fee-pay
at the secondary schools come from §{
smallest families of all, showing. one of |
economic advantages of belonging to a sit
family.

‘Secondary and contra! school childd
... INTELEIGENCE: AND. FAMILY SIZE

; oa ee Soa 4 S : . a

' : ves wm oe Ee ye ee lg % ! .
- . 8 fog ae ee ay 5 z Bs 4 . . .
1B) ON. PRIVATE: SCHOOL GROUP
FuURTHSR: UB-D) = Te om we: ie mae ™" sai 2 pe &
a Ps *, aon , * a met a ® woe “4 ’ . . =
. Seog . oof 8 .
* seme ea, Ee wes tt ‘8% . Loe ’ .
Cet gyn Settee hers be ae PR ae vot. fe. . woe we F .. .
. os : . .- .3 x Tyee ©

. . rity eee


  

po. cot ek .
. . aon eeeh te te - 98,’
Se ta : mo at oboe Pe ® ‘ fe wt
xo “ Sate Sha + , Otis
Oo.
‘ wot. \ 3 . . o
‘ ’ tes . :
i & : ‘ : . ‘
: *

children who sat |
scholarshi lace 36]
Non-s a. peace;
snildren who did; .
not sit exam. ©... 45
radeApublicand;  rade B private; |
gchools ...: | tee J 63 | 97
\ll private school}... :° |
children. ... te ORM _ 292. .
All children’... | 3,305.

| re28 | +0-123

      
  
   
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
   
  
   
 
 
 
  

218 | r-07 |; —0-133

-326 —0'032

1 2°47
1°68 |

| —0O° 166

118 | 1°43 =.) - —0°096
100 | 2:58 | -—-0°224

nave fewer sibs than the average child,
private school children far fewer. Is: this
educed number just what would be expected
rom the.association between intelligence and
ertility, because, of..course, if. we select
ever children.'we shall automatically select
ose with fewer sibs on the average? A
omparison is given in Table III. ©

TABLE III |
|CoMPARISON BETWEEN OBSERVED AND EXPECTED

Mran NUMBER OF SIBS 
secondary school. |
Bispecial place)

: ntral school eee
Private schools | -r:

| +o-r14+-0-x2
—0°04+-0°12
—0:90+0°09

The results show that the number of sibs
f the scholarship and central school children
5 just about what would be expected if they
ere selected on ability alone. They are
oups of reduced fertility, but only to the
ent that selection’ of clever children

ew sibs. In this case of the private school
Bhildren, howeyer, the number of sibs is far

ower than would be expected owing to their
uperiority in intelligence to the average for
he whole population,

Bhree Special Subgroups
The further results I. want. to present

   
  
 

nevitably implies selection of children with |

243

concern three groups selected from the main

group as follows :
Group 1. The 135 children securing the
highest results on the Otis Scale, being 4
‘per cent. of the whole group. (Retested
later on the Binet Scale.) |
Group 2. A median group of 135 children. . (Also retested later on the Binet
Scale) |
_ Group 3. A quarter of the whole group,
those securing the lowest results on the
Otis Scale, were retested on- the Binet
Scale. The 270 children with the lowest
“Binet E.Q’s, being 8 per cent. of the whole
group, form this sub-group.

Much more detailed information is available
about these children and their families than
for the whole group of 3,400. It is only some
of it that I am able to present to you,
because these records have only just been
completed. Actually some of the analyses
were only made last week, so the results are
almost as new to me as to you. And I must
admit that I am surprised by some of them.
Owing to the very short time available for
preparation I trust that you will forgive the
preliminary form in which the figures are
given. | : Oo
_ First of all, it can be said at once that for
our present purpose it did not prove helpful
to sub-divide these groups further according
to intelligence. In the case of the group
composed of the dullest children this may
seem surprising, because the lowest 8 per
cent. of Binet I.Q’s includes a considerable
Tange of.variation from the mentally defective and very backward to those a good deal
less backward. Actually, however, the number of sibs is the same throughout this group.

This raises a point of importance. Does

fertility go on increasing right down to the
lowest levels of intelligence, or does it cease
to do so. after reaching a certain point ?
Fig. 2 almost suggested that it falls off, but
our numbers are insufficient for a definite
statement to be made. It is often asserted
that mental defectives, or those upon the
border-line of mental deficiency, form a
group of specially high fertility as contrasted with the rest of the population. This
244

is true in a sense, but is a misleading state
ment. The increase of fertility, or the
decrease of fertility, is quite even from one
end of the distribution of intelligence to the
other. Or actually, if we accept the suggestion just put forward, the rate of increase of
fertility may fall off at very low levels of
intelligence. Thus the high fertility of the
dullest may not exceed the average for the
population by quite as much as the very low
fertility of the most gifted falls short of it.
In view of the imminent decline in the
population of this country, it would be fairer
to emphasize the infertility at one extreme
even more than the high fertility at the
other.

Fertility of Mothers of Children of the Three
Groups

Let me give you first a general comparison
between the three groups, the brightest, the
average and the dullest. The information is
much more detailed than for the whole group
discussed hitherto, and it is now possible to
take as the measure of fertility the number
of children born to the mothers, including
stillborn children and those who died prior
to the collection of the information. Stepsibs on the mother’s side are now, therefore,
included. TableIV shows the average number
of children born to mothers of the children
falling into each group. As the mothers were

TABLE IV

AVERAGE NUMBER OF OFFSPRING OF MOTHERS OF
CHILDREN IN THE THREE SPECIAL GROUPS

   
     
  
  
    
 

Group 1 | Group 2 | Group 3
(brightest) | (median) | (dullest)
Living* 1°70 3°72
Dead 0°13 0°53
stillborn 0°03 0-17
Total

* Propositi omitted.

THE ABOVE FIGURES AS PROPORTIONS

Group 1 | Group 2 | Group 3
Living I°-oO 1-6 2°2
Dead 1-o 2°4 4°0
Stillborn ... I-o 3°1 5°6

THE EUGENICS. REVIEW

brought the family. to notice are omittey

   
    
  

ascertained: owing to having a child withi, :
certain age limits, a better comparison yj
be secured if the children themselves wh, :

The death-rate amongst the sibs of th:
dullest children is much greater tha
amongst the sibs of the brightest. If, there
fore, we took the number of children born a
the measure of fertility, we should exaggerat, :
somewhat our estimate of differential fe.
tility, for what is most important practically
is the recruitment into the adult population,
This is the one factor which might lead to to
high an estimate for differential fertility jy
the population. Actually, however, in studies.
such as this, in which the families are brought.
to light through children of fairly advance
age, in this case about 12, the highe
death-rate has to a large extent already pro.
duced its effect. The remaining effect will
not be very great, and will be small com.
pared with other factors operating in the
opposite way, for example one that will be
mentioned in a moment. :

I should like to emphasize again that these
figures are averages ; there is great variation
in all the groups, though the general ten.
dency is clear. Table V will serve to illus.
trate this point. .
} TABLE V
PERCENTAGES OF CHILDREN OF THE THREE Groups
WITH GIVEN NUMBERS OF (LIVING) SIBS

   
    

Percentages

     

   
 

No. of sibs

Group 1 | Group 2 | Group 3
(brightest) | (median) | (dullest)

oO 9 7

I 23 II

2 18 15

3 16 17

4-5 17 18

6-8 . 12 22

9 and more 5 II

 

Effects of Incompleteness of many of the

Famtltes

An examination of the figures soon
revealed the fact that while the families
contributing the brightest children were
already practically complete at the time the
information was obtained, the mothers of
     
   
   

. dullest group would have.a considerable
be of Farther children. This expectaion can easily be deduced from the relationhip within the three groups between age of
other and number of children. The assoijation, expressed in the form of correlation
oefficients, was as follows :

Group I 0°10
Group2 ... oO°21
Group 3 0:38

It is easy to calculate what the family size
will be when all the mothers have passed the
age of 50. The results are given in Table VI.

TABLE VI
AVERAGE NUMBER OF LIVING CHILDREN

 

Group 1 | Group 2 | Group 3
(brightest) | (median) | (dullest)

  

 

At present see 1°70

Further children
who will be born
to mothers

Total when

mothers have all

passed 50 years

3°72

 

We see therefore that the association between
intelligence and fertility is much closer than
would be anticipated if we relied for our
estimate upon the numbers of sibs of children of school age and known intelligence.
Actually when we allow for extra children
who will be born later, the correlation coefficient is likely to be increased by, say,
‘roughly a half, which means that the trend
is about twice as strong as it would be
thought to be on the basis of the usual
unadjusted estimates..:

Early M arriage and Late Child-bearing

It is well known that one of the more
obvious factors in the infertility of those of
superior ability is a relatively late age at
marriage. The records for the three special
groups do not include the age of the mother
at the time of marriage, but they do include
a related measurement—the age of the
mother at the time of the birth of the first
child. The average ages of the mothers in
the three groups at this time were as follows :

Group I 27°4 years
Group 2 24:8 years
Group 3 23°9 years

INTELLIGENCE AND FAMILY SIZE

245

I must admit, however, that a further result
surprised me. The average ages of the
mothers at the time the information was
obtained were as follows :

Group I 43:6 years
Group 2 42°7 years
Group 3 43°5 years

Mothers of children falling into these three
entirely different groups, and selected simply
because they had a child within given age
limits, show no systematic difference in
average age at the time the survey was made.
I had expected that the mothers of the
dullest children, married, on the average,
several years earlier than the mothers of the
brightest children, would prove to be
younger. This was not the case. We must
also remember that the mothers of the
dullest children are going to have a considerable number of further children, as has
just been shown. The conclusion to be
drawn seems to be clear enough. It is
perfectly true that the mothers of the
dullest children commence their reproductive life much earlier, and this contributes
extra children; but they also continue it
much longer, and this contributes even more
extra children. Relatively late age at
marriage is a part of the mechanism producing the infertility of the gifted, but
cessation of child-bearing at a relatively
youthful age is even more important. It
seems to me that this finding is one indication that the association between intelligence and infertility in our population at the
present time is not just a simple problem in
economics, to be put right by single or simple
administrative remedies. It seems rather to
point to complex underlying causes deeply
rooted in basic qualities of body and mind...
The mechanism may often be simple, often
no more than the practice of contraception,
but this is only the way in which the result
is brought about ; the underlying causes are

far more subtle and will require all the

resources of science for their elucidation.

Relation of Fertility to Social Status within
the Three Groups .

The children composing the three groups
246

have been classified according to the occupa-~tion of the father as a measure of social
status. The correlation coefficients between
fathers’ occupation and number of children,
within the three groups, are as follows :

Group I +0°05
Group 2 —0O°24
Group 3 —0O°2I

Taking Groups 2 and 3 first, there is a considerable association between the occupation
of the fathers and of the number of children.
The occupations in Group 3 are, on the
average, considerably lower in status than
those in Group 2, but this does not: account
for all the difference in fertility by any
means. Suppose the occupations of fathers
of Group 3 children are adjusted to the
average level of fathers of Group 2 children
the result is:

No. of living sibs
Group 2 — a --» 2°78
Group 3 °72

Group 3 (occupation of fathers adjus
ted to same level as Group 2) 3°37
Thus, while the increased fertility in Group
3 may be attributed in a sense and in part
to an association between fertility and
occupational status, this only accounts for
some of the difference from Group 2. In
other words, at fixed social class there is still
a marked association between intelligence
and infertility.

The correlation coefficient in the case of
Group I is practically zero, so that in this
group there is no association between occupation of father and size of family. This
seems to me to be another indication of the
complexity of the problem of differential
fertility. The occupations of fathers in this
group, by the way, are particularly well
assorted, and represent adequately all occupational classes from the highest to the
lowest. The very bright child whose father
is in the lowest occupational group comes
from just as small a family as does the very
bright child of prosperous parents. The very
gifted are, on the average, very infertile, and
this is true of all social classes. Apparently
we cannot hope that the dying out of the
very gifted who belong to the higher social
categories will be at least partially made up

% . ;
by greater fertility: amongst the. very Rift:
poor. Unfortunately, if our results a
representative, the very gifted poor are then,
selves just asinfertile;- =

As you will have realized, the preseyil
investigation does not -disclose any ne
information of a startling character. It ;
more a matter of dotting i's and crossing ¢, 7
The results do not: suggest that Previn.
conclusions about differential fertility we,
unduly alarmist or pessimistic. Onthe co),
trary the process is probably even mop
rapid than has been feared. In the secon;
place the investigation has yielded yg
further indications of the complexity of th
problem. — |

Not long ago the Eugenics Society took th
initiative in founding the Population Invest,
gation Committee, under the chairmanshi
of Professor Carr-Saunders. I am sure thal
it will be generally agreed that no moni
useful activity could have been undertakey
I feel sure also that the committee wif
investigate most thoroughly not only totd
trends in population, but trends in diffe,
ential fertility as well. Detailed and varie
researches are needed, and it is to be hope(fl
that there will ultimately emerge knowleds
making it possible to maintain, and even ty
increase, the population, not only in quan
tity but also in quality.

Summary

1. An attempt has been made to secure:
sample of school children representing a com
plete cross-section of the population. The
group of 3,400 children was composed of al
the children whose homes were within the
boundaries of the city of Bath on July 27th
1934, and whose dates of birth fell betweer
September Ist, 1921, and Atigust.31st, 1925
inclusive. The children were tested on the
Advanced Otis Scale. The completeness of
the ascertainment and of the mental testin
is assessed. This lecture gives an account
of some of the results regarding intelligence
and family size obtained from the group.

“g. The association between intelligenc4
and number of living full sibs,expressed as 1
correlation coefficient, was —0°224. This i
somewhat higher than has usually. been found
in this couiatty: Thus it is likely that special
recautions to obtain « a representative sample
will reveal a higher association, while imperfections in this respect. will lead to too low
an estimate of the association. The relation
van be expressed: -by straight lines ;

and steadily as the number of sibs increases ;
and the number of sibs falls off evenly and
steadily as intelligence increases.

3, 1,271 ‘children were tested on the
‘Binet Scale as ‘well as on the Otis Scale. The
‘Binet results were more closely associated
with number of sibs, showing that the use of
the verbal group test had not introduced an
extra artificial association, but had on the
contrary; being. a less efficient measure of
general intelligence, minimized it.

4. The whole group was sub-divided
according to type of school and the results
for the different sub-groups are compared.

x, Three special groups of children were
selected from the whole sample; these were

 
   
 
    

children and the dullest children. More
detailed particulars were obtained for these
‘special groups.

6. The death-rate amongst brothers and
sisters in the dullest group was higher than
amongst sibs of the brightest children.

[

AKADEMISCHE NBELAESS

& SCIENTIA %

B THE OSLY BAVIEW that has a really world-wide circulation.

tec epeerrati} yehology, history of religion
biological sciences, physiolog logy, ogy, reveal of religions, an
such as those on the con

pro the whole worl

that are not French. te he Jansuage of

INTELLIGENCE AND FAMILY SIZE

that is,
intelligence falls off, on the average, evenly

composed of the brightest children, average >

Publishers: DAVID aE Lendon - mee BE.  STECHERT & Co., New York - NICOLA ZANICHELLI, Bologna - FELI
he MARUZEN COMPANY,

Is THE ONLY REVIEW the contributors to which are really international.

nations t to the advancement of science ; on determinism ; damental physical and chemical Guestions, and ind partewasty on telativites on the p hysics of the atom and of radiations ; on vitalism. §Sclentia thus radian all
the main problems interesting the intellectual circles of

Scientia, Milan, sending sixpence in one stamp of your country, merely to cover
| oos are granted fo those who, tk

— 247

yy. While the families of the brightest
children were practically complete, the
mothers of the dullest children will have a
considerable number of additional children
before the close of their reproductive life.
The association between intelligence and
infertility is thus much closer than would be
anticipated from the usual unadjusted estimates based on the sibs of children of school
age.

8. The mothers of the dullest children
commenced childbearing at a considerably
younger age than the mothers of the brightest, this being responsible for some of the
extra children; but they continue childbearing for much longer, this contributing
even more extra children.

g. In the average and dullest groups there
was a marked association between number of
sibs and occupation of father, so that even at
fixed intelligence there is still a considerable
association remaining between fertility and
social class. In the brightest group there was
no association ; if this group is representative, therefore, the dying out of the very
gifted i in the higher social categories cannot
be partly compensated by greater fertility

amongst the very gifted poor, who are themselves just as infertile.

 

 

X ALCAN, Paris
‘NACHFOLGER, Budapest - F. ROUGE & CIE, Lausanne

To
INTERNATIONAL REVIEW OF SCIENTIFIO SYNTHESIS
Published every month (each number contaieing 100 to 120 pages)

Editors : G. B. BONINO - F. BOTTAZZI - G. BRUNI - A. PALATINI
G. SCORZA. General Secretary: Paolo Bonetti.

     
 

B THE ONL Y REVIEW ofs afaynthesis and unification of science, fant deals in its articles with thenewest and most fundamental problems of all branches
of kn and advancement, mathematics, astronomy, geo

» physics,

chemistry,
tics ; articles sometimes constituting real and

proper enquiries,
; on the most fan

I8 THE ONLY REVIEW that among its contributors can boast of the most illustrious men of science in the whole world.
of their authors, and every number has # supplement

contsining the Bronet) Seeneeton of a8 the articles
know only French. oF @ ée copy General Secretary o
cover packing and postage.)

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXX, No. 4.
