GLANVILLE WILLIAMS
LL.D., F.B.A.

The Legalization of Medical Abortion*

HE HISTORY OF our legislative efforts

to reform the law of abortion goes back
to 1952, when Mr. Joseph Reeves introduced into the Commons a Bill which would have
given statutory force to the judge-made rule that
an abortion is legal if done to protect the woman’s life or health. We were doubtful whether

there was much advantage in such a limited mea- .
sure as this. It might have given reassurance te~

some members of the medical profession, causing.
them to terminate pregnancies on health grounds.
when they would otherwise have been too doubtful about the state of the law. But certainly the
measure, even if it had passed, would have done
little to diminish the tide of illegal terminations.
. Anyway, it did not pass, because Mr. Reeves
did not have a sufficiently lucky number in the
ballot for private members to be allowed
enough Parliamentary time for the proposal to
be debated. The experience we gained was this.
We were so bitterly attacked in the Roman
Catholic press for our timid little Bill that we
became satisfied that we could not be more
severely criticized whatever measure we proposed. Accordingly, when our second opportunity came along with Mr. Kenneth Robinson’s
success in the ballot for time in 1961, the Bill
that we worked out in collaboration with Mr.
Robinson included a number of other grounds
for termination. Under it, doctors could terminate a pregnancy where the woman had been
raped—humanly speaking, one of the strongest
grounds for termination—or on eugenic grounds
where there was grave risk of the child being
born grossly deformed or with such an abnormality that he would require constant hospital
treatment or special care throughout life.
That would have covered the thalidomide cases,

* The text of the address given by Dr. Williams,
President of the Abortion Law Reform Association, at
the Annual General Meeting of the Association on
October 30th, 1963.

which of course had not then happened, and
cases where there is grave danger of foetal
abnormality because the mother contracts
German measles in the early stages of pregnancy,
and various other eugenic cases.

Mr. Robinson prepared the ground for his
Bill with scrupulous care, and introduced it to a
discreditably thin House on second reading with
a most persuasive speech. What happened we:
all know. The debate under the rules of the House had to be finished at four o’clock, and the
Speaker could not put it to the vote unless
satisfied that members had had a fair say. When
it was moved just before four o’clock that the
question be now put, a group of Roman Catholic
Members, who had not before tried to speak,
stood up as if wishing to speak. The Speaker
then refused to put the question, and the
measure was lost. Had it passed second reading °
there were some prospects that the measure
would have received enough Government benevolence to have had time allocated to it for a
full debate.

The fact that so many Members of Parliament
did not think the debate worth attending is a
measure of the apathy and ignorance upon this
grave social issue. We cannot make progress
until we have awakened people more fully to the
evils of the present abortion law.

If Mr. Robinson’s Bill had passed, it would
have eased matters very greatly for the medical
profession, and would also have had the important effect of-allowing termination of pregnancy on the eugenic indication. Yet it would
not have solved all the doctor’s legal problems.
One of the difficult questions under the present
law is whether a doctor is legally justified in
terminating or advising the termination of a
pregnancy because he has reason to think that
the woman will otherwise commit suicide, or
undergo a dangerous illegal abortion. If it
appears to the psychiatrist, perhaps from pre
19

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, April 1964, 56, 1.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

vious suicide attempts, that there is a real risk
of suicide, the welfare of the patient surely
suggests that the operation should be performed. >
Yet it is not at all clear that termination would be’
permissible on these grounds under the present
law, and it would have been no clearer under Mr.
Robinson’s Bill. Also, Mr. Robinson’s Bill
would certainly not have put an end to the
illegal operator.

Last August I was in New York for a Conference of Professors of Criminal Law, and one
of the subjects we discussed was abortion. The
American Law Institute has proposed that
abortion should be legalized in that country very
much on the lines of Mr. Robinson’s Bill. At
the conference I supported this solution, but I
pointed out that no measure of limited legalization will get rid of dangerous abortions by unqualified people; to do that, you have to legalize
completely the operation for the medical
profession

One member of our Conference was a Priest
of the Roman Catholic Church who was also a
Professor of Law, a deeply sincere and warmhearted person. He took the usual Catholic
view on abortion, and made it clear that in his
view his Church could never accept a list of
indications for medical abortion in which the
operation could be regarded as proper. He did,
however, hint at one respect in which rethinking
might possibly take place in Romanist circles.
This was in respect of the time of animation—
the time when human personality is supposed to
begin. If it could be agreed that human personality does not begin at the time of conception,
but only at some later time, then the way might be
opened for tolerating abortion before this period.

Since this question of the beginning of human
personality is, in my view, the key to the whole
question of abortion law reform, I make no
apology for reopening it.

For centuries theologians have debated two

rival theories, that human personality begins at —

conception, when the ovum is fertilized—this is
called the immediate animation theory—and that human personality begins at some later
time during gestation—this is called the mediate
animation theory. The strong majority view in
the Roman Catholic Church supports immediate
animation.

20

The question is often muddled by Roman
Catholics who assert that “‘life’ begins at the
fertilization of the ovum. Of course, the ovum
was alive before it was fertilized, and so was the
sperm. Both cells, before they met, had a lifehistory of their own in the bodies of the respective parents. The mistake is perhaps a legacy of
the fact that animus in Latin means life, while
anima in medieval Latin means the soul. What
the controversy is really about is not the time
when the foetus becomes alive—it is always
alive—but the time when it becomes infused
with a soul. Historically, it is bound up with the
fear that if the foetus having a soul dies without
being baptized, it will face eternal torment.

At the present day, Roman Catholics who take
part in public controversy on abortion do not
speak of the soul; they try to put their belief into
secular terms by speaking in a rather vague way
of “the right to life”. This is what Dr. St.JohnStevas does in his recent book under that title.
The right to life, he says, begins at conception,
but when one looks more closely one finds that
this assertion is supported by the religious
argument, which runs as follows. Formerly, it
was thought that some qualitative change took
place in the embryo during its development;
this qualitative change was supposed to be
accompanied by the infusion of the soul:

To-day, and indeed for a very considerable
period, it has been accepted by biologists that
there is no qualitative difference between the
embryo at the moment of conception and at the
moment of quickening. Life is fully present from
the moment of conception. It follows that if there
be a soul it too must be present from the time of
conception.

This looks like a compelling argument, until
one begins to apply the same type of reasoning

- to this supposed moment of conception. What is

the moment of conception? It is not a moment
at all. Like the development of the embryo, it is
a process. I believe that the latest biological
account is as follows. The sperm meets and joins
with the ovum. Two structures called asters
appear, and a spindle forms between them. The
chromosomes from the egg nucleus and the
sperm nucleus collect around the equator of the
spindle before dividing longitudinally into
halves which move towards the asters, forming
THE LEGALIZATION OF MEDICAL ABORTION

two daughter nuclei. Finally the cytoplasm of
the egg cell divides, and two new cells result.*

' Now Dr. Stevas says that “‘life is fully present
from the moment of conception.” So it is, but
life is just as fully present before the moment of
conception; and “moment of conception” is a
figment of the imagination, since conception like
everything else is a process which takes time.
The argument that life begins with conception
is just as unbiological as the old notion that life
begins some time after conception.

To this the reply will certainly be made: “We
are not speaking just of life, but of human life.”
Here, I think, we have arrived at the real
question; and when one asks it in this form it
becomes evident that the answer depends upon a
somewhat arbitrary choice of language. Do you
wish to regard the microscopic fertilized ovum
as a human being? You can if you want to, and
if there were no social consequences of doing so,
there might be no reason why you should not.
But there are most important social arguments
for not adopting this language. Moreover, if
you look at actual beliefs and behaviour, you will
find almost unanimous rejection of it.

The law does not look upon a natural miscarriage as the death of a human being. A foetus
that is spontaneously aborted before the end of
the seventh month can be buried in the back
garden, or put in a hospital incinerator. No
statutory notice of birth need be given. No
religious community performs a funeral service
for an aborted embryo. No one attempts to
baptize the microscopic ovum. A Roman
Catholic priest will, if called upon, attempt to
baptize an aborted foetus that has attained such
a size that it can be recognized as such; but
Catholic doctrine is still not finally settled on the
time of entry of the soul, so Catholics do not
recognize it as certain that baptism can be effective if it is administered too early in the development of the foetus. If the baptism is administered,
therefore, it is just to be on the safe side.

Only in our own time have embryologists
discovered the immense rate of natural wastage

* Experimental Cell Research, 1962, 28, 323.

t George W. Corner, 1944, Ourselves Unborn: An
Embryologist’s Essay on Man, 93 (Based on the HertigRock erie of human embryos of the second and third
week.

of the foetus. One in three, and possibly one in
two, of all fertilized human ova are destined to
be lost by spontaneous abortion or reabsorption.t We do not regard these natural miscarriages as equivalent to the death of a child—
even the mother herself does not do so. She
regards it only as the loss of a potential child.

At least in the very early stages of pregnancy,
therefore, we do not consider that a human
being is in existence, but only a potential human
being. It is true that law and religious belief
generally look upon induced abortion as wrongful, but this hardly reflects popular attitudes.
Neither the law nor the Church has succeeded
in persuading the ordinary woman that it is
wrongful for her to endeavour to terminate a
pregnancy in the early stages, if having a child
would be a serious burden for her.

Recent advances in the control of fertility
emphasize the arbitrary nature of the line
between contraception and abortion. For example, success has recently been achieved with
IUCDs (intra-uterine contraceptive devices) for
the purpose of birth control, but it is still not
known whether their effect is contraceptive (by
preventing the fusion of the male and female
cells) or abortifacient (by preventing the
fertilized ovum from lodging in the womb). I find
it hard to believe that those who accept chemical
and mechanical methods of birth control will
attach importance to the question whether the
device operates just before the fusion of the two
cells or just after. It is a totally unrealistic point
on which to hinge a discussion. No one really
believes that detaching the fertilized ovum is
equivalent to the murder of a human being.

Protestant theologians and doctors have come
to accept the fact that the foetus does not have
the same moral status and claim to consideration
as the mother. In the well-known Bourne case, .
the judge directed the jury that the life of “the
unborn child” could be ended to save “‘the yet
more precious life of the mother.” If they were
of equal moral status this automatic preference
could hardly be made.

What is needed, therefore, is a more explicit
recognition of the fact that it does not accord
with the mores of our secular society to regard
the early foetus as an ordinary human being.
There are signs that even religious opinion may

2I
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

be prepared to take this view. A statement by the
Bishop of Exeter, Dr. R. C. Mortimer, would
give us all we want in the matter of abortion law
reform, and in some ways more than all we want:
he supposed, he said, that a case could be made
out that human life began at that moment at
which the unborn baby, if surgically separated from its mother’s womb, was capable of survival ,
as a separate entity. “If that were accepted as an:
answer, then abortion would be permissible up
to that moment.”’*

Reasoning along these lines, I have been led
to wonder whether we were right in sponsoring a
Bill that would have legalized abortion only on
given medical indications. As for the Roman
Catholics, it is clear that they will never accept
such legislation. They are obsessed by the
dogma that you can never do evil so that good
may come; if aborting the foetus is evil, no
medical or social or eugenic or moral argument
can make it good in their view. The only
possibility I see of any change of mind on their
part—and, if it comes, it is still a long time off—
is in relation to the time when human life or
human personality begins. On this, as I have
said, Roman Catholic doctrine is still not finally
settled. Dr. St.John-Stevas says it was settled in
favour of immediate animation by a constitution
of Pius IX in 1869, but, on my understanding of
the matter, that constitution merely pronounced
the punishment of excommunication for those
who caused an abortion, without regard to the
question whether the foetus was endowed with
a human soul. The theory behind the present
Catholic doctrine is that even if the abortion
occurs before the advent of the soul, it is still an
“anticipated homicide’. Some Catholic theologians continue to dispute the doctrine of
immediate animation, though they agree that
abortion before the entry of the soul is sinful, because, they say, it is a crime against nature.t.’
In effect this is merely part of the general
Roman Catholic objection to birth control.

* Exeter Express and Echo, November 13th, 1962. The
Bishop added: ‘‘and impermissible afterwards;” but this
was surely a mistake. There would be no objection to
inducing the premature birth of a viable infant. Deliberately killing such an infant, for any purpose other than
saving the life of the mother, would of course be a crime.

i of C. Messenger (Ed.), 1949, Theology and Evolution,
p. 306.

t The Times, February 6th, 1961.

22

It is not only the Roman Catholics who object
to our list of medical indications for terminating
pregnancy. At the time of Mr. Robinson’s Bill,
Canon G. B. Bentley wrote to The Times
objecting to the Bill on the ground that

It would further muddle and mislead the public
conscience. People would inevitably be encouraged
to suppose that abortion in the circumstances
mentioned in the Bill was morally superior to
abortion in other circumstances. But the supposition would be unfounded: for, as far as I can see,
any ethical theory capable of justifying abortion
in the situations described would justify it in other
situations as well—not to mention permitting
child destruction and infanticide.

Canon Bentley’s letter proceeded as follows:
If then the legislature is going to draw a new
legal line in this matter of abortion, let it draw it
where it will at least not make ethical nonsense.
The best place would be between therapeutic
abortion and abortion for other ends; for here is
an intelligible distinction between terminating a
pregnancy because you believe it to be a present
danger to the woman concerned and terminating

a pregnancy because for some reason or other you

would rather the child did not see the light of day

. .. Should drawing the line here be considered

insufficiently “‘progressive’’, it is hard to see any

reasonable alternative to removing the legal ban
from medical termination altogether and leaving
it to the medical conscience to determine each
case as best it can. Admittedly this would expose
incipient human life to considerable risk; but even
that would be preferable to making the law of

England explicitly sanction killing an unborn

child for fear that, if it were permitted to live, it

would become a burden to its mother or to the
state,{

Canon Bentley’s proposal to restrict the measure to the therapeutic abortion would not
satisfy us. This is not merely on the highly
abstract ground that it would not be sufficiently
“progressive”; no one thinks in such. absurd
terms. It is because it would be too limited a
measure to satisfy a demand for medical
abortion on grounds of conscience, for example
where the child is likely to be deformed, and
also because it would be far too limited to get
rid of the evil of unskilled abortions. This brings
me to Canon Bentley’s other suggestion, that
the legal ban should be removed from medical
termination altogether. With one qualification,
this is the step that I should like to see taken, and
I believe it is one that would be supported by
most members of this Society. The qualification
THE LEGALIZATION

relates to the period of pregnancy during which
the operation is to be permissible.

Mr. Robinson’s Bill incorporated a timelimit for the operation which we settled after
much thought. Under the Bill, it was not to be
performed after the end of the thirteenth week of
pregnancy, which allowed three months plus a
week. If you are going to provide for abortion at
all, you must give the woman time to realize
that she is pregnant and to make arrangements.
The longer you can give her the better, because a
woman who starts by wanting an abortion
sometimes changes her mind later on; if the
operation is postponed, therefore, there is a
chance that it will not be needed. On the other
hand, the longer the operation is put off the more
serious it becomes from the medical point of

view; and if it is postponed so long that the baby 
is fully formed, it needs serious grounds in
order to overcome the natural repugnance to
undertaking it. These opposing considerations
mean that some practical compromise must be
reached. When drafting Mr. Robinson’s Bill,

thirteen weeks seemed to be the narrowest limit.
that we could reasonably adopt, and, because 
we wished to be as moderate in our proposal as
we could, we took that. Recent advances in
obstetric practice suggest that-it-would be safe
to take a somewhat more extended period, say
seventeen weeks. If this seventeen weeks were
reckoned according to the usual medical method
of dating pregnancy, it would mean that the
foetus would on average be only fifteen weeks
old, not seventeen.

The important thing is to fix a time-limit
making it clear that we are not attacking the
sanctity of human life in any reasonable meaning
of that expression. If the foetus has recognisably
become a baby, you could not operate under our
Bill, except for the single purpose of preserving
the mother’s life. Up to about mid term, on the
other hand, the psychological objections to the
operation are minimal. Abortion before this
time was legal under the old common law, which
allowed abortion before quickening; this remained the position in England till 1803, when
misguided legislation first made abortion before
quickening a crime.

If we could only get the law back substantially
to what it was before 1803, we should solve the

OF MEDICAL ABORTION

problem of illegal abortions, because in practice
they rarely take place after the first three months.
Thus, at a stroke, we should have achieved our
full objective, instead of just nibbling at it.

I have given reasons for supposing that a
simple measure along these lines might even
have more support from some Church people
than the Bill that Mr. Robinson put forward.
If the Bishop of Exeter is prepared to contemplate unrestricted abortion for the medical
profession up to the time of viability, the end of
the seventh month, surely he would support a
measure that would only cover the first four
months plus one week. Those who, like Canon
Bentley, object to an act of Parliament appearing
to give its blessing to particular grounds of
medical termination would also be satisfied, or
at any rate less dissatisfied than they were with
Mr. Robinson’s Bill. Such a measure would also
make more sense for the medical profession,
because it is not the practice to prescribe
medical considerations by Act of Parliament.

Once that we decide that it is better for an‘

operation to be performed by the medical
profession than by illegal operators, there is no
point in imposing a limiting list of conditions.
Indeed, such a list is self-defeating, because it
brings back the illegal operator.

The measure that I have in mind, therefore,
would be a simple one. It would provide that a
registered medical practitioner may lawfully
terminate pregnancy, except that such termination shall not be performed after the end of the
seventeenth week of pregnancy save for the
purpose of preserving the life of the mother.

If such a measure were passed, this Association could happily go out of existence. Until
such a measure is passed we cannot go out of
existence, because until then we shall still have
illegal operators.

In my book called The Sanctity of Life and the
Criminal Law I devoted two chapters to the
problem of abortion, in one sentence of which I
remarked that the legislation in Sweden and
Denmark allowing medical abortion on stated
grounds had not, unhappily, substantially
reduced the number of illegal abortions.
Commentators upon my book who were critical
of my point of view seized upon this one
sentence as destructive of the argument for

23

ER—E

~
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

legalizing abortion. For example, Dr. St.JohnStevas in his book The Right to Life
thinks it enough to deal with the matter as
follows. He first recognizes that

a powerful argument for extending legal
abortion is that this is the only way to curb the
trade of the back street abortionists. Legalized
abortion, it is said, would put them out of business.... If it could be established that a change
in the law really would get rid of dangerous
abortions there would be a case for its alteration.
The state would not be approving abortion but
merely removing a penal sanction in the interests
of public health.

Having expressed this apparent interest in the
argument, how does the author deal with it?
He thinks it sufficient to say:

Such evidence as there is, however, suggests
that legalized abortion does not reduce the itlegal
rate. In Sweden for example where a legal abortion may be obtained under a variety of conditions
including a situation where it can be assumed
that bearing and rearing a child would appreciably
overtax a mother’s bodily and mental powers,
legal abortions have increased sharply but so have
illegal ones.

To the unwary reader, this passage might
convey that the law hampering medical men
from terminating pregnancy has positively no
connection with the existence of the back-street
abortionists, except that in some mysterious
way it keeps their number down. Of course that
is nonsense. The law which outlaws this operation for the medical profession is directly the
cause of the existence of back-street abortionists.
How is it, then, that in Sweden with its liberal
laws there are still illegal abortions ? The answer
is obvious: their law is not sufficiently liberal.
We are told that in Sweden the special hospital
boards which hear applications for abortions
allow only 40 per cent of the applications. In
addition to the 60 per cent who are turned down,
there is the unknown number of women who
do not apply for legal abortions, either because
they realize that their case does not fall within
the rules, or because they cannot tolerate the
formality and even humiliation of applying to a
hospital board in a matter which they regard as
being uniquely their own affair. These are the
women who go to illegal abortionists; and
illegal abortion would still flourish in England if
Mr. Robinson’s Bill had been passed. On the

24

other hand, if the Bill I have just outlined were
passed the social problem would be solved. No
woman would go to a quack if she could get a
proper operation performed without formality
and in the usual way.

The law as I have suggested it is purely
permissive. It would not compel any medical
man to act, but would merely free him from the
constraints of the criminal law. At present, the
doctor in considering an abortion cannot confine
himself to deciding what is in the interest of the
patient, as he normally can; he must consider
whether he can get an acquittal by judge and
jury if he operates. This is an intolerable imposition upon the medical profession, and for the
more timid members it means that the decision
tends to be against operating even when it would
legally be allowed.

Two utilitarian arguments are commonly
advanced against proposals to legalize the
termination of pregnancy by medical men. The
first is that the operation is harmful. To discuss
this at length would take considerable time, but
the short answer is that although abortion is far
from being an ideal method of family planning,
the question whether a particular abortion is the
best solution of a particular medical or medicosocial problem is not for Parliament to decide in
the abstract but for the woman’s medical adviser
to decide in the actual case. Moreover, if the
termination of pregnancy were put within the
ordinary course of medical practice, with all
fears of the Old Bailey removed, a woman
would go to her doctor in her trouble, knowing
that he will do his best for her; and the doctor
would then be able, if he thought fit, to try to
dissuade her from the operation. At present, too
often, the woman goes straight to a charlatan,
who gives her no advice, and who will sometimes
operate on her even when in fact she is not
pregnant.

Although no one proposes abortion as a
substitute for an adequate system of contraceptive advice (which we do not possess at present),
we cannot yet foresee a time when contraception
will be completely reliable. Moreover, there will
always be some people so thoughtless, improvident or clumsy that they cannot use contraceptive techniques. These people cannot achieve
family planning except by voluntary sterilization
THE LEGALIZATION OF MEDICAL

or, in the last resort, abortion. I need hardly
stress the eugenic argument for extending
family planning to all groups, not merely to
those who are the most intelligent and socially
responsible.

The second utilitarian argument against us is
that legalization of the operation would swamp
the maternity hospitals. In itself this is a strange
argument—that we should continue to send
doctors to prison for performing an operation
because if we did not the operation would be

ABORTION

too popular. It is also erroneous: no obstetric
surgeon would be compellable to perform the
operation, and naturally he would continue to
give priority to those maternity cases of all
kinds that he considered the most urgent. It is
also to be noticed that an abortion if properly
performed results in a considerable saving of
hospital time; whereas a woman who gives birth
to a child spends about ten days in hospital,
between two and four days are enough for a
medical abortion.

25
