POSITIVE EUGENICS: A PROPOSAL
By C. P. BLACKER, M.A, M.D., ERCP.

T has always been difficult to devise
| practical measures to further the aims of

positive eugenics. A perusal of the suggestions in the standard books is apt to
disappoint the reader : they are apt to strike
him as unrealistic, impracticable or else insufficiently worked out in detail. The theory
of eugenics is impressive and convincing ;
the practical proposals too often seem to peter
out in triviality or futility.

Recently there occurred to me a measure
upon which I would value comment and
criticism. It is of such simplicity that I can
hardly believe that it has not been thought of
before, yet I cannot recall having seen it in
print or heard it put forward. In a sentence
the proposal is that financial help should be
given to the parents of, say, three children
recognized as of superior type, in order to
assist them in bringing up a fourth child. I
will try to explain this proposal in greater
detail.

1. It must be a common experience of
school teachers to see occasional sibships of
two or three children who make an impression
of being highly promising and above the
average in abilities and character. The
thought must occur to such _ teachers:
“What a pity that we cannot have more
children like the X’s: they are a pleasure to.
teach ; their influence in the school is good ;
they promise to do well in after-life ; their
parents are of superior type, and their home
is excellent. The country could do well with
more children of the X type; and it could
readily dispense with the all-too-numerous
children of the Y or Z type.”

I have been informed by two persons with
teaching experience in elementary schools
that they have encountered children about
whom they have felt in this way.

2. If appropriate funds were available,
would it not be a good thing to be able to
approach the parents of the X children, if
these (the parents) were still of reproductive

age, and to say to them something of this
sort : “‘ We have been watching the development of your children, who have done
very well in the school. In fact, they are the
sort of children that we think the country
could well have more of. If you have both
felt that it would unduly strain your re
‘sources to have another child, would it

25

make any difference to your decision if we
were to guarantee you a sum of {— a year
(say a fifth of the family’s earned income)
for fifteen years to help in rearing a third
or fourth child ? ”’

3. I submit that 99 per cent of parents
would feel profoundly flattered by such a
suggestion. Every parent is sensitive about
his children. There are no forms of praise
that touch parents more closely than praise
of their children : and in this case the praise
would redound in the most agreeable manner
upon themselves. The father would feel that
a tribute had indirectly been paid to his wife
as well as to his children; and the wife
would feel the same about her husband. The
worst that could happen would be that the
offer was refused, in which case no harm
would have been done. If, on the other hand,
the parents accepted the proposal, a guarantee would be given that the transaction
would be treated as secret by the sponsoring
body. The parents would be free to make the
arrangement known or to keep it secret as
they preferred. From the eugenic standpoint,
it would be best if they did not keep it a
secret. The principles of positive eugenics
would benefit from the publicity and the discussion which would be provoked. It is, I
think, conceivable that some parents would
be pleased if an arrangement which so redounded to their credit were made known.
Subsidies would begin with the birth of the
child, or perhaps when pregnancy had been
definitely established.

4. If arrangements of this sort were
reached with parents of children at elemen26 : THE EUGENICS REVIEW

tary or secondary schools (rather than with
parents of children at expensive preparatory
or public schools), there could be no question
of class bias being involved. It could not be
said that the scheme benefited primarily the
upper and middle classes—a reproach incurred by -certain proposals for furthering
positive eugenics. The less the earnings of
the parents, moreover, the smaller would be
the annual subsidy (based on a fraction of the
earned income), and the less the cost of the
scheme as a whole.

5. The sponsoring body might, in the first
place, be some central organization like the
Eugenics Society. But no scheme of positive
eugenics could ever operate on a wide scale
if it remained entirely centralized. Galton
strongly advocated the formation of local
associations for promoting eugenics. If the
scheme caught on, such local associations
could perform a most useful task. They could
appeal for funds and subscriptions with good
prospects of success. It is notoriously difficult to spend money constructively on
“‘ charitable ’’ causes. The big trusts for the
public distribution of money, such as the
Nuffield, Carnegie and Rockefeller Trusts,
are prepared to spend very considerable sums
on obtaining the best expert advice on how
funds should be allocated to the best advantage. Here would be a “charity ’’ which
would have in it nothing of the charitable,
in the sense in which that word is commonly
used. It is difficult to imagine any “‘ cause ”’
which would yield more certain and more
valuable dividends.

6. It is one of the aims of a positive
population policy to encourage large families,
to induce parents to have three children

instead of two, or four instead of three. The
fourth (or third) children born in this way
would stand excellent chances of being valuable assets to the nation. There would,
doubtless, be occasional mishaps. The fourth
child might turn out to be a Mongolian
imbecile or a social failure, or he might die.
But isolated instances of this character
would not invalidate the general results,
which would be to augment the nation’s most
valuable wealth which resides in the quality
of its best citizens. a

47. The scheme would not depend, as do
some of Galton’s proposals, on elaborate
eugenic assessments whose significance is
predictive ; I refer to assessments of people
before they get married. The outcome of
such evaluations is unknown at the time they
are made, because no children have yet been
born. In the cases here considered the

-assessment of the eugenic value of the

parents would be immediately to hand. It
would exist in the concrete form of the two
or three children already born. The assess
‘ment would not be made by some obscure

form of expert. It would be made primarily
by the teachers or other.education authorities
whose standards are easily understood, and
are indeed obvious to everyone. There
would be no question of giving autocratic
powers to “experts ’’ centred in anthropometric laboratories or in “‘ eugenic courts ”’
on the Nazi model.

8. The scheme would require very tactful
handling, and many persons would have to be
consulted before it was put into operation.
The people whose judgment I would value
most at this stage would be educationalists
and medical officers of health. ~

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXXVIII, No. 1
