EUGENICS AND CRIME
By Dr. W. C. SULLIVAN

(Medical Ojficsy of Holloway Urtsox)

In considering crime from the eugenic point of view we meet
with an initial difficulty of a kind that is tolerably familiar in the
investigation of bio-social problems. It is a difficulty which
depends on the dissimilar nature of the two sets of phenomena
which we propose to correlate. What the eugenist wants to
know is, I take it, of what sort of stock are the people who
become criminals ; he wants to ascertain, for instance, in what
degree their criminal habits are the result of specific inborn
characters. This is obviously a question of biological import,
but it is asked with reference to a category of individuals which
is defined not by biological but by sociological criteria. For
what do we mean when we talk of ‘‘ criminals”? It is impossible
to frame a definition of the word in purely biological terms. Try
as we may, we must bring in the notion of legality; this is
indeed the really essential element in the definition, for the one
and only characteristic which is common to all the individuals
which form the motley “criminal” group is precisely the
illegality of their conduct. Now it is obviously,somewhat difficult to give a biological rendering of illegality. How, for
instance, are we to conceive of the criminal disposition that
underlies thieving? For our present purpose a thief may
perhaps be defined in general terms as an.individual who satisfies
his acquisitive instincts in ways not sanctioned by the community. The instinct therefore is normal in itself; whilst its
expression, as violating the ethical code of the community, is
criminal. But it is self-evident that behind this seeming unity
of conduct the psychological mechanism may differ enormously
in different thieves and in the same thief at different times.
EUGENICS AND CRIME 1q3

A man, for example, may steal because the restraints that
usually withhold people from such acts have been temporarily
removed by drunkenness, or, again, because these restraints have
been weakened by disease, or because they have never been
formed owing to the defective development of the individual’s
brain or the vicious nature of his training, or because special
temporary conditions have increased the force of the acquisitive
impulse, or have weakened the strength of the inhibiting impulses, and soon. In these several cases we have, therefore, an
act which is socially the same in kind and which has the same
fundamental instinct underlying it, but which is brought about
by a psychological process differing widely in each instance, and
differing, we may add, in such sort that the act must sometimes
be accounted entirely normal, and even, when accounted morbid,
may vary enormously in the nature and origin of its morbid
cause. Clearly we cannot expect to discover in a group made
up in this way any distinctive biological characters which we can
regard as indicating a criminal disposition ; and in the absence of
such characters we cannot connect thieving with any particular
sort of stock.

It follows that before discussing criminals from the eugenic
standpoint it is necessary to classify them psychologically, to
split them up into groups defined by biological and not by
sociological criteria. Until this has been done—and work on
these lines has, unfortunately, hardly commenced—the inferences
from such data of criminology as are really to our hand must be
very vague and insecure.

Taking the available evidence then, for what it is worth, what
does it tell us of the relative importance of nature and nurture in
the evolution of the criminal? In considering this matter it is
important to remember that when we talk of crime, and still more
when we talk of professional crime, what we mean, though we
do not always realise the fact, is ordinarily crime of acquisitiveness, which in this country accounts for some go per cent. of
serious delinquency. So far, therefore, as the fundamental impulse is concerned, it is in nine criminals out of ten an impulse
of normal character, an expression of active vitality. That, with

a similar strength of this impulse one man should become a
4
114 W. C. Sullivan:

successful business man and another a successful burglar need
not, itis obvious, depend on any innate difference of character and
organisation ; it may quite as well be due to the action of the
environment, it may be a result of the special social and economic
conditions in the two cases; and in the absence of any proof that
the burglar shows a relatively greater weakness of ethical feeling
in other directions, this will appear to be much the more probable explanation. It is the view to which, I think, we are likely
to incline when we take due account of the extreme complexity
of the relation of environment to organisation in regard to
facts of social conduct.

If I may be allowed to borrow an illustration of my meaning from chemical science I would suggest that we may compare
criminals to poisonous organic compounds ; in these compounds
we have, on the one side, a physiological property, that of toxicity,
and on the other side we have various types of molecular structure. So amongst criminals we have the sociological fact of
delinquency related to various biological conditions. Now sometimes the physiological property of being poisonous seems to
depend mainly on the general structure of the molecule, and this
we may look on as resembling the case of the moral idiot of
whom we shall have to speak later on. Sometimes, on the other
hand, the toxicity depends on the influence of accessory groups
which have linked themselves on to the radical; and then we
have an analogy for what we may perhaps term the normal
criminal—the criminal, that is to say, who is the creature of his
milies. Such a criminal may be compared to one of the aromatic
compounds in which appropriate chemical agencies have modified
one or two of the side chains so as to produce a difference of
formula which is slight and superficial, but which gives to the
compound a toxicity entirely independent of the fundamental
type of the series, exactly as appropriate conditions in the environment by slightly influencing the side-chains of character
will form a criminal or an honest man.

The view which I wish to put forward, illustrated by the
analogy I have just presented, is that, at all events in this
country, criminal conduct is usually the outcome of the action
of the environment on an organisation of normal aptitudes.
EUGENICS AND CRIME II5

And though I cannot bring before you any. exact and cogent
evidence to support my opinion—for in fact there is no definite
evidence bearing on the point at all—nevertheless there are
certain broad indications which go to show that the balance of
probability leans strongly to this side.

To put the argument in another form, I would say that
crime is one of a group of bio-social phenomena which, as Dr.
Mercier has aptly put it when speaking of insanity, are in mathematical terms functions of two variables—structure and stress.
These two factors enter into the causation of every one of these
phenomena, but in degrees which may differ very widely. In
some of them we can recognise in a general way that structure
is much the more important factor, and then we observe that the
statistical movement of the phenomenon in question is relatively
independent of those influences which I have called social and
economic. In other phenomena of this group, on the contrary,
stress appears to be the more important element, and then we
find that the effect of these social and economic influences is very
marked.

To determine, therefore, in which category crime should
be placed we may compare it in a rough manner with some
bio-social fact in which the influence of structure, of innate
tendency, is generally admitted to be predominant. Insanity
is a convenient instance for our purpose. Now when we
compare crime and insanity with respect to some of the main
influences which react on bio-social phenomena, we find a very
remarkable contrast. In insanity the sexual incidence is sensibly
equal; in crime, on the contrary, there is a predominance of
males, corresponding to the greater part taken by men in social
and industrial activities and similar in amount to the predominance of males in suicide and in alcoholism. Again, the
statistical movement of insanity shows relatively little trace of
the influence of those industrial changes which so potently affect
the volume and character of crime. And again, to take a test of
a different sort, we have the notorious fact that insanity in
twins is‘not infrequently observed, while on the contrary crime
in twins is extremely rare. I have only come across one single
instance of criminal twins, and that was an exception that proved
116 W. C. Sullivan

the rule, for the individuals were mentally deficient from birth.
So that in all these points—and it would be easy to find others—
we see that there is a very wide difference between insanity and
crime, which must, I think, suggest to the unbiassed critic that,
broadly speaking, criminals, unlike lunatics but like suicides and
alcoholics, are made rather than born, that in their genesis
environment plays a larger part than innate predisposition.

If the view for which I have been contending is correct, it
may perhaps be inferred that the relation of eugenics to crime is
somewhat restricted ; and so far as that relation has to do with
the prevention of crime through improvement of stock, this is no
doubt true. But though restricted in extent, it is by no means
unimportant. For there is undoubtedly a section of delinquents
and very dangerous delinquents, too, who are congenitally defective
and who by reason of their mental inferiority are incapable of
forming the higher and more complex associations which are involved in social conduct. This incapacity obviously implies a
certain predisposition to crime, though not, of course, of the
specific kind which is commonly understood when people talk
of congenital criminality and of criminal heredity. In these delinquents, as has been pointed out by Dr. H. B. Donkin who speaks
on this question with exceptional authority, the relation of heredity
is simply through mental defect: what may be inherited is not
criminality but the incapacity to acquire the elements of good or
social conduct, and this incapacity does not exist as an isolated
condition but is merely one side of a general debility of mind.
From the eugenic point of view, therefore, the weak-minded
criminal is only a particular case of the general problem of the
feeble-minded, and, accordingly, does not call for any measures of
treatment essentially different from those which eugenists would
apply to prevent the propagation of any category of the unfit,
whether actively anti-social or not.

It 1s not, however, inconsistent with this view to recognise
that amongst the feeble-minded criminals there are many whose
mental deficiency is expressed so predominantly in the sphere
of impulse and feeling and so slightly in that of thought that they
form a class of somewhat special character. They are the
individuals who are sometimes spoken of as ‘“‘ moral idiots,’’—a
EUGENICS AND CRIME 117

class which furnished to Lombroso the data for his conception of
the congenital criminal. This is not the place to discuss the
fallacies of Lombroso’s theory, and I will only remark that the
intermediate conditions which connect these so-called ‘“ moral
idiots ’’ with the less noxious forms of feeble-mindedness, and the
evidence of their dependence on the same ancestral factors, are
enough to show that they are not to be regarded as a special criminal
stock, and that when we speak of them as a distinct group we
merely do so for convenience of description. The practical
utility of treating them as a definite class is twofold: it gives a
clearer view of their criminal potentialities, and in this way
emphasises the social dangers involved in degenerative conditions; whilst on the other hand it brings out with special distinctness the effect of one of the most important and one of the
most preventible of these degenerative agencies.

For it may be specially noted, as bearing on the question
under discussion, that in the production of these conditions of
perverted development, coupled with moral insensibility and impulsiveness which characterise the moral idiot, there is one cause
which has a very special and predominant importance, and that
cause is parental alcoholism. I am aware that this is a matter on
which opinions are divided, and that it raises issues too numerous
and too far-reaching to be dealt with parenthetically, so I must be
content with the expression of my personal belief that parental intoxications are peculiarly apt to give rise in the offspring to conditions of.arrested nervous development which are associated with a
morbid instability appearing sometimes as epilepsy, sometimes as
an impulsiveness similar in character to that of the epileptic. The
adolescents who commit cold-blooded and brutal murders, the
people who run amok after taking small doses of alcohol, the
women who under the influence of the ordinary strains of life
become so neurasthenic and thrown off their mental balance as
to destroy their young children—all these, when not of insane or
epileptic stock, will generally, I believe, be found to be the offspring
of alcoholic parents. The criminals of this type, therefore—and,
as was remarked above, though they are few in number, they are
socially important from the nature of their delinquency—have a
special interest for the eugenist, because he can so frequently trace
118 W. C. Sullivan :

their innate abnormality to a definite cause, and a cause for
which he can suggest preventive measures of a feasible sort.

To sum up, then, my view on this head: it is that we cannot
speak of a special innate predisposition to crime except in connection with a small minority of offenders, and then only ina
very loose sense as meaning that in certain cases of mental
debility, impulsiveness and affective insensibility are so predominant and the power of inhibition is so weak that the individuals
are more prone to criminal conduct than are other weak-minded
persons. But, it will be observed, this is a mere phase of mental
debility, it is a result of the interaction of the various faultily
working processes in the defective brain, and not a simple
elementary function having its definite cerebral organ and heritable
in the same way as a character of pigmentation.

What we have been considering so far is not, however, the
only, and is not, perhaps even the most important aspect of the
question. If Eugenics or the improvement of the stock may (as
most people will agree) contribute to the prevention of crime, the
converse is also true, namely, that measures for the prevention of
crime may be in themselves directly eugenic, and this in two
different ways. First, when we shut up a weak-minded criminal»
as when we shut up any other weak-minded individual, and so
cut him off from the opportunity of procreation, we are evidently
helping to prevent the reproduction of mental defect in so far as
this defect is a transmitted condition or character. Here what
we are immediately aiming at is the prevention of the repetition
of crime by the segregation of the criminal. Secondly, we
may and, perhaps more effectually, prevent crime by arresting
the formation of the criminal habit. In the latter case the
ultimate effect on the stock will obviously depend on the value of
the human material which has been diverted from the criminal]
career.

If the view maintained throughout this paper is the
correct one, and if skilled criminals are recruited not from the
mentally inferior stocks of the proletariat, but on the contrary
from those in which energy and initiative are most abundant,
then the merely repressive measures which in the interest of
society must be used against incorrigible offenders, and which
EUGENICS AND CRIME 11g

indirectly decrease the fertility of the individual, have no eugenic

utility. On the other hand, a system of reformatory discipline

capable of checking the growth of the criminal habit, and there
fore tending to retain in the service of the community the

capacity, often of no mean order, which under the influence of a

bad environment would be devoted to preying on society—such

a system would obviously contribute to racial betterment ; it

would prevent the wastage of good stock in a career which for
self-evident reasons is very unfavourable to reproduction. On

this account a special value from the eugenic point of view may
be claimed for those reformatory methods which have been

recently initiated in this country by the present head of the
prison administration, Sir Evelyn Ruggles-Brise, and which have
become widely known under the name of the Borstal System.
This system does not purport to be of universal application: it
is not designed to turn “ moral idiots” into useful citizens, but
to prevent normal and healthy adolescents from developing into
professional criminals. And it is because the picked adolescents
who are subjected to it include a very large number whose native
endowments in intellect and character are probably well above
the average in their class, that the Borstal Svstem may claim to

exercise a eugenic influence. For I believe that those who have
had much experience of the criminal will agree with me when I

say that under the conditions of life in the urban proletariat it is

very often the best endowed and most promising youths who are

directed into the criminal profession, so that the efforts made to

reclaim wasted material of this sort are in no way open to the

reproach justly addressed to those humanitarian schemes which

make it their aim to antagonise the beneficent action of natural

selection. On the contrary, the effect of the reformatory system

to which I have alluded, and its special virtue from the eugenic

point of view, are precisely that it combats an artificial selection

made by civilisation to the detriment of the fit.

And now let me summarise in a very few words the opinions
which I have endeavoured to express in this paper. In substance
they amount to this. Criminals, looked at from the eugenic
standpoint, cannot be put into any single category; some of
them, probably most of them, are of average stock, and become
120 W. C. Sullivan :

criminal under the influence of their milieu; they do not directly
interest the eugenist. Some, again, are of bad, of degenerate
stock ; they form an artificial group inside the great pathological
class of the feeble-minded, and will be reached by the same
preventive measures. And, lastly, some are of good stock, and
are endowed with native aptitudes which may be of high value
to the community ; these it behoves the eugenist to rescue from
the sterile career of crime, so that the energy and capacity which
they apply to anti-social ends may be made both immediately
and remotely profitable to the race.
