SELECTION THEORY
AND ITS ALTERNATIVES.

By GUY A. K. MARSHALL, C.M.G., D.Sc., F.R.S.

In the Eugenics Review for last July there appeared an interesting
article by Mr. M. A. C. Hinton, in which he purports to demonstrate
that species have been produced, not by the process of natural selection,
but by means of variations acquired by the individual during its lifetime (owing either to the direct action of its environment or to the
acquisition of new habits) and subsequently transmitted to its offspring.
Some of his statements have been briefly, and very justly, criticised by
Professor E. S. Goodrich in the same publication; but the subject is
of such importance to Eugenists that it may be permissible to deal with
this old controversy again at somewhat greater length. For if it really
be true that efficient, vigorous, and successful species have been
evolved merely by the direct action of external influences without any
process of selection, some of the fundamental postulates of Eugenics
may well be called in question.

Although there is a profound difference in the processes postulated
by Selectionists and Environmentalists to explain the evolution of
species, superficially the distinction is apt to appear rather subtle, and
it would seem to have escaped Mr. Hinton. Environment is an important factor in both cases, but in the Lamarckian interpretation its
action is direct and in the Darwinian indirect. In other words, the
Darwinian argument may be briefly stated thus :—No two individuals
are absolutely identical in every respect ; there is a tendency to vary in
many directions, this tendency being due to the extreme complexity of
the germ-plasm and therefore conditioned by the past history of the
species ; such congenital variations are inheritable, but the so-called
‘‘acquired’’ variations that are produced by external factors after
birth are not transmissible ; in every generation the descendants of a
given species are vastly in excess of the numbers that can ultimately
survive, resulting in a very keen struggle for existence ; therefore any
beneficial congenital variations that may arise will give an advantage
to the individuals possessing them, and these will tend to leave more
offspring than the others ; those of the offspring that have such variations in a more marked degree will again predominate, and thus the
adaptation to the environment will be gradually perfected by the
elimination of those that are less well adapted.

Lamarckians, on the other hand, hold that variations are the
direct result of the environment on the individual, so that where the
204 EUGENICS REVIEW.

environment is absolutely constant there will be no variation. All
such variations are assumed to be inheritable, and it is further contended that the effects of the environment are cumulative, so that they
are gradually amplified. In this way the adaptation of an organism
to its environment is explained. :

There is another important factor that is relied on by Lamarckians,
namely, the supposedly inherited effects of use and disuse ; but exigences
of space make it impossible to deal with this more complex question
here, and we shall consider environmental influence cnly.

It will be noted that the Lamarckian theory takes no cognisance
whatever of the effects that are produced by over-production of offspring and the consequent acute competition, although the actual
occurrence of these obviously important factors cannot be denied.
The more moderate advocates of the theory do, however, admit the
reality of natural selection, but contend that its effects in the building
up of species are of minor significance. Yet, if selection be ruled out,
there is no convincing reason why the direct action of the environment
should necessarily produce any characters whatever that are specially
beneficial to the species subjected to it, and adaptations would have
to be regarded as merely accidental coincidences.

If we now turn to Mr. Hinton’s paper, we shall find that every
case which he has put forward as proving the validity of the Lamarckian
theory can be equally well, and sometimes better, explained by natural
selection, so that a mere statement of the results produced constitutes
no evidence as to which of these two theoretical factors has produced
them. No proof whatever is brought forward to show that acquired
characters are really inheritable, although this constitutes the essential
basis of his theory, nor is any reason given why the Lamarckian interpretation of the facts adduced should be regarded as more convincing
or scientifically sounder than the Darwinian interpretation. And the
author even goes on to say that ‘‘the theory for the inheritability of
acquired characters of this sort rests, so far as mammals are concerned,
upon the solid foundation of palaeontology : and it is doubtful whether
any evidence that can be brought from Zoology, experimental or
otherwise, can materially affect the issue. It may confirm; but it can
never refute the theory.’’ Such dogmatic assertions seem to indicate a
complete misapprehension as to what constitutes scientific evidence,
and the paper cannot be regarded as affording any proof whatever of
the truth of the Lamarckian hypothesis.

We may now consider some of the special cases cited in support of
this theory. We are told that there are in the Arabian Desert two
rat-like gerbils (Meriones), of which one is nocturnal and has a thick
dark coat, while the other comes out in the bright sunlight and has a
thin pale coat. It is therefore asserted that the pale colour of the
latter is due directly to the bleaching effect of the sunlight. Now my
friend, Dr. P. A. Buxton, has recently dealt with this interesting
problem of desert colouration in his book ‘‘Animal Life in Deserts.’’
He points out that in nearly all desert animals the colouring harmonises
so wonderfully with the surroundings that it is almost impossible to
detect even large species until they move. But he also notes that the
apparently unicolorous effect in such animals is commonly produced by
SELECTION THEORY AND ITS ALTERNATIVES. 205

fine mottling, which is due to an admixture of dark markings; and
further that where the soil of a desert happens to be red, the colour of
the animals becomes reddish instead of sandy.

These facts alone are sufficient to indicate that the bleaching
effect of the direct rays of sunlight is not the determining factor, for
there is obvious adjustment to the colour of the soil. If Mr. Hinton
shifts his ground and claims that the colour of the animals is produced
by reflection of the light from the soil, his position is hardly improved.
For even if we accept the gratuitous assumption that the soil-like
colouring can be produced by these obliquely reflected rays of sunlight,
it is obvious that the rays would have their greatest effect on the lower
surface and the flanks, whereas the middle of the back would be much
less affected by them. But actually in these gerbils, as in most desert
mammals, the lower parts are white and the soil-like colour is most
fully developed on the top of the back, so that their colouring does not
accord with the assumptions of the hypothesis. On the other hand,
the Darwinian interprets the wonderful adaptation to the surroundings
in deserts as being due to the persistent elimination of any variations
that make for conspicuousness, as a result of the extremely keen
struggle for existence that must obtain in such localities ; and this does
at least give a reasonable and consistent interpretation of the facts.
Even the white undersides have a practical value in this connection by
neutralising the shadow effects, on Thayer’s principle of countershading. :

With this latter view Dr. Buxton does not agree, for he considers
that the very fact that cryptic colours are almost universal in the
desert makes it difficult to believe that they have the utilitarian significance usually attributed to them. He proceeds to subject the theory
of protective colouration to somewhat trenchant criticism, as a result
of which he concludes that, while it does offer a reasonable explanation
of the colours of some insects, such as certain grasshoppers, and even
of some vertebrates, such as snakes, these cases are very few; as a
general interpretation of desert colouring he entirely rejects it.

It is impossible here to deal with all his criticisms in detail,
though it may be said that an effective reply could be made to every
point he has raised. There is, however, an important fallacy which
underlies many of his arguments and which is to be-found in almost
every criticism of the theory of protective and warning colours. This
fallacy consists in the assumption that the protection afforded must be
absolute, and that therefore if any cases can be found of protectively
coloured animals being eaten by their enemies, then the whole theory
falls to the ground. Arguments of this kind merely indicate a failure
on the part of the critics to understand what natural selection really
means. That theory does not postulate that protective or warning
colours confer absolute immunity from attack on their possessors, for
such a contention would obviously be absurd ; what it does postulate is
that these colours afford a relative advantage that materially reduces the
incidence of attacks. Indeed, it might almost be said that the
exact converse of the criticism would be nearer to the truth
than the criticism itself; namely, if it could be shown that no
protectively or warningly eoloured animal was ever eaten by any
206 EUGENICS REVIEW.

enemy, then the Darwinian interpretation of such colours would be
demolished. The relations between; say, a bird and the insects on
which it preys are not conceived as being absolutely stable, for they
will continually be reacting one on the other, increased activity or
perspicacity on the part of the bird resulting in greater agility or more
cryptic colouring on the part of the insect, and vice versa. A highly
adaptive colouring, ex hypothesi, can only be built up and maintained
by persistent elimination of the less fit, and thus we should expect to
find that destruction by birds is not unfrequently taking place.

Another remarkable objection is raised by Dr. Buxton and constitutes his principal argument against the adequacy of natural selection
in these cases; this is that although an animal may be practically
invisible when at rest, it becomes conspicuous immediately it begins
to move, and therefore its protective colouring can have no protective
value. One almost wonders whether it is worth while discussing a
point like this, because the reply is so obvious. In the case of a bird
like the courser, to which special reference is made, its colouration
constitutes only one line of defence; it has at least two others, swift
running and flight, and naturally these will be relied on when it is
moving about and on the alert ; moreover these methods have also been
rendered more efficient by natural selection. Its colours are of special
use to it at a time when otherwise it would be most open to attack,
namely, when it is at rest and off its guard, and to their astonishing
efficacy in such circumstances Dr. Buxton himself testifies. How then
can it be argued that this colouring is of no value to the bird when it is
at rest simply because when it moves it has to rely on another line of
defence? But the colour has yet another use, namely, to confuse a
pursuing enemy, as I have often seen in one of the South African
coursers. The bird runs along at great speed and then suddenly stops,
crouches, and vanishes from sight ; the eye carries on the image of the
running bird, and it is extraordinarily difficult to mark the spot where
it has crouched.

We are then told that the colouring of such birds as coursers and
sandgrouse cannot be protective, because they have no diurnal enemies
from which to be protected, for the desert falcons cannot catch them,
This statement is based on information from native falconers regarding
tamed falcons of other species, and from what one knows of African
falcons, it appears so highly improbable that it should not be accepted
unless supported by an examination of the casts or stomach contents
of wild desert falcons. Again, it is said that ‘‘the real enemies of these
birds are probably cats and foxes and possibly jackals; these all hunt
by night and by scent ;’’ so that the cryptic colours are again supposed
to have no value. It would be interesting to know on what evidence
it is stated that cats hunt only by scent ; from my own observations on
these animals I am of opinion that in hunting they rely almost entirely
on sight and hearing, and that scent is used but little. If cats do
not use their eyes for hunting, how are we to explain away the highly
specialised mechanism that enables them to see in the dimmest light ?

It is upon such debatable and unconvicing points as these that Dr.
Buxton’s whole argument against natural selection is based, and it is
hardly necessary to examine them further. But before leaving the
SELECTION THEORY AND ITS ALTERNATIVES. 207

subject there is one important set of facts that must be considered,
namely, certain cases that contradict the general rule, that desert
animals are coloured like their surroundings. It is exceptions of this
kind that will probably give us the most satisfactory means of testing
the rival theories.

One of these exceptions is to be found among certain comparatively
large terrestrial beetles of the family Tenebrionidae (Adesmia and
Pimelia), which are entirely black and walk about conspicuously ir: the
daytime. Dr. Buxton points out that black is the normal colour of
terrestrial Tenebrionidae everywhere and suggests that it has been
retained in deserts because it is not a disadvantage there. This
argument is not Lamarckian but purely Darwinian, for it implies that
if the colour had been actually disadvantageous it would have been
eliminated. It is even very reasonably suggested that these beetles
may be to some extent saved from destruction by their size and hardness, but this protection is stated to be inadequate because one wheatear
has been shot near Cairo with its crop full of Adesmia and a falcon has
been observed to eat Pimelia on the Russian steppes. It has already
been pointed out how fallacious such an argument may be, and in the
present instance it is clearly contradicted by the fact that these insects,
in spite of their conspicuousness, are abundant in the desert, and this
in itself affords a practical demonstration that they are not very liable
to the attacks of insectivorous animals. In addition to their size and
hardness some species of Pimelia are further protected by small spines
all over their wing-cases, and there is reason for supposing that both
genera have another important defence. In Uganda Dr. G. D. Hale
Carpenter (Trans. Ent. Soc. Lond. 1921, p. 64) tested nine species of
terrestrial Tenebrionidae on a monkey (Cercopithecus), which treated
them all as being more or less distasteful, some very markedly so.
Again, Mr. C. F. M. Swynnerton, in his very extensive experiments
on the palatability of insects in Southern Rhodesia (Trans. Linn. Soc.
Zool. xxxili, pp. 203—385), found that one of his birds, a roller
(Coracias garrulus), rejected four species of Psammodes and Amiantus
(which represent Pimelia in East and South Africa) with unmistakable
signs of distaste. It is therefore not unreasonable to suppose that
their near relatives in the north are also probably protected to some
extent by an unpleasant flavour. In view of these special methods of
defence, their conspicuousness, abundance and behaviour are entirely
in accord with what we should expect if the Darwinian theory be true;
on the other hand, there seems to be no Lamarckian explanation as to
why these insects thus disconcertingly defy the direct action of the
environment.

Another similar case is that of a large wingless locust (Eugaster)
which is shining black with some red markings, and thus highly
conspicuous. Its movements are slow, and it has lost the power of
jumping, but it is capable of giving a severe bite, and ‘‘when handled
it pours forth a copious brown oily secretion.’’ Dr. Buxton has
pointed out how highly important it is for desert plants and animals
to conserve their moisture, and it is difficult to explain the unusual
behaviour of this insect when interfered with, except on the
supposition that it thus derives protection from an imminent
208 EUGENICS REVIEW.

danger that is even more pressing than the possible risk of
future dessication. At all events the emission of liquid
can hardly be regarded as an appropriate Lamarckian response
to a desert environment. It seems much more likely that this is
another instance of what Darwinians call ‘‘warning’’ colouration.
In other words, when an insect possesses qualities that are highly
distasteful to the great majority of insectivorous animals, instead of
adopting a concealing type of colouring, it is more advantageous to it
to assume a conspicuous appearance and behaviour which will readily
impress themselves upon the memory of those inexperienced enemies
that are rash enough to eat it, and they will thus learn to avoid it in
future. But such warning colours do not afford absolute protection
from attack for every individual, any more than do cryptic colours,
though they do materially reduce the risks for the species. In the
first place, young animals will probably have to make several experiments before they learn; again, animals that normally avoid such
insects will eat them when pressed by hunger; and finally, sooner or
later a few enemies will learn to make a speciality of this abundant
source of food, just as some cuckoos and orioles specialise on hairy
caterpillars, and bee-eaters on stinging Hymenoptera. This association of conspicuousness and unpalatibility is not a mere supposition,
as Neo-Lamarchians are too apt to suggest, for it has been adequately
demonstrated by very numerous experiments made by various observers
in different parts of the world. To mention some of those who have
experimented on a fairly large sacle:—Frank Finn in India, R. I.
Pocock in England, G. D. Hale Carpenter in Uganda, and C. F. M.
Swynnerton and myself in Rhodesia. :

Thus in this case again natural selection gives a reasonable explanation of the facts, supported by collateral experimental evidence ; while
under the Lamarckian view this locust remains an inexplicable paradox.

In his final summing up on desert colouring Dr. Buxton admits
that for certain cases natural selection offers a not unreasonable interpretation. As regards the cause responsible for the remaining cases
he remarks, ‘‘No biological agency . . . . can cover so wide a
range of animals; heat alone it is not . . .; low and fluctuating
humidity it can hardly be;’’ and the discussion ends on a Micawher
ike note of optimism, that some day some physical factor will turn up

and explain the whole matter for us—provided that we cleanse our
minds of all thoughts of natural selection. In the meantime no
Lamarckian explanation is forthcoming.

If it really be true that diversity of species has been produced
merely by diversity of environmental conditions, we should expect to
find relatively few species where the general conditions are uniform and
numerous species where they are diversified. The conditions of heat,
moisture and sunlight in the great equatorial forests are extraordinarily uniform throughout the year, offering a marked contrast
in this respect to those in temperate forests, and yet, contrary to the
Lamarckian anticipation, the species of plants in the latter are but few
compared with the astonishing diversity cf forms to be found in tropical
forests. These facts are in complete accord with the Darwinian view.
For the uniform and highly favourable conditions on the equator lead
SELECTION THEORY AND ITS ALTERNATIVES. 209

to an intensely vigorous growth and consequent internecine competition between plant and plant. and between species and species, struggling for each inch of soil, each drop of moisture, and each ray of sunlight, so that sooner or later every niche where a plant can grow is
occupied, and we thus find an immense variety of plant forms, not only
among the trees themselves, but also in such special adaptations as
lianas, creepers, parasites andepiphytes. (In Trinidad I was informed
that four tons of epiphytes had been removed from asingle large rain
tree.) As Darwin has said :—‘‘Natural selection, also, leads to divergence of character; for the more organic beings diverge in structure,
habits, and constitution, by so much the more can a large number be
supported on the same area.’’ On the other hand, in temperate forests
the struggle for existence is mainly against climate, and the further we
go north the fewer are the species of trees that can maintain themselves; thus the comparative monotony of our oak, beech and pine
forests is due to this, and not to any greater uniformity of conditions
as compared. with the equatorial belt.

The same statement applies to insects, and it is in the tropics,
where bird and insect life are most abundant, that we find the highest
development of that remarkable form of adaptation known as
‘“mimicry,’’? whereby a palatable animal derives advantages from
assuming a superficial resemblance to a distasteful species. Such a
case as that of the butterfly, Papilio dardanus, which has been so fully
studied by Professor Poulton and his fellow-workers in Africa, presents
an insuperable difficulty to the Lamarckian hypothesis. For here we
have a species that is capable of producing even in a single brood two
or three quite different types of females, entirely unlike their own
males in either colour or shape and each presenting a highly deceptive
resemblance to other quite unrelated butterflies, all of which belong to a
group that has been demonstrated by experiment to possess highly
distasteful qualities. Or again, we find such widely different insects
as moths and beetles and flies departing entirely from the normal
appearance of their relatives that live under the same conditions, and
taking on the guise of bees and wasps, not merely resembling them in
colou. and shape, but also in their flight, and sometimes even reproducing the characteristic buzzing of those insects. All these fascinat ing adaptations, for which natural selection supplies a reasonable and
logical interpretation, are apparently treated by Lamarckians as mere
meaningless coincidences, for which it is not worth while trying to
offer any detailed explanation.

But probably the most crucial test for these explanatory theories
is to be found in neuter insects. Among most species of termites, or
white ants, and in many species of true ants some of the most striking
specific differences are to be found in the soldiers, a highly specialised
caste in which the head and jaws are enormously developed for fighting ;
while in some termites the soldiers have entirely lost their jaws, the
head being produced in front into a tube, through which the insect
squirts a fluid that is capable of disabling its enemies. Now these
remarkable forms cannot have been produced by the inherited effects of
use and disuse or by any other kind of transmission of acquired characters from parent to offspring, because these soldiers, being sterile,
210 EUGENICS REVIEW.

never have any offspring. Thus it is clear that in such cases the
Lamarckian theory breaks down hopelessly. Characteristically, this
difficulty was not ‘shirked by Darwin, though at first he thought it
insuperable and possibly fatal to his theory. He discusses it at some
length in the ‘‘Origin of Species,’’ concluding: ‘“With these facts
before me, I believe that natural selection, by acting on the fertile
ants or parents, could fcrm a species which should regularly produce
neuters.’’ And his explanation stands unshaken to this day.

To turn now to some general aspects of the question, in the April
number of this Review a notice was published of Professor Berg’s book
on ‘‘Nomogenesis,’’, which contains certain drastic criticisms of
natural selection. Some ofthese Prof. MacBride has not unjustly condemned as mere ‘‘travesties of the truth,’’ but he considers that there
remain some powerful and conclusive arguments against natural
selection, and these are worth examining. They resolve themselves
into two main issues, of which the first is stated thus: ‘‘Natural
selection is a purely negative agent : it weeds out but it does not create :
it accounts for the elimination of the unfit, but not for the appearance
of the fit.’ Unfortunately this statement does not adequately represent the real position. In the first place, it is a misuse of terms to
suggest that the effects of elimination are merely negative; for the
persistent destruction of individuals of a certain type must obviously
have a positive effect upon the trend of variation in a given community,
as compared with that in another similar community in which such
elimination has not taken place. But apart from this, selection
operating on a useful or needed variation can actually produce a
cumulative effect from generation to generation, and thus a new form
can gradually be built up. Nor is this a mere speculative assumption,
for it is based on a knowledge of what selection has actually achieved.
Man himself, utilising merely chance congenital variations that he
certainly did not create, has by cumulative selection produced from a
wolf-like animal such utterly different forms as the mastiff, the toy
terrier, and the Pekingese. And as Darwin said: ‘‘As man can produce a great result with his domestic animals and plants by adding up
in any given direction individual differences, so could natural selection.’’

I am aware that some of the more extreine Mutationists have
claimed that natural selection can operate only on large mutations
and cannot build up new forms by the cumulation of continuous or
graded variations ; but this contention is based on theoretical assumptions that have not been experimentally demonstrated, whereas there
are experiments on record that actually support the opposite view.
For over 20 years Professors C. G. Hopkins and L. H. Smith, at the
University of Illinois, experimented with a variety of maize in an
endeavour to modify the protein and oil contents by the selection of
small fluctuating variations. Although ‘‘pure line’’ theorists positively predicted that this could not be done, actually four strains of
maize were eventually produced from this stock that differed markedly
from each other in the chemical constitution of their grain. With
reference to these experiments Professor W. E. Castle says (‘‘Genetics
and Eugenics,’’ p. 190): ‘“They show that valuable new varieties are
SELECTION THEORY AND ITS ALTERNATIVES. 211

not simply discovered, as the mutation theory holds, but may be
created by a process of systematic selection.’’ (Author’s italics.)

Professor Castle has done much to refute the mutationists’ assumption that Mendelian unit characters are not subject to quantitative
variation, and a striking case is afforded by his experiments with the
so-called ‘‘hooded’’ rats. Discussing his results he says (ibid. p. 188):
‘“The conclusion seems unavoidable that the single genetic factor
involved in this case has undergone quantitative change under the
influence of selection. If so, two foundation postulates of the mutation theory are false, viz., (1) that continuous or graded variations
are not concerned in evolution, and (2) that selection of such variations,
no matter how long continued, can effect no permanent or progressive
racial changes. Selection, as an agency in evolution, must then be restored tothe important place which it held in Darwin’s estimation, an
agency capable of producing continuous and progressive racial changes.”’
And this conclusion finds strong support in another important and quite
independent experiment of a different type which will be referred to
later.

The second criticism runs thus: ‘‘What the belief in natural
selection as an efficient agent really implies is the constant occurrence
of small inheritable variations in all directions. This assumption is
directly contradicted by every relevant experiment designed to test the
point. If the conditions are kept constant selection is powerless to
effect progressive change’’ (authors’ italics). And this statement is
based on the supposed occurrence in a few cases of what are misleadingly called ‘“‘pure lines.’’

Now in the first sentence of this criticism there are two points to
which exception can be taken, for it is not essential for the operation of
natural selection that variation must either be incessant or take place
in all directions; provided that variation takes place in many
different directions, natural selection can still be the dominant
factor in determining the evolution of a species, even if variations in
certain parts of the organism are intermittent and not continuous.
In other words, the case has been presented the wrong way round in
order to score what is merely a debating point : thus, it is assumed that
incessant variation in all directions is essential to the theory attacked,
and it is then claimed that the whole theory falls to the ground because
in few cases single characters have been shown to be relatively stable for
a limited number of generations. If the failure of natural selection
is to be demonstrated along this line of argument, it must be shown
that, as a normal occurrence, it is possible to find two parents that are
practically identical in every respect, and that all their offspring are
similarly identical for a number of generations. In such a case, when
it is actually discovered, natural selection will be inoperative; but
no one has yet discovered it.

With regard to the assertion that selection cannot effect progressive
change where the conditions are constant, various experiments in a
contrary sense could be cited, but it will only be necessary here to
refer to the important recent work by Dr. A. M. Banta on one of the
water-fleas (Cladocera). Of this organism he has bred under uniform
conditions a line of no less than 650 consecutive parthenogenetic
212 EUGENICS REVIEW.

generations. In discussing his results Dr. C. B. Davenport says
(Year Book Carnegie Inst. No. 25, p. 29): ‘‘Probably in no other multicellular organism has the succession of generations been followed so far
in genetically constant germinal material. As this germinal material
has been carried through the generations it has undergone changes.
In the breeding lines, at intervals of between 5 and 35 generations,
obvious changes have occurred that have permitted the investigator to
raise a new strain of organism, one or more of whose qualities varied
around a new mutative center . . . . The inference as tothe
cause of this mutation that seems most justified is that, without special
external exciting agents (my italics), the germ plasm (chromosome
complex) of the Cladocera is undergoing changes in the direction that
is being followed by the investigator (and very likely in others, as
well), and which may be accumulated by a selective agent (in this case
the investigator) until they acquire an important increment.’’ This
seems to be a sufficiently precise refutation of the purely speculative
assumption of Lamarckians that transmissible variations can arise
only as a result of the direct action of the environment.

Such changes are explained by some mutationists as being due
to the assumed existence of what they call ‘‘multiple modifying
factors,’’ which Prof. Castle regards as mere figments of the imagination. Dr. Davenport, however, suggests that the changes from one
generation to the next are normally so minute that they are inappreciable to the human eye until there has been a certain amount of
accumulation, thus giving a false appearance of discontinuity; and
this explanation is just as valid as that of the mutationists and seems
more probable. °

This question has also been very fully’ dealt with by Professor
H. S. Jennings as a result of his investigations on the Rhizopod
Difflugia corona (Jl. Washington Acad. Sci. vii., 1917, p. 281, and
American Naturalist, li., 1917, p. 801). He selected this species
because ‘‘it has numerous distinctive characters, all congenital; all
inherited in a high degree; yet varying from parent to offspring also;
none of the characters changed by growth or environmental action
during the life of the individual. Long continued work showed that
a single strain of this animal, all derived by fission from a single
parent, does differentiate gradually, with the passage of the generations, into many hereditarily diverse strains.’’ ‘‘Hereditary variations arose in some few cases by rather large steps or saltations. But
the immense majority of the hereditary variations were minute gradations. Variation is as continuous as can be detected.’’ ;

Prof. Jennings also discusses the work of Prof. T. H. Morgan and
his associates on eye colour in the wine fly, Drosophila melanogaster .
They started out to investigate the two forms, red and white; but as
their strains progressed they found that there were not merely two
inheritable variations, but no less than seven—red, blood, cherry,
eosin, buff, tinged, white. Further, Bridges, on studying the middle
member of this series, eosin, found seven modifying factors, each of
which alters its intensity and gives rise to a secondary grade of colour ;
and each of these factors is specifically described as a mutation or
actual change in the hereditary material. Prof. Jennings summarises
SELECTION THEORY AND ITS ALTERNATIVES. 218

the position thus :—‘‘In Drosophila there occur minute changes in the
germinal material, such as to give, so far as our present imperfect
knowledge goes, seven diverse grades of a colour which is itself only
one grade of another series of seven known grades. By means of these
graded changes one could obtain, by the mutationist’s own statement,
the continuously graded results which selection actually gives. What
more can the selectionist ask?’’ Again, ‘“The work in Mendelism,
and particularly the work on Drosophila, is supplying a complete
foundation for evolution through the accumulation by selection of
minute gradations. We have got far away from the old notion that
hereditary changes consist only in the dropping out of complete units,
or that they are bound to occur in large steps. . . . The objections
raised by the mutationists to gradual change through selection are
breaking down as a result of the thoroughness of the mutationists’ own
studies.”’ .

Finally, it may be noted that in his work on bean seeds Johannsen
found that characters that were obviously due to the environment, such
as position in the pod, nutrition, etc., were definitely not inherited.

It would thus appear that none of the critics here dealt with has
put forward any adequate reasons for the rejection of natural selection
as an effective agent in the evolution of species. That it offers an
explanation of all specific characters it would be foolish to suggest in
our present state of ignorance, but it can be claimed that this principle
does afford a reasonable and logical interpretation of an immense body
of facts of the most varied description, for many of which there is at
present no other probable explanation, and constitutes a sound working
hypothesis in the study of the problems of evolution. Its very wide
applicability and its inexorable logic appear in themselves to arouse in
certain types of mind a spirit of unreasoning antagonism; but despite
attacks from many directions during the past 70 years, the steady
accumulation of confirmatory evidence, both observational and experimental, has brought Darwin’s theory into a stronger position to-day
than ever before. ,
