INTERNATIONAL FAMILY CONFERENCE
AT BRUSSELS

Mr. A. ]. Brayshaw, the General Secretary of the National Marriage Guidance Council, was one

of the eight British delegates who attended the Brussels Conference of the International Union of

Family Organizations at the end of July. In thts article, which is here published through the

courtesy of the National Marriage Guidance Council and of the editor of tts monthly bulletin,
Mr. Brayshaw gives a personal tmpression of the conference.

NE of the reasons for attending over
seas conferences, or indeed for any

travel abroad, is to sense the different
atmosphere and learn the different background. Read as you may, you have to go to
a country to learn the things that are taken
for granted there, the assumptions that are
common to their thinking, the things that
seem in their setting too obvious to need
telling. The Brussels Conference was a fascinating opportunity to discern the common
factors and the divergences between the ten
nations represented by the 125 conference
members, and I learned much that was new
and striking to me.

The conference itself was of particular
importance as the first meeting of the
I.U.F.O. General Assembly since the organization was founded in Geneva in 1948. The
General Council and the larger Assembly had
a number of sessions, therefore, with much
to consider about the Union’s constitution,
finances, functions and future work. In
addition, the first part of the week was occupied by a family conference, attended mainly
by representatives of voluntary bodies, while
at the same time experts from different
governments met to discuss housing and its
finance and technicalities. Their meetings
were a particular success and it is to be
regretted that the British Government was
not represented. It seemed, incidentally, a
different world, in which one could talk with
Swiss or Belgian experts about their countries, where there is no real housing shortage ;
and as you go about Brussels you can see
many notices in windows advertising flats or
shops to let or for sale.

Mainly between the two world wars
organizations have sprung up, especially in
France and Belgium, consisting of familles

nombreuses, of Catholic families, Protestant
families, workers’ families, or families in particular regions. They have grown and
flourished, perhaps more especially because
of the recognition that they have received
from the State in view of the serious anxiety
felt about a declining population. Thus the
family organizations have set to work to
obtain price concessions for their members
from the manufacturers of prams or furniture, for instance, and to get family allowances, reductions in railway fares and other
family concessions from the State.

They also provide all sorts of services for
their members, like convalescent and holiday
homes, insurance services, education for
parents and teachers, legal advice, and sometimes consultants to help in resolving marriage difficulties. They have grown in wealth
and influence, and in many cases they are
represented on official bodies and serve in a
sense as consumers’ representatives on behalf
of the family. They are to a large extent
pressure groups, championing the economic,
social and political claims of the family
somewhat in the way that trade unions
uphold the claims of their members here.

One of the most arresting things about
these organizations is the great stress that
they place upon economic factors. It was
significant that in one of the discussions, for
instance, on ‘‘ The Proclamation of the
Rights of the Family ” a draft was adopted
stressing the demands of the family for
recognition and concessions, with very little
reference to the duties and responsibilities of
families, which were taken for granted.

At first sight it was a strange contradiction
that these organizations, in which Roman
Catholic influence is great, should be so much
occupied with material considerations. I

138
INTERNATIONAL FAMILY CONFERENCE AT BRUSSELS

came to the conclusion, however, that
although these organizations are called
leagues and associations of families they tend
in practice to reflect the preoccupations of
the Chef de familles, which on the Continent
quite definitely means “papa.” He is
anxious about the income tax, the children’s
education, the discount on the purchases,
while his wife rules absolute in the home. I
do not think, therefore, that this heavy
emphasis on economic factors really means
that Continental family organizations are
materialist in outlook, but simply that they
tend to represent the viewpoint of the
husband, who is primarily concerned to
provide for his wife and children.

Certainly it was significant that throughout the whole conference it was the external
relations of the family unit that received
most attention. Conference members were
not only unwilling to discuss the hated subject of le birth-coniréle, but they hardly mentioned the inter-personal relationships within
the family. Papers read by Mrs. Eleanor
French (British Social Biology Council), Dr.
C. P. Blacker (Eugenics Socrety) and myself
stood alone in referring to personal relationships and psychological factors, apart from
the valued contributions of Dr. Abraham
Stone of the American Association of Marriage Counsellors.

In Anglo-Saxon countries we tend to think
of marriage in psychological, emotional and
physical terms. We note marriage breakdown among all classes of society, with little
regard for economic or educational levels.
Therefore, we think, money has little to do
with it. The economic emphasis of the Continental organizations was thus a stimulating
challenge. Is it not true that in Britain many
middle-class husbands help their wives with
the washing-up who would never help if the
family could get domestic labour as readily as
in some Continental countries ? And is not
this an economic factor shaping family
relationships ? More than once speakers
virtually reproached Britain and the U.S.A.
for their ‘‘ backwardness’ in having no

leagues of families to press their claims. Why

was it, we were asked, that when the British
Government recently increased old-age pen
139

sions there had been no furore from the
family organizations pressing for increased
family allowances ?

For my part I felt uneasy about some of
the assumptions, and some of the statements
that drew applause, like the declaration that
the State should see that with each new child
the standard of life of the parents was maintained through some form of subsidy. The
idea recurred that parents ought to be as
well off as single or childless people. Well, I
wonder. I have five mouths to feed, and
compared with my unmarried friends I see
very well that they have more to spend on
themselves, their clothes and entertainments
and holidays. Is this really wrong ? It seems
to me that we who have children have such
precious riches that we should not begrudge
our single friends such compensations as
money can buy.

What astonished and, I confess, distressed
me, was this apparent lack of an adequate
sense of the infinite value of children for their
own sake. It is all very well to pay farmers a
subsidy to cultivate acres that they would not
otherwise plough ; but is it really right to
induce people to have babies they would not
otherwise have ? The right reason for having
children is because a couple really want them
and will really love them. It is true that
parenthood should not involve economic disabilities that will handicap the children or
dishearten the parents ; but there is a real
danger to the nobility of parenthood if
children are regarded primarily as economic
assets. This is not merely hypothetical. In
French North Africa, for instance, the family
allowances seem to the natives like fabulous
wealth, and it is commonly said that many

_of the men regard it not only as patriotic

that they should keep their wives in the
family way, but also less trouble than
working for a living.

As to the conference itself, the Belgian
National Committee of the I.U.F.O. and the
Ligue des Familles Nombreuses made admirable arrangements, and were delightful hosts.
But while it is true that at one dinner we
each received more meat than a week’s
ration at home, and that we enjoyed an unforgettable excursion to Bruges, yet there
140

was hard work, too, with constitutional discussions starting at 8.30 in the morning. The
International Union is still a young organization with vigour and enthusiasm and with
sufficiently varied outlooks among its members to provoke lively discussions for years
to come. Although there were deep dif
| ceealiliedl

i Sir ARNOLD MCcNAIR, K.C., and Professor H. C. GUTTERIDGE, K.C.
Honorary Secretary : E. H. WALL, Esq. "

; Annual Subscription 
Address :

SOCIETY OF COMPARATIVE LEGISLATION

1 “For the promotion of knowledge of on course of legislation in different countries, more particularly in the several
parts of His Majesty’s Dominions, and in the United States.”

i President: The Rt. Hon. Lord MACMILLAN, G.C.V.O.

y Chairman of the Executive Committee: The Rt. Hon. Lord Justice DENNING

Honorary Editors : Professor F. H. LAWSON, D.C.L.
assisted by

i8, NORTHUMBERLAND AVENUE,

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

ferences of view there was always courtesy
and tolerance, and while this is assured the
Union has a most important function.
Without it we should grow parochial, so that
we welcome the challenge and stimulus and
cameraderie as well as the exchange of
knowledge that it brings to our work.

Sir CECIL CARR, K.C.B., K.C.,

a a Se OT Da ne a rr

ONE GUINEA
LONDON, W.C2 7

Engenies Roview, Vol. XLIIL, No. 8
