WHITMAN AS THE POET OF GOOD
BREEDING

By Henry Bryan BINNS

HOWEVER dangerous it may be, it is both easy and convenient
to consider any universal fact in one of its special aspects; and
having once acknowledged that in so doing we can only render
a partial account of our fact, the danger need not deter us.
Whitman, was not, of course, ‘‘the Poet of Good Breeding” :
criticise him as you will and must, Whitman continues to defy
definition: nevertheless in this paper I shall consider him and
his Leaves of Grass, as far as I can from the eugenist’s point of
view. And I do so with the less compunction because he himself laid special emphasis on all matters relating to the nativity
and breeding of his ideal race.

From whatever page or standpoint we begin a reading of
the Leaves we are certain to be almost immediately confronted
with ‘‘ Walt” himself, ‘‘ well-begotten and rais’d by a perfect
mother,” singing ‘‘the body electric,’”’ proclaiming “an athletic
democracy,” “‘ the most splendid race the sun ever shone upon,”
a ‘race of passion and the storm,” “one hundred millions of
superb persons,’’ ‘“‘a larger, saner brood ”’—and declaring with
all the authority his genius and assurance could summons

‘* Produce great persons, the rest follows,”—

in a word, you cannot begin to read Whitman without recognising his preoccupation with this problem of right begetting and
right birth.

Nor is this first impression set aside later. It is in a sense
symbolical of his message as it continues to unfold itself year
after year in the mind of the sympathetic reader who recognises
something deeper in Whitman’s thought than mere adoration of
“the strong man.” I shall not here discuss his rank as a poet:
I fear the brief extracts which I am using will not be calculated
. WHITMAN AS THE POET OF GOOD BREEDING ITr

to advance his literary fame, since they are deliberately cut away
from their context, and chosen for a didactic purpose. But
Whitman himself often disclaimed purely literary pretensions in
order that he might with better grace assert what he knew to be
his prophetic or inspirational gift. Whatever his Leaves might
be as poems he never doubted their immense spiritual significance
not only for America but for the cause of Liberty itself, that is to
say for the future of the whole human race. Leaves of Grass was
essentially an oracular utterance out of the life of the Race
through the lips and brain of a typical (“average”) man, who
was also a pioneer of the new social order. The book was,
according to its writer, the gospel of the Modern Man, a Bible
for America; and its purpose was to inspire a race capable of
freedom. The manifesto of Democracy, it was to give impulse
and spiritual nourishment to a people, in order that having
become filled with its spirit, they might have the faith required
if they would confront their own future and destiny, and resist,
if need were, the combined attack of the rest of the world.

It is evident then that Whitman had undertaken the
responsibility of Race-building. It is also clear that he was
singularly conscious of the immense importance of a sound
physical basis for the whole superstructure of his ‘“‘ nonchalant
breed.’’ Singularly conscious, I say, for the oftener I read his
pages, the more am [ startlingly convinced of the man’s vision
into the inward meanings and essential forms of outward things.
For Whitman, more perhaps than for any poet of his time
or ours, the body was the actual mould of an eternal and
indestructible Form: and though defects in the body might
ultimately be mastered and remedied, yet so long as they
remained, they were the sign and substance of spiritual
disabilities. The body was, for him, a definite and defining
part of the personality; and physical health was, to his
mind, the foundation for the religious and ethical life of the
future. I do not mean that Whitman subscribed to the common
and wide-spread intellectual heresy of his age which denied the
possibjlity of personal consciousness after life has left the body.
Whitman’s clear-seeing eyes perceived a more permanent body
being formed within the mould of the body of flesh and blood, ang
I12 H. B. Binns:

he consistently held that at death this interior body was (if I may
use the expression) born from the other body. But this mysticism of his only enhanced the value to be set upon the actual
physical body in its many-sided relation to personality. He saw
in it the medium of perception and expression and the storehouse
not only of experience but also of those “‘ magnetic ”’ personal
forces whose possession gives power, influence and distinction.
Thus he writes To a Pupil:

**Ts reform needed ? is it through you?

The greater the reform needed, the greater the Personality you need to
accomplish it.

You !—do you not see how it would serve to have eyes, blood, complexion,
clean and sweet ?

Do you not see how it would serve to have such a body and soul that
when you enter the crowd an atmosphere of desire and command
enters with you, and everyone is impressed with your Personality ?

O the magnet ! the flesh over and over ! "

It is not without deliberate intention that the poem followang on the same page is the one of maternity beginning
‘Unfolded out of the folds of the woman man comes unfolded, and is
always to come unfolded,
Unfolded only out of the superbest woman of the earth is to come the
superbest man of the earth,
Unfolded out of the friendliest woman is to come the friendliest man,
Unfolded only out of the perfect body of a woman can a man be form’d of
perfect body.”
Again, turning over three pages, the reader is confronted
‘with the doubtful question of America’s future :
“With all thy gifts America,
What if one gift thou lackest? (the ultimate human problem never
solving),
The gift of perfect women fit for thee—.
The mothers fit for thee ? ”

In these three short poems is thus briefly indicated
‘Whitman’s attitude towards Eugenics:—In any reform the agent
needed is a great Personality ; and that must include a magnetic
body. But such can be born only of a perfect woman: the
future of the race lies with her.

In order to suggest Whitman’s further view of woman,
WHITMAN AS THE POET OF GOOD BREEDING II3

especially in this connection, I must quote again the often quoted
dines in The Song of the Broad-Axe :
‘‘ Her shape arises,
She less guarded than ever, yet more guarded than ever,
The gross and soil’d she moves among do not make her gross and soil’d,
She knows the thoughts as she passes, nothing is concealed from her,
She is none the less considerate or friendly therefor,
She is best belov’d, it is without exception, she has no reason to fear and
she does not fear,
Oaths, quarrels, hiccupp’d songs, smutty expressions, are idle to her as
she passes,
She is silent, she is possess’d of herself, they do not offend her,
She receives them as the laws of Nature receive them, she is strong,
She too is a law of Nature—there is no law stronger than she is.”
It should be noted that this follows shortly after a passage
an the same poem descriptive of the great city in which women
have a place equal with men in all its public life:

‘‘ Where the city of the cleanliness of the sexes stands,
Where the city of the healthiest fathers stands,
Where the city of the best-bodied mothers stands,
There the great city stands.”’

After this I need hardly add that Whitman’s women are no
more ‘“‘ mere mothers ’”’ than are his men mere fathers; he does
not so exaggerate the place of sex or of nativity. Yet in the racelife, and in that of the individual also, he sees that ‘‘ sex contains
all,” and—‘‘ underneath all, nativity.” Before going further:
one ought really to try to render some account of the way in
which Whitman uses this word ‘“‘ sex,” since one dare not take it
for granted that so mystical a writer would be satisfied with the
ordinary contents of the words he employs; often, indeed, they
come from his pen surcharged and overflowing with significance.
No doubt Whitman uses the word ‘‘sex” to include much more
than do most writers on such subjects; and of course one must
be careful not to take him too literally when he describes himself as the procreator of whole breeds of heroes and _ bards,
remembering that he also says, “only the poet begets.’’ The
principal matter is, however, that when Whitman writes of sex
he always includes the physical and never evades it, as too many
others are fain to do.
114 H. B. Binns:

The man knew what he meant and meant what he said
when he spoke of ‘‘the great chastity of paternity to match the
great chastity of maternity,” and of ‘‘ the oath of procreation I
have sworn.” It is true he did not conform to social standards.
in his own sex relations—his children were born “out of wedlock ”’—but we have plentiful evidence of the cleanness and
wholesomeness of the man. Those who were, or imagined themselves to be, wholly out of sympathy with his writings bore half
reluctant witness to this obvious—one might almost say tangible
—personal characteristic. I shall not apologise for Whitman’s.
actions any more than for his poetry: and to attempt an “‘explanation” here would only be impertinent. But the facts are
now public property and in this connection could not but be
stated. At the same time, he never exposed them to public
view himself, as though he wished others to follow his example..
Neither, I am sure, was he ever ashamed of hissecret. His quality
and utterance belong no more to the repentant rowé than they do
to the emasculated theorist. He always gives the indubitable
impression ofa full-blooded, healthy, deliberate personality, whose
attitude towards sex is perhaps best summarised in those two
lines, more pregnant than elegant :

‘“ Bravas to all impulses sending sane children to the next age,
But damn that which spends itself with no thought of the stain, pains,.
dismay, feebleness it is bequeathing.”

Whitman believed in the domestic institution of marriage,
but he was not primarily concerned with institutions. His.
intensely vital personal and social morality would have been
shocked at the suggestion of neglecting his own part in strengthening and vitalising his race, physically, mentally and spiritually
to the utmost of his power: and his influence makes it more
difficult for any who come into contact with his vigorous and
robust personality as it expresses itself in Leaves of Grass, to
escape the obligation and glory of parenthood. The obloquy
which is supposed, in America, to attach to his work, attaches
to it precisely because American society is hostile to all essential
considerations of good-breeding; and abhors above all things.
that wholesome but irrepressible sexuality which Whitman
WHITMAN AS THE POET OF GOOD BREEDING IT5

regarded as an essential quality of the people of the future; at
least this is my own view of the situation.

Whitman never suggested that the mere bringing to birth of
a better race is the whole responsibility laid upon men and
women of exceptional personality. In the Calamus poems and
elsewhere he reiterates the tremendous force of comradeship and
the value of every other vital form of inspiration. A sound body
is a good foundation to work upon, but it must be fine too, and
responsive to every living rhythm ; it must be capable of enthusiasm and heroism, it must be made of the very stuff of poems.
Health is nothing to him unless it can be kindled into illumination: However prolific she may be in other births, America is
but barren till she is the mother of bards that can arouse. So.
also in the relation of the sexes, he is not concerned with the
child alone; but—

‘‘ After the child is born of woman, man is born of woman ”—

for manhood does not properly begin before the second birth of
sex enfranchisement, that new consciousness into which womanhood alone can open the gate.
