HEREDITY OF FEEBLE-MINDEDNESS.’
HENRY H. GODDARD, Vineland, N.J.

THE admission forms of institutions for the feeble-minded
generally have some questions relating to the ancestry of the
applicant. Upon examination of those on file at Vineland, N.J.,
it was felt that the answers were not sufficiently accurate to be
valuable. In some cases, at least, parents had stated that which
they thought would get the child into the institution.

Recognising the difficulty of preventing these inaccurate
statements, it was decided to publish a new form which should
be called the “ After-admission Blank,” containing very careful,
detailed questions about the relatives of the child. This form
was sent to all parents and physicians, with a little note urging
them for the sake of the child to tell all they possibly could
about the child’s relatives, their condition, any diseases they had
had, any habits, such as alcoholism, any insanity or the like
which had occurred in the family. It was expected that this
would only be preliminary to more detailed and careful work
later. We were, however, greatly surprised at the amount of
information received, which has since been proved to be generally
very accurate. Upon the basis of this information, we prepared
charts of the children, which were truly remarkable in what they
revealed as to the etiology of feeble-mindedness.

This spurred us on to more careful and detailed work. We
were fortunate enough to find some philanthropic people who
were glad to furnish the funds necessary to employ two field
workers. It was felt that this was very delicate business, but
the relation between the superintendent at Vineland and the
parents of the children is so intimate and friendly that we have
had complete co-operation from the start. The field worker goes
out as the superintendent’s personal representative with a letter
from him recommending her and urging the parents, for the sake
of the child, to tell all they possibly can, and to send her on to
other relatives or to any one who may be able to give the
information, which may be used to help their child, or some one’s

1 Reprinted from Volume I, No. 3, “ American Breeders Magaxtne.”
HEREDITY OF FEEBLE-MINDEDNESS 47

child. The response has been full, free, and hearty. Parents
do all in their power to help us get the facts. There is very
rarely anything like an attempt to conceal facts that they know.
Of course, many of these parents are ignorant, often feebleminded, and cannot tell all that we should like to know. Nevertheless, by adroit questioning and cross-reference, we have been
able to get what we believe to be very accurate data in a very
large percentage of our cases.

The charts here presented are typical of about eighty so far
completed. The symbols used in the charts are the following:
Square indicates male. Circle indicates female. A capital letter
indicates disease, habit, or condition, as follows: A, alcoholic
(habitual drunkard); B, blind; C, criminal; D, deaf; Dwf,
dwarf; E, epileptic; F, feeble-minded, either black letter, or
white letter on black ground (the former when sex is unknown);
I, insane; M, migraine; N, normal; Sx, grave sexual offender ;
Sy, syphilitic; T, tuberculous; W, wanderer, tramp, or truant.

Any of these letters may be used with no square or circle
when sex is unknown. When even the letter is omitted the
vertical line points to the fact that there was an individual of
whom nothing is known.

Small black circle indicates miscarriage—time is given (in
months) when known; also cause; stillbirth is shown as a
miscarriage at nine months; b = born; d = died; m = married ;
inf = infancy; hand shows which child is in the institution for
feeble-minded ; illeg = illegitimate; heavy line under any symbol
indicates that the person is in some institution at the expense of
society.

Al & mer 7
IN WO ff Ol! (ru) fia 7 Z

Nr bb OMLIE] Gi G

N.

oo hi

CuaArt I,
48 H. H. Goddard:

On the lowest line, which represents the brothers and sisters
of the child in the institution, the children are indicated in order
of birth—the oldest to the left. In other cases the order would
be indicated, if known, by numerals placed above the horizontal
line.

Chart I shows the maternal grandparents feeble-minded,
and they have as usual only feeble-minded offspring—two girls.
One of these married a feeble-minded man whose brother was
feeble-minded and a criminal, and whose sister was disgracefully
alcoholic. However, a normal brother of the husband married a
normal woman and had six normal children. The offspring of
the feeble-minded woman and this feeble-minded man were three
feeble-minded children and two others who died in infancy. An
illegitimate child of this woman is feeble-minded and a criminal.

cfLOH OR-O8g

(wu) (v) [x] LA} pub @Cb

4385.
oe) AIL. Zz OWW
wos. “S.. 433, AT GIRTH

Cuart II.

Chart II shows a combination of alcoholism and mental
defect in the ancestry of the parents, resulting in alcoholism on
the one side and direct feeble-mindedness with alcoholism on
the other. The offspring of these two individuals are all defective
—one still-born, two that died young, one miscarriage, and two
feeble-minded.

A--@ N KH-@

a a

lt OBONN®A) «._4..3)

NN) G ul zai OU MEE EE] a
eng, ves. b

CHART III.
HEREDITY OF FEEBLE-MINDEDNESS 49

Chart III is instructive, in that it seems to show the effect
of a combination of alcoholism and mental defect in the father,
when the mother’s family is good—herself and sisters being
normal. The result of this woman’s marriage with a feebleminded alcoholic man is five feeble-minded children, five that
died in infancy, two others that died before their mental condition could be determined, and one normal child. Apparently a
clear case of transmission through the father.

Chart IV, also, seems to show the defect coming through the
male, the grandfather, a feeble-minded man, marrying a normal
woman, the result of this marriage being two feeble-minded

CT a en aw)

—

710 ©) @) @ }-—&) i hI G

TWINS

ON NE @ON@OL
“de

37MoG,
O40

Cuart IV.

children and two normal ones. One of these normals married a
normal man. They had six normal children, one feeble-minded,
one who died in infancy, and one infant still living, but condition
unknown.

 

CuarT V, A.
50 H. H. Goddard:
N) O A) A)

OHOOLHBOHOG

"lila @ @®EIO

CuHartT V, B.

Chart V is presented in two parts—A and B. It gives us
what may be called a natural experiment of extreme suggestiveness. The father of our child was twice married. He himself is
alcoholic, otherwise his family seems to be very good. His first
wife was a normal woman, but a victim of tuberculosis. The
result of that marriage was eleven children, of whom five are
known to be normal, the others died young. This man married
for his second wife a woman who was alcoholic and feeble-minded,
and who had two sisters, a brother, a father, and a mother that
were also alcoholic. The result of this union was seven children
—three feeble-minded, two that died young, and two that are as
yet unknown. It seems to be fairly clear in this case that the
father’s alcoholism may have caused the physical weakness that
led to so many early deaths in the first family, but the mother’s
defect has been directly transmitted in the second family, with
the result that there are at least three feeble-minded children.
We might also add the two others that died young, because,
according to the definition of Tredgold, which describes an idiot
as ‘fone who cannot avoid ordinary dangers,” these children
were also defective, since they were both killed at play, apparently
not being able to protect themselves in a usually harmless game.

Ww) [NF

meOREMO@LL-C

 

a a Ea INT ini ig
row of | b — .

Cuart VI,
HEREDITY OF FEEBLE-MINDEDNESS §1

Chart VI shows a marked instance of the defect skipping a
generation. The maternal grandmother was feeble-minded, her
husband was alcoholic, but not one of their children was defective.
Indeed, four of them were distinctly normal. However, the
mother of our child had had St. Vitus dance, a brother is
alcoholic, a sister had had St. Vitus dance, and another hysteria,
but mentally, they were not defective. The father has no history
of mental defect in his family; he himself was alcoholic, but his
five brothers and sisters and the parents were normal. Nevertheless the result of the union of these two is three feeble-minded
children, one still-born, one that died in five days, two miscarriages, and two normals. If we had this family only, perhaps
it would be too hazardous to ascribe these three feeble-minded
children to the influence of the feeble-minded grandmother, but
when we look at the other children of this grandmother we find
that a second daughter has a feeble-minded child, and a third
daughter had an illegitimate child that died young, and later two
feeble-minded children born in wedlock, and the third child of
that woman was defective in eye-sight. The husbands of these
women are not known to have been defective. It seems a clear
case of the defect passing over from the grandparents to the
grandchildren.’

   

'

 

W) [7 aU
aT

     
 

HOO O-t-+-66uuueC

‘and
wire

  

 

tet
wire

ONWW acl e

in

Cuart VII.

Chart VII shows the father twice married. His first wife
was feeble-minded, and bore him one feeble-minded child and
another child that died at six weeks. As will be seen, this
wife’s family is a bad one, there being five feeble-minded children
from a father who was tubercular and a mother who was
52 H. H. Goddard:

tubercular and feeble-minded. Two of the sisters married.
One had at least two feeble-minded children, the other had one.
Coming back to the father of our child, he married the second
time a normal woman who gave birth to three normal children
and one who died at two years.

Chart VIII (in two parts) is in some ways the most astonishing one we have. There are in the institution at Vineland five
children representing, as we had always supposed, three entirely
independent families. We discovered, however, that they all
belonged to one stock. In Chart VIII, A, the central figure, the
alcoholic father of three of the children in the institution,
married for his third wife a woman who was a prostitute and a
keeper of a house of ill-fame, herself feeble-minded and with five
feeble-minded brothers and sisters. One of these sisters is the
grandmother represented on Chart VIII, B.

On A it will be seen that this alcoholic man was four times
married. He comes from a good family but was spoiled in his
bringing up, became alcoholic and immoral—a degenerate man.
His first wife, however, was a normal woman and it is claimed
that the two children were normal. For his second wife, he took
out of the poorhouse a feeble-minded woman. Her children
were: two normal, one that died young, and one feeble-minded.
He married the third time. The woman was the prostitute
above referred to. She had three illegitimate children, all feeble
    

Rs 7 F

A)

4
wi

0 OBMEEIE: WIA ao F)F{FYFIF
a wi

f\)

    
  

(N) F F
wire wire

ON © OF

 
  
     

wag uLeG.

F FOF @F FEF @e
b's “neous
Cuart VIII, A.

minded. After their marriage, they had three children, all of
whom are feeble-minded. Two of these are in this institution.
HEREDITY OF FEEBLE-MINDEDNESS 53

The father then deserted this woman and married a fourth wife
who is alcoholic and a prostitute. Of this union, however, there
are no children.

There is, moreover, very strong evidence that he is the
father of the third child in this institution by another woman,
who is also feeble-minded.

ret aa @ il G

J@utagnover

   

®a@ GEE @ GE
Ee \G,

   

 

NHOONNON

 

 

Srir fr fal jefe 200

CuartT VIII, B.

Chart VIII, B, will be understood if we note that the
mother’s mother is a sister of the third wife of the much married
man of Chart VIII, A. This sister married a feeble-minded
man, and the result of that union was seven feeble-minded
children, of whom one is a criminal and one an epileptic. Four
are married. The feeble-minded epileptic woman married a
normal man, who is one of a fairly good family. His mother
was insane, the father died in an almshouse; however we find
no mental defect. As the result of this marriage, we have seven
feeble-minded children, four others that died in infancy, and
there were two miscarriages. This is the fourth child of this
strain that is in our institution. The fifth one referred to is a
half-sister of the other girl referred to on Chart VIII, A.

oO t--O
[ussano MuseAno

OOCI Eb! & wy)
wire

ere

r
é
. A (N) IN (nN) (nw) THEOL AL. DIED UN OED VAS)

CuartT IX, A.

Chart IX (also in two parts) is another one of nature’s
experiments. The father of the child in this institution, an
54 H. H. Goddard:

alcoholic man, was married twice. His first wife was a normal
woman of good family. The result of this union was nineteen
children, all born within a period of nineteen years. Thirteen
of these children died under three and a half years of age, three

LIF-O--L A}

   
   

lot
MUSBAND

and
HUSBAND

   

WOON CG @ONM

WIFE

 

> Gia
a

a a

i’
b DD

Cuart IX, B.

are distinctly normal, one neurotic, one alcoholic, and one
unknown. This man had a congenital defect in the number of
joints in the fingers. However, not one of these nineteen
children showed that defect.

This man was married a second time to a feeble-minded
and alcoholic woman, the daughter of two alcoholic parents.
She has a feeble-minded brother, besides a normal brother and a
normal sister. The result of this union was eleven more conceptions, three resulting in miscarriages and the rest mental
defectives. Every one of these children shows the father’s
defective fingers or toes, one of them is also deaf. Apparently
the first wife was prepotent and overcame entirely the husband’s
defect of fingers, and there was no feeble-mindedness. In the
second marriage, however, this defective woman was not prepotent in that she allowed him to transmit his physical defect,
although she transmitted her mental condition.

IN 7 a F Gi
 wuliidne, Huseano

Sy Sy

©-——FNNN @ @ ia » ta G
. Se ows

7 J ow. wee: ds. a

N@OOG®G Hi: - Oi
oO ‘ween

Cyart X.
HEREDITY OF FEEBLE-MINDEDNESS 55

Chart X shows the descendants of a feeble-minded woman
who was married twice. Her first husband was normal. There
were four normal children, one of whom is alcoholic. This
alcoholic son married a normal woman and produced two feebleminded and three normal children. This is another instance of
the defect skipping a generation, being transmitted by the
grandmother through the father.

The second marriage of this feeble-minded woman was with
an alcoholic and immoral man. The result was four feebleminded children. One of these became alcoholic and syphilitic
and married a feeble-minded woman. She was one of three
imbecile children bern of two imbecile parents. The result here
could, of course, be nothing but defectives. There were two
still-born, and three that died in infancy. Six others lived to be
determined feeble-minded. One of these was acriminal. Two
are in the institution at Vineland. The mother’s sister also has
a feeble-minded son.

Chart XI also brings together in its two parts (A and B) two
children in the institution that were not previously known to be
related. The maternal grandmother in A is the maternal grandmother in B, being the grandmother of both of these children,
as well as of several other defectives. The mother of our child
on A was an illegitimate daughter of this woman. She was
feeble-minded; she married a feeble-minded son of a feebleminded man. The result was two children that died in infancy,
three miscarriages, and two mental defectives. Going back to
the grandmother, we find that she married, later, a normal

   
 

SOOOOHOSE

 

 

Cwart XI, A.
86 H. H. Goddard:

although neurotic man. The result of that union was one feebleminded, one normal and neurotic, and three that we do not
know about. |

Chart XI, B, is somewhat complicated, but shows many
variations. For example, one of the sons of this same woman
had three children, one of whom was feeble-minded. A neurotic
daughter married a feeble-minded man who had two feebleminded brothers and two normal brothers. The result of this

iN-——@ [1 & (> IN-—G

()W) WIN] Gi Gi G WClmatcitl @

jeeeenoants’

aed

NN C1: os El G)
6

1

Cuart XI, B.

union was the child that is in our institution, two that died
young, one miscarriage, and one normal man. This normal
man married a normal woman and had two children, one of
whem is feeble-minded.

Going back to the father of our child, we find that one of
his feeble-minded brothers married a woman who was spoken of
as a pervert. They had two children, one of whom was a
criminal and the other insane. Two other brothers were normal.
One had a normal son and a normal grandson; the other has a
normal son, and a grandchild that died in infancy. Going back
to the third generation, we find that the grandfather was twice
married. He was normal; his first wife was normal. They
had four! normal children and fourteen descendants, all normal.
He married for his second wife the feeble-minded woman who
was the mother of the children already referred to. She hada
brother who was feeble-minded, and another brother whose
mental condition is unknown, but whose child was feeble-minded.

1 Only two shown on chart.
HEREDITY OF FEEBLE-MINDEDNESS 57

Ny) WN) Nw)

 

   

IN] (N). CO) [7] [8] [8] [8] ©) OLN (uy) (wu) Ce) [NJ

ee) ¢ [x] [yj ih] (© Be ke

—_

CuHartT XII.

Chart XII shows a type of imbecility that is clearly not
hereditary. It will be seen that all this family on both sides are
normal people, with the exception of one woman who is reported

a——O cI)
mC )NC)1@@w F 7
ie

“acs. (ND 7
(ND

Cuart XIII.

as being insane with religious mania. The child in our institution
is what is known as the Mongolian type, and we have come to
believe that there will be no other mental defectives found in
such families. Usually such a child is the last born. In this
case, there was one other child later, but he died at the age of
ten months. Mongolism is an arrest of development resulting
from some cause acting in utero, perhaps about the second month.

Chart XIII presents nothing new, but emphasises what we
have already seen. Two feeble-minded parents have five feebleminded children. The paternal grandfather, however, seems to
have been the one that transmitted the defect on the father’s
side.
58 H. H. Goddard:

a

Se

 

   

(06 ©) EG

 

NOQORR@O@OGL-@e8OD

    

il prs F IN ifr. ied (br)

CuHarRT XIV.

Chart XIV is particularly interesting as showing the mental
defect running through four generations, and through the
mother’s family in three of these, although there is defect on the
father’s side also in the third generation.

Chart XV perhaps adds nothing new for heredity, mainly
emphasising the exhibits of the other charts. However, for a
social study, it is perhaps the best of anything that we have yet
found. Here we have a feeble-minded woman who has had
three husbands (including one ‘“‘ who was not her husband”),
and the result has been nothing but feeble-minded children.
The story may be told as follows:

This:woman was a handsome girl, apparently having
inherited some refinement from her mother, although her father
was a feeble-minded, alcoholic brute. Somewhere about the
age of 17 or 18 she went out to do house-work in a family
in one of the towns of this State. She soon became the mother
of an illegitimate child. It was born in an almshouse to which
she fled after she had been discharged from the home where she
had been at work. After this, charitably disposed people tried
to do what they could for her, giving her a home for herself and
her child in return for the work which she could do. However,
she soon appeared in the same condition. An effort was then
made to discover the father of this second child, and when he
was found to be a drunken, feeble-minded epileptic living in the
neighbourhood, in order to save the legitimacy of the child, her
friends saw to it that a marriage ceremony took place. Later
HEREDITY OF FEEBLE-MINDEDNESS 59

another feeble-minded child was born tothem. Then the whole
family secured a home with an unmarried farmer in the neighbourhood. They lived there together until another child was
forthcoming which the husband refused to own. When finally
the farmer acknowledged this child to be his, the same good
friends interfered, went into the courts and procured a divorce

a
F

 

U FO
. w
PW VOU O-_-&OUG
Sx. ROT MannicoS 5
. NW)
NS:
Fer @)-§ SLI ww.
ite wire ~
OD sar. snr. ine. Pal anur. scr. we. FEE
2nd nUS@aNo _
‘ FReFOEE EE es a 7 ter a @
Cuart XV.

from the husband, and had the woman married to the father of
the expected fourth child. This proved to be feeble-minded,
and they have had four other feeble-minded children, making
eight in all, born of this woman. There have also been one
child still-born and one miscarriage.

As will be seen from the chart, this woman had four feebleminded brothers and sisters. These are all married and have
children. The older of the two sisters had a child by her own
father, when she was thirteen years old. The child died at
about six years of age. This woman has since married. The
two brothers have each at least one child of whose mental
condition nothing is known. The other sister married a feebleminded man and had three children. Two of these are feebleminded and the other died in infancy. There were six other
brothers and sisters that died in infancy.
60 H. H. Goddard :

Such is the bare presentation of a few of our cases already
worked up. We have made no attempt to study these points,
or to mark them statistically, as such labour will be more worth
while when all of our cases are completed.

It should be stated that while Chart XV and Chart VIII
are undoubtedly the worst cases we have come across, the
others here presented are hardly exceptional. They can be
matched by many that we already have on file.!

We have nearly four hundred children in the institution, and
we may reasonably hope to present a fairly complete family
history of at least two-thirds of these. If this prediction is
verified, it will give us enough data to deduce something of
importance concerning human heredity. The work is going on
as fast as we can pushit. We have now three workers in the
field, and will perhaps add a fourth before very long. Later we
shall hope to present a full report of all our findings.

1 Since this was written this family has been further investigated, with the
result that we now know the facts concerning 319 members, of whom 119 are
feeble-minded with only 42 known to be normal.
