THE CAUSES OF RISE AND FALL IN THE
POPULATION OF THE ANCIENT WORLD.

By Proressor J. L. Myres, F.S.A.,
Wykeham Professor of Ancient History, Oxford.

EUGENICS, in the modern sense, is a very recent branch of
knowledge: an art, or an applied science, utilizing experience
for the improvement of the future. And hitherto most of this
experience has been experience of the immediate present, or at
least of the very near past. Further back, the evidence was not
collected, mainly because its value was not seen. Yet the
problems to the solution of which we try to apply it were already
perceived, and attracted more than merely theoretical attention,
in the ancient world.

It is one of the attractions of ancient history, that we are
sometimes able by its help to make intelligent anticipations of
the course of current events. History never repeats itself, but the
forces whose interaction makes history are not very numerous,
and many of the ways in which they operate have been formulated : many more can be described in an intelligible way, though
not with scientific accuracy; and their interactions can be
followed in particular instances, sometimes through a number
of phases, with a confidence which varies with the accuracy of
our estimates of each several factor. It is, therefore, possible
to compare situations and processes within our own experience,
and as yet incomplete, with essentially similar situations and
processes of which the outcome is, as we say, a matter of history.
Our comparisons and analogies may be inexact in detail, and
leave a large margin for our own misapprehension of the facts;
but history is, as surely as geology, a comparative science, and
in the light of the fossil politics which make so large a part of
history we can estimate the outcome of policies and modes of
life in much the same way, and with the same degree of
assurance as we can predict the transformations of a river,
valley, or a coastline, under given conditions of structure and
16 EUGENICS REVIEW.

climate. We cannot be sure that no catastrophe will occur, to
change the ‘‘course of nature’’ altogether; but putting
catastrophe aside, we have a good deal to learn about the future
of man from our study of his past.

This is my apology for submitting here a sample of ancient
eugenics, in which theory, and practical politics, and the mere
course of nature, can be watched playing upon one another
through at least a thousand years, and producing quite early in
that period effects which resemble some which cause us anxiety
in our own world too. We shall see populations overtaking the
means of subsistence in a limited region; the relief of this congestion by colonization oversea; the complete occupation and
development of the colonial regions; the pacific penetration of
the regions of stable or less progressive culture by an aggressive civilization, itself in rapid development; forcible dispossession of obstructive occupants, and no less forcible elimination
of competitors for maintenance within the home circle of the
conqueror; a veritable struggle for existence, under the thin
veil of one of the world’s greatest achievements hitherto. How
to control population, both in success and in defeat, was in fact
one of the great perennial questions for ancient statesmen and
for fathers of families. In theoretical politics too, the problem
is an old one. As far back as there has been a “* political
science ’’ at all, its subject has included more than the external
relations between the persons who compose the state; it has
always considered as lying within its province the collateral
question, what kind of person is the best member of the state;
and how is the proper supply of such persons to be secured?
And here, too, Greek thought had not gone far, before the subject
fell into two parts: how to get the proper breed of man, in the
first instance; and then how to preserve him from deformation.
And to Greek thinkers of the fourth century it seemed
obvious that the supreme remedy for such deformation of
naturally good quality was to regulate the quantity : to discover,
as Plato puts it, ‘‘the Number of the State,’’ and keep the
population at that number.

No other ancient people seems to have displayed this anxiety
about ‘‘ the Number of the State.’’ Eastern monarchies valued
CAUSES OF RISE AND FALL IN THE POPULATION. 17

population, as they valued area, as the basis of military power.
In a theocracy, where the source of power was conceived as
superhuman, a king who ‘‘numbered the people’’ was
suspected of revolt against God. In the same way, the militant
republic on the Tiber, ringed round with populous highlands,
supplies in its census rolls the only coherent statistics which
have come down to us from an ancient people; and their purpose
was purely military.

We have first to note the modern course of the enquiry,
before we deal directly with ancient evidence. For as in other
historical problems, our own standpoint is prepared for us, in
part at least, by the perplexities of those who have worked at it
before us. Renaissance scholars, dominated by the belief common to ancient and modern despotisms, that a large population 1s
necessary to the well-being of the State, inferred, not unnaturally,
that the most prosperous States, and periods of history, were
blessed with large populations. They therefore tended to
exaggerate the populousness of the Mediterranean world during
the period of Grzco-Roman civilization, until Montesquieu
estimated it at double the modern population.’ Critical study
of the question began with David Hume,? who argued the
improbability of these large estimates, and even of the slave
totals recorded by Athenzus. Hume’s view, though repeatedly
challenged, was only superseded by Boeckh,*® whose great learning, and generally scientific method were devoted to maintain the
high ancient figures, and encouraged lesser men to guess far
beyond them, Niebuhr alone protesting. Meanwhile Gibbon®
had been led to the conclusion that the population of the ancient
world had risen to a maximum in the Antonine Age, and had
then declined rather rapidly; and Zumpt,® criticizing Gibbon’s
details, agreed with him as to the fact of a decline, though he
placed the culmination in the sixth century B.c., at the close of
the period of Greek colonization.

2 Montsequieu. Lettres Persanes. No. 112.

3 David Hume. Essay on the Populousness of Ancient Nations, in Political Discourses.
Edinburgh, 1752.

3 Boeckh. Staats-hauskaltung der Athener, I. 52.

4 Niebuhr. Romische Geschichte, 1830, I1., 80.

5S Edward Gibbon. Decline and fall of the Roman Empire, I1., 59.

6 A. W. Zumpt. Abhandl. Berl. Akad., 1840, pp. 1-92.
18 ; EUGENICS REVIEW.

Clinton,’ though his maps were inadequate, had attempted to
correlate populations with areas, and Wietersheim? had compared an estimate of the modern populations with the ancient
data, and had called attention to contrasts between ancient and
modern agriculture, as limiting factors: he was also able to
revise Clinton’s estimates of area. Similar economic factors
had already been brought into consideration by Dureau de la
Malle, in a work which stands side by side with that of Boeckh.
Bunsen’s argument‘ from the Roman corn-doles is another early
use of collateral economic data. The first separate study of
urban populations is that of Péhlmann.® All older work was
superseded in 1886 by Beloch,* whose essay on the population of
the Grzco-Roman world is still the best general introduction
to the subject. Beloch’s estimates are so cautiously framed
that the tendency of subsequent work has been to raise them
slightly in detail, but without seriously affecting the proportions
between them. Of collateral questions, the most important
contributions since Beloch’s work have been those of Edward
Meyer, Nieboer, and Zimmern, on slavery’; of Francotte® on
Greek industry; of Glotz® and Sundwall’® on the deliberate
restriction of increase, and of Gernet?? and Grundy” on the
general question of Greek food supply. The most notable
revision of estimates, particularly for the Persian Empire, and
for Greece in the fifth century is that of Cavaignac.™

Imperfect as the evidence is, as to the actual population of

the ancient world, or any but a few sections of it, at any given

Clinton. Fast Hellenict, II., Oxford, 1824.
2Wietersheim. Geschichte der Volkerwanderung, I., pp. 169-269.
3 Dureau de la Malle. conomte Politique des Romains. Paris, 1840.
4Bunsen. Beschreibung Roms., I., 184.
5Pohlmann. Die Uebervilkerung der antiken Grosstadte. Leipzig, 1884.
©Beloch. Die Bevolkerung der Griechisch-Rimischen Welt. Leipzig, 1886
7E. Meyer. Forschungen, ii , 185.
Nieboer. Slavery as an Industrial System. The Hague, 1900.
Zimmer. Soctological Review. Jan.-April, 1909.
8Francotte. L’Jndustrie dans la Gréce antique. Brussels, 1900-1.
9Glotz. Etudes sociales et juridiques. Paris. 1906.
%oSyndwall. Hetratsalter und Kinderzahl, Klio (Nachtrage iv).
"™Gernet. L’approvistonnement d@’ Athenes en blé au cingutdme et au quatridme st2cle.
(Bibl. Fac. Lettres de ? Université de Paris). 1909.
Grundy. Thucydides and the History of his Age. London.

3Cavaignac. Histoire dé PAntiguité, Y1., III. 1912-14. Volume I. is not yet
published ; volume II. begins with an estimate of the resources of the Persian Empire
ander Darius.
CAUSES OF RISE AND FALL IN THE POPULATION. 19

period, it is possible nevertheless to trace certain large movements of rise and fall, and to assign approximate limits in time.
The most conspicuous instance is in the Roman census totals,
where the numbers rise steadily from 214,000 in the year 204,
after the terrific losses of the Hannibalic War, to 337,452 in 164,
and then fall to 317,933 in 136, and 318,823 in 131; rising again
suddenly to 394,736 in 125, and to 910,000 in 70, this time in
consequence of known political changes, whose effects can be
discounted. These are, of course, not records of the whole
population, but as they represent the men of mature age from an
important region of peninsular Italy, and eventually, in 70 B.C.,
from almost the whole, they may be taken as a good index of it;
and as there is no reason to think any one of them less trustworthy than the rest, they are in the full sense comparable with
each other.

For the long period before the first adequate data, we
can, of course, only deal with large general considerations,
geographical and economic; but as these are applicable also to the
later periods, it is necessary to discuss them in some detail, and
their effects can be most clearly shown when their operation is
not complicated, for us, by more transient political or individual
movements.

In the first place we have to distinguish, in the ancient
world, at least three distinct types of geographical region,
linked with three types of economic regime. There are the great
continuous flat-lands of the north and south, Scythia, Arabia,
and Libya, and their miniature counterparts, the intermondane
plateaux of Asia Minor, Hungary, and Spain. Here human
activities were limited essentially by the supply of grass: society
is pastoral and at least seasonally nomad; polygamy is as
common as the food supply permits, and children have economic
value; the boys as shepherds and goatherds, the girls as wealth,
exchangeable for more cattle. On the flat grass-lands the
societies are stable, in the sense that nomad pastoral existence
is the only mode of life which permits man to live there at all:
but the geographical regime is at the same time unalterable by
man, and liable to large secular modifications which are quite
beyond his control. The result is that whereas all expansion of the
20 EUGENICS REVIEW.

vegetable basis of subsistence can be compensated within half-acentury by natural increase within the grass-land societies themselves, all contraction makes an immediate surplus of men and
increases the exodus which is always going on round the
margins of these regions. These are in fact regions of what I
can best describe as high man-pressure ; permanent anticyclones
in the human envelope of the earth. Their output of men across
their margins may be less or greater, but it probably never
quite ceases; and under extreme conditions it may become very
copious.

For these regions we have no trustworthy figures, and very
few estimates, either ancient or modern. All we can say is that
for the reasons given already, the grass-lands are (1) very thinly
populated, (2) usually as full as they can hold, and practically
impervious to immigration, unless and until an immigrant comes
armed with some device for making the steppe grow something
other than grass. In the event of a defect of sustenance, surplus
population is easily and rapidly removed, for it is migratory
even at home; if population falls short, it is easily replenished,
for polygamy is permitted by custom, and children are valued.
It is only anti-social persons like Hagar who are eliminated, in
the literal sense, with their offspring.

Next, traversing the great flatlands in abrupt-sided canyons,
from far-off mountain sources to maritime delta-swamps, there
are the great river valleys of the subtropical desert-belt. Their
flood-beds within the canyon, and the heads of their deltas, are
capable of great fertility under irrigation, and support a dense
sedentary population of cultivators. Unlike the great tropical
river cultures, which are fed on rice, Egypt and Babylonia grow
wheat, using draught animals for ploughing, threshing, and
carrying; and maintaining them on crop-refuse, fallow, and unreclaimed marshland. Like the tropical river cultures, however,
these civilizations are stable; that is to say, nothing short of a
derangement of the geographical surroundings avails to modify
the essential characters of the societies which maintain them.
At most, minor fluctuations of fertility permit the luckier and
more provident cultivators to accumulate capital, and eventually
to finance industries such as weaving, glazed-ware, and jeweller’s
CAUSES OF RISE AND FALL IN THE POPULATION. 21

work, first for local or palatial use, then for exchange abroad
against timber and other raw materials, or foreign rarities.
Egypt’s isolation restrained such trade and industry, and therewith the growth of an urban population, until the Greek conquest. Here the limit of population is set by the efficiency of
the central authority. A strong enough king made a fully
populated Egypt, for he could ensure that the Nile water was
fully and fairly distributed, and organize a national corn reserve
against years of low Nile. But Babylonia, more central, and
better connected with neighbouring regions, developed early,
and maintained throughout, a capitalist regime and an industrial
population, large enough to create and maintain irrigation works
of sufficient extent to feed it. Here too the limit was set by
administrative efficiency; and great religious corporations held
capital enough in trust, to insure their laity against famine by
organised industrial undertakings.

Here, too, though we have no adequate records of population, the general situation is clear. The country is as full as it
will hold, and great renown comes to the man who can “ enlarge
its borders.’ Epidemics and war, as in modern India, make
havoc now and then; but it is quickly repaired, for it is seldom
universal, and communications are good. Children are well
looked after by their parents, both in Egypt and in Babylonia;
the king and the gods, being great employers, have a kindly eye
for the fatherless and the widow; and in Babylonia there is even
public provision in case of neglect. . Hammurabi’s Code for
example provides (§ 193) for a dead man’s children if the widow
neglects them. Unwanted children could be legally adopted,
and it is probable that illegitimate children whom no one wished
to adopt could be sold by the State ; but anything like infanticide,
as a custom, was out of the question.

The third type of region and regime is that of the Mediterranean lands. While it is characteristic of the greater part of
the coasts of the Midland Sea—the ‘‘ Great Lakes ’’ of the Old
World—it is not restricted to these, but extends far along the
folded mountain zone, from the Pyrenees to the Caucasus and
the Persian highlands, wherever the ‘‘ Mediterranean ”’ type of
climate is maintained, with its hot rainless summer, and its com22 EUGENICS REVIEW.

paratively cool moist winter. It passes gradually, of course,
round the margins of the great flatlands, into opener rolling
country with parkland and arable meadow, and so into steppe
as the winter rainfall diminishes: and inversely, towards the
Atlantic seaboard, or wherever locally the summer rainfall is
enhanced by altitude or prevalence of sea breeze (as for instance
on the west side of the Balkan Peninsula), its normal evergreen
vegetation becomes mixed with deciduous trees of larger growth.
Between these transitional zones, however, the moderating
influence of so large a mass of water as the Midland Seas
(including in these the Adriatic, the A®gean, the Black Sea,
and in principle also the Caspian), preserves a remarkable
uniformity of climate and vegetation, and of the human activities
which these permit. And when we speak of the Ancient World,
it is rather of this Mediterranean region that we are thinking,
than of the flat-land regions with their nomad pastoral inhabitants, or even of the riparian civilizations of the Nile and
the Euphrates.

I have spoken of the great river-cultures as stable regimes,
in the sense first that the limits of human exploitation (apart
from modern expansions due to mechanical power) were approximately ascertained and reached some thousands of years ago;
and secondly that since that initial attainment there has been no
disproportion between the human population and the means of
subsistence, serious enough to result in either an exodus ora
change in the mode of living, or in the social order. The human
activities of the Mediterranean region do not seem to have been
so clearly described or defined, as those of the other two types.
This is partly because the whole study of Mediterranean
societies has until recently been conducted with very slight
attention to any other kind of demography ; partly for the special
reason that it is only within the last generation that we have
realized that there was possible here any of that deeper chronological perspective which is familiar to students of Egypt and
Babylonia, or even to students of a grass-land margin, as it is

1 This of course only applies fully to Egypt. Babylonia suffered just such a
‘ catastrophe ” as was contemplated in an earlier paragraph; for the waterworks
were neglected by the Mongol conquerors in the thirteenth century, and a large

art of the irrigable area went out of control. Yet what remains in use is utilised
in the ancient way.
CAUSES OF RISE AND FALL IN THE POPULATION. 23

illustrated in the history of Israel. It was only in 1872 that the
first stratified site in the Eastern Mediterranean was excavated
by Schliemann at Troy; Phylakopi in Melos was not excavated
till 1895, and Knossos not till 1900. Even in the West Mediterranean the lake-dwellings and terremare were untouched till the
sixties; the first general agreement as to their significance dates
from the Bologna Congress of 1874; and the prehistoric layers
under the Roman Forum were untouched till 1902.

The discovery that in the South Aigean an independent
civilization came into being within the same period as those of
Egypt and Babylonia, and that it was shared by a large population over a considerable area for nearly a thousand years, before
its collapse in the twelfth century B.c., changes altogether our
estimate of the newness and originality of the Greek civilization
which succeeds it, at all events as regards its economic substructure... The great store-rooms, oil jars and oil presses of the
Cretan Palaces, and the inventories of various sorts of tribute in
kind, illustrate the centralized organization of an A®gean agriculture essentially similar to that of to-day; and the ups and
downs of smaller country places like Gournia and Palaikastro
show how this centralization affected the arts, the prosperity,
and even the populousness of provincial districts. At present
we have no statistics; but the distribution of settlements and
cultivation terraces of the Minoan, Hellenic, and medizval and
modern periods suggest that the cultivated area of Minoan
Crete was probably rather larger than that of later periods, and
the population greater; for there is no reason to believe that the
fertility of the soil has been diminished, or the methods of
farming improved, since the Minoan Age.

Our evidence, such as it is, is naturally fuller for the central
areas of Crete and the Cyclades, in which Minoan civilization
grew up, than for the mainland regions into which it spread in
the late Minoan Age, between 1800 and 1400 B.c. Here, as in
earlier. Crete itself, exploitation was gradual. In Argolis, for

1 This is better realised west of the Rhine than east of it. Péhlmann, for
example, still discusses early Greek society as if its sole knowledge of agriculture descended from an ‘‘indo-germanische Urzeit’’; even ‘‘noch nach der
Occupation der siidlichen Balkanhalbinsel’’ agricultural organization was ‘* so
wenig entwickelt’’ that common ownership prevailed. Geschichte der sosialen
Frage und des Sosialismus in der antiken Welt. 1912. I. p. 6. .
24 EUGENICS REVIEW.

example, were occupied early and effectively ; Laconia very late,
and partially. Attica was late, too; but when the chance came,
penetration was general here. We may probably regard this
extension of Minoan life to the peninsula mainland as evidence
of over-population in Crete itself, and perhaps also in the other
islands; and certainly we must interpret in this sense the far
more extensive and rapid spread of Aigean settlements, this
time chiefly of mainland or ‘‘ Mycenaean ’”’ type, in the ‘* Third
Late Minoan ’’ period which opens after the Fall of Knossos
about 1400 B.c. ‘These settlements are spread from Cyprus and
Philistia eastwards, to Tarentum and Syracuse in the west, and
as far north in the Aigean as Lemnos and the seaboard of
Thessaly. The whole movement lasted nearly three centuries,
and in its latest phases began to affect the west coast of Asia
Minor, hitherto impervious, though Rhodes and other islands
of its fringe were occupied fairly early in the period.

It is not easy to correlate this coherent set of data, derived
from the distribution of sites and areas of exploitation, with the
more fragmentary evidence of the human remains from the same
region, which shows, intruding into Crete and the islands, a
type of man characteristic of the mainland mountain-zone both
east and west of the Aégean. In the Cyclades, where the
evidence is mainly early, and the Mediterranean and Alpine
types seem to be distributed haphazard, it looks as if both were
in competitive expansion from the beginning of the Bronze Age;
but in Crete there is a marked increase of the Alpine element in
the late Minoan periods, and as this increase is most marked at
the ends of the island, which lie nearest to the two, mainlands,
we have to recognize an inward movement into Crete, at a time
when the A®gean coasts as a whole are colonizing widely outwards. The two trends are however compatible; for central
Crete was receiving settlements of AEgean but non-Cretan
culture, after the Fall of Knossos, and it is quite likely that the
immigrants were partly or even mainly of the mainland Alpine
type.

Somewhere in this period of oversea colonization we probably have to take account of another intrusive element, of more
distant origin. The Achzan overlords who are represented as
CAUSES OF RISE AND FALL IN THE POPULATION. 25

dominant in peninsular Greece, from south Thessaly to Crete
and the Asiatic island fringe, and their rivals the Trojan and
Phrygian overlords of the north and east foreshores of the
fEgean, right and left of the Hellespontine region, have in
common the worship of the ‘‘ Olympian family ’’ of deities, and
the free use of homebred horses in war; and there is some reason
to believe that the Indo-European speech of the Achzans was
not far removed from the language of the contemporary intruders
in the Thraco-Phrygian region; though there is no direct
evidence of the latter. At all events the Homeric poems presume free intercourse on the battlefield between Achzean and
Trojan warriors, and make no mention of interpreters. We are
probably justified in accepting the popular view that in the Late
Minoan age there was a considerable inflow of fresh folk,
habitual horse-riders organised in patriarchal clans; and the
former characteristic makes it unlikely that their point of
departure on this southward adventure lay short of the Danubian
grass-lands or the South Russian steppe.

Immediately following the grass-land invaders, Greek
tradition places another movement which recalls on the one hand
the intrusion of Alpine types, which we have already noted as
in progress slightly earlier, and on the other resembles in its
general character and effects the southward spread of Albanian
highlanders into Greece in the fourteenth century a.p. And it
is noteworthy that in the same obscure but not very long period,
from the eleventh century to the ninth, Greek tradition also
places a fresh movement of Carian folk from the south-west of
Asia Minor into the islands.

It is difficult to find any one human cause for two movements so distinct geographically; and it is even more difficult
to correlate socially or politically the intrusion of the northern
grass-land peoples in the preceding centuries with the contemporary pressure of nomad pastoral peoples ‘‘from beyond
Jordan ”’ into the Palestinian foreshore. In both cases we must
look for some large geographical change. Now it is already a
familiar notion, since the work of Ellsworth Huntington,? that
the intermittent eruptions of nomad pastoral people, round the

1 The Pulse of Asia; 1907. Palestine in Transformation. 1911.
26 - EUGENICS REVIEW.

margins of the great grass lands, are to be correlated with
periods of minimum rainfall, or rather with the onset of a
period of diminishing rainfall, over the north-temperate region,
and I have already made elsewhere’ the suggestion that increasing and maximum rainfalls, while they tend to keep the grass
lands fertile and quiescent, have the opposite effect in highland
regions, curtailing the summers, spoiling hay and harvests, and
driving highland peoples down-valley into regions where the
Mediterranean type of climate would be in process of enhancement from the same cause, with less intermittent river-flow
in the dry summer, and moister growing times in spring and
autumn.

I have dealt at some length with these very general considerations applicable to the pre-Hellenic A®gean, for two
distinct reasons. The first is because they illustrate the multitude of new glimpses into the earlier history of the Mediterranean population which are revealed by recent archzological
work, and particularly because they seem to show that the world
in which the Greek people came into being was not in any sense
virgin soil. It had already borne and brought to maturity a
whole cycle of civilization, in comparative seclusion, and had
then seen it collapse through a combination of internal and
external stresses. In particular we can now see what historic
fact lay behind the old Greek belief that in the days before the
Trojan War ‘‘the world was too full of people ’’; so that the
war itself seemed in retrospect a divinely appointed remedy. In
spite of invasion and transmigration, this way and that, there
clearly was lost ground to be recovered, when things began to
settle down; but the main fabric of civilization, in the shape of
cultivation terraces, water channels, farmsteads, and all that
Homer groups together as the ‘‘ works of men,’’ were already
there, except where a torrent had broken loose here and there
during the troubles. One great piece of reclamation, indeed,
which had been achieved in the Minoan Age, was never repeated
in the Greek period, the draining of the Copais. Minoan
Boeotia must be imagined with the fertile heart which the
English company has restored to it in the last twenty years, not

™Proc. Brit. Ass. Adv. Sci., 1912 (Dundee), pp. 534-5.
CAUSES OF RISE AND FALL IN THE POPULATION. 27

with the pestilent swamp which the old Greeks knew, barring
all roads but one, between Thebes and Orchomenos, and
determining the battle fields of Chaeroneia and Coroneia. And
in the same way, the complicated road system of Minoan Argolis
owes its preservation mainly to the fact that it was almost disused
in historic times. Out in the west, too, Nestor’s Pylos, “‘ sandy
Pylos ’’ even then, was a city of the first rank in the thirteenth
century B.c.: once deserted, however, when the Neleids were
expelled and moved to Attica, the sand dunes swept over its
ploughlands, and in Hellenic times even its situation was not
known for certain.

The other reason why these early movements of invasion
are of interest is on account of their complete contrast with the
immunity and insulation of Hellenic Greece. With the one
exception of the Gaulish raid of 275 B.c., no foreign blood seems
to have reached A‘gean shores between the twelfth century B.c.
and the fourth century a.pD.: for the Kimmerian invasion in the
seventh century affected mainly the inland districts of Asia
Minor, and hardly seems to have touched the west coast: the
only Greek city damaged by raiders from over the Hellespont was
Magnesia-on-Meander, which lies some miles inland. There
was a good reason for this. It sounds like a paradox, but in the
present sense I think it is true, that a free Greece needed a
strong Macedon. Only with the northern passes closed by a
hardy half-barbaric neighbour, could the Greek cities in the
south live out their life-histories unmolested. It was the crime
of Croesus of Lydia, on the other hand, as Herodotus saw, that
by neglecting the eastern defences of the A‘gean he reopened
an ‘‘ eastern question ’’ which had been closed since the Trojan
war. But Persian aggression did little to affect the composition
of the Greek people; the effect of its neighbourhood, on the
growth of the Greek states, was of a quite different kind, as we
shall see. |

From these two considerations taken together—the long
previous history of the Aigean world (and particularly its complex ethnology) and its subsequent seclusion until and throughout the Hellenic period—a further point emerges, which may be
conveniently dealt with here. The Greeks were themselves quite
28 EUGENICS REVIEW.

clear on three points in their own pre-history ; that they were of
mongrel ancestry; that somewhere in that ancestry there was
some one strain to which they owed their birthright as
‘‘children of Hellen’’; but that Hellenism had also in some
sense been communicated by intercourse to others who were not
of the chosen seed. Now. it is worth noting, first, that this
composite explanation of an obviously composite nation is confirmed in its main outlines by the recent evidence as to physique
and culture which I have summarized above; and next, that
these are just the conditions for the breeding of a fresh,
vigorous, and specially adapted variety; namely a period of
multiplex interbreeding of distinct stocks, followed by a second
period of seclusion under rigorous environmental control.

Now the Mediterranean climate and the rest of the Mediterranean regime do in fact exert rigorous control over man. In
modern Greece only about one child out of three survives to its
first birthday, the sudden chills of the fickle winter weather, the
blazing summer sun, the precarious water supply, and the
temptations of copious soft fruits in early autumn, being the
chief sources of trouble. Ancient survivors ran the gauntlet, as
shepherd lads, of wolf and lion, precipice and thorn brake,
in the simplest blanket garment, living on meal cakes, goat
cheese, and a handful of olives, exposed to the sore eyes, and
septic cuts and scratches, which are the curse of the modern
villager. No sooner were they mature than they entered the
“* greater game ’’ of habitual seasonal war, hand-to-hand combat
with athletes like themselves. Strength and speed and endurance, and (above all) skill were the only armour worth wearing.
Marriages, it is true, were arranged in due form between the
parents, and in later days the young couple did not necessarily
meet before the wedding day. But earlier, in the centuries when
Hellas was in the making, there was arduous courtship beforehand, and bucolic poetry is there to testify how this happily
survived in the backwoods. There were runaway matches in
the towns too, if we may trust the comedians. Here were the
cradle and nursery of a sturdy, not ungracious breed, intimately
adjusted to its peculiar haunts in the minute plains between the
mountains and the sea; highlanders at beach-level who could
CAUSES OF RISE AND FALL IN THE POPULATION. 29

plough, and fight, and row a war canoe, and hunt wild bull or
lion, and swim the Hellespont for a pretty girl. All that the
most exacting eugenist would require is that there should be
either so large a supply of such Greeks-in-the-making, or
(what comes to the same thing) that the margin of subsistence
should be so narrow, that there should be real selection of the
fittest. And the fact that the seasonal wars were mostly, in the
last resort, about ownership of corn-lands makes it pretty clear
how this condition was fulfilled.

We come now to the most conspicuous fact of population in
the whole of Greek history, the colonizing movement of the centuries from the eighth to the sixth. Here we have still no
Statistics to control our general impressions, except the total
number of new foundations, which is comparable with the total
number of autonomous states in the /Egean world at the time
when the movement began. But it would not be safe to say that
as many Greek colonists left the A‘gean as there were Greek
citizens remaining at home. Anything like bisection of the
adult male population of a Greek city, on the occasion of a
colonial enterprise, would almost certainly have disorganised its
society and imperilled its security among its neighbours. Some
of the western colonies, at all events, are described to us as joint
enterprises from the first; and when a state like Miletus is
credited with eighty or ninety colonies, it must probably be
supposed that the mother city took the responsibility for the
selection of a site, and for initial organization and transport,
but that many of the colonists were volunteers from elsewhere,
or at most had been resident aliens in the ‘‘ metropolis.’’ This
was certainly so in one of the latest colonies, where we have a
summary of the prospectus. The Corinthians, refounding
Epidamnus in 435 B.c., advertised publicly for colonists,
guaranteeing equal privileges to all comers, whatever their place
of origin. Here then we find repeated the conditions of intermixture followed by segregation under a fresh external control,
which we have already studied in the making of the parent
stock.

The course of events which led to this outburst of colonization may be reconstructed fairly clearly. The disturbances at
30 3 EUGENICS REVIEW.

the close of the Minoan Age had forced open at least three new
areas of settlement; the east coast of the ASgean which is the
foreshore of Asia Minor; the Chalcidic section of the north
coast, which is the foreshore partly of Macedon partly of
Pzeonia; and the south coast of Italy, which becomes Magna
Grecia. In the last named, and particularly in its middle
section, from Metapontum to Sybaris, the geographical conditions are in some ways so different from those of Greece, and
particularly from those of the Corinthian Gulf coasts, from
which the settlers came, that the growth of these West Achzan
cities seems to have been abnormal, and is certainly difficult to
trace. We hear of large populations, subject territories, client
tribes of Italian natives, and of what looks like refoundation,
sometimes more than once. Only when later events have
already brought them into new and formal relations with one
another, or with more normal Greek states elsewhere, do these
cities seem to take any part in the general history of the Greek
world.

In Chalcidice, and still more on the Asiatic coast, the surroundings repeat almost exactly those of the old Minoan societies.
The cultivable areas are strictly limited in extent, and separated
from one another by rugged hill country. But up to these
limits their fertility is great, and it was not a long business to
‘« domesticate ’’ them,! as the Greeks put it, and to breed a
population commensurate with them. Then difficulties began,
in the new regions, as in the old. Hesiod, writing just before
the colonizing movements began, and professing to sum up the
practical wisdom of the time, recommends the cultivator not to
bring up more than one son at home, ‘‘for thus wealth will
increase in the house.’’ We may infer that if more than one
son remained, wealth would not increase, but rather diminish ;
at all events there would be no margin. And the reason why
there would be no food for another mouth was this, that there
would be no productive work on the little farm for another pair
of hands. That crisis, in fact, had come, in Greece in the eighth
century, about which in the modern world we fortunately can

1‘ HyepGdac the same word is used for taming animals, and for bringing land under
cultivation.
CAUSES OF RISE AND FALL IN THE POPULATION. 31

still only speculate: the population had overtaken the means of
subsistence. Emigration was the only obvious remedy, for
persons already in existence; limitation of increase the only precaution possible, if facilities for emigration should cease, even
temporarily. Redistribution of estates, and conversion of waste
and grazing land, hitherto held in common, into freehold or
leasehold allotments were attractive political remedies, but hardly
touched the disease. :

The question has been often raised, why Greek colonization
came to such a standstill in the course of the sixth century. The
answer seems now, in the main, to be that almost all the available sites had been taken up already. Agrigentum, founded in
580, was resented by Carthage as an intrusion into the Punic
West, and provoked a movement of retaliation which was only
stemmed with difficulty by the united Greeks of Sicily, in the
generation of the Persian war. Carthage also repelled the
Greek attempt to colonize the African Tripoli in 513. Sardinia
in the same way was proposed for colonization more than once,.
between 550 and 500, but the same enemy was beforehand here,
and without Tharros, the only corn-land, the rest of the island
was not worth winning. Etruria barred the way, north of Greek
Campania, and held the Campanian hinterland itself till 509.
In the Adriatic, the climate and the Illyrians were alike inhospitable: Corinth’s few colonies in this quarter clung
unusually close to their mother city, and had constant trouble
with the interior. The last unoccupied bit of the north Aigean
coast was the Strymon valley, assigned to Miletus in the last
years of the sixth century, and eventually exploited by Athens
after the Persian war.

Eastward, the seaboard was all occupied, already, either
by Greeks or their rivals; and the Persian organization of the
whole interior made penetration impossible, on any terms that
were tolerable to Greeks.

For we must remember once again that in the centuries
which preceded the fifth there had been created, in the Greek city
states, that uniquely ‘‘ political animal,’’? Greek man, with
standards. of conduct, personal and social—as peculiarly his as
his Hellenic temperament and physique—which postulated,
32 EUGENICS REVIEW.

among other kinds of liberty, freedom from certain kinds of
effort, and certain kinds of worry, which he summarily tabooed
as ‘“‘ banausic.’” In Greek theory, from Hesiod’s time onwards,
the only quite normal life was the ‘‘ self-sufficient ’’ one; and the
only ‘‘ self-sufficient ’’ life possible under Mediterranean conditions was the old mixed farming where the ancestral estate
produced practically everything, and at most the farmers had to
go to a town once a year to renew their store of iron. The
spread of Greek colonies, outside their natural habitat in the
recessed oases of the mountain zone, into regions like Scythia,
where there were no earthquakes or olives, and wheat was
grown for sale, permitted wholesale interchange of this corn, of
which Greek lands could not grow enough, against oil and wine
which they could grow economically, and on a larger scale, in
proportion as they were free to reduce their corn land. Thus
a fresh lease of life was won for the old agriculture, at the price
of some specialization, and a corresponding loss of ‘“‘ selfsufficiency.’’ But the corn countries needed other things besides
oil and wine, especially textiles, metal work, and other plenishings, to make outlandish homes more Greek-like ; and they were
prepared to pay handsomely in corn: and so Greek industries
arose, concentrated round harbour towns where raw materials
accumulated, from over sea and down old land routes from the
interior. These industries, and the carrying trade, needed
many hands, and the personal capital of technical skill. It was
also almost necessary that the industrial Greek should be landless: he could not be in two places at once, in the workshop,
where he was needed, and on the farm, where (as we have seen)
he was not.

The political fortunes of this new population of industrial
Greeks—they called it +A#00s and dyAos because it “ filled ’? and
‘* encumbered ’’ the city streets—do not concern us here; what is
important to note is that industry began to provide accommodation for a large increase of population at home, in the same
century which saw the last of the great emigrations.

Then two economic disasters happened, almost at the same
time; the spread of industrial slavery, and the national quarrel
with Persia.
CAUSES OF RISE AND FALL IN THE POPULATION. 33

There had probably always been slavery in Mediterranean
societies. There was in fact no alternative fate for prisoners of
war, except to kill them, which was wasteful, and might lead to
reprisals if the captor’s people were captured next time. But
until the industrial movement began, there was nothing for a
slave to do, except to work on the farm or about the house.
Only kings and very rich people bought the kidnapped “‘ slaves
of luxury ’’ whom foreign traders sometimes offered on the
beach. For these the real market was in eastern palaces, and
merchant-cities like Tyre. A good slave however made himself
useful at the forge or the bench; and when the industrial movement came, it was a windfall to him. His skill, whatever it
was, found a new outlet, and as his savings accumulated, the
day of freedom drew near; for the Greek slave at all periods, like
his prototype, the prisoner of war, was always liable to be
ransomed, and was free to ransom himself if and when he could
collect the amount of his price. Once freed, we must
remember, the slave was his own master, and could choose
his own career. In a state as liberal as Athens at the close
of the sixth century, he might even become a full citizen,
and intermarry with the best, if he was himself a proper
man. Greek slavery played thus the very interesting and
important part of a recruiting agency, gathering the likeliest
raw material from the margins of the Mediterranean world,
and particularly from the Balkan and Anatolian highlands;
selecting, in long apprenticeship to a Greek master, those who
proved themselves most adaptable and efficient under Greek
conditions of life; and drafting out into the free community those
who could pass as Hellenes. They had, indeed, earned their
freedom, for as a Greek would put it, they were freemen duce:
‘‘in the manner of their growth,’’ and only slaves by accident
of capture or war.’

But meanwhile, in the workshop, the master took his commission on the industrial output of the slave; and a master
with employer’s ability could now find work for a larger number
of slaves, and bought what he required from the dealers, just as

On this subject of apnrentice-slavery, and on the fate of the refuse, or chattel slaves, see
Zimmern, Sociological Review, Jan-April. 1909.
34 EUGENICS REVIEW.

others in the same street were taking skilled freemen into their
workshops as journeymen, and training young freemen as
apprentices. There seems to have been no greater social reluctance among freemen to work side by side with slaves, than
there was among citizens to work with resident aliens. But the
relations of freeman and slave with their employers differed, and
there seems little doubt that it was believed (in Athens for
example) that slave labour gave the higher profit to the
employer. The effect, as industry grew and became more
highly organized and capitalized, was to restrict the demand for
free labour, and lower the economic status of the free labourer
to a point at which most freemen would rather starve than work,
at all events in their own city. Many skilled freemen, however,
in the sixth and fifth century ‘accepted the alternative, and left
home to join the great army of metics, following the international
demand for their skill, and working wherever they got the best
terms.

I leave out of account here the tragic Athenian experiment
of an Imperial Democracy living less on industrial wages than on
administrative pay, not so much because its interest is rather
political than economic, as because it has only recently received
ample treatment in Dr. Grundy’s Thucydides. It was in any
case an exceptional device, and a disastrous failure, and the
attempt was never repeated.

I omit also the last resource of the unwanted freeman, to
hire himself as a professional soldier, not so much because the
number of mercenaries was negligible until the fourth century,
as because this profession is really only a special illustration of
that international reserve of fluid labour to which all metics
belong; an element in the total population which eludes almost
all attempts to measure it; and yet at Athens about the year 300
it formed nearly one-third of the free adult males.

The other economic disaster of the great age of Greece was
the national quarrel with Persia. Into the rights and wrongs
of this quarrel it would be irrelevant to digress here, further
than to note, first, that the national antipathy was long reflected
in individual reluctance to cross the frontier and settle and do
business within the Persian Empire; and secondly that in the
CAUSES OF RISE AND FALL IN THE POPULATION. 35

fourth century, after the expedition of Cyrus and the return of
the Ten Thousand, better acquaintance with Persian conditions
led to a great relaxation of the old prejudices of individuals, and
that this in turn reacted on public opinion so as to tolerate far
more easy intercourse between Persia and Greek states than the
mere force of Persian gold would explain. But there seems no
doubt that in fact the provinces of the Persian Empire remained
closed to Greek organized settlement, however widely they were
beginning to be permeated with individual Greek traders and
concession hunters. It is the persistent plea of Isocrates, by far
the clearest sighted of Greek writers of the fourth century, that
it is the Greek’s own fault that their country has become too
narrow for them; that there is more than enough to do in the
world, for all the Greeks there are; that the Nearer East is
theirs, to go in and possess it, whenever they choose to drop
their current quarrels with each other and release it from
Persian administration.’ And it is precisely because this would
otherwise have been so easy, and was in fact imminent from the
moment of Cyrus’ Raid in 4o1, that Persia spent habitually the
large sums, of which we read, to keep the Greek states disunited j
and when that policy failed (with the rise of one strong man in
Macedon), spent all the energy that was left, in savage
undoing of half a century of ‘‘ peaceful penetration.’’ The
‘* frightfulnesses ’’ of Artaxerxes III. were the last weapon of a
policy of despair.

The same situation is revealed as soon as we look below the
surface of what at first sight looks like the antithesis of Isocrates’
view, in the political thought of Plato and Aristotle. For Plato,
the besetting sins of his own age are greed of land, which leads
to war, and greed of money, which leads to labour. His aim is
to recall men from work to leisure, and from war to peace: and
he sees that the reason, why Greek men of the fourth century
had as a rule neither leisure nor peace, was the same as had
been given of old for the Trojan War: ‘‘ there were too many
men upon the earth.’’ His ideal state is a Greek city of
moderate size, sufficiently provided with land to supply all its
needs; it will have neither foreign trade nor a foreign policy.

This point is elaborated by Ferguson. Gresk Jmperialtsm, p. 26.
36 EUGENICS REVIEW.

There will in fact be neither a Scythia nora Persia in his paradise.
But even so, his experience tells him that his paradise wil! not
last long, unless the growth of population can be regulated :
otherwise the land will only run short again, and leisure will be
curtailed by distracting kinds of work. We must note again
that for Plato it is not merely a question of breeding the right
kind of citizen, and reclassifying the new generation according
to innate ability; it is no less urgent to discover ‘‘ the Number
of the State’’ and keep the population at that number. His
remedy is to abolish the family, which has proved itself, in
Greece, unable either to restrict its increase, or to breed for
quality ; to transfer to the State the responsibility for supplying
vacancies by judicious breeding and selection; and to eliminate
rigorously all unwanted infants.

Is this reconstruction of society a philosopher’s nightmare,
or does it stand in any relation at all with practical life?
Aristotle, as usual, supplies the connecting link between Platonic
theory and Hellenic fact. His ideal State, too, is to have limited
territory, commensurate population, and self-sufficient economy.
Though he retains the family as the basis of society, he still
thinks it possible to regulate the population, and his medical
training suggests the means. A good deal can be done also, he
thinks, to improve physique, and perhaps also mental qualities,
by more careful breeding, and particularly by restricting the age
of parenthood. Implied in all this reconstruction is an actual
State of things in which not only were unfit children born and
reared, but families were improvidently large and infanticide
was practised untidily and inadequately. Is this implication
supported by what we know of Greek family life ?

We have already noted Hesiod’s advice not to bring up
more than one son, and the question now is, what did he expect
his friend to do with the others ?

The answer is given with overwhelming evidence by Glotz.’
There is only occasion here to summarize his argument. In all
patriarchal households, the admission of new-comers to the family

is at the discretion of the house-father. It makes no difference

In his articles Exposttio and Jsfanticidium in Daremberg and Saglio’s Dictzonnaire
des Antiquités, published respectively in 1892 and 1898, and reprinted with some
revisions in his Aissdes sociales et juridiques sur Pantiguité Grecque. Paris, 1906
CAUSES OF RISE AND FALL IN THE POPULATION. 37

whether they are lambs, kids, or infants: in neither case had
they any ‘‘ right to live,’’ unless the house-father decided to
grant it to them. This patriarchal right to determine the fate
of his infants (which includes besides his wife’s children, the
children of his slaves, and any children borne by unmarried
daughters) was jealously guarded during the long adjustment
of rights between the immemorial family and the nascent State,
and only appears in legislative codes on occasions when it is
necessary to recognize or interpret it in special or doubtful cases,
as at Gortyna, or in Solon’s code, or at Delphi in deeds of
manumission involving a slave’s offspring or expectation of
offspring. Only in Sparta, in Thebes, and in Ephesus did the
State interfere at all. In Sparta it was to prevent a too kindhearted father from acknowledging an infant for whom when
reared there was no expectation of state allotment of land. In
Thebes it was to restrain habitual infanticide, partly by penalties,
partly by prescribing an alternative way of abdicating parentage, by public sale of the infant. At Ephesus alone, a parent
was compelled to prove that he was too poor to rear the child,
before he was allowed to get rid of it. Exposure of an infant
was a commonplace of legend from Homeric times, and of
romance and the stage from Herodotus and the Tragedians
onwards; it is explicitly described as a precaution against
doubtful paternity, against the worries and expenses of the
nursery and education, against the risk and disgrace of leaving
descendants inadequately equipped and endowed. The practice
was mitigated, it is true, by the common habit of exposing the
infant (in its cradle, or a convenient jar) at a time, or in a place,
where it was fairly certain to be seen and picked up by passers
by; but there was no obligation on anyone to take any notice of
it, or to give it anything but a slave’s upbringing if he did:
nor was it worth while to do more for it, for the original owner
might at any time trace and reclaim it without compensation to
the foster-parent. But all this was a mitigation only. The
expectation of life for a ‘‘ potted ’’ infant was not many hours;
and in an excavated graveyard at Gela in Sicily there are 233

‘‘ potted ’’ burials, out of a total of 570 interments.’

* Wilamowitz-Moellendorff. Staat und Gesellschaft der Griechen p. 35, in Hinnenberg’s Kultur der Gegenwart Il., iv. 1. Berlin. 1910.
38 EUGENICS REVIEW.

Thus the philosophers of the fourth century when they commended infanticide as a cure for over-population and its consequences, were only accepting, justifying, and systematizing into
greater rigour, a custom which was already well established in
the Greek world; and that, not late or sporadically, but widely
and at all periods.

We thus reach the conclusion that down to Alexander’s
time, and as far back as the Homeric Age, and in all probability
in Minoan antiquity as well, those districts of the Mediterranean
seaboard which were peopled by the Greeks or their indigenous
ancestors, were normally full to overflowing. War and
disease took heavy toll of lives, and famine was never far off ;
but these causes only retarded the consummation: ‘‘ there were
too many men upon the earth.’’ Vast fresh regions, thrown
open by adventure and discovery in the eighth century, were in
full possession by the middle of the sixth, when the conquest of
the Persians on the east, the consolidation of the Punic settlements in the west, and abrupt climatic limits to north and south,
brought colonial expansion to a standstill, and substituted for it
intensive industry in urban areas at home. Slave labour, yielding higher profits, and tolerating narrower quarters, added to
the population, altered its social distribution, and diminished
the prospect of a competence for the free labourer; and political
ideals and prejudices precluded expansion of organized settlements into the continental hinterland of Asia. But, all the
while, population grew, and the prospect of ‘‘ political ’’ life, in
the sense in which a Greek understood the only life which he
thought worth living, became more and more vague for the
majority. Philosophers wanted to replace quantity by quality,
and recommended eugenics tempered with infanticide; while
politicians preached a national crusade to exploit the Persian
Empire. All agreed that once again ‘‘ there were too many men
upon the earth.’’ As Alexander’s levy for his Persian adventure amounted to 200,000 foot and 15,000 cavalry, excluding
Sparta and Epirus, we may estimate the total population of the
Greek states of the peninsula in the year 337 at about four
millions, of whom about a million and a half were slaves.
CAUSES OF RISE AND FALL IN THE POPULATION. 39

Alexander’s conquests more than realized the hopes of
Isocrates and the ‘‘ crusading ’’ school. In less than a century
Greek cities were scattered over all the chief centres of cultivation, from the Afgean coast of Asia Minor to Bactria, Scistan
and the Punjab; not uniformly, but with regard, on one side, to
the strategical necessities of their founders, the Hellenic dynasts
who shared Alexander’s inheritance; on another, to the main
avenues and junctions of a voluminous international commerce;
on yet another, to the previous occupation of some regions by
those great religious corporations which fill the same place in
the Hellenistic East as the monasteries in modern Turkey and
medizval Europe. Over all this inland region, the new movement of colonization-—as indeed it was—brought a large increase
of inhabitants: for the Greek cities do not seem to have displaced the native population; their citizens were added to it,
organized its activities, and made it work harder; realizing
Aristotle’s ideal system of agriculture, wherein “‘ it is necessary
to have the cultivators slaves, or non-Greeks of the countryside,’’ that is to say enserfed indigenes, under Greek direction.
Taking ten thousand, Aristotle’s minimum population for a
well-ordered State, as a rough and quite cautious average for the
free population of these new cities, we have an increment of a
million persons for every hundred of them; and this does not
take account of industrial or commercial slaves not drawn from
the old local inhabitants, or of the large floating population of
metics engaged in various crafts and professions outside their
own city.

These new city foundations were for the most part founded
within a century of Alexander’s death, and play the same part
in the equipment of the Hellenistic world as the colonies had
played in the Hellenic. But as in the colonial period, though
new foundations are not common after 200 B.c., this was not for
lack of will, but of opportunity. Most of the work was done,
and the few gaps, in Cilicia, Pontus, and other parts of Eastern
Asia Minor, and also in Thrace, only waited for the political
opportunity, to receive similar foundations, from Pompey.
Julius Cesar, and Augustus, in the first century B.c., and from
Trajan and Hadrian in the second century A.D.
40 EUGENICS REVIEW.

But the inland cities were not all clear gain of population
to the East Mediterranean as a whole. The prospect of new
and more fertile areas for settlement drew off not merely an
already fluid population of mercenaries and metics, and the
superfluous inhabitants of old Greece, but induced many cultivators to leave their hereditary farms, which were often cultivated
at a loss under the new conditions of production and transport. The great industrial and commercial centres, such as
Athens and Corinth, retained their population, and perhaps
increased it; a few older cities found trade coming back to them,
like Chalcis and Eretria; other cities, of second or third rank
before, like Argos, Delos, and Histiaea now offered fresh facilities and attracted large numbers; but the country-side states,
which had rested throughout on their own land and its produce,
suffered a steady drain: and these were a large majority.

The only exceptions are in the districts of north-western
Greece, Etolia, Acaranania, and Epirus, and from thence away
into Illyria. These now seem to have increased their indigenous
population, and yet to have maintained themselves from their
own resources. As this prosperity is shared by the comparatively well forested districts of Achza and Elis, and is preceded
by a similar access of population in Macedon from the middle
of the fourth century to the middle of the third, it looks as
though the cause was geographical. Probably we have to look
for a period of comparatively moderate rainfall, giving greater
security for highland crops in the north-west, and at the same
time making those of the south-east more precarious than usual.
But there are no direct observations, and the north-western
region is still so imperfectly explored that the archzological
evidence of cultivation-terraces and farmsteads is not yet available. The only survey of sufficient scope and accuracy is
Woodhouse’s tolia, and this was published just too early to
take this kind of problem into account. Philippson’s geographical work in Thessaly and Epirus’ lays the foundation for a
survey of the vegetation and climate, and Mr. Maurice
Thompson’s recent paper on Deforestation in Ancient Greece?®
is mainly based on Thessalian observations.

1 Philippson. Zhessalien und Epirus. 1897.
2 Thompson. Proc. University of Durham Philosophical Society. WV. 2.
Newcastle-on-Tyne. 1913.
CAUSES OF RISE AND FALL IN THE POPULATION. 4!

It is instructive to note, however, that as the mode of life in
the north-west becomes more Hellenic, we begin to have
evidence of concomitant slavery. For the period covered by
the Delphic manumission records, there is little to choose
between one district of Northern Greece and another in respect
of frequency of manumissions. There is in fact no longer any
distinction in this region between slave-free and slave-holding
States... And the same applies to Peloponnese, where Arcadia
and Achza seem earlier to have been almost slave-free.

In the year 168 B.c. the population of Epirus seems to have
been about 300,000, or 38 to the square kilometre; and if this
density was maintained over the whole of Greece including
Macedon, the total population must be estimated at 4,370,000.
This, however, allows a million for Macedon, which is probably
excessive, in view of the terrible drain of the wars with Rome.
Even including, therefore, the large increase of population in
the north-west, the total population of Greece had risen but
little, in a century and a half, above the four millions which are
estimated for the beginning of Alexander’s reign.

In the second century the tide had turned, at all events in
the Greek peninsula; and Polybius? had no doubt as to the
cause. Love of display, love of money, and love of ease, are
the three reasons which he assigns for the reluctance of his contemporaries not merely to rear children, but to marry at all.
Families, usually limited to one or two, ‘‘so as to leave these
rich,’’ were brought up extravagantly as a ‘“‘ leisured class,’’
and given no incentive to work. We have seen already that in
early Greece the same motive had been at work. In its earlier
manifestations it had had its admirable side. It was a new
idea in national economy to prefer quality to numbers; to insist
on what we should now call a “‘ standard of living ’’ which could
only be reached or maintained by making something other than
the food-quest a first charge on a man’s time; and to dread the
accumulation of forms of wealth which in simple and rather
rigorous surroundings there was no opportunity to use, except
to sink the neighbours, less fortunate or less capable, ever deeper

"Beloch. Bevelkerung, p. 497.
2 Polybius, 36, 17.
42 EUGENICS REVIEW.

into debt, on mortgaged farms which (for whatever reason) no
longer paid their way. It had been the supreme boast of fifth
century statemanship that it was possible in Athens ¢:Aoxadew
per €ursAcias, to pursue excellence on limited means; and to
devote the intellect to make the content of life wider and deeper,
instead of merely more comfortable and secure. The achievements of that ambition we know; and our best efforts now are
dedicated to the same end, under external conditions which are
in many ways far more favourable. To take only single
instances, thanks to coal and iron we reckon mechanical
power in foot-tons and generate it continuously, where a Greek
worked in foot-pounds, with an interval for meals, and for sleep ;
and we can also apply it continuously, for we have artificial
light in commensurate profusion. But it was the fatal counterpart of Hellenic intellectualism, that the ‘‘ liberty ’’ maintained
in the fifth century in spite of Persia, and extended in the fourth
at Persia’s expense, seemed in the third to have achieved its
purpose. Even in the generation of Alexander and Aristotle
almost everything seemed to have been conquered, geographically, and almost everything culturally to have been found
out. The art of living well under Mediterranean conditions
had been discovered, and formulated, and standardized, like so
much of the life of modern Europe in the middle of the nineteenth century ; and the population of the Greek cities, old and
new, settled down to enjoy themselves in the world they had
made.

But they had omitted two provisions, the lack of which
cost them the future. Their achievements had been the work of
societies wholly male, and almost wholly middle-aged, as we
count the ‘‘ages’’ of aman. Athens, at its very best, had been
a brilliant but temporary exception: after Alcibiades we have
no ‘‘ precocious genius ’’’ even there; and Alexander’s greatest
stroke of luck was that his father’s murder put him on the
throne at twenty. There had been, too, brilliant women in the
sixth century, particularly in some eastern cities; and there
were brilliant queens in the noble houses of Macedonian decent,
for Macedon had a larger place for women in its life than Greece.
But these were the exceptions, like Alcibiades and Alexander
CAUSES OF RISE AND FALL IN THE POPULATION. 43

among the men: the type was that poor little untaught child,
Ischomachus’ wife, in Xenophon’s Aiconomicus.

The fatal neglect of the Greeks to educate systematically
either their children or their women perpetuated this onesidedness,
and canonised the club aspect of their social life. Plato’s remedy
had been to teach the young to think accurately for themselves,
and to bring the women into the public and social life hitherto
reserved to the men. Aristotle, impressed once again by his
medical experience, despaired of making citizens out of the
female patients of the fourth century, and failed to see the bearing of his own views on education. Moreover the expensiveness
of children, serious enough when they were boys, became
oppressive when they were girls : as the proverb put it ‘‘ Raise a
son even if you are poor; expose a daughter even if you are
rich.’’ We have probably to assume, as in all the south-east of
Europe to-day, a marked minority of females in the whole
population ; and when we consider also the time-consuming tasks
which made up woman’s work, when they not only washed and
cooked, but made the clothes and the cloth, ground the corn,
carried the water, and collected the fuel, it is clear that a Greek
woman had not much time to spare for accomplishments, any
more than her modern Greek sister has.

The result of this intellectual divorce between men and
women was an increasing break-up of home life. The women
liv.d at home, the men at the club; and where their heart was,
there they left their treasure also. Side by side with everincreasing difficulty in finding the means to bring up a family,
or even a single child, in an ultimately clubable style, stand the
ever-increasing endowments of the gymnasia and the thiasoi,
the trust-funds held for dining clubs, the donations of plate,
all the trival old-bachelordom which is the background of the
equally trivial public life of Hellenistic towns. No wonder that
even in the fourth century we begin to have complaints that
‘‘ children are such a nuisance in a house.”’ |

Such ‘‘ emancipation of women ’’ as there was did not help
matters much. The wider scope allowed to Macedonian women
set a fashion in high places which was easy to misinterpret, and
easier still to travesty. It was a fresh excuse for expenditure
44 EUGENICS REVIEW.

among the men, already overloaded by the double effort to keep
up appearances at home as well as at the club; and a fresh
excuse for postponing or avoiding matrimony.

To keep the treatment of a large subject within bounds I
have deliberately confined myself to the course of events in
Greece ; but the history of the Italian peoples presents no factor
which is not present in some degree in Greek society. There
is the same type of indigenous culture, less intensely developed,
and never centralized round a western Knossos; the same period
of intrusions from abroad, less complex, but leading to much
the same social and economic effects. Organized colonization
is represented by the institution of the ‘‘ Sacred Spring,’’ and
the southward propagation of the Sabellian highlanders. The
cleruchies of Athens, and the tied colonies of Corinth, have
their counterpart in the Roman Colonte, and the spread of the
Italian merchant and prospector repeats the part played by the
floating population of resident aliens in the Greek world, before,
and still more after Alexander’s time. The only point of
contrast is that whereas Greece never ceased to own itself, to
have its special national way of life, and to work out its own
destiny almost impervious to neighbouring civilizations in all
essential points, Italy and, in less measure, all the Western
Mediterranean had been fringed with Greek cities, and penetrated
with Greek traders, since the seventh century at least, and South
Italy, in particular, had become very greatly Hellenized a
century betore the Roman conquest : and from the moment when
each region comes under that Hellenic spell, the history of its
population merges in that of the Hellenistic world, with its
industrial slavery, its secluded womanhood, its limited families
and its pretext of high living to excuse a low birth-rate.

So serious was the depopulation towards the end of the
first century B.c., after a century of intermittent wars and unprecedented loss of life and waste of capital equipment, that it
became the first task of Augustus, at the close of the Civil
Wars, to take stock of the whole population and resources of the
region, and attempt to give new sanctions to marriage and
family life of the older type. For the moment he succeeded, and
a slightly under-populated world profited by the general peace
* CAUSES OF RISE AND FALL IN THE POPULATION. 45

to recuperate and replenish itself. But the effect was transitory.
Hellenistic culture, with its rather tawdry ideals and _ its
vicious economic system had too firm a hold, and even the
imperial peace did not maintain the population permanently at
the restored level. By the middle of the second century the
estimates begin to sink again; and a first symptom of what is
coming is the new habit of endowing orphanages, for the
foundlings of whom the State began to discover that it had need,
though their parents continued to expose them.

Only a fresh morality, based on quite a different set of
national habits, and bred in another environment altogether,
could hope to break the spell of this calculated hedonism. The
first recorded protest against infanticide is that of the Jewish
publicist Philo, in the middle of the first century A.D. It comes,
that is, from the one people, of pastoral nomad descent, which
after early translation to a highland region, under Mediterranean
climatic control, and populated already with societies of
essentially Mediterranean regime, deliberately kept itself aloof
from the ‘‘ works of the heathen that dwell in the land,’’ and in
spite of incredible difficulties, and repeated failures and defections, had maintained that principle of conduct in Philo’s time
for over twelve hundred years already. In spite of their
abstinence from infanticide, the Israelites maintained themselves
in economic equilibrium in their narrow territory down to the
catastrophe of the Captivity. After the Return, their continued
care for their children gave them the means not only to replenish
Palestine very rapidly, and repair the waste of desperate fighting, but to spread in great numbers over a large part of the
ancient world. Of the qualities which enabled them to do this,
it would be impossible to treat in a concluding paragraph. 1!
only note the fact of the antecedents and discipline, under which
‘that new view of the value of individual life was matured, which
has dominated the medizval and most of the modern world,
and marks them off completely from the ancient Mediterranean
regime with which this essay is concerned.
