THE LAST TEN YEARS

Mrs. Hodson’s Record

NLY one year before celebrating its

twenty-fifth birthday the Eugenics

Society loses, in Mrs. C. B. S.
Hodson, one of the bare half-dozen personalities to which it owes its existence and
growth. She entered its service at a time,
1921, when, in common with most similar
movements, eugenics was only stirring in
its sleep after the anesthesia of the War.
From then until eighteen months ago she
was principally responsible, with Major
Darwin, for its activities and extraordinary
growth, and up to the moment of writing
she has played a greater part than any in
popularizing eugenics among hundreds of
small working-class bodies scattered all over
Great Britain.

It was in January 1921 that Mrs. Hodson
was appointed as the half-time salaried
secretary of the Society; in that year only
eleven propaganda meetings were held and
inquiries revealed that the local branches
of the Society which had at one time or
another been created, were now all dead.
The REvIEW was. published without
interruption, and a few members’ meetings were held from time to time. The
general financial position of the Soctety was
extremely insecure and certainly did not
permit of any expansion. Mrs. Hodson’s
first task, therefore, was to create an office
and an organization without adequate funds
for the purpose. Her genius for persuading the best out of other people rose to the
occasion, and she collected a staff of voluntary workers to do all the humdrum,
necessary work of office routine—first of all
women of independent means who came in
to do typing, carding, circularizing, and the
rest, and then two men, an ex-sea captain
and a business man, who gave up their
scanty spare afternoons and evenings. ‘The
Society will never realize, probably, how
great have been the money savings effected
by the regular and faithful work, then and

of Work for Eugenies

later, of anonymous volunteers, nor what
it owes not only to them but to Mrs.
Hodson’s unusual flair for collecting and
making them into a team.

Having thus created an organization,
Mrs. Hodson’s next task was to utilize it
for the three-fold object of securing funds,
increasing membership, and of popularizing
eugenic ideas. She succeeded in all three,
but her greatest success was, without doubt,
in the third—and the most important.
When the history of the eugenics movement
comes to be written her name will come first
as the woman who did more than any one
to make a eugenist of the man in the street.
In 1921, for instance, the Society gave I1
propaganda lectures; in the last full year
(1931-2) that number had risen to 210*
lectures systematically planned to suit their
respective audiences and delivered by
experienced speakers with a full knowledge
of the subject. Mrs. Hodson herself has
always given a large proportion of them.

THOSE OUR PROPAGANDA HAS REACHED

THE UNIVERSITIES: the Unions, Student
Societies, Hospital Medical Schools.

EpucaTION: ‘Teachers’ Training Colleges,
Public and Secondary Schools.

RELIGIOUS BopDIES: The Modern Churchmen’s
Union, Brotherhoods, Sisterhoods, Adult Schools.

PUBLIC AND SociaAL WorRK: the personnel of
Local Authorities, Relieving Officers, Rescue
Workers, Police Women, Students of Social
Work.

CITIZENS: Agricultural Organizations, Rotary
Clubs, Labour Clubs, Co-operative Guilds,
Women Citizen Societies, Women’s Institutes,
Scouts and Guides, Boys’ and Girls’ Clubs.

But the Society was not merely content
with this old-fashioned form of propaganda,
and adapted the most up-to-date methods of
films and wireless to the needs of eugenics.

* This number does not include several addresses,
perhaps more important, to the British Association
and the British Medical Association.

23
24
It was in the autumn of 1925 that the first
eugenic talks were broadcast, and in 1926
the Society acquired its first film, which
greatly increased propaganda work, for in
addition to its use in Health Exhibitions
and the like, it was offered free to Picture
Houses. ‘Two reels became necessary, and
went in and out of the office continually.
This led to the purchase of a second film,
‘‘ Heredity: Master or Servant?’ Mrs.
Hodson, too, was responsible at about the
same time for another adaptation of the
methods of modern publicity, in her
creation of a ‘‘ Eugenics Exhibit ’? which
went travelling round with a lecturer—
usually herself—to a variety of those
popular educational-publicity exhibitions
which have become so common since the

War.

THE EXHIBIT ‘ON THE ROAD’

The Exhibit consisted of chicks, rabbit
skins, maize, and other simple examples
of mendelian breeding, charts and pedigrees
illustrating and explaining them, human
pedigrees, animal pedigrees, simple vital
statistics, and the like; these were accompanied by a selection of free or very cheap
literature suited to the tastes and understanding of customers. One week it might
be found at a small town in the Midlands, sandwiched between a Clean Food
propaganda stall, a manufacturer’s free
distribution of hot ‘ beef’ drinks and biscuits, and some horrible photographs of the
results of being buried uncremated. Factory ‘ hands,’ their wives—especially—and
their children gaped at it and realized, for
the first time, that heredity meant something. The next week it would be in a
southern market town, taking a decorous
part in a municipal demonstration of mutual
admiration, and being intelligently, critically, and sympathetically investigated by
farmers and rural labourers. It was (and
is) always accompanied by a lecturer, whose
frequent five-minute talks to groups, ranging from three or four to twenty or thirty,
form half the value of the show.

This democratizing of eugenics was all
Mrs. Hodson’s creation, and she finally

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

secured a ‘ scoop’ in persuading the Royal
Agricultural Society—to which we can
never be sufficiently grateful—to give
generous space in the Education section of
its annual show. Here we touched our own,
ready-made public, and for ten hours a day,
five days in the year, ‘ put eugenics across ’
to people who had never heard the word,
but thoroughly believed in the principle.

But while her main object was always to
secure the support of the working classes,
Mrs. Hodson did not neglect the wealthier
groups ; and coincident with the first broadcasts—which then reached only the comparatively well-to-do—an appeal was sent
out to 10,000 business men. It was followed
by a second issue the following spring
(1926), and the net result was a considerable
rise in membership and subscriptions.

Even more practical and effective was the
persistent ‘drive’ at the economic factors in
the differential birth rate, finally resulting
in the increase, in 1928, of the incometax rebates for children (how many hardpressed tax-payers realize that both those
and the original rebate were mainly due to
the efforts of this Society ?).

Another success was scored in vital
statistics, when we secured registration
reforms which will make possible the
ascertainment of true fertility by social
class in future generations.

Although research had never been a
major function of the Society, in 1923 a
permanent Research Committee was
formed, composed of prominent scientists,
to support Mr. Lidbetter’s work, and for
three years it was possible to furnish him
with one and sometimes two competent
investigators. A grant from this Committee gave the first stimulus to researches
on race-crossing amongst hybrids in English
ports. The important Oxfordshire village
study made by Mrs. Sturge Gretton was
encouraged in the same way.

The credit for all of these successes must
be ascribed mainly to the resource and
energy of Mrs. Hodson herself, who was
also responsible both for our campaign for
eugenical sterilization and for our entrance,
in the most effective manner possible, into
THE LAST TEN YEARS

the field of birth control. Biological
students of this subject, on the one hand,
demanded statistical data on the effects and
the extent of contraceptive practices and, on
the other, were asking whether birth control
could ever be an effective eugenic instrument. The prospect of a future sterilization
policy called particularly for an answer to
this latter question, but it seemed clear that
no single clinic could supply adequate numbers for a statistical study. The Society,
standing in some sense outside the birthcontrol movement, invited all the existing
voluntary clinics to appoint delegates to
consider these problems. A model case-card
was finally drawn up, and while each clinic
adapted this to its own needs, the plan made
possible the collection of comparative data
from different regions. The two most
important aspects of this endeavour are
covered to-day by the Birth Control Investigation Committee and the National Birth
Control Association.

In 1922 a memorial was presented to the
Ministry of Health asking that birth control
facilities be added to the public health
services. Signatures were secured from
prominent scientists in all our Universities
to a Memorandum urging the creation of a
Chair of Eugenics in the London School of
Hygiene. (The subject has figured in lecture syllabuses since the opening of the
School.) In 1927 the second Mental Deficiency Bill, introduced by Mr. Crompton
Woods, was passed owing in part to the
energetic support of the Society.

HER PART IN STERILIZATION

While the Society has always, of course,
been the driving force of the movement for
sterilization, the credit for first bringing
the subject into the political arena belongs
to the National Citizens’ Union, which in
1928 organized a_ strongly supported
address to the Minister of Health, calling
for legislation to promote the sterilization
of the unfit. Mrs. Hodson took a leading
part in securing that this Society should at
once support the address, and thereafter
she became the organizing centre for a

25

nation-wide movement for sterilization,
securing the help and support of a number of local authorities, social workers,
and others with especial knowledge of the
practical problems of pauperism and defect.
While she also secured a great deal of support from the Press, from medical men,
psychiatrists, and other intellectual quarters, undoubtedly the greatest achievement
was the enlisting of a large number of
working-class organizations. In other
words, she has been largely instrumental in
providing that the demand for sterilization
should’ be a spontaneous movement from
below, from the general population, instead
of an attempted imposition—as it would
surely have been called—by a minority of
the ‘ privileged ’ classes.

THE INTERNATIONAL SPHERE

Herself the Honorary Secretary of the
International Federation of Eugenic Organizations, Mrs. Hodson has always had the
‘international mind’ of the scientific
worker, and has spent much of her energy
in fruitful co-operation with foreign eugenists. The result is that this Society now
stands as one of the chief leaders among
the many similar organizations all over the
world, and further took a considerable part
in the first World Population Conference
(Geneva, 1927), thus ensuring that the
Union thereafter formed should pay as much
attention to the qualitative as to the quantitative aspects of population. In the same
year Mrs. Hodson secured our participation in the first International Congress of
Social Work (Paris), most of the participants in which then considered heredity
irrelevant to discussions of destitution and
relief. Her success is shown by the fact
that eugenics now takes its place as a recognized aspect of the studies being prepared
for the Second Congress (to be held this
July).

Of her many other activities and achievements, two deserve especial notice—the
re-creation of the Eugenics Societies of
Cambridge and Oxford, the latter of which
is now a very vigorous body, and the
26

organization of this Society’s study of
family councils, now published under the
title of ‘‘ Family Council Law in Europe.”
Finally, she took an especially active part
in securing interest and support for the
studies of Mr. Lidbetter, whom she assisted
in many other ways.

Fortunately for eugenics, Mrs. Hodson’s
resignation is only partial, since she retains
her Honorary Secretaryship of the International Federation of Eugenic Organizations, will continue to work for the
Leicestershire eugenic organization (which
has already done much to make eugenics a
practical affair of everyday life), and will
come on to the Council of this Society.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Both the present writers have been
intimately connected with the Society for
many years, have seen Mrs. Hodson create
a eugenic sense in apparently the most
impossible quarters, and are now experiencing the triumphant difficulties of an
organization no longer shouting in an intellectual vacuum, but taking an active part
in practical politics. And they hope that
others, when they see one eugenic ideal after
another being thus realized, will also feel as
they do—that the main credit for these
advances is due to the three who did the hard
and thankless early work, Major Darwin,
Mrs. Neville Rolfe, and Mrs. Hodson.

D. W. C. and E. M.

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIV, No. 1.
