OTHER NOTICES

Bell, Alan. Noise, An occupational hazard and public nuisance. Geneva, 1966. World Health
Organization. Pp. 131. Price 10s. Available through HMSO.

ALTHOUGH WE HAVE, for many hundreds of years, possessed the knowledge that excessive noise is damaging to hearing, it is only since the Industrial Revolution that many
workpeople have been exposed to excessive noise in their daily occupations. The extraordinary rise in noise levels in our towns and cities is still more recent.

Dr. Alan Bell in his short monograph on noise has given a good introduction to the
problem and its effect on the human organism. He has stressed the fact that noise is increasing and in the modern industrial community it has become “‘a public nuisance and a danger
to mental and physical health”. He has given a concise account not only of the effects of
noise on the human body and mind but has also outlined the methods that must be adopted
to control it.

The loudest and most damaging noise to the hearing mechanism is of course met with
in certain industries, and it is surprising and regrettable that in many countries compensation legislation does not protect the worker from noise-induced hearing loss directly
resulting from his employment. A necessary step is to make industrial deafness a disease
for which compensation is payable by management. This would lead to a demand for
quieter machines, screening methods, and the compulsory wearing of protective devices
by the worker. This legislation is long overdue in Great Britain.

The problem of community noise is a comparatively recent one, and the level of noise
in towns and cities has now reached such an intensity that it is becoming intolerable and
may well be damaging to hearing. City noise in the USA is said to be increasing at the rate
of 1 decibel a year, and if one adds to this the possibility of our being subjected to the noise
of supersonic aircraft in the near future, the prospect is a bleak one.

We have reached the stage when it is necessary on public health grounds to limit the
amount of noise that is permissible in our towns and cities, and to control as far as possible
excessive noise in factories. In some industries noise levels will be high, and those that work
in them should have the benefit of legislation to compensate them for any permanent
damage to their hearing resulting from their work. The conditions of workers would be
immediately improved if this step was taken.

Dr. Alan Bell’s book, although very compressed, gives much useful information to
public health workers, industrial management, legislators, and the general public. Future
editions could well include a more comprehensive bibliography with chapter references.
It would also be useful to mention modern building techniques that include sound protection in buildings. These methods are seldom seen in this country although they are commonplace in Scandinavia. PHILIP H. BEALES

Clarke, Ann and Clarke, A. D. B. (Editors). Mental Deficiency: the changing outlook
Second revised edition. London, 1966. Methuen. Pp. xxi+596. Price 63s.

THE FIRST EDITION of this book was published in 1958 and in its concept and execution
was a notable contribution to our knowledge of mental deficiency and in particular of the
work of psychologists engaged in its study. For this second edition the book has been
revised throughout and much new material added, especially on learning and training.
The original contributors remain; a new chapter by Dr. J. M. Berg on pathological factors
in the aetiology of mental deficiency provides a succinct account of those conditions known
to be due to specific genetical conditions or to environmental causes, pre-natal, natal and
post-natal. The references (numbering over 1,200) have been brought up to date and are a

132
OTHER NOTICES

valuable part of a book that is essential reading for all engaged in the study of mental
deficiency. The terminology of the subject, never very good, has unfortunately been made
worse in recent years by the introduction into psychological and medical practice of the
legal terms “‘subnormal” and “severely subnormal”’, and it is a pity that some contributors
to this book have in places thought to use these confusing and derogatory terms.

J. G.

Gabb, Michael and Chinery, Michael. Human Kind: Foundations of Human Biology. London,
1966. Sampson Low, Marston. Pp. 142+-150 colour diagrams. Price 32s. 6d.

IT IS PERHAPS an irony that so many people, including adults, may be intimately familiar
with the workings of their car, wireless set, kitchen cooker and camera, and yet know next
to nothing about their own body. It is one of the most intricate yet most abused of machines,
yet we cannot do without it. The miracle is that it keeps going—the tragedy is that it can
break down when repair is too late.

We should know it better, and this book sets out to explain the human body and its
functions in a clear and readable text which is liberally illustrated with useful colour
diagrams.

Each organ and bodily function is dealt with, and as a sound buy for the general
reader, and a useful present for the growing adolescent, it should make for better understanding as to how we function. It should also stimulate further reading.

ALFRED LEUTSCHER

Harris, H. Human Biochemical Genetics. London, 1966. Cambridge University Press.
Pp. viii+310. Price 12s. 6d. Paperback.

Human Biochemical Genetics was first published in 1959 and was then reviewed by Professor
H. Griineberg* who wrote that it would “‘be eagerly read by a very wide circle of biologists

far beyond the confines of human genetics. . . . The book is excellent in its clear and lucid
presentation of the facts and the cautious and critical attitude to controversial issues.”

The book has twice been reprinted; obviously its appearance as a paperback is to be
welcomed.

Hill, A. Bradford. Principles of Medical Statistics. Eighth edition. London, 1966. Lancet.
Pp. ix+381. Price 15s.

THIS IS THE eighth edition of a book which first appeared in 1937, almost thirty years ago.
The book has been translated into Spanish, Russian, Polish and Korean. There must be
few medical research workers who have not read “Bradford Hill’ and the steady improvement of the presentation of figures in the medical journals over the past generation, though
still far from perfection, is in large part due to this book.

In this edition the section on the ethics of clinical trials is much expanded, and the
Medical Research Council’s statement on Responsibility in Investigation on Human
Subjects is included as an appendix, together with the Recommendations Guiding Doctors
in Clinical Research of the World Medical Association. c. 0. Cc.

McConnell, R. B. The Genetics of Gastro-Intestinal Disorders. London, 1966. Oxford
University Press. Pp. ix-+282. Price 70s.

IN THIS VERY interesting book, the second volume in the series of Oxford Monographs

* THE EUGENICS REVIEW, 1960, 52, 109.

133
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

on Medical Genetics, R. B. McConnell reviews current knowledge of the hereditary influences in gastro-intestinal disorders. The book is well produced; the chapters are concise
and good use has been made of tables and pedigrees.

The relation between ABO blood groups and disease is extremely well dealt with and the
published data is set out in several tables which should prove most valuable to those
engaged in this aspect of gastro-enterology. Each chapter has an extensive list of references,
in all 1,098, and at the end of the book there is a complete index and a glossary of genetic
terms.
The facts presented are up to date and accurate and errors are very few. It is probably
not true, that heterozygotes for hereditary hyperlipaemia tend to develop early arteriosclerosis (p. 171) and, contrary to the author’s conclusion on page 211, most workers
consider liver involvement to be a feature of congenital polycystic kidney disease.

In summary, this book well deserves a place on the shelves of medical geneticists and
of all practising clinicians with an interest in gastro-enterology.

NORMAN C. NEVIN

Mental Health Book Review Index. Vol. 11, 1966. Published by the Council on Research
in Bibliography Inc. (Rseearch Center for Mental Health, New York University).

VOLUME 11, the 1966 issue of the Mental Health Book Review Index, brings the total number
of books indexed since its inception to 3,582, and the references to reviews to more than
20,000. There is, of course, an inevitable time-lag: most of the books listed were published
before 1963 and there are few reviews later than those printed in 1964.

The Editorial to this volume is on Links between the Humanities and the Literature
of the Human Sciences and quotes examples of how ‘“‘creative writers, artists, humanistic
scholars, and human scientists freely cross into each other’s domain”.

Muramatsu, Minoru and Harper, Paul A. (Editors). Population Dynamics: International
Action and Training Programs. Baltimore, 1966. Johns Hopkins. (London, Oxford University
Press). Pp. viii+248. Price 52s.

THIS BOOK CONTAINS the Proceedings of the International Conference on Population
which was held in May 1964 at the Johns Hopkins School of Hygiene and Public Health.

In his “Keynote Address” Frank W. Notestein draws attention to the change in world
opinion. At the present time governments are adopting new attitudes and public awareness
of population problems is increasing.

The Proceedings are divided into three sections. In the first and longest, Action Programs
four papers deal with the situations in India, Pakistan (2) and Puerto Rico, followed by
twelve pages of an apparently verbatim report of the comment and discussion on them.
There are then a further four papers dealing with Japan, Korea, Taiwan and the Chinese
population of East Asia, which again are commented upon.

Part II of the Conference was on Programs in the Western Hemisphere, opening with
an account of Voluntary Agencies by Alan F. Guttmacher followed by papers on family
planning programmes in the US, on “Provoked Abortion in Santiago, Chile” and on
population control in Latin America. Here again, one discussion covers all the subjects
dealt with in this section.

Part III deals with three aspects of the training of professional personnel in population
dynamics. After the ensuing discussion there is a final chapter on “Population and Public
Health Policy’’.

Evidently there is a difference between a world conference and an international one:
it will have been noted that in this case the floodlights have been turned on Asia and America.

134
OTHER NOTICES

Indeed, except for a representative of the WHO from Geneva, all the participants were from
these two continents. K. H.

Racial Integration and Barnardo’s: Report of a Working Party. 1966. Pp. 51. Obtainable
from Information Department, Dr. Barnardo’s, 18-26 Stepney Causeway, London, E.1.
No charge, but a donation of 5s. accepted towards costs.

THIS IS AN interesting social document which emerges from the activity of a group,
mostly but not entirely consisting of Barnardo’s own staff, which was “‘To report on the
position with regard to children of non-European descent in Dr. Barnardo’s, whether in
residential care or otherwise; to examine the problems arising, and to make recommendations”.

The document throughout demonstrates the kindliness and thoughtfulness which are
so typical of Barnardo’s, and the efficient care which has made the organization so substantial and so widely known. What has been printed is really an internal report made public.
‘Integration’ is used only in the sense of differently pigmented children and young people
learning to live happily together—not a difficult matter within Barnardo’s but too frequently
becoming awkward as the child-care and schooling periods end and the non-Europeans
face the British population as it is.

“The practice of Dr. Barnardo’s has always been to provide appropriate help, whenever
circumstances have appeared to warrant it, for any child for whom a Protestant upbringing
is desired. The colour of the child has never been a factor affecting the decision to help or
to decline a case”’. Before the war there were very few coloured children in Barnardo’s care,
but the numbers soon began to increase and have continued to do so. “‘The first count of
coloured children was only made in 1955... . Since 1961 a regular return has been made. ...”’
The proportion of coloured children below school-leaving age has risen in 1965 to just over
20 per cent (1486 out of 7423). But the distribution of these children in the Homes varies
enormously according to area, from nil to over 80 per cent in one Home in Derbyshire.

The proportion of coloured children in the Homes overall is quite evidently far greater
than the proportion of coloured parents in the population as a whole. That has arisen with
Barnardo’s using its uniform criteria for admission. This disproportion is a measure of a
national social problem with a facet of which Barnardo’s is courageously struggling, as
described in this Report. G. C. L. BERTRAM

Roberts, J. A. Fraser. An Introduction to Medical Genetics. Fourth edition. London, 1967.
Oxford University Press. Pp. xii+ 290. Price 25s. paper; 38s. cloth.

An Introduction to Medical Genetics first appeared in 1940 and revised and enlarged editions
followed in 1959 and 1963.* In this fourth edition there have also been a number of changes,
as the author points out in his Preface: there are new sections and parts of sections, such
as those dealing with the genetics of the commoner congenital malformations and with the
risk of overvaluing family histories in connection with the common chronic diseases of
adult life.

Students who rejoice in the possibility of buying this important book for 25s. in paper
covers will be too young to realize that the first, cloth bound, edition of 266 pages cost
15s. in 1940! K. H.

Waddington, C. H. Principles of Development and Differentiation. New York and London,
1966. Collier-Macmillan. Pp. x +115. Price 15s.

IN THE SPACE of only 115 pages Professor Waddington sets out to summarise what we

* See THE EUGENICS REVIEW, 32, 87; 51, 176; 55, 225.

135
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

know of the principles which we assume to underly normal development from the unfertilized ovum to the fully differentiated adult. |

He draws material from modern work in molecular biology, the genetics of bacteria
and higher organisms, cell physiology and, not least, his own immense background of
classical and experimental embryological studies in order to try and discern the features of
development common to all organisms. He lucidly describes what is known and so, by
contrast, reveals our wide ignorance in this field of knowledge.

The book requires a fairly extensive background knowledge of biology on the part of
its readers. K. W. WILKES

136
