THE EUGENICS REVIEW

These chapters are easy and clear to read. The examples are taken from a wide range of
organisms, but animals are used more than plants to illustrate points, and human examples
are common. The subject is explained logically: by this I mean that descriptions of cell
division and chromosomal behaviour are given and then used to interpret genetical phenomena. There are still too many books about which describe Mendel’s experiments in the
first chapter and then enlarge upon a plethora of peculiar segregation ratios. In this way the
reader is persuaded that genetics is a somewhat mystical subject, although he gathers it
has some connection to structures found in cells (which are introduced about Chapter 5),

Winchester’s expositions are less sure in some of his later chapters. The chapter on the
“Gene control of cell activity” reads rather like a string of anecdotes. It is still too soon for
such a chapter to give a lot of answers, but the author could have improved the framework
wherein the partial answers are expressed. The chapters on mutation contain some odd
statements. For example the statement that “the mutation rate in Drosophila per generation
is much greater than the rate in man” requires a considerable amount of qualification.
Muller is quoted as the discoverer of the genetical effects of radiation once again, despite
Mavor’s right to the title.

The poorest chapter in the book is the one on population genetics. Polymorphism is
not even mentioned, and this makes discussion of population structure impossible, and
the account of the “‘decline in intelligence of the human population” facile.

Sex determination in man is described in terms which suggest that there is a similar
autosome/sex chromosome balance as in Diptera. For instance, it is stated that ‘in human
beings it appears as if a single X-chromosome can bring about the development of a female
body, but that two X-chromosomes are required for the development of normal ovarian
tissue and the secretion of the hormones required for maturity of the female organs and
reproduction’’. It would follow from this that triplo-X females are either super-females or
nymphomaniacs! No mention is made of the ideas of either M. F. Lyon or L. B. Russell.
There is a long chapter which is a “Survey of Human Heredity”’. This is a discursive list of
some of the inherited conditions known in man.

Most of the pictures and diagrams are good, although a few (such as the diagram of the
stages of mitosis) are not as informative as they could be. However, there is no doubt that
the good points of the book outweigh the bad. Furthermore, 500 pages of glossy American
textbook for three pounds is good value nowadays. Winchester’s Genetics can be regarded as
a good buy.

Developmental Genetics is a small paperback in a series conceived and first published
in the United States, entitled ‘Selected Topics in Modern Biology’’. The editor of the series
in a preface states that the “book will serve a dual need. It will introduce developmental
genetics to those to whom this is a new concept, and it will augment the knowledge of those
whose textbooks slight this important subject’. He may be right, but I doubt not that
students will do better to buy a good textbook than Professor Gottlieb’s book.

R. J. BERRY

Pratt, R. T. C. The Genetics of Neurological Disorders. London, 1967. Oxford University
Press. Pp. vii+ 310. Price 80s.

THIS IS THE second in a series of Monographs on Medical Genetics published by Oxford
University Press. The first was R. B. McConnell’s The Genetics of Gastro-intestinal Disorders

published last year.

' Dr. Pratt’s book certainly fulfils an important need for a well-documented (there are
over 2,800 references), up-to-date review of the genetics of neurological diseases. It is
primarily intended for the physician, to provide him with a review of genetic information

118
REVIEWS OF BOOKS

on the neurological disorders which he may encounter in his practice. Actual clinical
descriptions have been kept to a minimum and have been included only for certain rare
diseases or where there is clinical or genetic heterogeneity within a particular disorder.
The information given is accurate and well organized. The text covers not only those
conditions which are strictly neurological but also includes sections dealing with the
muscular dystrophies and the amino-acidurias. There is little discussion of experimental
work, most of the text being concerned with familial aggregation in specific disorders. This
is perhaps inevitable because we are still at the stage of “‘pedigree genetics” in many of
these disorders, the underlying biochemical defects being quite unknown.

From a practical point of view one of the most important functions of a book such
as this would seem to be to help the clinician when faced with a problem in genetic
counselling. The author has marshalled a great deal of information on the genetics of each
particular disease, but in order to give genetic counselling the reader would occasionally
require a little more help than is given in the text. This is so for example in the case of the
neurogenic atrophies, the congenital muscular dystrophies and in “‘idiopathic” epilepsy.
Certainly in the section on genetic counselling in epilepsy the reference cited would be of
very little help in this regard. In certain sections the information might best have been
summarized in tabular form, as for example in the case of the Mucopolysaccharidoses, and
sometimes an occasional illustration might have helped make the text clearer. However,
these are minor criticisms. The book as a whole is a most valuable contribution and will
probably be an important reference work on the genetics of neurological disorders for
some time to come. We can look forward with eagerness to subsequent monographs in
this series. ALAN E. H. EMERY

Dawe, Clyde J. Editor. The Chromosome: Structural and Functional Aspects. In Vitro,
Vol. 1. Publication of the Tissue Culture Association Inc. Annual Symposium. June 1-4,
1965. New York, 1966. Williams and Wilkins. (Edinburgh, Livingstone.) Pp. xiii+ 107.
Price 68s.

THIS VOLUME CONTAINS eight original papers presented at a symposium, sponsored by
the Tissue Culture Association Inc., held in Miami in June 1965. It is concerned with various
structural and functional aspects of the chromosome. The main points outlined in these
papers are admirably summarized in an informative preface.

Topics dealt with include: chromosomal polymorphism and speciation; the use of
photometric procedures (mainly estimates of DNA content) in the identification of particular
chromosome pairs; measurement of chromosomal dimensions using automated techniques;
single-stranded and multi-stranded concepts of chromosomal structures; evidence relating
to a possible specificity of effect of certain viruses and chemical agents in inducing chromosomal abnormality; relationship of RNA-synthesising sites to localization of chromosomal
anomalies; synthesis and turnover of nuclear proteins in relation to phases of the mitotic
cycle; and, lastly, mechanisms responsible for repression and derepression of interphase
chromatin and relationship to the heterochromatin-euchromatin concept.

Subject matter is, in general, dealt with critically and with authority, although in
some cases by no means exhaustively. Arguments are well presented, easy to follow and
usually well illustrated. It is unfortunate that in four of the eight papers presented the
conclusions reached are not definitive and the reader is left with a sense of frustration.
Nevertheless, in all papers the questions raised and the methods employed to examine
these questions deserve serious consideration by the student of biology. Text and Tables
are well laid out and Figures well reproduced. There is a useful index.

An outstanding feature of this volume, at least to this reviewer, is a comprehensive
dissertation on ‘‘Mechanisms of Repression and De-repression within Interphase

119
