VERA HOUGHTON

Medical Termination of

Pregnancy Bill

February 10th, Mr. Kenneth Robinson,

Labour member for St. Pancras North,
moved in the Commons the second reading of a
Bill to amend a hundred-year-old Act of Parliament, the Offences Against the Persons Act of
1861, Section 58 of which makes it a felony to
administer drugs or use instruments to procure
an abortion.

More fortunate than its predecessor of 1952
which was talked out after a minute or two, the
debate on the present Bill continued for two
hours when “‘it being four o’clock’’, and Mr.
Speaker having declined to put the Question,
“the debate stood adjourned”. Early on an
opponent of the Bill, Wing-Commander GrantFerris (Nantwich, C.) tried to cut the debate
short and end the sitting by calling for a “‘count”’:
an unusual occurrence on a Friday in the House
and one about which Mr. Douglas Houghton
(Sowerby, L.) later said “‘we should express our
disapproval’’. It happened at the conclusion of
Mr. Robinson’s speech and just after several
members were seen to leave the House. However,
forty members being counted present the debate
continued.

The main purpose of Mr. Robinson’s Bill is to
bring statute law into line with what case law has
been since the Rex v. Bourne judgement of 1939.
It seeks also to extend the grounds for legal
termination of pregnancy. Clause 1 of the Bill
States:

It shall be lawful for a registered medical practi
tioner to terminate pregnancy in good faith:

(a) for the purpose of preserving the life of the
patient, or .

(b) in the belief that there would be grave risk
of serious injury to the patient’s physical
or mental health if she were left to give birth
to and care for the child.

S HORTLY BEFORE TWO O'clock on Friday,

93

As things stand at present there can be no
uniformity of practice: women wishing to have
their pregnancies terminated are treated quite
differently according to who their general
practitioner is, in which town they live and to
which hospital they are sent. The result is that
not only the unskilled, so-called backstreet,
abortionist thrives but so does the skilled professional, so-called Harley Street, abortionist: a
simple example, Mr. Robinson pointed out, of
one law for the rich and one law for the poor.

Mr. Patrick Gordon Walker, the official
spokesman for the Labour Party, and backbencher Mr. R. J. Mellish (Bermondsey, L.)
crossed swords on whether this Bill would in
fact help to get rid of backstreet abortionists.
Mr. Mellish argued that the Bill would not make
the slightest difference to which Mr. Gordon
Walker retorted ‘“‘we cannot stop manslaughter
by motor car on the road, but we try to pass laws
which will reduce it’’.

The fact that Section 58 of the 1861 Act refers
to the “‘unlawful” administration of drugs and
the “‘unlawful” use of instruments implies that
there exists some “‘lawful” use and such has been
the interpretation of judges. So, maintained Mr.
Peter Rawlinson (Epsom, C.), no doubt should
exist in the mind of any doctor. This was too
much for Mr. Julian Snow (Lichfield and Tamworth, L.). He for one could not believe that the
ordinary medical practitioner clearly understood
his position: whether this was the fault of his
professional organization, or the fault of his
training in medical school Mr. Snow could not
say but it seemed to him that “‘case law was not
a very good method of so instructing the medical
profession’’.

The medical members, Dr. Barnett Stross
(Stoke-on-Trent Central, L.) and Dr. Alan Glyn

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, July 1961, 53, 2.
THE EUGENICS. REVIEW

(Clapham, C.), who spoke in the debate were
both in favour of letting the Bill go to Committee.
Dr. Stross drawing on his own experience as a
medical practitioner in an industrial area over
many years said that among those cases which
had come to his notice there were women who
had gone into the back streets to have their
pregnancies terminated who, if this Bill had
passed into law, would have been saved that
terrible experience. Dr. Glyn agreed that every
effort should be made to remove from the social
system the ghastly tragedies of abortion. He
thought it would be “extraordinarily difficult to
adapt a Bill in Committee to cover the defects in
the law and, at the same time, to give the doctor
protection’’. None the less he was prepared to
see it go forward.

The more controversial part of the Bill was
as expected the additional grounds for lawful
abortion:

(c) in the belief that there would be grave risk of
the child being born grossly deformed or
with a physical or mental abnormality
which would be of a degree to require
constant hospital treatment or special care
throughout life, or

in the belief that the patient became pregnant
as the result of intercourse which was an
offence under Sections one to eleven
inclusive of the Sexual Offences Act, 1956,
or that the patient is a person of unsound
mind.

(d

ew

It was here that the really serious legal problems might arise. For the Government, Mr.
David Renton, Under-Secretary of State for the
Home Department, said “we would have no
objection in principle to the Bill’s limited purpose
of putting into statutory form the present case
law and practice’. He went on to explain that
the Government would hope to see it amended
in Committee “to eliminate or overcome some
of the difficulties” and at that stage ““would have
a good deal of advice to give”. As the Guardian
commented next morning “‘to have learned what
advice he had in mind would be not merely
interesting but very helpful to any other member
who might wish to introduce a Bill on similar
lines at some other time. . .. Can the ingenuity of
members find him [Mr. Renton] some opportunity of outlining it?’’.

94

Of the types of cases which might come within
the provisions of sub-clause (c) Mr. Robinson
quoted virus infections of the mother during early
pregnancy, the most common being German
measles, and what he termed “‘genetical dangers”
such as Huntington’s chorea, retinoblastoma
and phenylketonuria, all admittedly fairly rare.
Not so German measles : few members could have
known that there exists a voluntary organization
of parents of deaf-blind children whose terrible
affliction stems from this cause. The risk to the
child of serious abnormality if the mother is
infected by German measles during the first
three months of pregnancy is something like
25 per cent: the risk in the first month is 50 to
85 per cent.

Rape and incest (sub-clause (d)) it was frankly
admitted would be difficult to prove though, as
Mr. Renton pointed out, where a girl is under
thirteen and is pregnant the position is somewhat
less difficult because the mere fact that she is
under thirteen and is pregnant is in itself evidence
that someone has committed a criminal offence.
He hastened to add that the number of such
cases is very small indeed. When it comes to the
definition of “‘a person of unsound mind” there
are always legal difficulties.

The “killing of the unborn child”, which in
some sections of the opposition press had been
exaggerated to the absurd point of trying to infer
that the happy healthy baby in the picture was
the victim instead of an unrecognizable foetus
which most of us would not consider a human
being, had been carefully gone into by Mr.
Robinson. “‘I have come to the conclusion’’, he
said, “‘that the best case which can be made out
on logical grounds is that a human life begins at
the point at which the foetus becomes viable... .
when it becomes capable of an independent
life apart from its mother... normally in the
28th week of pregnancy.”

Except for the saving of the life of the mother
in an emergency, the Bill limits the lawful grounds
for termination of pregnancy to the thirteenth
week. To that extent it is restrictive because
present law makes no limitation but “if the best

medical opinion says that this is a dangerous
operation after thirteen weeks’ it is, Mr.
Robinson suggested, a desirable limitation.

It must be realized that the provisions of this
Bill were deliberately moderate to try to make
it as acceptable as possible to the House and as
non-controversial as possible outside. The Press
reaction was on the whole favourable: the
Economist and the Spectator as well as the
Guardian were in favour of the Bill. At a very
late hour the Church of England Moral Welfare
Council (which does not speak for the Church
of England as a whole) issued a statement opposing the Bill which a committee, headed by the
Bishop of Exeter, reported must be judged on
whether it would help or hinder the doctor in
cases of conflict between the claim of the mother
and the claim of the unborn child. To that extent
the committee judged the Bill to be bad.

Mr. Douglas Houghton (Sowerby, L.) had
this to say about the question of religious convictions or morals: “‘those of us who believe in
the Bill, and who believe in going further than
the Bill, do so because we believe in certain basic

MEDICAL TERMINATION OF PREGNANCY BILL —-.

human rights... and that, from my point of
view, takes precedence over any other conviction
in regard to this matter”’.

There was undoubtedly a good deal of support
for a change in the law both among those who
spoke in the debate (twelve in all) and among
other members who although not called upon to
speak were ready to vote. Had it been the first
instead of the second Bill to be taken that day its
fate might well have been different. The Guardian
pointed out “‘how ill-equipped Parliament is for
dealing with a measure of this kind... the
hazards of such a Bill are so great that, even if a
member is found to embrace the principle, it is
odds against its coming to a vote”.

It is now twenty-two years since a Government
inter-departmental committee on abortion, under
the then Mr. Norman Birkett, reported in 1939
in favour of a change in the law. Not only the
world but people’s ideas have changed greatly in
that time. It seems incredible that out-of-date
Victorian ideas on sex should in this respect still
govern our private lives causing endless distress,
ill-health, death and professional ruin.

95
