EUGENIC ASPECTS OF SOCIAL SECURITY

HE proposition “ That the programme
of social security set out in the
: Beveridge Report should be supported
on eugenic grounds’’ was discussed at a
Members’ Meeting of the Eugenics Society
held at the Rooms of the Royal Society,
Burlington House, Piccadilly, W.1, on
Tuesday, January 18th, 1944, at 5 o’clock.
Mr. B. S. Bramwell, who took the Chair in
the unavoidable absence of Lord Horder,
urged that Sir William Beveridge’s recommendations should be considered strictly in
their relation to eugenics. This was not the
occasion for a discussion on the wider aspects
of the subject. |

Mrs. E. M. HuBBACcK said that she proposed to take the definition of eugenics given
in the Aims and Objects of the Eugenics
Society as “‘ the attempt to promote fertility
of persons who possess inborn qualities above
the average.’”’ Her task, therefore, was to
inquire, first, how the fertility of such persons
could be promoted ; secondly, to determine
who possessed inborn qualities above the
average—namely, whether in our present
social conditions we could tell the difference
between the worse and the better stocks ;
and lastly, to discuss the Beveridge scheme
itself, and to ask whether it would influence
the birth-rate ‘in the direction in which we
wished it to go.

She reminded the audience that the birthrate was now such that the population was
not replacing itself and that our net reproduction rate was somewhere in the neighbourhood of 80. It might be asked whether
in certain sections of the population, on the
whole the better-fed and better-off sections,
the birth-rate was smaller, and in the less
well-educated portion, the birth-rate was
larger. In fact, it had been found by experts
that the differential birth-rate was changing ;
that whereas in the past there had been great
differences between different economic
sections of the population, much lower rates
among the richer and much higher ones
among the poorer, in recent years this had
changed. It had been shown that in the

17

textile industry, for instance, the birth-rate
of the semi-skilled workers was lower than
that of the employers, so that it looked as if,
apart from the social problem group, we
were getting to a state of very little difference
of fertility between the economic classes.

The persistent fall in the birth-rate during

the last seventy years—except for the flareup during the war—was due mainly to two
groups of causes. The first was the psychological group. High in this group she placed
the feeling among potential parents of insecurity, especially of economic insecurity,
above all the fear of unemployment.
' The’ other big group of causes was very
familiar—the economic causes which acted
throughout nearly all society, except in the
5 per cent at the top, and in the 5 per cent
at the bottom who formed the social problem
group and were probably already breeding
as fast as was physiologically possible. In
practically every other class the economic
motive was decisive in determining the
number of children. Among these were the
people whose income was so low that the
birth of another child meant not enough
food, house-room, clothing, or medical care,
both for the possible new child and, if it
came, for the existing children. There were
also those, in another section of society, who
could not afford a second son because they
could not send him to an expensive school.
The economic motive applied to all people
who would like to have more children if
having a family did not represent such a large
financial handicap.

Turning to the second question, namely
whether those with inborn qualities above
the average could be recognized with any
certainty, she suggested that one of the
reasons why eugenics made such slow progress was that, as long as there were great
environmental inequalities between different
sections of the community, it was not easy
or even possible to disentangle differences in
hereditary endowment. It was now known
that although certain groups of middle-class
children were taller and stronger and more
18 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

intelligent than children from slums, these
differences were wiped out if these slum
children were given the same conditions as
the others. |

The recommendations of the Report, she
suggested, made substantial contributions
with respect to both causes of reduction in
the birth-rate. In the first place, they would
give a sense of security, partly by the benefits
which would come into operation when the
ordinary earning-power had gone, because
of unemployment, illness, old age or other
cause, and, perhaps even more, by the
assumption on which the whole Report was
based, that we should be able to prevent
mass unemployment. Secondly, there were
the proposals for encouraging marriage and
having children. The marriage benefits, the
maternity benefits, and, above all, the scheme
for family allowances, would remove some
of the economic deterrents to parenthood.
Lastly, the provision of pensions for old
people would stimulate fertility, for many
families could not afford young children
because of the need of keeping older dependents.

It might be asked whether the scheme
would not have a dysgenic effect in encouraging fertility in the social problem
group. But, in fact, this group was already
breeding as fast as it could, and the Béveridge
benefits, by favouring a higher standard of
living, might even, for some of its members,
result in a more ordered life and the beginning
of the planned family. |

Mr. CEcIL BINNEY pointed out that,
although Sir William Beveridge’s Report
had been put over with a great deal of publicity and had been accepted by many
without thought, it was an elaborate and
detailed scheme, and the only fair way to
criticize it from a eugenic or any point of
view was by going into details.

He began with the postulate that social
insurance was almost necessarily not eugenic,
though it did not follow that for this reason
it should be rejected. The whole basis of
social insurance was that the more effective
members of the community had to bear the
burden of the others, and this must be
dysgenic rather than eugenic. Widows’

pensions could not possibly be eugenic ; the
old Hindu system of marriage at an early age
and death on widowhood, though undesirable
on other grounds, was more likely to promote:
the population because there were no old
people to be kept by those who were still in a
position to produce children. Every effective
man, who would be able to have healthy
children and could keep them, now found
himself burdened by rates and taxes which
he had to pay for the support of others. He
was not sent to gaol if he did not have
children, but he was sent to gaol if he did
not pay the rates ; and about one-fifth of his
income had to be paid away to the community for various social services before he
could have children of his own. The Beveridge scheme called upon those who were able
to earn money to find the money to keep
those who could not or did not work, and
those persons whom one would on eugenic
grounds encourage to have children were
being taxed to pay for the others.

It might be argued that the most effective
member of the community might be ill or
out of work, and there must be something
like a Beveridge scheme, but that assumed
that the only way in which a man could be
kept when unable to work was by social
insurance. There were other ways. A man
might for the first few years of his working
life be able to depend on his parents, later on
he could save or insure voluntarily, but by
the Beveridge scheme he was compelled to
pay just as much as the person who would
draw out far more. In other words, there
was no longer any basis of insurance in the
scheme. In no insurance scheme could one
entirely adjust the rates; those who were
bad risks paid too little and were carried by
those who were good risks. In the Beveridge
scheme any attempt to adjust the contributions proportionately to what people were
likely to draw out was deliberately thrown
over. Sir William thought it out of date, and
even where particular industries had schemes
of their own they were to be swept away and
the people in those industries reduced to the
level of the others. For instance, the banks
had a scheme to insure their employees
against the same risks as the Beveridge
EUGENIC ASPECTS OF BOLIAL SECURITY | 19

scheme, andi it worked so well that the
employees contributed nothing and the
banks very little, the reason being that
banks employed people of a high standard
who did not lose their job and were healthy.
Yet under the Beveridge scheme the bank
clerks would be compelled to pay the same
contributions as workers in industries where
there was a real risk of unemployment, and
this meant that the bank clerks would be
taxed in order to bear the risk of those who
had less certain jobs.

That was the general nature of social
insurance. To offset this dysgenic trend, all
Sir William Beveridge offered was children’s
allowances, and they could not be regarded
as eugenic since they promoted the birth of
children without consideration whether they
were of a desirable type. This was clear
because it was a flat rate of 8s. per week and
the inducement would therefore be greater
in inverse proportion to the earnings of the
people who were receiving it. Although a
man who had an income of £10,000 was not
necessarily more valuable to the community
than a man with {1,000 a year, one could
say of wage-earning people that their value
to the community was roughly proportionate
to the amount which they earned. This
scheme of paying the same to everybody
offered the highest inducement to those with
the lowest standard and to those who were
careless as to how the money was spent.

Turning from the lowest group of people,
those to whom 8s. would be a consideration,
to the higher groups, he considered the
position of a young professional man. The
Eugenics Society had always taken the line
that for a system of children’s allowances to
be eugenic it must not pay a flat rate but be
worked out in each profession. Sir William
Beveridge admitted, when he spoke to the
Society, that his scheme would have to be
supplemented by schemes in the professions,

and one naturally asked him why it was.

necessary that the scheme should be compulsory at all. His answer was, “‘ It has got
to be compulsory.” Hitler himself could not
have given a better answer!

One had to consider not only what was
going to be drawn out but what had to be

paid in. At present .the professional man
was burdened with income tax and rates,
but was left outside the scope of social insurance. Under the Beveridge scheme he
would be compelled to contribute ; he would
pay 4s. 3d. a week himself; what his wife
contributed would depend on whether she
was working, but under certain circumstances she would be paying 3s. 9d., so that
between them they would pay 8s. a week or
a tax of £20 a year. Therefore they would
have to have three children before the proposed children’s allowances were of any
benefit to them. In view of the birth-rate
among these people it was improbable that
they would have three children.

Moreover, the contributions they paid
before they had a child must be taken into
account. Also, Sir William Beveridge
postulated that the introduction of the
scheme would cost an extra £86,000,000 a
year in income tax. The effect of the
Beveridge scheme was to surcharge them
with a large sum of money when they were
already failing to have children for the
economic reason that they could not find the
money. It would be observed that this class
of people would get practically nothing from
the scheme except the cost of their burial
and some medical advice. They got no help
if their work ceased, nor if they were disabled
by illness for less than thirteen weeks, a
period which would probably have brought
their profession to an end. The class of the
community which should be encouraged to
have children, both because their birth-rate
was falling and because they were regarded
as socially valuable, were offered nothing by
the scheme, which imposed on them an
enormous liability which they would be
unable to shoulder and yet have more
children.

He had hoped to say something about the
psychological reasons mentioned by Mrs.
Hubback, but time would not permit. He
asked those who had not read the Report to
do so and to see the kind of society which it
envisaged. People did not want to bring
children into a world of insecurity, neither
did they want to bring them into a world of
slavery. Those who thought that word
20 . THE EUGENICS REVIEW

inapplicable to the Beveridge scheme should
read the Report through. People would be
sent to work they did not want, in places
they did not like. All would have identity
cards, all would be tabulated: in other words
a police state, the very thing which they

were supposed to be fighting against, would .

be introduced into this country.

Mr. G. R. MircuHison said he could not
accept the Society’s definition of eugenics
because it seemed to imply that someone or
another was in a position to estimate what
were the superior inborn qualities which it
was desired to perpetuate. He had not the
impertinence to make such an assumption.
Nevertheless, he was glad the Society did
not describe as eugenics the process of
abolishing the poorer part of the population,
though listening to Mr. Binney he felt that
some of the members might have that in
mind.

The need for social insurance had been
recognized in this country since the reign of
Queen Elizabeth and earlier ; he seemed to
remember a statement about the duties of
the rich in the matter of distributing their
goods to the poor which ante-dated Queen
Elizabeth by 1,500 years or more. It was
too late to go back to magnificently premedizval ideas and wash our hands of the
poor and only look at the upper classes on
the system of “ the richer the better.’’ Those
ideas died some considerable time ago. He
welcomed the Beveridge Report because it
seemed to him to shoulder a burden which
lately we had not had the courage to shoulder,
and it did mean to go forward. He would
rather shoulder that burden than stay in the
dark stream of moderate respectability.

The main object of this Report was to deal
with want, which as to three-quarters or
more of its causes, as the experienced author
of it found, was a matter of temporary loss
of earning power. How did any of us expect
those who were faced with starvation whenever they were out of work, or when illhealth affected them, to provide a healthy
and fine race? True eugenics must mean
enabling the decent people in every stratum
of the population to have and nurture
children. Implicit in these criticisms was

the assumption that we recognized where
such decent people were to be found, but
he for one had not the courage to make it.
Sir William pointed out that the remainder
of causes of want in this country were the
failure to adapt earning-power to family
size, and with that in view he recognized the
necessity for children’s allowances, the first
assumption made in the Report. Children’s
allowances were, Sir William affirmed, now
generally recognized as something which
had to come.

What did people want who opposed this
Report ? What was the use of their saying,
“ This is going to leave the middle-class in a
worse hole than ever ’”’? The statement
that the scheme would cost £86,000,000 in
income tax was a misrepresentation. It was
perfectly true that this was the sum given by
Sir William as the cost of what he proposed,
but it was not the answer to the question of
what it would cost the middle class. The
answer was that if one let other people
starve, if one let them be out of work, if
their children were allowed to be undernourished, the {86,000,000 would be saved,
but the country would be ruined in the
process. It was sheer misrepresentation to
take one side of the balance-sheet without
at the same time considering the other.

This was a case where a man had found a
system which was wildly bad and confused.
The Government Department had produced
a system under which a man with a wife and
two children who was unemployed for a time
would receive an allowance of 38s. per week ;
after a week or two he might become sick,
his need greater than ever; but because of
his illness his income dropped to 18s. per
week. A young man of 17 without wife or
dependents received gs. per week when he
was unemployed, and when he fell sick he
received not less but 18s. per week. Was
there any sense, an atom of common justice,
in that sort of system? What the Report
said was that it must be put right and
simplified. At present four means tests at
least were imposed on people who needed
assistance, not for any fault of their own but
because of some accident which had happened
to them. Was this not the “ police” stateEUGENIC ASPECTS OF SOCIAL SECURITY 21

of which Mr. Binney was afraid, and had it
not made a mess of things already ?

Continuing, the speaker urged eugenists
to read the Report with a fair mind and a
sense of their responsibilities towards the
community. They would find that it was a
genuine, workable and necessary scheme to
simplify a system the complications and
hardships of which fell on the people who
-could least afford it, those who in this
civilized country were left to starve when
some accident happened to them. At the
end of the Report there were figures which
Seebohm Rowntree gave for York. Those
who could still say, having read them, that
all they cared about was the middle class,
that they could not stand more taxes, that
it was not their responsibility, meant that
they would let the poor starve in York and
elsewhere !

Mr. E. J. LIDBETTER said that the
Beveridge Report was admittedly only an
outline of a scheme; it lacked the detail
which was so necessary before it could be
discussed at any length, and he thought it
better to confine his consideration strictly
to its eugenic aspect.
want has in the past been due to maladjust
ment was in his view a little far-fetched..

Want was known to be due to a variety of
causes of which maladjustment was only one,
and not the most important.

He would like to discuss the most important suggestion in this Report which, to
his mind, had a vital bearing on the subject
of eugenics. This was in Sir William
Beveridge’s suggestion that the old poor law
group should be amalgamated with, and
form part of, the nationally insured group of
people. Sir William went further and said
it was essential that this group should do so.
There, in the speaker’s opinion, the Report
made a fundamental error. To his mind the
old poor law group, as much of it as was left,
the social problem group as it was sometimes
called, should not be connected by administration with the nationally insured
group of people, because in the main they
are not insurable.

To take the present position of that group :
the relief of the able-bodied unemployed had

The suggestion that.

been taken away from the poor law, and was
now the work of the Assistance Board ;
secondly, the assistance to the old-age

pensioner had also been taken away from

the poor law and was now a separate
organization; thirdly, by the transfer of
poor law functions to the County and
County Boroughs the poor law infirmaries
now formed part of a national hospital
system; and finally, the maintenance of
the blind was a separate organization.
These four groups were the bulk of the
cases which had to be dealt with by the
former poor law administration, and the
effect of their transfer had been to leave a
residue so limited as to give a clarified
problem of intermittent destitution. In the
Beveridge Report, paragraph 371, this group
was divided into four: those who failed in
their contributions to national insurance on
the grounds of deficient income, including
partially employed people and those who
were on the fringe of employment, street
traders, and the like ; those who were disqualified for benefit through refusal of employment, leaving work without cause or
being discharged for misconduct, or those
who refused to attend a training centre ;
those who had abnormal needs in the matter

of diet and other needs; and lastly, the

separated and deserted wives and children.
Sir William suggested that these four groups
must come into the national insurance group,
but in a separate section. In this Sir William
was using the language of insurance. Here
was a definition of the same group taken
from the Wood Report on Mental Deficiency
(the report of a Royal Commission): “ Let
us assume that we could segregate as a
separate entity the families in this country
containing mental defectives of the primary
type, we should find we had collected among
them a most interesting social group. It
would include a much larger proportion of
insane persons, epileptics, paupers, criminals,
prostitutes, inebriates and other social unfortunates than would a group of families
not containing mental deficients which comprise at least 10 per cent in the social scale
of most communities.”’

That was the definition of the social
22 | _ THE EUGENICS REVIEW

problem group by this Royal Commission.
- The speaker was not suggesting that all the
people who were being assisted to-day under
the poor law fell into that group, but a very
large proportion of them did, and from the
point of view of eugenics it was most important that that group should not be
endowed with benefits such as were suggested in the Beveridge Report. That is why
he suggested they should be regarded as the
separate community which they had always
been. It was essential that there should be a
close study of this group: some kind of
research which would enable us to understand it, to know its fertility rate, its survival
value, its contribution to human progress,
and- what demands it made upon the community for its care and maintenance.

He agreed that its survival value might
not be increased greatly by the Beveridge
Scheme, because it probably already reproduced itself to the maximum of human
fertility. That, however, was a proposition
which was not established by any means
and it was one of the problems which we
needed to understand. It was quite certain
that if this group was to be identified with
the insured population proper, it would, to
a very large extent, be merged into and lost
sight of in the great mass of organization
which would be necessary to bring the
Beveridge scheme into operation. This, he
thought, was a strong reason why we should
not, as a Society, support the Beveridge
Report as it stood. |

General Discussion

In the course of the discussion which
followed, Mr. HorE-JONEs pointed out that
£86,000,000 spread over the entire population
came to {2 per head and not (as stated by
Mr. Binney) £20. He questioned whether
compulsory insurance would add to the
burden on middle-class people, for at present
when insurance was not compulsory or
universal the care of the old or incapable fell

on the generous, and it was certainly arguable

that that was an unnecessary tax upon

them.
Lady Ruys WILLIAMS said that the
Beveridge proposals stood in the way of a

much wider reform, namely that of the
whole income tax system. She accepted the
view that want must be abolished, but
considered that by such a reform this could
be achieved without placing additional
burdens on the better types of hardworking
persons. She asked the meeting to consider
that the income tax allowances as at present
arranged could be developed in such a way
as to provide for the elimination of want in
the community.

Mr. Titmuss said that Mr. Binney spent
most of his time in discussing the financial
effects of the Beveridge Report on 5 per cent
of the community, Mr. Lidbetter- most of
his on less than 1 per cent. The bulk of the
nation—8o0 to 85 per cent—had been neglected altogether apart from Mrs. Hubback’s
opening remarks. The 5 per cent: group at
the top was failing to reproduce itself when
income tax stood at 2s. 6d. in the f, and if
the whole community had followed its
example we should have been unable to wage
this war. If the social problem group, at the
other end of the scale, was reproducing itself
to its physiological maximum, how. could the
inducements of the Beveridge Report have
any effect ? Was it not true, he asked further,
that the great bulk of the additional expenditure of £86,000,000 was due solely to the
ageing of the population and that in the
future an increasingly larger sum would
have to be found for the care of the rising
number of old people? If that was true,
what did opponents of the Report suggest
should be done with the increasing population of old people?

Mr. HALFoRD said that, in his Galton
lecture, Sir William Beveridge stated that he
did not imagine his audience would feel that
the Report had any eugenic value. He
amplified this by saying that one had only
to realize that the unskilled labourer had a
larger family than the skilled worker to
see that his scheme could not be depended
on to affect the birth-rate. There had been
a good deal of middle-class prejudice in the
discussion ; they must eliminate that and
look at things apart from their political and
social prejudices. Mrs. Hubback was the
advocate of a policy which more than anyEUGENIC ASPECTS OF SOCIAL SECURITY

thing else was psychologically adversely
affecting the birth-rate.

Mrs. ARNOLD Brown asked if it was
eugenically sound that the eighth child of
a family was the best. She wondered how
the Beveridge Report would. tackle the
question of the excessively large family.

Mr. PERCIVAL said that it appeared to be
assumed that if people were better off they
would have more children, although it was
a fact that the most prosperous countries
had a lower birth-rate than the less prosperous. Would an increase in prosperity
increase the size of families ?

Replies to Discussion

Mrs. HUBBACK, in replying, recalled that
Sir William, in his address to the Soczety,
had said that although he had put forward
a flat-rate scheme of family allowances, he
also advocated a graded scheme so that
different economic sections could, through
some form of mutual insurance, receive
children’s allowances in proportion to their
own expenditure.

She did not agree that social security would
not have any effect on fertility. It might be
true that in the past, possibly because the
practice of birth control had not spread
‘throughout the social scale, prosperity had
brought about a lower birth-rate. But it
was also true that the feeling of insecurity
which had grown in this country had adversely affected the birth-rate and was likely
to continue to do so unless that feeling could
be removed.

She agreed that the breeding of some
members of the social problem group should
be restricted, by sterilization or by segregation. The State medical service proposed in
the Report might be of help in this respect.

As for Mr. Binney’s observations on the
-expense of maintaining old people, the fact
was they had to be maintained and could
not be allowed to starve. The question
whether, as proposed in the Report, the
charge should be spread over the whole
community or whether, as happened now,
it should be borne by a few individuals, did
not affect the total amount; and if it was
spread over the community it was less likely

23

to result in people not being able to afford
to marry or have children.

Mr. BINNEY, also in reply, assured Mr.
Mitchison that he, too, was capable of saying
that the poor should not be left by the rich to
starve. That appeared to be irrelevant to
the subject of the debate. Sir William had
said that the main point of the. Report was
not to transfer money from the rich to the
poor, but to redistribute income among the
poor, and his first objection to the Report

was a eugenic one, because Sir William

redistributed money by making those who
were provident and hard-working contribute
to the support of those who were not, instead
of having the money available for their own
families.

Mr. Mitchison had queried his reference
to £86,000,000 and said that he did not refer
to the other side of the balance sheet. If
Mr. Mitchison was speaking metaphorically
he could not answer him, for it did not mean
anything. £86,000,000 was the figure in
money given by Sir William, and in answer
to Mr. Titmuss the speaker said that there
was nothing in the. Report to suggest it was
due to the increasing number of old people.
They had: to be paid for, but the treatment
of the aged was the one thing in the Report
which could be defended on eugenic grounds ;
they did not seem to have come out of it
very well. Sir William admitted this and
said that there was not money enough, but
it could be defended on the ground that
money was better spent on children or
parents than on old people.

As Mr. Hope-Jones said, any social scheme
did relieve the burden on the generous by
redistributing it amongst the generous and
ungenerous, but the generous would always
find others to impose upon them!

He had been accused of devoting too much
time to one section of the community, those
described as the middle-class, but these
groups were extremely arbitary and he was
not sure to whom reference was being made.
He had devoted so much time to the professional classes because his time was short.
and it was the section of the community
which he knew best, and one had heard so
many speeches about the fall in the birth-rate
24 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

among them. His principal reason, however,
was that it was an important point in the
Report which had been entirely neglected.
The Report had on one class, which was
more than 5 per cent of the community, a
definitely dysgenic effect, and it was the
greatest change proposed in the Report.

This feature of the scheme was, in the
speaker’s opinion, unworkable, and when
he asked Sir William how it would work he
had refused to answer.

The CHAIRMAN thanked the speakers for a
very interesting debate and the proceedings
terminated.

, ABC
CONSTRUCTIVE BIRTH CONTROL

SocIETY AND CLINIC FOUNDED BY Dr. Marie STOPEs IN 1921

The oldest Birth Control Clinic, the first to establish Birth Control
Case Sheets and collect scientific data; C.B.C. Clinics are still the
only free clinics: the only birth control clinics dealing from the first
with all aspects of birth control, i.e. prevention of detrimental births,
spacing of healthy births and inducing potentially desirable pregnancy
in sterlle women, and general marital help.

THE PIONEERS OF THE CLINIC MOVEMENT
Library, Museum and Clinics open daily, 10-6 (except Sats.)

Books and Racial supplies may be obtained direct.

TECHNICAL DEMONSTRATIONS for MEMBERS of the MEDICAL PROFESSION
First Thursday each month

Applications to The Hon. Secretary, Headquarters Clinic,

 

106 Whitfield Street, W.1

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXXVI, No. 1
