CORRESPONDENCE.

PRIMOGENITURE AND ABNORMALITY: A POSSIBLE FALLACY.

Probably the earliest observation that consumption seemed to pick
out the eldest born for its victims was made in 1906 by the present writer
at the Crossley Sanatorium. For the purpose of mathematical confirmation, the data were offered to Professor Pearson, who kindly examined
them. The result was A First Study of the Statistics of Pulmonary Tuberculosts, in which especial incidence of consumption upon first and second
born children was described; the only related observation quoted being
from an article in Siometrtka (on the inheritance of duration of life) that
“the elder adult sister and adult brother live on an average four years
longer than the younger adult sister or brother.”

Following this brochure on consumptives there came, also from the
biometric side, two others in which I had no part: on lunatics and on
criminals. In both classes (the figures for the latter may be found in
Pearson’s Boyle Lecture) very much the same sort of incidence was described, while later a third, albinism, was added.

Meanwhile, looking round for a larger material of consumptives upon
which to test further the hypothesis, I had found it in five German works}
and in some further pedigrees of my own. In an article (7ke Lancet, Oct.
7th, 1911) I showed that all save one of these sources yielded on analysis
special incidence of consumption upon first and second born children. A
bibliography of the subject was appended, going as far back as 1866,
giving authors who, I now found, had asserted eldest born incidence
amongst idiots, amongst criminals, and in men of genius. The last
observation came from that distinguished pioneer in other fields, Dr.
Havelock Ellis, who was the first to posit a multiple abnormal tendency
on the part of the eldest child.

Of the chief of the foregoing investigations the exact figures are
now given. To show them as succinctly as possible one contrasts two percentages—first, the percentage of eldest born children in the whole
material of each inquiry; secondly, the percentage of eldest born
children in the particular class examined. Thus Sir A. Mitchell? says:
“Of all the children born in Edinburgh and Glasgow in 1855, 22°8 per
cent. were first pregnancies, while of the 85 idiots 33 per cent. were first
pregnancies.”

So we can put it :—

Mitchell—
wlfole material wes ves bee ves 22'8 per cent.
special class (idiots)... Bie sa a 33 per cent.

Somewhat similarly, but preferably, as giving a closer comparison,
may be expressed Langdon Down’s® data. Of 2,000 idiots he found 24 per
cent. first born. Now the average size of the families these idiots came
from was 6'91, the total number of children being therefore 13,820
(6°91 x 2,000). Among these 13,820 there were, of course, 2,000 oldest born,
one to each family, making a percentage of 14°4.

Hence :—

Down—
whole material wee wee wee wee 144 per cent.
special class (idiots)... wee wes wee 24 per cent.

1 Brehmer: Die Aetiologie der chronischen Lungenschwindsucht (1885). Die
Therapie der chronischen Lungenschwindsucht (1889). Riffel: Erblichkett und
Infektidsitat der Schwindsucht (1892). Weitere Pathogenetische Studien (1901)
Schwindsucht und Krebs (1905).

* Edinburgh Medical Journal. Jan., 1866.

Mental Affections in Childhood. 1887.
CORRESPONDENCE. 59

Again, the 381 Crossley Sanatorium consumptives of whom I got
particulars came from as many families, the members of which numbered
in all 2,164. Now in 2,164 people the number of eldest born was 381, or
176 per cent. Amongst the 381 consumptives it was 113, or nearly 30

per cent.
And so :—
Pearson and Rivers—
whole material sa wa vee ves 17°6 per cent.
special class (consumptives) wee me 296 per cent.

The method of comparison is now clear, and succeeding figures will
be given without comment.

Heron|— |
whole material wes won sa s+ 16°5 per cent.
special class (lunatics)... we wee 23 «per cent.
In Brehmer’s cases—
whole material nm dine Les wes 14°8 per cent.
special class (consumptives) vc ws 18°2 per cent.

ln Riffel’s records—
whole material, “S. & K.,” 163 per cent.; “W. P. S.,”
16°3 per cent.; “E. & I.,” 20°1 per cent.
special class (deaths from phthisis), “S. & K.,” 20 per
cent.; “W.P.S.,” 18 per cent.; “E.
& I.,” 17 per cent.
Own Pedigrees—
whole material se wes Lee wes 15°8 per cent.
special class (consumptives) on gas 20'1 per cent.
Among other findings which can be similarly stated is one kindly sent
by Dr. Crzellitzer? :—

Creellitzer—
whole material wis sa sae bes 18'9 per cent.
special class (high myopics) we vee 28°6 per cent.

S. Hansen’s results, published in the EUGENICS REVIEW last October,

come out :—
whole material... wes wee wee ves 17 per cent.
special class (consumptives)... sw om 28 per cent.

It becomes clear, then, that calculations such as the above have convinced many different people that the fate of the eldest born is to recruit
the ranks of certain abnormal classes more often, proportionally, than do
succeeding members of a family.

Now, as regards consumptives, from the outset I had suspected a
mathematical fallacy. That was why, to begin with, high mathematical
opinion was invited. In my examination of Riffel’s data, too, I had taken
the percentages of deaths from pneumonia, typhus, trauma and cancer,
and compared them according to order of birth. Except cancer, they had
not shown eldest born incidence. Crzellitzer, in a later paper,? had done
similarly with ocular defect other than hereditary high myopia; he had
not found eldest born incidence here either. But the numbers of his
“control ” were very small; and my figures from Riffel, although larger,
were not comparable with those derived from a material of living consumptives. Therefore having begun for another purpose a “control ”
consisting of normal persons of the working classes, mostly urban
dwellers, and of an age distribution similar to that of sanatorium patients,
I made order of birth one of the particulars on the schedule. After this

1 A First Study of the Statistics of Insanity. 1907.
2 Wie vererben sich Augenleiden? Gesellschaft fur Soziale Medizin, Hygiene
und Medizinalstatistik. Feb. 10, rgro.
Die Vererbung von Augenleiden. Berliner klin. Wochenschrift, 1912, No. 44.
60 EUGENICS REVIEW.

was begun, Mr. Macaulay sent his pamphlet,} in which, considering only
the biometric publications, he put down the described elder born incidence
to a statistical fallacy connected with the ages of the subjects examined.
And seemingly the findings in my control cases support his main contention. They relate to 259 subjects, both men and women,? coming from
as many families, the members of which numbered 1,754. The percentages
of eldest born are :—

whole material vee ees vee eee 147 per cent.

special class (the actual examinees) _... 22 per cent.

Other methods of calculation give a like result, as is shown in the

following table :—

Expected Actual
Crossley Sanatorium Consumptives— Number. Number.
Ist born ... ans ass ws ii 67°1 war 113
2nd_ born... vee eee wee wee 64°4 ve 79
Normals—
Ist born ... ves wee wee ww. «= - 382 vee 57
2nd born... ° 4!

The normals go on to show a large third born Axcess, which the consumptives do not; but both agree in a practical equality of actual and
expected numbers in the case of the fourth born, and after that a counterbalancing deficiency for all born later than fourth; precisely the phenomenon invoked to prove not only a special incidence, according to order
of birth, of consumption, but also of lunacy and of criminality; indeed a
general pathological tendency connected with primogeniture.

These results in normal subjects require confirmation; but it must be
remembered that statistical work, as that high authority Professor Pearson
and others are always stating, is notoriously full of pitfalls. There was
a prioré likelihood that the eldest born would turn out consumptives and
lunatics. We know from obstetricians that the eldest born child is
shorter and lighter than succeeding children. Primiparae must be of
immature age oftener than multiparae, and K6rési and Marro have
described an unhappy fate for the scions of immature stock. My own
experience in pig-breeding confirms that of others, namely that first litters
are decidedly unsatisfactory compared with later ones. The child of a
primipara is more subject to head injury during labour. Wallich and
Fruhinsholz? found that 16 out of 30 premature children brought to a
Bicétre clinic for nervous affections and other defects were eldest born.
The well known tuberculous tendency of the insane would be well explained if being elder born were a part of the diatheses of both phthisis
and lunacy. Similarly, too, the hardly less certain “ variational diathesis ”
of men of genius; while all four classes, mentally unsound, men of
genius, criminals, and consumptives, are just the ones which had been
tentatively associated aforetime. Nevertheless, all such @ frzorz arguments
must, of course, yield to direct evidence, if that stand examination.

In conclusion, assuming that this excess of elder born in interrogated
persons is, aS we Say, an artefact, to what can it be due? The question
must be one for statisticians and mathematicians. Mr. Macaulay appears
to think that the elder born will naturally be more often of the age at
which phthisis appears than will the younger born. However, the average
age of the normal examinees mentioned above hardly varies at all with
order of birth. Another explanation is that first advanced by Von den
Velden,* who took the tuberculous families in two of Riffel’s publications,

1 The Supposed Inferiority of First and Second Born Members of Families.
Montreal.

2 In the Lancet article I have shown, what Crzellitzer for his part confirms,
that elder born incidence has nothing much to do with sex.

8 Annales de Gynécologie et d’Obstétrigue. November, 1911.

4 Archiv fur Rassen-unad Gesellschafts-Biologie. Juli-August, 1908.
CORRESPONDENCE. 61

and made out that while in them there were certainly more deaths from
consumption amongst the three earlier born than in the remainder, yet
this was due to smaller infantile mortality amongst these earlier born. In
other words, proportionally more first, second, and third born infants
would survive to grow up to adolescent and adult ages, the time at which
phthisis shows itself; and so both the general adult population and the
consumptive population are made up to a disproportionate degree of first,
second, and third born. The criticism I have to make upon this does not
now, after examining normals, differ much from what was said in the
Lancet article before. These normals do indeed show (what, by the way,
the whole of Riffel’s data did not) a lessened infantile mortality amongst
first, second, and third born children, just those which are present in
apparent excess. But that lessened mortality seems too small to account
wholly for that excess; and may itself be apparent only.

What would be instructive would be the histories of completed
families, all of whose members had died; it may be because Riffel’s records
consisted partly of completed family histories, that they showed smaller
eldest born incidence than other sources.

However, these are matters for statisticians rather than for clinicians.
All that is here urged is that the evidence upon which an association of
abnormality with primogeniture has been based, is open to cavil.

W. C. Rivers, M.R.C.S., D.P.H.

NoTe.—Since writing the above, Mr. Cobb’s article in the EUGENICS REVIEW for
January, 1914, has come to my notice. In this he suggests a leash of fallacies to
account for elder born incidence in consumptives, etc. Two of these, being of
purely mathematical bearing, I am incompetent to discuss; but the third is
inaccuracy of the data, particularly from a younger “‘sibling”’ forgetting a deceased elder one, and therefore wrongly reckoning himself or herself eldest born;
and concerning this it might be said that it would not apply to many of the cases
in the material mentioned above as ‘‘ Own Pedigrees,”’ since in them the parents
of the subject were often questioned. Neither could it apply to the special
class of idiots, for here by the nature of the case the subjects themselves could
not have been the informants (see Mitchell’s data, Down’s data, and a more
recent and unmentioned paper by Dr. Hunter). Good judges inform me that
Mr. Cobb’s mathematical attack upon elder born incidence seems so far the best
directed one. That matter statisticians will no doubt soon decide. But if it be
confirmed that the phenomenon obtains also in the case of normals, then the matter
loses interest for clinicians and eugenists—except as a warning against ‘‘ uncompleted’ families.
