REVIEWS OF BOOKS

WORLD RESOURCES

Furon, Raymond. Trs. Paul Barnes. The Problem of Water; A World Study. London, 1967,
Faber. Pp. xvi + 207. Price 42s.

THE AUTHOR OF a popular book must consider carefully the knowledge its intended
readers are assumed to have. Professor Furon has not done this. No one who will need the
general information on the chemical and biological properties of water that is contained
in his first few chapters, will find them very helpful because of the liberal and undefined
use of such terms as karst, hypotonic, osmotic, epeirogenic and peridinean. After this bad
beginning the book improves but it is marred throughout by its ancestry. The book was
published in France in 1963 and has not been brought up to date. Thus projects such as the
Kariba dam and the Rance tidal power installation are spoken of in the future tense. It is
reasonable that most of the examples of water needs and use should deal with France and >
French Africa, but translation has rendered the units unwieldy. Instead of having one table
of conversion factors, the translator has chosen to add the inch and gallon (in brackets)
equivalents of metric units throughout: this adds several pages to the length of the book.
The author has not helped by constantly switching units. Sentences like “Flow calculations
gave 60 litres (13 gall.) per second, and this was insufficient to suppy the Basle Canton,
which required at least 100,000 cu. m. (about 25 million gall.) per day” could easily have
been phrased more helpfully. The author stresses the ultimate necessity for large-scale
desalination of sea water but his readers are not likely to get much illumination from the
sketchy descriptions of the various methods that may be used.

So much for criticism. On the subjects in which he is really interested, Professor Furon
is informative. He deals comprehensively with the methods used in antiquity to collect
and control water in what are now deserts and discusses the distinction between deserts
that could be made productive again by the restoration of something like the old systems,
and those that could be made productive only by vast works such as the High Aswan Dam.
In this connection he gives several valuable analyses of the reasons for the success or
failure of irrigation projects. He may be right, and no one would dispute the necessity for a
careful study of the nature of the soil, the value of the product that will be grown, and the
readiness of people to move into a new irrigated area to work the land, but it is easy to be
wise after the event. It is legitimate to wonder whether, with a little more luck or skill,
some of the failures might have been successful. Enough evidence is however marshalled
here to dispel the widespread idea that, as soon as nuclear power cheapens desalinated
sea water, vast populations will live and work in the deserts.

Like most writers with experience of North Africa, Professor Furon has an obsession
about goats—like people, they are admirable creatures if there are not too many of them
in one place.

N. W. PIRIE

ABORTION

Guttmacher, Alan F. (Editor). The Case for Legalized Abortion Now. Berkeley, Cal., 1967.
Diablo. Pp. i + 154. Price $1.95 Paperback.

NEARLY FOUR MILLION babies are born in America each year. And each year there are
claimed to be about one million criminal abortions—and 8,000 legal abortions.

The law that maintains this absurd state of affairs falls increasingly into contempt,
and is evaded, as these estimates suggest, by one pregnant American woman in every five.
It is also estimated that “‘one out of every five women will have an out-of-hospital abortion
by the time she is forty-five”. In America, as in Britain, the well-off purchase their pseudolegal, or frankly illegal, abortions on the open market from qualified doctors. The poor

279
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

make do with unskilled abortionists. As a direct result of this, more than 5,000 American
women are thought to die from abortion each year (most of them Negro or Puerto Rican,
which is why there is little outcry) and very many more have their health permanently and
seriously impaired. ‘““The infrequency of abortion in municipal hospitals, less than one
twentieth the incidence recorded for private patients in voluntary hospitals, is largely due
to the fact” writes Dr. Alan Guttmacher, the book’s editor, “‘that physicians for patients
in municipal hospitals still conservatively stick to the old organic diseases triad—heart,
lung and kidney—while physicians for private patients, frequently the very same physicians,
alter their vision to be in clear focus with the social and philosophic changes in medicine’.

This collection of twelve essays on the abortion situation in America, written by
reformers, is aimed at the lay public—and rightly so. Reform in the medico-social field, as
the history of the birth control movement, among others, demonstrates, is the work of
lay pressure groups, not medical ones. (The reasons for this are not discussed in this book.
It would make a fascinating study, with a relevance far beyond the field of abortion.)
Meanwhile, at the time of writing, no less than twenty-eight out of America’s fifty states
are attempting to reform their abortion laws. So far, three have been successful in bringing
about moderate reforms: Colorado, North Carolina, and Mississippi. The National
Conference of Catholic Bishops has duly responded by authorizing a first year’s budget
of $50,000 to “‘fund a campaign against liberal abortion laws”’.

There is nothing in this book to surprise the British abortion law reformer. It confirms
that abortion laws in all developed countries are characterized only by their ineffectiveness
in preventing abortion, and their effectiveness in causing death or injury to the women
involved. In all countries with repressive abortion laws, abortion constitutes a major public
health problem—not because there is anything intrinsically complicated about abortion,
but as a direct and obvious result of compelling women to consult untrained persons in
inadequate premises. (Tonsillectomy would also be a major public health problem if carried
out furtively by amateurs.)

Many contributors to this volume favour abortion-on-demand. They support this
stand both on public health grounds and on moral grounds. “It is almost impossible to
imagine circumstances in which society would be morally justified in withholding rights
of abortion” writes Professor Garrett Hardin, the biologist. This view, though generally
shared by educated persons in both countries, is rarely uttered in public in this country.
When it is, it is often condemned for its immorality. At a more practical level, it is sometimes
objected to on the grounds that the hospitals would be flooded out with abortion cases.
The consultants’ beds, we are told, must be kept free for more interesting and rewarding
cases.

One of the major arguments in favour of abortion-on-demand is precisely that it is
the only method of compelling timid and parsimonious governments to take birth control
seriously, and to give its provision the social priority that it requires. Harriet Pilpel of the
American Civil Liberties Union draws attention to the vast sums collected annually in
America to further research into TB, heart diseases and cancer. “‘Isn’t it about time” she
asks “‘that similar efforts be made to face the public health hazard of abortion which lurks
in the background of the life of every American woman capable of childbearing?”

But, happily, abortion law reform has been overtaken by events and, in particular, by
technological development and scientific research. The simple suction techniques developed
in Eastern Europe, and refined and adapted in Britain,* will totally transform the abortion
situation in its hospital context, both here and in America, in the very near future. When

* Abortion Induced by Means of the Uterine Aspirator, by Dorothea Kerslake and Donn Casey.
Obstetrics and Gynaecology U.S. Vol. 30, 1. July 1967. See THE EUGENICS REVIEW, 1963. 54, 189; 1964.

>

280
REVIEWS OF BOOKS

women can have abortions as outpatients and can return home on the same day, the
economic argument about the consultants’ beds will be seen to be lacking in any substance.
Of even greater significance, of course, are the “abortion pills” at present undergoing
clinical trials. These will undoubtedly reach the mass market within the decade, and when
they have have done so, yet another pseudo-moral problem will have been dissolved by the
advances of science.

Can anyone doubt that the next generation will read our abortion debates with the
same incredulity that we now reserve for those eminent Victorians who cast religious doubts
on the use of pain-killing drugs in childbirth? The only lesson of history seems to be our
inability to learn from it.

MADELEINE SIMMS

281
