HUMAN FERTILITY

A Demonstration of its Genetic Basis

By Dr. med. WILLY WAGNER-MANSLAU
Translated by E. O. Lorimer

Y article, ‘‘ Heredity as an Explana
tion of the Declining Birth Rate,’’

which appeared as No. VI of the
Eugenic Research Association’s Monographs, sought to demonstrate that the main
cause of the fall in the birth rate was an
actual evolutionary change of the human
animal itself (Umziichtung der Menschheit)
due to the conditions of civilization.

My hypothesis is, therefore, the exact
antithesis of the generally accepted view
that the sole cause of the declining birth
rate resides in altered external circumstance. This being so, I must naturally be
prepared for considerable opposition to my
thesis.

In Monograph VI, I proved my case by
quoting a large number of observations
made on the actual population, by the
marshalling of masses of statistics, and,
finally, by drawing several conclusions, all
of which seemed to me to tell the same tale,
namely that the decline in the birth rate
must be mainly caused by alterations in the
hereditary constitution of the people.

But syllogisms are tricky things. Even
when the inaccuracy of a deduction cannot
be proved, there remains the possibility that
some vital factor has been overlooked which
would put an entirely new complexion on
the data, and with one blow lay low our
house of cards. ‘The question is so farreaching, and its importance so immense,
that in this present article I am attempting
an entirely new approach to the whole
problem.

In Monograph VI I came to the conclusion that the decisive factor in the
declining birth rate was the marriage for
money, which compelled the offspring of
families where children were numerous—

potential parents of high fertility—more
and more frequently to seek wives from
small families of lower strata. Thus the
highly fertile father almost invariably
marries a wife from a stock of minimum
fertility. |

A large collection of statistics assembled
in the tables of Monograph VI showed that,
in fact, up to 4o per cent. of the daughters
of large families remained spinsters. That
is, Io per cent. more than in the case of
small families. It therefore seems that, in
the conditions of modern civilization, the
propagation of the human race comes to lie
with the offspring of the less fertile stocks
to a greater degree than their numerical
proportion in the population would warrant
—which must in the long run detrimentally
affect the fertility of a people. It is only
fair to admit, however, the possibility of a
fallacy lurking in this conclusion. But the
correctness of my theory cannot be impugned if I can prove by statistics, drawn
from a sufficiently large human community
whose intimate structure is adequately
known, that those who marry into a lower
social stratum beget, in fact, fewer children
than those who take a wife of their own
rank.

The Genealogical Gotha Almanachs provide, from this point of view, an excellent
field of observation, for they supply information about the families of the Princes
for over 150 years; of the Counts for 125
years ; of the Freiherren for 100 years; and
of the lesser nobility for 50 years.

Their data are not entirely ideal, since
they completely omit dead members of the
family. But, since all the genealogies are
similarly deficient, the material yields unexceptionable data for comparative study.

195
196

Not only is the number of children in each
marriage recorded, but it is possible also to
look up the number of brothers and sisters
of each parent.

Certain considerations govern the inclusion of a family. The following potentates
are omitted : The Popes, the Turkish aristocracy, non-European princes, and members of the Albanian house of Zogu.
Information as to whether a given person
belonged to the old or to the new nobility
is somewhat unreliable in the earlier issues.
The claims of certain families to original
nobility have not withstood later investigation, and on the other hand, many families
first quoted as later creations are able to
prove their original nobility. Recent
decades have, however, been hypercritical
in demanding documentary proof of unbroken genealogies, and many families
whose original nobility cannot seriously be
questioned have been consequently transferred to the list of later creations.

For my purpose it matters little whether
the family in question can produce exact
proof of their title to belong to the original
nobility so long as their right was recognized by their peers. For determining these
questions I have therefore been content to
abide by the findings of the Almanachs de
Gotha for 1912 and 1913. I have only
utilized other editions, on occasion, to fill
up gaps in these. Marriages with women
whose families had not separate entries of
their own in the Almanach have been
entered (unless with princes) as marriages
with new nobility.

In studying the following tables, therefore, it should be borne in mind that the
marriages into the new nobility may always
contain a certain percentage of cases where
the woman really belonged to the older
nobility, especially in the case of foreign
brides.

Before 1873 the Almanach was not regularly issued in complete revised annual
editions, but was amended as required,
some families being brought up to date
every year, some every second year, and
no distinction being made between the two
categories of nobility. I have therefore found

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

it necessary to gather data in every case from
two successive issues, and if the article about
any given family occurred in both I have
utilized the earlier entry. I have reckoned
dead children as well as living ones. Where
marriages with more than one wife have
taken place I have tabulated them on the
following lines: If they were childless, I
have only reckoned the first marriage; if
there were children, I have entered them in
the column of the wife who had the largest
number ; if the numbers were equal I have
reckoned the latest marriage.

In order to understand the following argument it is absolutely essential to master the
structure of the German nobility. Table I
shows the system. ‘‘ Standesherr ’’ cannot
be translated into English and the word
‘* Freiherr ’’ must not be rendered by Baron
because the English baron is socially of
higher rank than the German Freiherr.
The two words must be therefore retained
in the text.

The guiding principle of my investigation
has been to endeavour to establish the relation between the number of children springing from a marriage and the number of
brothers and sisters of each parent.

Linking these present researches on to
those of my Monograph VI, I have taken
I912 as a starting-point, and have ascertained at intervals of twenty years the
number of children of each man who, in the
index year in question, was 40-60 years of
age; further, the number of children in the
two marriages from which the parents
sprang. I devoted my attention to the men
between the ages of 40-60 because highly
fertile families require a longer time for
their full development than those less
fertile, and it was therefore essential to take
a sufficiently long period into account.

TRANSLATOR’S NOTE :
To avoid recurrent circumlocution I denote throughout text and
tables :
the noun Old Nobility (Uradel)
and the adjective belonging to the O.N. (uradlig) boy ON
the noun New Nobility (Brietadel) po NN
and the adjective belonging to the N.N. (briefadlig) ¥
Commoners, xs
the noun{ Middle-Classes f (Birgertum) (145 uc
and the adjective belonging to the M.C. (biirgerlich)
HUMAN FERTILITY

197

TABLE I.—ScHEDULE OF THE GERMAN NOBILITY.
I. THe HiGHER NosBiiry.

A. Original or Old Nobility.
[ All families who can prove that they
were ‘ noble’ before 1350. |
. Ruling Princes.
[a. Families who were ruling in Germany, Austria, Russia, and Bulgaria
up to November 1918.
b. Non-German, European
still ruling. |

=~

families

. Standesherren.

[Princely families who were ruling
families till the Congress of Vienna
and preserved the ‘Equality of Birth’
—1i.e. were considered equal mates for
ruling princes, whose children would
enjoy the right of succession. |

3. Non-ruling German Princes.
[Families to whom the title of
‘ Prince ’ has been accorded but who
have not ruled. ‘They have not
‘Equality of Birth’ with 1 and 2,
and their children would not enjoy
the right of succession. |
4. Non-ruling Non-German Princes.
[The non-German equivalent of 3. ]
5a. Original Counts.

NO

B. Patent—or New Nobility.

[Families to whom a patent of nobility
has been granted since 1350. ]

1. Even some ruling princes belong to the
newer nobility with patents; but there are
too few to form a separate category. And
as they persistently sought their consorts
in families of the old nobility they may
be considered as belonging biologically, as
far as questions of fertility are concerned,
to the Original Nobility.

56. Patent-Counts.

II. THe Lesser Nosinity.

6a. Original Freiherren.
7a. Lesser Nobles.

6b. Patent-Freiherren.
7b. Lesser Patent-Nobles.

e

Children of Ruling Princes or Standesherren [Grades 1 and 2] by a less noble wife or
by a commoner are ranked in a lower class of nobility according to the decree of the

relevant Sovereign.

Children of the grades 3 to 7 take the father’s rank regardless of their mother’s origin.

 

I had already recorded in my seventh
article (see list of my articles at end) that
the Court Calendar of 1912 disclosed a very
noticeable difference in fertility between the
offspring of less fertile and more fertile
families. The Court Calendar, however,
deals with such small numbers that I was

compelled to supplement it by considering
the marriages of the women folk with men
of other social strata to procure mathematical corroboration of the differential
fertility amongst the offspring of the less
fertile and the more fertile families. Though
I cannot myself detect any error in this pro 

 

 

 

198 THE EUGENICS REVIEW
TABLE II.—NuMBERS OF CHILDREN
of all married noblemen between the ages of forty and sixty according
as the father springs from a
a
Almanach Date of Marriage yielding 1 or 2 Marriage yielding 6 or more
de Gotha Marriage children children
Average Actual Actual Average Actual Actual
No. of | total No. No. of No. of | total No. No. of
children of Marriages | children of Marriages
per father} children per father | children
Court Calendar
IgI2 1852-71 2°48 236 95 2°79 488 175
Court Calendar
1930 1872-91 2°84 230 113 2°4 432 180
ON Counts
Igi2 1852-71 2°11 423 196 2°64. 484 183
ON Counts
1930 1872-91 I-97 307 156 2°7 524 194
NN Counts
1892 1832-51 2°46 374 152 2°81 365 I30
NN Counts
IgI2 1852-71 2°24 342 153 2°84 313 IIo
ON Freiherren
1892 1832-51 2:5 534 213 2-66 745 280
ON Freiherren
IgI2 1852-71 2°19 651 207 2°71 741 273
NN Freiherren
1893 1832-51 2°33 741 318 2°53 597 236
NN Freiherren
1913 1852-71 2°02 773 383 2°28 530 232
Totals 2°22 4,611 2,076 2°62 5,219 T,993
+0:0487 +0-0589
ON=Belonging to Old Nobility. .NN=Belonging to New Nobility. [See Table I]

 

determined to make a study of the entire

cedure I am, nevertheless, dissatisfied with
data offered by the Almanach de Gotha.

this method of securing data. The subject

is of such far-reaching importance that I
was anxious to obtain as much unexceptionable material as possible and I therefore

Table II shows an analysis of the two
last 20-year periods. This reveals that 2,076
offspring of less fertile stock had an average
HUMAN FERTILITY

B-22 children each, and 1,993 offspring of
we fertile stocks an average of 2°62.
Kling to the first and subtracting from
f second the margin of error, the values
kk out at 2°3461 and 2°4433 respectively.
ms, even according to the least favourable
prpretation of the figures, the number of
idren per head of the offspring of the
re fertile stocks is 0°0972 higher than
tm the less fertile.
kt is therefore mathematically established
t the origin of one parent from a more
tile or a less fertile stock determines
yuestionable differences in fertility. <A
siderable and definite degree of difference
fertility—in phenotypical fertility at
st—is therefore determined by heredity.
fhis correlation will naturally be more
ous when both parents spring from less
le (or more fertile) stock ; my material,
fed, shows clearly that the offspring of
a matings themselves produce distinctly
(or more) children. ‘The marriage
money—far more than would a marriage
mfluenced by financial considerations—
fluces the result that the poor person (i.e.
‘person from a family of numerous chilm) looks out for a rich mate, which is
pst synonymous with a mate from less
Ble stock. The result of this is that the
riage of two persons who are both from
& fertile families is extremely rare; and
8 therefore difficult to muster sufficient
stics to show with mathematical exactif this difference in fertility. I cannot
fessfully approach this part of my probuntil I have fully worked out the
ily very considerable) material profi by the Gotha Almanachs.
| Tables IV and V of my Monograph VI
onstrated that there existed a marked
ence, in the last four generations, in
relative fertility of Counts and Freibn of the old and those of the new
lity. In explanation of this I referred
Fables X, XI, and XII, which also
wed definite evidence that there was a
Be tendency, increasing with every
ation, for the nobility to marry beneath

   
    
    
   

 
 
   
 
   
 
   
  
   
   
  
   
  
   
 
    
 
 

Ethis present article I have endeavoured

199

to bring proof of this assertion. If my
assumption is correct that the differences in
fertility between the ON and the NN are
caused by this type of marriage, we shall
expect to find that the individual noblemen
who have married beneath them have fewer
children than those who have married their
social equals. In examining these relationships in greater detail I soon perceived that,
while a marked difference was to be detected
according as the wife came from the ON or
the NN, it was still more strongly marked
where the wife was a commoner. I was
therefore driven not only into dividing up
the husbands into ON and NN, but to subdividing the wives into ON, NN, and MC.
The sub-groups of Counts thus formed are
tabulated in Tables III and IV.

THE WEALTHY WIFE

Table III shows all the marriages of
Counts during the 80 years from 1832-1911
which are recorded in the Almanach. It is
immediately patent that very considerable
differences in fertility, ranging from 3°41 to
1°92, are manifested between the various
sub-groups, according as the wife springs
from the ON, NN, or MC. The divergence
is so pronounced that, in spite of the limited
material, the difference between the ON and
MC wife (with the exception of the period
1832-51) and between the NN wife on one
side and the ON and MC wife on the other
is mathematically established.

The Table shows that the fertility of the
three sub-groups of marriages with wives
of the ON, NN, and MC has altered little
in the three-score years of our investigation.
This fact stands in glaring contrast to the
results of Table VII in Monograph VI,
according to which the average fertility of
a Count was 2°6 in 1852 and 2°22 in 1912—
that 1s to say, has shown a definite decrease
during the period under examination. ‘The
explanation is not far to seek. A glance
at the percentage column on the right shows
that marriages with the fertile ON women
had fallen off by ro per cent. between 1852
and 1912, while marriages with the much
less fertile MC women had increased by 10
per cent. It is obvious that this increase of
200

MC marriages—the ultimate cause of which
was the more and more ruthless hunt for
the maximum dowry—had the inevitable
result of the lowering of the average fertility
of the whole group.

‘The percentage table is most instructive
in showing how strong was the uprush of
the socially ambitious commoners. The
New Nobility had, of course, itself emerged
not so very long before from the ranks of
the middle classes. The grant of a patent
of nobility and a coat of arms, naturally,
could not alter a man’s hereditary fertility
factor* (supposing such to exist). The first
section of this article has shown that there
do exist genotypical differences in the FF
which considerably influence phenotypical
fertility. If so, the men of the NN will be
just as surely carriers of a less fertile gene
complex as the MC women, who in Table
III have married direct into the social
stratum of the Counts.

THE SELECTION OF INFERTILITY

It is only in a negligible minority of cases
that a commoner is elevated to the peerage
for sheer merit, since the overwhelming
majority owe their elevation to the great
wealth that makes it possible for them suitably to support a title. And we know that
great wealth regularly accumulates in families with the fewest children. Thus the conditions of civilized life operate automatically
to select the wealthiest commoner families
who at the same time are those with the
weakest desire for offspring.t These families
pour upwards into the ranks of the nobility
in a mighty stream, the men by acquiring
a peerage and the women by marriage. And
since the elevation does not alter the RI of
either sex they both help to destroy the
fertility of the ON.

Table III shows that only a third, even
of the Counts, conclude an ON marriage.

*The ‘predisposition to fertility’ [Fruchtbarkeitsanlage] I have rendered by “‘ fertility factor ”’
—FF.—Translator.

+‘ Desire for offspring,’ ‘ reproductive impulse ’
[Wille zam Kinde] I have frequently denoted by RI.
Obviously FF and RI are frequently interchangeable
terms.—Translator.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

  
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
 
   
  
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
 
 

It is an amazingly small proportiog
we realize that the blood-dilution is st¥
still when we reflect that even befo:
two-thirds of the marriages of ON @
had been made with the less fertile ‘ mj
ing ’ daughters of the NN or MC. Alt&
the Counts of 1892-1911 had, accord
the German law, the right to call them
ON through their fathers, a large prop
of them inherited the less fertile MC]
from their maternal ancestors. The q
of this are unmistakable in the declid
fertility between 1892 and Ig11, noty
in the groups of the NN and MC moff
but also in the ON. 4

My contention, that the NN nobij
represent just as much a selection is
direction of a weaker RI as do the wa
commoners who marry into the nobilit¥
convincingly demonstrated by a sepf
scrutiny of the marriage relationships o
ON and NN Counts. This sub-divig
however, makes the sub-groups so sq
that the differences are not mathematid
established. But since the differences
consistently parallel (apart from the ex
tions indicated by an asterisk) with}
mathematically unexceptionable figure
Table III, they may safely be consid
fairly sound. From this point of view:
may be checked by the figures in brae
which indicate the actual number of
riages in each case.

In Table IV we see that the two groug
their marriages with wives of the ON,
and MC display differences in fertility
show the same principle at work as$
entire material does. This is not surprig
It is worth noting, however, that the nuq
of children per marriage of the NN Co
is consistently lower than the correspond
figure for the ON Counts. It is impo
to escape the conclusion that heredg
differences in fertility exist between the4
The most interesting point is that the §
bination of ON Counts with ON ¥
yields the highest and that of NN Ca
with MC wives the lowest number of @
dren per marriage. ‘The only plaug
explanation of this is that the ON
been selected for high fertility, and the

    
  
      
   
  
HUMAN. FERTILITY

201

q TABLE III

Average Number of Children per head
of Counts between the ages of forty

Percentage of Counts who contracted marriages with wives of

and sixty [from the Almanach de

Gotha] married to wives of

1-98 . * .
+0°132
I

Date of
Marriage NN
between
-51 2:68
+o°12
352-71 2°63
+0°II5
72-91 2:66
+0-104
Bg2-I9QII ... 2°45 I+Q2
eo +0-0997 | +0-1086
B 32-1911 ” 2°6 .
sl +0:055

 

 

y* These figures are of no weight. The number of marriages involved is too small, and further

   
 

ON=Old Nobility.

yd the wealthiest commoners for low
rtility.
Tables V and VI analyse the same relams for the Freiherren as III and IV did
r the Counts.
In Table V the totals for the two outside
lumns are mathematically established,
th the exception of those of 1852-71. The
tility figures for the NN wives for the
pole period, and the ON wives for 1892iri are likewise established.
‘The tables all show the same principle in
peration—decrease of fertility according to
Mether the marriage is contracted with
IN, NN, or MC wives. The combination
INx ON yields the highest number of chillen per marriage, and NNxMC the
avest.
sOn the other hand, two points should be
ted, firstly that the fertility of the Frei’ marriages with commoners is con
 
   
  
 
 
   
   
 
  
 

ney include some unusually high rates of children per family.
NN=New Nobility.

MC=Middle Classes (Commoners).

sistently less low than that of the equivalent
Count marriages ; and secondly that between
1872 and 1891 a definite decline is noticeable in the fertility of marriages with NN
and MC wives.

The first of these points is obviously the
statistical expression of the fact that those
Counts who decided to stoop to a middleclass marriage had the first choice of
wealthier and, therefore, less fertile brides,
while the Freiherren had only the second
choice, and the fertility of the wives they
secured was definitely higher. The fact
that the fertility of the Freiherren in the
individual sub-groups is more variable than
that of the Counts, is doubtless due to the
Freiherr feeling less class-conscious than
the Graf and less averse from marrying a
commoner.

A glance at the percentage column shows
that as early as the middle of last century
 

202 THE EUGENICS REVIEW
TABLE IV.—THE SAME COUNTS AS IN TABLE III DIVIDED INTO ON anp NN
Average of Children per Head 3
ON Counts married to wives of NN Counts married to wives of “4
Date of
marriage MC
between
1832-51 ... 3°06 2°63 3°64* |
[133] [259] [14]
1852-71 ... 2°81 17 3
[276] [60] ¥
1872-91 ... 1°93
[x13]
1892-1911 I°9
[130]

 

 

The figures in brackets give the actual number of marriages in question.
* These figures are of no weight. The number of marriages involved is too small, and be:
they include some unusually high rates of children per family.

the Freiherren sought more than a quarter
of their wives among commoners and less
than a quarter from the ranks of the ON.
By 1912 the marriages with commoners have
increased by 12 per cent., those with the
ON wives have decreased by 2 per cent.,
those with the NN wives by 9 per cent.
From the outset, therefore, the blood of the
Freiherren is much more diluted by that
of the rising MC than is the blood of the
Counts.

THE GENETIC FACTOR

Summarizing all these considerations, it
appears that fertility is determined by heredity. From Table II it is manifest that the
phenotypical consequences of the varying
fertility factors are very considerable ; and it
is indubitable that the marked variations in
fertility are referable to an inherited FF—
though I would expressly emphasize that I
by no means overlook the contributory influence of environmental circumstances. In
several passages in Monograph VI, I expressly pointed out that some of the results
in my statistics can only be explained by

external influences. But environmental in
fluences play a subordinate role to those a
heredity, now waxing, now waning, accor¢
ing to time and place.

The decisive factor in the steady declir
in the birth rate of the nobility and welldo during the last fifty years, and the gre
increase in the birth rate of certain class¢
and sometimes of entire populations remain
however, the hereditary factor. ’

THE EFFECT ON THE NATION

This raises the question whether tif
principle we have found valid for a nobilit
leading a more or less self-contained exis
ence, will also be found good for civilize
mankind as a whole. ‘The proof that
reproductive impulse in the German nobilit
is determined by hereditary genes m
obviously be equally valid for the rest ¢
mankind, and further discussion is unnece
sary. 3
The circumstances governing the destru
tive influence on fertility of the marriage fq
money throughout the rest of the people af
not so clear. If we fully understand ho

 
   
         
   
  
HUMAN FERTILITY 203

TABLE V
Average Number of Children per head Percentage of Freiherren who conof Freiherren between the ages of tracted marriages with wives of

   
 
 
  
     
   
    
  
 
   
   
 

forty and sixty married to wives of
ae a:

+0: 156 ©

3
+ 0°135

2°53
+0:°105

2°84
+ 0°0745

 

: TABLE VI.—THE SAME FREIHERREN AS TABLE V DIVIDED INTO ON AND NN

Average of Children per Head.
ON Freiherren married to wives of NN Freiherren married to wives of
———— >

 

 

 

iage ON NN MC ON MC
isa-71 ms 3°14 2°51 2°53 2°99 2°44
3 [251] [325] [186] [142] [255]
P: “OI ... 3°15 2°66 2°2 2:69 2°24.
Eo [327] [364] [358] [162] [374]
iya-1911 2-67 1+83 2-07 2°33 1-87
. [345] [440] [486] [226] [511]

 

S figures in brackets give the actual number of marriages in question.

differential decline of fertility has ratios in figures and to work out the govern= amongst the nobility, and grant ing principle with the maximum simplicity,
Wifferences in fertility—with marked I shall first deal only with weak and strong
ypical manifestation—are hereditary FF’s.

ad n, then we see that each social Let us arbitrarily assume that, in view
a inevitably consists of a chaotic of the actual fluctuations of human ferBre of carriers of weak, medium, and tility, a strong FF implies a wish for 10
ig fertility factors. ‘To express ‘these children, and a feeble FF a wish for only
204

two. The average fertility of a population
must naturally vary within wide limits
acording as the carriers of these different
factors mate together. Now, supposing that
there are 200 men and 200 women, one half
of each sex with a strong and the other
half with a feeble reproductive impulse (RI
or FF), then either—

1.—Strong mates with strong and feeble
with feeble, or

2.—One strong and one feeble mate together.

In the first case the strong groups yield
Ioo marriages with ten children, and the
feeble a hundred marriages with two children
—making a total of 1,200 children. In
the second, the 200 marriages of the highly
fertile yield only one or two children each,
because, though one parent desires many
children, that is insufficient for their procreation—the mate with the strong RI
would depend wholly on the other’s will,
because a job which requires the co-operation of two cannot be carried out if one
refuses.

This imaginary example shows that very
considerable differences of phenotypical
fertility can be produced merely by variant
combinations of the carriers of the FF’s.

Our knowledge of the FF in man is
limited to the knowledge that such exists.
Since we are dealing with a physiological
property, we may assume with a high
degree of probability that the FF depends
on several hereditary genes, and that its
different degrees are the products of their
varying combinations.

The various genes for any physiological
property are known to be distributed according to the binomial theorem ; and if we
reckon those combinations which lie beyond
the centre of the variation curve as strong,
we find that these strong RI’s will be present in only about 34 per cent. of the population. It would therefore be possible, if
all matings were of the second type (strong
and feeble RI), entirely to eliminate the
more fertile marriage. If this were the
case, or even if the number of more fertile
marriages decreased, the population would

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

gradually grow poorer in carriers of s

FF’s in proportion to the decrease in 1
number of more fertile marriages—for {
chief source of a strong FF will nat
be the more fertile marriage. It is ti
that even in less fertile marriages the t&
dency to greater fertility may be formed}
the coincidence of complementary geng
but it is improbable that such fortung
coincidences would be numerous. 73

We have, of course, no clue as to t
number of carriers of the strong and feel
FF’s in the various social strata at tl
beginning of last century. We are just
fied, however, in deducing from ‘Tables ]§
and VI that the diminution of the avers
fertility of Counts and Freiherren was i
mediately promoted by the fact that t
highly fertile scions of these stocks, :
their quest for fat dowries, did not light
often as of old on highly fertile wives. |
consequence of this the number of man
child marriages fell off, and this in its tt
was the cause of an increased reduction
the number of carriers of a strong
throughout the population.

Such marriages as take place within
pale of the ON itself denote no renuncia
of the marriage for money. With n
ligible exceptions the decisive factor in f
choice of a wife is her dowry. The yot
Count or Freiherr is, of-course, best sui
when he finds the wealth he requires w
a wife of his own rank; only if this
denied him, does he turn his thoughts!
the wealthy heiress of a lower soe
stratum. In civilized conditions, therefo
even within the limits of the same cag
there is a selection in favour of lower §
tility. If circumstance arose which cd
pelled young men to seek brides in of
their own caste, the women with the hi
fertility would, as of old, attain 4
matrimony. j

Instead of this, the young men are
offered the chance of finding a rich wife:
themselves lower in the social  sc¥
and a surplus to per cent. of the daught
of the more’ fertile families of the high
stratum (according to Tables II, VII, af
VIII of my Monograph VI) remain spi

 
 
 
   
  
   
   
 
   
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
 
 
  

fers. Inasmuch as the ‘ mounting’
omen represent a selection in favour of low
Prtility, this substitution of wives, so to
beak, involves an increase in the combinaons unfavourable to fertility. Referring
b Table V of the Monograph VI, we do not
ad, as we should be justified in expecting,
hat the decline in the average fertility is
Bflected in the corresponding shrinkage in
he number of children per marriage; it
hanifests itself, rather, in the decrease of
wrge families and in a simultaneous inkease of few-child famuilies—which are
histributed, however, in such a way that in
ch index-year the ON has more manyfhild and fewer childless marriages than the
. If my theory is correct, this is bound
lo be the case : for the ON represent a selecfon in favour of high fertility and the NN
8 selection in favour of a low FF.
; Tables III to VI demonstrate conclusively
hat the increasing shrinkage i in the number
if carriers of a high FF in the population
m question, such as was theoretically bound
© follow the altered marriage conditions,
pad in fact set in. This is shown by the
ecline in the numbers of children even in
DN x ON marriages in recent generations.
} In direct relation to the pace of this
endency to contract marriages for money
nm a lower stratum, is the speed of the
fhrinkage of the numbers of carriers of a
Bigh FF in the population; and the decline
m the average fertility of the individual
strata of the nobility will consequently
Hevelop at varying rates. For the various
strata have exploited in different degrees the
possibility of finding a rich wife by marryng beneath them. The Princes clung with
fie utmost tenacity to their “‘ equality of
mirth,’’ particularly the reigning princes and
’ he Standesherren. For, in these two higher
Btrata, the Princes’ own caste feeling was
re sinforced by the fact that if they married
Beneath them their children forfeited the
right of birth.’’ The consequence of this
Haccording to Table VI of Monograph VI)
was that for over 100 years, ending at 1912,
the Princes retained unimpaired their relalively high fertility.

: Phe Counts proved less resistant, and

  
 
   
   
   
 
  
  
 
 
   
   
  
  
  

HUMAN FERTILITY

205

between 1852 and 1912 their fertility sank
from 2°6 to 2°22; while the lower ranks of
the nobility show a lesser power of resistance
proportionate to their lower rank.

The net result of these varying marriage
relations has been the remarkable fact
(demonstrated in Table I of Monograph VI)
that the NN has the lowest average fertility
of all, and that the rate increases as the
social scale both rises above and falls below
their class. In the nobility, the highest
rank has the highest fertility, while among
the commoners it is found in the lowest
ranks !

These remarkable differences can easily
be reconciled if my theory proves to be
correct that the decline in the birth rate is
in the main a matter of heredity.

EFFECT ON THE MIDDLE CLASSES

The next question that presents itself is
whether the marriage for money is destructive to the fertility of the middle classes.
No wideawake observer can fail to see that
the reckless dowry-hunt prevails also among
the MC and is the determining factor in
most marriages. The difficulty is that the
facts are not easily reduced to statistics.
Official and _ semi-official records never
systematically take note of the wife’s social
origin, and a great drawback of all official
records (and still more of family records) is
the definite effort to draw a veil over a lowborn wife’s origin. Further, middle grade
or petty officials are described by highsounding titles from some accidental occupation such as ‘ Town Councillor’; small
peasants are designated ‘ land-owners,’
shop-keepers become ‘ directors,’ honest
craftsmen ‘ contractors,’ ‘ rentiers,’ etc.

But it is possible, nevertheless, to show in
another way that in the great body of the
MC whole sections, showing strongly differing FF’s, live side by side uninfluenced by
each other, according as they are or are not
slaves to the marriage for money.

Let us consider first the evangelical
ministers who are notorious for their
remarkably large families. I took the
trouble to investigate this recurrent assertion which seemed to be nowhere proved,
206

and in my second article I extracted from
all the family histories I could lay hands
on the number of children of ministers and
other professional men. My researches
showed not only that the popular belief was
well-founded, and that for centuries the
ministers’ average was one child per head
more than that of other professional men,
but, further, that the officer class had had
for centuries two children less per head
than the ministers.

SUBNORMAL FERTILITY IN A.D. 1700

My second article also established the fact
that as early as 1700 in Danzig, a city with
a relatively self-contained and well-to-do
population, exactly the same subnormal fertility prevailed as in our large towns to-day
—and this in the midst of a surrounding
peasant population which was undoubtedly
on the increase.

All these remarkable reductions in fertility set in in earlier centuries; at a time,
that is to say, when there was no talk at all
of a rationalization of the birth rate or any of
those external influences which are popularly supposed nowadays to account for the
fall in the birth rate. The Church was then
still at the height of its power, and none of
those influences which are reputed provocative of a falling birth rate were in existence.
I therefore conclude that none of these
external factors, which are quoted to-day as
the cause of the declining birth rate, are
really vital, but that, at the most, they are
mildly contributory ; the one vital factor is a
change in the hereditary gene-complex
[Erbmasse] consequent on the marriage for
money. For the marriage for money is no
new phenomenon.

The difference between then and now is
just that in earlier centuries the marriage
for money was only open to a very few
strata, whose numbers were relatively
negligible, but left the great bulk of the
people unaffected, for the simple reason that
they had no property. That is why the
declining birth rate was only noticed in
olden times in a few circles where a fetish

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

  
  
   
  
  
   
 
   
 
   
  
  
   
  
  

was made of the marriage for money why
has to-day become universal. 4

THE MONIED AND LANDED CLASSES

Long ago, the nobility, higher and lows
the military caste, and the merchant pring
of the towns married for money ; and 4
know for certain that all these groups wé
involved in a progressive process of sé
elimination—that is, were becoming inf¢
tile. For the military and the mercha
princes this still holds, and their fertility
therefore even lower than before. Seved
changes, however, have affected the nobilit
Since the emancipation of the peasang
landed property has increased enormougj
in value. Hence the older nobility, in wha
hands the bulk of landed property la
experienced an immense increase in wealt]
Numerous many-child families of the O}
were thus preserved from social decay, at
their highly fertile offspring were able
participate in the propagation of their cast
so that the ON was enriched by individua
with a very high FF. ‘Thus the ON,
comparison with the NN, represents a selec
tion in favour of high fertility, and he
therefore proved more resistant to th
decline of the birth rate.

The same circumstances have even mof
affected the Counts, who possessed ev4
larger landed properties, and most of all ti
Princes. ‘The Princes further benefited }
the institution of the ‘‘ right of birth ”’ aq
of ‘‘ apanage ’’—i.e. the absolute guarant§
of an income suitable to the individual
rank and birth regardless of work done ¢

of the number of children. ‘This almoj
completely neutralized the social dq
advantage of the large family which had g
seriously threatened the Princes’ fertility
In response to these measures we note 4
prompt recovery of the Princes’ fertility ant
its stabilization at the relatively high fig
of 2°7, in spite of the accumulation 4
immense wealth in the hands of the MC i
recent centuries which tempted even the ‘
Princes to marry beneath them—though no
to the same extent as the lesser nobility. a

In the same way great changes have taken:
place of late in the marriage conditions of

  
   
  
   
   
 
  
   
   
  
  
  
HUMAN FERTILITY

bvangelical ministers, but in a reverse direc; fion. Theological students used to have
mumerable free places, free food, bursa: es, scholarships, and what-not secured to
them at all ancient schools and universities.
‘hese safeguarded the sons of large families
mongst the clergy from a fall in the social

ale, and they became ministers like their
prefathers. In the early days there were
fo university men in the countryside except
he clergy. Their social intercourse was, on
he one hand, with the landed nobility, who
h marriage questions did not recognize the
Rinister as an equal, and, on the other, with
he peasant serfs, whom they, in their turn,
id not accept as equals. ‘The consequence
pas that they were mainly driven to interparriage. How straitened their circumHances were is common knowledge, but the
ances of marriage for the daughters of a
nister’s large family were more favourable
an they are to-day. Thus the ministers of
srly days were protected from social decline
nd their daughters from spinsterhood, far
fore than were the other professional
asses. Hence, the mating of two indivinals, each with a high FF, occurred more
fen among them.

   
  
   
   
 
  
   
  
  
  
   
   
   
 
   
   
  
   

SE CLERGY TO-DAY

Harge families nowadays are economically
hed by high educational expenses, while
hs are driven into secular posts in banks,
Bt-offices, etc. From material at my disgal__not a very large quantity—I could
w that the ministers of to-day most often
ting from the lower MC. ‘Their rise to
E position of minister would only be
sible in families which had been able to
ii the money for their education by limitan of the number of their children. They
Imselves represent, therefore, a selection
gfavour of low fertility, and, in order to
w off the debts of their student days, they
} compelled to seek wives with means.
peir average FF is therefore low. It is
nificant that the few among them who
7 , still highly fertile are invariably
Scendants of old minister-families.

207

COLONISTS’ ‘NEED FOR CHILDREN’

Colonial populations and their fertility
statistics also make an interesting study.
The enormous fertility of the Boers, the
French-Canadians, and the Mennonites is
well known. It is commonly explained that
the colonists needed children as workers—
which at first sight seems illuminating. But
this explanation does not bear scrutiny.
The Spanish and Portuguese in South
America and the Australians in Australia
are similar colonizing populations, though
not customarily styled so, and they have
never displayed any remarkable fertility,
although they would equally have benefited
by their children’s labour. We may leave
these groups out of our reckoning because
they did not start as small-scale cultivators,
but from the first as large landowners with
an upper-class outlook, particularly in that
most important point—marriage for money.

But in the United States and Canada all
these colonizing populations of small-scale
cultivators continue to exist in every period,
completely unchanged in externals in spite
of changing times, side by side with other
types of population.

The so-called ‘‘ spaciousness of colonial
life’ works with extraordinary selective
force. Cheek by jowl with the highly
fertile French-Canadians, old-American,
and German-Russian Mennonites, live the
new American settlers of German and
English stock with their low fertility.

It is irrational to suppose that circumstances which have hypothetically provoked
an almost extravagantly high fertility
amongst the former group should leave the
latter entirely unaffected.

Limitations of space compel me to leave
these unusually interesting and instructive
questions aside, and to refer the reader to
Monograph VI; but I should like just to say
this about the results of my investigations
there recorded—that in genuine colonizing
conditions, where the cultivator must himself perform all the labour needed for his
own support, he is compelled to marry.
This rules out the marriage for money, or
at any rate, it leaves none of the daughters
even of the largest families unmarried. The
208

complete elimination of one factor which is
persistently potent in reducing fertility in
civilized countries (viz. the spinsterhood of
daughters of large families) has the effect
of multiplying so mightily the highly fertile
families that the fertility actually becomes
excessive. When, however, it is no longer
a question of annexing land, but of installing agricultural machinery which demands
initial capital, the offspring of large families
are unable to hold their own and are driven
into the towns.

Reports are unanimous that from the
moment of the introduction of economic
capital the average fertility of Boers,
French-Canadians, and Mennonites immediately showed a sharp decline. This evolution (Umziichtung) towards low fertility
requires two generations for its accomplishment and thus, for a certain period, as at
the present moment in Canada, highly fertile early colonists exist side by side with
new settlers who have already, in their
original homes, been bred to a lower level
of fertility.

We can see, therefore, on all sides the way
in which the marriage for money pursues
its baleful work of annihilation. It only
now remains to explain the varying fertility
statistics of the MC.

THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION

In the year 1800, four-fifths of the population were peasant serfs, and only one-fifth
lived in the towns. ‘The citizens of the
towns consisted for the most part of small
artisans who differed little in culture and
education from the peasant serfs. The
ancestors of our present MC were therefore
preponderantly people of extremely humble
birth. After the emancipation of the
peasants, outstanding individuals on all
sides acted as pace-makers for the more
gifted individuals of the common people.
In this struggle for precedence all weapons
which proved useful were employed, and not
intelligence, industry, and thrift alone. A
most potent aid to advancement was the
restriction of the family, an aid which was
bound to become increasingly valuable with

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the growing need for initial capital ff
rising to higher levels.

In the early generations when the isolate
individuals of the higher and lower s
stood nearer the average of the 1807 pop
tion, highly fertile marriages must ofté
have occurred even in the higher stratg
though not so frequently as in the loweg
The rising costs of education, howeveg
brought about the economic collapse of
larger families and an average intelligence
type is clearly seen emerging, closely allie
to an average fertility-type, which shows
higher strata as a selection from the lowe

a selection for low fertility.

THE CAUSE OF CLASS DIFFERENCES

The consequence of such conditions hg
inevitably been that the various strata of tl
MC display a lower degree of fertility
higher they stand in the social scale~
phenomenon which is confirmed by
almost unanimous statistics from the mo
varied places. The peak of this develoj
ment of the MC is reached in the new nobl¢
and Freiherren of the 1913 creation.
studying the nobility we had already noti
that the issues of the Gotha Almanach §
these two years showed the lowest fertily
yet attained.

Conversely, of course, if we again taj
as our starting-point the year 1807 and cd
sider its average population as the standag
the strata below this standard have a hig
fertility than the average. All the descé
dants of large families who were econonq
ally unable to hold their own in the higf
strata, were bound in the course of gene
tions to sink to the lower or lowest levé
according to their intelligence. Hes
the strata of the skilled and unskilled wos
ing classes contain a greater percentage!
individuals with a high FF than does ¢
mean for the year 1807. 4

‘The result was that in these lowest str@
a far larger number of highly fertile m
riages occurred than before 1807. Furth
since in consequence of all these fertili
conditions the strata below the MC ma
are numerically far in excess of those aboq
two most important and  remarkal

 
  
   
 
    
 
     
  
  
   
   
 
  
   
  
  
  

phenomena inevitably occur—the progresRive intellectual proletarianization, and an
absolutely amazing rise in the total feritility of our people as compared with 1807
-—a rise which it is quite impossible to explain
by external influences. The former, the
ual proletarianization of the people is so
generally recognized that no elaboration of
he point is necessary, and it is possible to
Fprove the latter in comparison with the fertility of earlier centuries without recourse to
Fexact statistics. The population of Germany
‘approximately doubled itself in the nineHteenth century. If the natural increase had
been at the same pace in earlier centuries
the population of Germany, as a simple
alculation will show, would have been only
some 800,000 in 1300—which is certainly
wrong. We must therefore conclude that
the fertility of the German people in the
mineteenth century must have been very
much higher than ever before.*

» As the increase in population before 1800
ican only have been slight, the average fertility of the population before 1800 will have
n only some 3°3. Our earlier calculations
showed that the strata above the social mean
imust have been suffering from reduced ferility, their numbers will therefore be below
-3, and the numbers for those below that
ean must, correspondingly, have been
above 3°3.

k This was how the case stood in 1912, the
year which I made the starting-point for
my research in Monograph VI. The evolutionary process (Umziichtung) has continued
uninterrupted ever since ; and even the workling man has learnt to appreciate the value of
ia modest dowry. Just as in the earlier
generations the women who were carriers of
a high FF tended to remain spinsters or to
sink a degree or two in the social scale, their
last representatives are now for the most
part employed as spinster sewing-women,
‘waitresses, nurses, etc.

    
  
 
    
  
  
  

i
- ®It is possidle, however, that the birth rate was
equally high in the centuries preceding 1800, but
that a very hig’: death rate resulted in a low rate of
natural increase —ED.

HUMAN FERTILITY

209

THE EFFECT OF THE WAR

The War brought about a violent upheaval; first a steep upward curve of the
numbers of children (in consequence of
marriages which had not taken place during
the War and were hastily concluded after it)
and then a sudden drop. By the end of the
War the evolution was complete. If the
War had not interfered, a gradual modification of public opinion in favour of the twochild family would in any case have set in.
The biological conclusion of the evolutionary process, happening to fall in the
severe post-War distress, made it easy for
extremists to convert the mass of waverers
to the two-child system. In this instance
biological causes were reinforced by external
conditions. The ultimate result has been
the almost complete levelling of the average
fertility rates between the various strata of
the upper and lower MC, and since the
abrogation of the ‘ equality of birth’ tradition the Princes have shown unmistakable
signs of approximating to the MC average.

Since this average is not large enough to
maintain the numbers of the nation, we are
now entering on the last phase of cultural
decay. Apart from the decline in intelligence, the final dissolution has begun, the
actual Passing of the Civilized Races.

This fate might yet be averted. But can
the various Governments be induced to
envisage facts so clearly as to take the necessary measures while there is yet time? If
they did, would they be able to induce their
people to use their powers with firm resolve?

Finis Germanorum !

[BIBLIOGRAPHY]

Articles by the same author, referred to
in the text:

1. Geschichtlicher Rtickblick auf das Vergehen
der alten Kulturen. [Historical Survey of the
Decay cf Ancient Civilizations.] Wdchter, XII,
Io and It. .

2. Uber die Fruchtbarkeit der héheren Stande
in den letzten vier Jahrhunderten. [The Fertility
of the Upper Classes in the last Four Centuries. ]
Archiv fir Sippenforschung, VIII, 4.

3. Erklarung des Geburtenriickganges durch
210

erbliche Einfliisse. ~The Decline of the Birth
Rate explained by Heredity.] Monograph VI of
the Eugenics Research Association, New York,
1931.
4. Uber die Ursachen des Geburtenriickganges
beim deutschen Adel. [The Decline in the Birth
Rate of the German Nobility and its Causes. ]
Archiv fir Sociale Hygiene und Demographie,
VI, 5. 1931.

5. Die Fruchtbarkeit der Danziger Bevdélkerung im 18ten Jahrhundert. [The Fertility of the
Population of Danzig in the 18th Century.]

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

 
    
       
  
 

Mitteilungen des West-preussischen Geschl
vereins, XXXI, 1. —

6. Die Wandlungen der Fruchtbarkeit 3
deutschen Adels im i19ten Jahrhundert. ff
Fluctuations in the Fertility of the Gerg
Nobility in the 19th Century.] Archiv fir Rasq
hygiene, XXV, 2, 1932. e

7. Zahlenmdssiger Nachweis des Einflusses.
Erbmasse auf die Kinderzahlen des Hochadg
[Statistical Proof of the Influence of Heredity%
the Number of Children of the Higher Nobi
Eugenik, 1932.

DIFFERENTIAL CLASS FERTILITY

(See footnote on p. 188. D. Caradog Jones’s article.)

To prevent any possible misunderstanding of the
fertility figures in this first paper it is perhaps well
to explain here that we were not seeking to find
out how many children families containing an
ament could produce if they tried, nor how many
they would produce by the time their families were
completed, but simply how many children on the
average they had produced per family at the time
of investigation. The result came out large in com
arison with the average number of children per
amily in a random sample of the working-class
population, where also the families were not necessarily completed. It might not have appeared so
large had we adopted some other standard for comparison. We took the most general standard available, but it may be argued that it would have been
more appropriate to take a random sample of families containing at least one child of school age,
since (1) a family cannot have a feeble-minded
child if it has no child at all, and (2) feeblemindedness may not be detected till a child reaches
school-age. But our object was to compare the
mean accomplished fertility of families containing
an ament with the mean accomplished fertility of
families in general, and the latter group contains,
among others, families which, by their own wish
or otherwise, produce no children and families
whose children die before they reach school age.
Both these classes ought to be adequately represented in their failure to contribute to the general
population, but they would be ignored if we took
as our norm families containing at least one school

child. Moreover, if the standard adopted weg
limited at one end, it ought for consistency to ¥
limited at the other end also. One would therefor
be driven to take a random sample of families cot
taining at least one child between the ages of §
and 22, since all the ament families contained
least one ament between these ages. To rule ow
families with no child over 5 would tend to raisf
the accomplished fertility in comparison with thq
of families in general (the standard actual
adopted), but to rule out families with no chil
under 22 would tend in just the opposite directiosy
and these two tendencies would go some way t
cancel each other out.

There is another important point to which attem
tion should be drawn. Quite apart from any otheg
forces at work in that direction, there is
doubtedly a higher probability of an ament beingj
found in a large family than in a small family
just as there is a higher probability of finding @
genius in a large family—simply because there are
more children available to be genius or amentz
Some readers may be interested to inquire what thej
influence of this factor is upon the figures. I haveJ
discussed the question with two ‘listinguished’
statisticians and they estimate that it would raise¥
the average size of family by one chiid to a child
and-a-half. Consequently, an allowence of about)
that amount might be made in readinz the relevant;
tables if it be desired to determine “he effect npad}
them of other factors independently of this one. -;

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIV, No. 3. :

is

  
   
     
  
