PRENUPTIAL MEDICAL EXAMINATION IN
TURKEY

By DR. NACI SOMERSAN
(Istanbul, Turkey)

is now compulsory in Turkey. This

measure, so important for the health
of society and the future of the race, was
adopted in 1925 and became generally
acceptable in a short time. The period when
it was regarded as an irksome obligation is
‘past. To-day this examination forms part
iof the routine formalities which normally
lprecede any marriage. Its details are
lestablished by special regulations, and it is
as readily submitted to in the villages as in
he cities.
+ In this paper will be discussed some of the
more important aspects of this examination,
marticularly the diseases constituting an
pbstacle to marriage, together with the
sstrictions it imposes on marriage in certain
Bases and the methods of dealing with
Konditions that constitute a temporary bar

A Extoe compa medical examination

$0 arriage.
y Article 122 of the Law on Public Hygiene
s worded as follows :} ‘“ Every man or woman

who intends to marry must undergo a
inedical examination. The mode and details
if this examination are fixed by the Board of
fealth and Social Assistance.”’

bs tacles to Marriage

«A candidate for marriage who has underine this examination and found to be free
fom the diseases proscribed by the law
bceives a health certificate which must be
Aened by the Government physician and
Mtached to the marriage record by the
wistrar of marriages. In cases in which
bere are health reasons which constitute an
bistacle to marriage, this certificate is
Anporarily or permanently withheld. To
ote Article 123:

t‘ No marriage is permitted to those infected
ith syphilis, gonorrhea, soft chancre, leprosy

  
   
   
  
   
 
  
   
  

201

or mental diseases, unless they present a
medical certificate stating that all danger
of infection is over and that the diseased
person has made a complete recovery
following a proper course of treatment.”’

Besides the diseases mentioned in this
Article, a special paragraph is devoted to
tuberculosis ; this will be discussed later.

Venereal diseases other than syphilis may
be considered very shortly. They constitute
an obstacle to marriage so long as they are
not treated. A health certificate can be
granted only when their effects, whatever
they may be, have totally disappeared.
Leprosy and certain mental diseases may be
a complete obstacle to marriage, while other
mental affections may necessitate a temporary refusal of the medical certificate. In
doubtful cases, examinations by specialists
are recommended.

Venereal diseases

About the registration mechanism in
Government Hygiene Bureaus of persons
affected with syphilis, there are two facts
which must be noted. First, treatment of
syphilis as well as of other venereal diseases
is compulsory* and free of charge in Government health institutions. Secondly, syphilis
is subject to a system of confidential notifications whereby the books in which the names
of those affected are recorded and can be
kept up to date whether they are treated in

* Article 103 of the Law of Public Hygiene: ‘* Any
person affected with syphilis, gonorrhea, or soft chancre,
whatever the part of the body affected or the form of
the affection, must be treated by a physician qualified
to practise in Turkey. In the case of infected children,
the parents, tutors, or guardians (including institutions)
are responsible for _having them treated.”

Article 105: ‘‘ Persons affected with syphilis,
gonorrhoea or soft chancre shall be treated free of
charge in all public health institutions, as well as by
Government or municipal doctors.”
262

Government institutions or by private practitioners.* Before ratifying a prenuptial
medical certificate, the Government physician
must make certain that the name of the
applicant is not in his records. If it 1s, he
must withhold his ratification.

For how long? Legally when can a
syphilitic or a former syphilitic be allowed
to marry ? When a former syphilitic who has
been examined several times and whose
Wassermann reaction has been negative for
a long time comes for a prenuptial medical
examination, some of his blood is taken for
a new serological examination, and if this
examination is also negative, and if he does
not show any clinical signs of infection, the
medical certificate allowing him to marry
may be granted. But if, in spite of treatment,
the Wassermann reaction remains positive
the test must be applied once more when the
person desires to marry: if the reaction is
still positive, a course of treatment (by means
of arsenobensol and mercury) 1s prescribed.
When it is finished marriage is allowed if
there are no clinical signs.

In doubtful cases, a marriage licence is
granted only when repeated clinical and
serological examinations (with minimum
intervals of fifteen days) are negative. If
they are not, the persons concerned have to

* Article 104 of the Law of Public Hygiene: ‘“‘ At the
end of each month all practising doctors must send to
the local Government Hygiene Bureau, which transmits
it to the Board of Health, a written list of the syphilitic
patients whom they have seen. The list must show, with
respect to each patient, the age, the period of the
disease, and the courses of treatment received. These
statements are absolutely confidential, and official
employees who divulge them will be considered to have
abused their functions and be subject to the penalties
laid down for those who have divulged secret documents of the State.”’

Besides the persons whose names have been confidentially communicated, or who bear manifest marks of
syphilis, the following are also recorded : (a) individuals
recognized during their military medical examination
as having syphilis, (6) parents of children bearing the
marks of congenital syphilis, as well as all the children
of a family whose first-born was syphilitic, (c) persons
whose antecedents suggest syphilis and whose genitals
bear a doubtful scar. Except for those suffering from
congenital syphilis and their parents, no decision is
taken concerning all these people before the BordetWassermann reaction or a substitute for it has been
made. The interested party is considered free of
syphilis only when two clinical and serological examinations carried out with an interval of a fortnight are
negative.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

 
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
       
   
    
 
   
   
   

go through the ordinary treatment. Shog
the infection date further back than f@
years, the patient is ordered the treatment
tertiary syphilis ; if not that, of secondag
syphilis. After that he is permitted to ma
The case of congenital syphilitics aski
for a marriage health report does not ¢ i
frequently. Still, if anyone presenting iy
manifest signs of congenital syphilis (Hutc¥
inson’s teeth, ocular and auricular lesiong
tibial malformations, etc.) asks for a marmiay
certificate, he is first made to go chron
course of treatment suitable for tertiar
syphilis, whatever the result of the Bordef
Wassermann reaction may be. After
the certificate can be granted to him. 4
In short, besides obligatory and exce tional circumstances, the medical certificaf®
permitting marriage can be granted to i
person previously infected with syphilis only
when the Wassermann reaction or a flocula¥
tion or precipitate reaction that replaces R¥
is negative. In cases where it wovwld t 3
impossible to make the serological examina}
tion on the spot, or to send the blood
because of distance, the marriage health’
certificate will be granted if the doctor is*
convinced that the person concerned has 4
undergone a regular course of treatment and :
has not presented any clinical sign of syphilis 3 :

y

?

for four years. With incompletely treated
patients this must be a five-year period, and.
before obtaining the health report they must |
undergo a fresh course of treatment.

Prescribed treatment for syphilis

As stated above, the treatment of syphilis is free in all the Government public health institutions of Turkey. The methods of prescribing this treatment, the drugs to be used,
and their dosage and distribution are all fixed
by a special regulation. Needless to say ample
margin is left to the doctor in the supervision
of the treatment. Its general outline is given
below :

For adults in whom the diagnosis of
syphilis is confirmed, treatment covers a
period of three years, and can be carried on
by a private practitioner if the patient
wishes. It comprises three courses of treat-.
ment with neosalvarsan and mercury during
: Lo wee hte N06 la ee ean
Oo atl AGRA sitet AR ce
an get * eT Ee i eee ,
ee RN :

 

the first year, two such courses during the
second year, and one course with mercu
alone during the third year.* At the end of
the period of rest that follows each treatment,
and. before beginning a new one, blood is
taken for a serological examination, and on
the result depends the length of the treatment. |.

For patients with signs of tertiary syphilis
treatment lasts two years and comprises four
mixed courses, each of three months with a
total of 2°85 grams of neosalvarsan and 1:20
grams of mercury, as well as a daily dose of 2
to 4 grams of potassium iodide. Congenital

syphilitics who have never been treated or |

who have been incompletely treated must
also undergo this two-year course of treatment.

" Patients who in spite of treatment show
signs of tertiary syphilis have to undergo a
fresh course, and if at the end of this the
symptoms have not disappeared a second

 

* For men the total dose of arsenical compound for
one course of treatment is 4-05 grams; and-of mercury
it is 1°20 grams. For women the total doses are
3°15 grams and I gram respectively.

Publishers: DAVID NUTT, London - G. E. STRCHEKS & Co., New York 
KADEMISCHE VERLAGSGESELLSCHAFT m. b. H. Leipzie’A F. ROUGE & CIE, Lausanne - F. MACHADO

“SCIENTIA *

: Editors : F. BOFFAZZI
18 THE ONLY REVIEW the contributors to which are really international. Gen

18 THE ONLY REVIEW that has a really world-wide circulation.

3 THE ONLY REVIEW of synthesis and unification of science that d
of knowledge : scientific philosophy, history of science

most fundamental physical and chemical uestions, and
Scientia thus studies all the main problems interes
realization of an international organization of the p
18 THE ONLY REVIEW that among its contributors

articular]

-NUPTIAL MEDICAL EXAMINATION IN. TURKEY

RUIZ HERMANOS, Madrid
C.ia, Porto - THE MARUZEN COMPANY, T
iN REVIEW

on relativity, on the physics of the atom and
the intellectual circles of the” rid. a

: whole world, and represents at the same time the first successful
osophical and scientific movement. | ' |

263

course is prescribed. . Persons. who give a
history of syphilis incompletely treated at a

previous date must follow another year of

treatment. |

Tuberculosis

Tuberculosis is the subject of a special
article of law. It does not constitute a
definite obstacle to marriage. The relevant
Article of the law, No. 124, reads as follows :

" The marriage of persons infected with
advanced tuberculosis should be delayed for
six months. If at the end of this period no
improvement is observed, another delay of
equal length is prescribed. At the end of this
period the doctors are bound to inform the
contracting parties of the danger of the
illness and the disadvantages of marriage.”’

Penal clauses

Mention must also be made of the fact that
the Law of Public Hygiene as well as the
Penal Code prescribe penalties for all
infraction of the rules concerning prenuptial
examinations and the treatment of venereal

‘diseases.

NICOLA ZANICHELLI, Bologna - FELIX ALCAN, P

aris
- F. KILIAN’S NACHFOLGER, Budapest
okyo.
INTERNATIONAL SYNTHESIS
Published every month (each sumber containing 100 to 120 pages)
Late Editor: SE RIGNANO

-G@. B - PF. ENRIQUES
eral Secretary: Paolo Bonetti 8

eals in its articles with the newest and most fundamental problems of all branches
des yet yeh y of s e, scientific ; teaching and advancement, mathematics, astronom

biological sciences O psychology, sociolo aw, economics QO
real end proper inquiries, sek as those on the contibution given by the

ay, geology, physics, chemis
of religions, anthropology, linguistics : cles sometimes constituting
erent nations to the advancement of science > on determinism ; on the

of radiations; on vitalism.

See

can boast of the most illustrious men of science in the whole world.

‘in the of their authors, and every number has & supplement containing the French translation of all the articles

not French. The review ia thus complotaly aoteasias Co Gane oe aa, plement (Write for a free copy to the General Secretary of
sending sizpence in one stamp of your country, merely to cover packing postage.) |

and

SUBSCRIPTION: 45 Shillings

. OB For information apply to “ SCIENTIA,” Via A,

? Toni, 18°- Milans (italy)
Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIX, No. 4,
