REVIEWS OF BOOKS

FERTILITY

Loraine, John A. and Bell, E. Trevor. Fertility and Contraception in the Human Female.
Edinburgh and London, 1968. Livingstone. Pp. viii + 384. Price 70s.

THERE ARE MANY BOOKS on infertility and on contraception, but none like this. The others
have mostly been written by clinicians without extensive backgrounds of scientific research,
and though they may deal, with varying degrees of adequacy, with the art, few attempt any
extensive treatment of the science of the subject. This book takes precisely the opposite
standpoint, the authors justifying their efforts by the rapid progress of research in the last
decade which has enormously advanced our knowledge of the endocrinology of the menstrual
cycle and some at least of its abnormalities, and has led to the widespread use of highly
effective forms of hormonal contraception.

Anatomical, biological and biochemical aspects of the ovary constitute the first
chapter, followed by morphological and biochemical aspects of ovulation. Next comes a
chapter on the technology of hormone assay, a review of methods for the quantitative
determination of oestrogens, progesterone, pregnanediol pregnanetriol, testosterone and
pituitary gonadotrophins in body fluids. The importance of this chapter depends upon its
providing the basis of most of the scientific advances described later. Many of these are
dealt with in the next three chapters which cover hormone levels and effects during the
normal menstrual cycle and in abnormal gynaecological conditions. In the following two
chapters the subject is induction of ovulation in women with failure of that function; by
Clomiphene in the first and by gonadotrophic hormones in the second. The last three
chapters are concerned with contraception—oral, by intrauterine devices, and in relation to
the world problem of over-population. Each chapter begins with an introduction, setting
out the objectives, and concludes with a summary and an extensive and up-to-date bibliography. This is a most pleasing arrangement, especially as there are separate author and
subject indices.

This is a scholarly work, objective, sound and of good judgment. It is not a textbook
of the subject for clinicians; it does not, for instance, deal with the routine investigation of
the infertile couple, with post-coital tests, tubal patency tests, surgical treatment and so
forth. Nevertheless, it provides the scientific background, and sources of reference to it,
that clinicians mostly lack, but can no longer afford to ignore.

G. I. M. SWYER

MIGRATION

Alvarez, J. H. Return Migration to Puerto Rico. Berkeley, 1967. Institute of International
Studies, University of California. Pp. xiv + 153. Price $2.00.

MANY STUDIES of migration and migrants have dealt with the great primary movements
of recent times. With some such movements at least, there has been an element of reversal—
a proportion of the emigrants have returned home again. This partial offset has often been
disregarded as being of a relatively minor character, but recently a particular interest has
begun to be shown in the nature of the reaction and the people who participate in it. Which
types of person return—is it the less successful, or those of a particular age or sex, or those
with particular family ties? How long do they spend away from home? Do they return to
their former place of residence, or do they find a new location in their country of origin?
How does any such change of location tie in with the pattern of internal migration in that
country ?

185
