H. YUAN TIEN

Ph.D., University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee

Birth Control in Mainland China:
Ideology and Politics’

The Innocuous Beginning

VENTS IN THE birth control campaign
fF: China can be conveniently divided into

four phases. A speech by Shao Li-tzu on
September 18th, 1954, at the First National
People’s Congress, has been generally, and
erroneously, taken to be the beginning of the
first phase of the birth control campaign. Shao
was a deputy to the Congress and also had held
high positions in the previous regime.

The inception of the campaign to promote
birth control was much more innocuous than
this widely publicized speech of 1954. In an
editorial in the People’s Daily more than two
years later, in March 1957, it was disclosed that
the State Council (the highest administrative
organ in China) had in August 1953, quietly
instructed the Ministry of Health to help the
masses to control reproduction and also had
approved the Ministry’s revised regulations
governing contraception and induced abortion.}
The original regulations, therefore, must have
already existed for some time, and the actual
work to revise them must also have begun before
that date. The other significant point here is this:
the introduction of birth control programmes
was not, as has also been generally assumed,
simply a reaction to the consequences, real and
imagined, of the fact that the 1953 population
of Mainland China was nearly 600 million;
the action by the State Council in 1953 preceded
the 1954 announcement of the census results by
some ten months.

To be sure, the census “confirmation” of the
size of the large and growing population un
*The Milbank Memorial Fund Quarterly, 1963, 41,
269-90. This shortened version is reprinted by permission
of the author and of the Editorial Board. The study was
supported by a grant from the Social Science Research

ouncil.

doubtedly furnished a great deal of support to
the person or persons who apparently had
already made some small headway in introducing a de facto change in the official view
regarding fertility control. Who were they?
Available information suggests that Shao Li-tzu
was one of them, or indeed could have been
alone in this endeavour. He was then a member
of the State Council, serving apparently in a
non-Communist capacity. But there were other
non-Party members on the Council at that time,
six of whom were later purged when the so-called
rightists were accused of using the birth control
issue to advance their own political ambitions.?
While Shao Li-tzu certainly played an important role in the birth control campaign, the
timing of his open advocacy of its necessity in
September 1954, seems to have been accidental
as the National People’s Congress then met for
the first time and provided an opportunity which
did not previously exist. The significance of his
speech lies in the fact that it anticipated much
of what was said subsequently in the birth
control campaign. Shao introduced the subject
in language which, in harmony with official
views, discredited Malthus and argued for birth
control in terms of the welfare of mothers and
children during the transition to socialism.®

The Slow Acquiescence

Shao’s speech therefore probably should be
regarded as the beginning of the second phase of
the birth control campaign. . .. Its
seed was, from the point of view of the Party, of
an “‘alien’’ variety. And its germination was very
slow in the then ideologically unfavourable soil;
the article in People’s Daily (November Ist,
1954) which discussed the result of the 1953
Census, played up the theme “Six Hundred
Million People—A Great Strength for Socialist

213

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, January 1964, 55, 4.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Construction.”” Note also the long interval of
over two years between the first steps taken in
August 1953 and the appearance in October
1955, in the Party’s chief journal for ideological
indoctrination, of the first major article defining
and accepting the need for birth control.

In all probability, the leadership of the Party
was not then prepared for an all-out acceptance
of birth control, even if it did tacitly allow the
adoption of the 1953 measure by the State
Council. At best, it was probably a marriage of
convenience rather than true love. Nonetheless,
some steps were taken to cultivate the ground
for possible further developments:

Following the symposium on the problem of
birth control called by Comrade Liu Shao-chi on
December 27th, 1954, the Second Bureau of the
State Council designated the responsible officials
of the government departments concerned to
form study groups on the question of contraception, [and] put forth a number of methods to
promote birth control.?

The Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party, which, in fact, is the highest
policy-maker in China, followed with instructions in March 1955:

Under the present historical circumstances and in
the interest of the nation, family, and the new
generation, our Party seconds appropriately
planned births.*

But the climate remained unfavourable as far
as any concrete measures to implement the
policy were concerned. ... In February 1956,
Chen Po-ta, a highly-placed theoretician of the
Party, proclaimed, ““There is no sign of overpopulation in China, . [and] China can
provide room for at least another 600 million
people.’’® It was also reiterated that “‘under
the leadership of the Communist Party, as long
as there are people, any miracle known to men
can be accomplished.’’’

This unfavourable climate was later recalled
by Ma Yin-chu (who was to become the most
vocal advocate of birth control in 1957-59):

In 1955 . . . I drafted a speech concerning the

population question [New Population Theory],
... and planned to deliver it at the 1955 session of

* This is based on the author’s examination and
classification of over 500 news items on birth control
which appeared in Chinese newspapers in the course of
the birth control campaign.

214

the National People’s Congress. Before doing so,
I submitted it to the Chekiang subcommittee for
discussion. At the meeting of the subcommittee,
all but a minority of the members either refrained
from expressing any opinions, or disagreed with
my views. There were people who asserted that
my statements were the same as Malthus’. There
were also people who maintained that, though
my phraseology differed from that of Malthus,
the essence of my thought was of the same persuasion. Although their opinions were not
acceptable to me, I felt that they were given in
goodwill. On my own initiative, I therefore withdrew the draft of the speech and waited quietly for
the time to ripen enough for its presentation to
the whole Congress.®

It was not until March 3lst, 1957, that Ma
made the contents of the speech known to the
public.®

Another salient indication of the unfavourable
climate lies in the more or less completely silent
treatment accorded to birth control in the pages
of the People’s Daily. From August 1953, when
the State Council first took action, to the end of
1956, only a handful of items on the subject
were given space, none of which was of any
consequence. Apart from a few short articles in
New China’s Women and China Youth (both of
which have a nation-wide circulation),!° news
about birth control appeared mostly, and
infrequently, in newspapers in major provincial
capitals and in Peking and Shanghai.*

The appearance of these articles seems to have
emanated from the almost single-handed and
persistent efforts of Shao Li-tzu, who repeatedly
raised the issue at both the 1955 and 1956 sessions of the National People’s Congress. He
urged in 1956: the acceleration of birth control
propaganda and the relaxation of restrictions
on the use of birth prevention techniques,
particularly sterilization. Instead of limiting
either vasectomy or salpingectomy to couples
with six or more children, he recommended that
sterilization be permitted after the birth of three
or four children if both the husband and wife
give the consent for one of them to undergo the
operation." About a year later, the Ministry of
Health announced that sterilization would be
allowed without reference to family size. . . .¥

Meantime, on September 16th, 1956, Premier
Chou En-lai declared:

To protect women and children and bring up and
educate our younger generation in a way conBIRTH CONTROL IN MAINLAND CHINA:

ducive to the health and prosperity of the nation,

we agree that a due measure of birth control is

desirable.'*

However, Li Teh-chuan, the Minister of
Health, devoted only two sentences to birth
control in her report to the 1956 People’s Congress... .

Thus, a real improvement in the over-all situation had yet to evolve and it did so in February
1957, when Mao Tse-tung is reported to have
said the number of births each year was
indicative of:

Great progress made in medical service and the
general rise in living standards, especially in the
countryside; and of the faith people have in the
future. But this figure must also be of great concern to us all. . . . The increase in grain harvest for
the last two years has been 10,000,000 tons a
year. This is barely sufficient to cover the needs of
our growing population. .. . It is estimated that
at present 40 per cent of our youth have not been
placed in primary schools. Steps must therefore
be taken to keep our population for a long time
at a stable level, say, of 600,000,000. A wide
campaign of explanation and proper help must
be undertaken to achieve this aim.‘

The above quotation appears to have been one
of the portions of a speech which Mao delivered
at a meeting of the Supreme State Council, but
which was later deleted. The revised version of
this speech was published in June 1957, under
the well-known title “On the Correct Handling
of Contradictions among the People.” The
reason for the deletion is unknown, but may
have been due to its Malthusian overtone and to
a lack of unanimity in the Party leadership on
birth control. Be that as it may, the pronouncement represented an acquiescence, however
reluctantly arrived at, to the need for birth
control.

The Auspicious Moment

Meeting less than two weeks after Mao’s speech,
no fewer than twenty-five deputies to the Third
Session of the Second National People’s Political
Consultative Conference, spoke out on birth
control early in March 1957. Li Teh-chuan, the
Health Minister, delivered her longest and most
informative speech in public in favour of contraception. All these speeches were carried in
full in the People’s Daily, even though one of
them contained the most specific and undiluted
remarks echoing Malthus:

IDEOLOGY AND POLITICS

... if this year the number of babies should be
23,310,000, . . . then each year thereafter the total
number of children born would be still larger... .
The proverb “Two in the first generation means
a thousand in ten generations” (1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32,
64, 128, 256, 512, 1024) is therefore not without
foundation.15

The moment was indeed auspicious and ripe
for birth control. Yet, as Chuang Hui-nan
expressed it, the need for birth control was no
longer confined to the original arguments of
Shao Li-tzu, who emphasized its necessity
exclusively in terms of the welfare of mothers
and children. ...

Throughout the ages people everywhere have
been called upon (implicitly or otherwise) by
society to be fruitful or to desist, as the case may
be. “‘Population control’’ may be used to denote
this regulation of population numbers in the
interest of the society as a whole. Yet, in the
modern era, the number and timing of pregmancies increasingly reflect the desire and
decision of individual parents. In other words,
“fertility control’ refers to the regulation of
childbearing in accordance with personal circumstances and inclination. This distinction is
important; and, as a case in point, fertility
control gained support and momentum in the
West only when it was wedded to a line of

appeal.

Which insisted that over-large families were a
cause of poverty, that restraint of late marriage
was an overheavy burden to lay upon people at
large, and that some artificial check might regulate the size of families to economic bounds and
enable the conception of children to be checked.

Cast in these utilitarian terms and known as
neo-Malthusianism, this appeal fell a step short
of recognizing Malthus’ natural checks to
population.1®

Thus, the invocation of the Malthusian threat,
however disguised in the writings of Ch’en Ta,
Wu Ching-chao, Fei Hsiao-tung and others!’
during this third phase of the birth control
movement, transformed the need for fertility
control into a question of “‘population control.”
Almost no effort is required to demonstrate
empirically the advantages of controlled fertility
in terms of the immediate well-being of individual families; whereas, Malthus’ principle of
population has never been factually validated.

216
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Nor is it free from inconsistencies and ambiguities.° Nor, of course, have the counterarguments of the Communists been verified by
concrete examples... .

But, the “indiscretion” of non-Communist
demographers and others were not limited to
discussing the need for population control in
Malthusian terms. In one instance, Chen Po-ta’s
thesis that China could in twelve years’ time
absorb another 600,000,000 people was declared to be “rather too optimistic.” And the
attack on Wang Ya-nan, the President of Amoy
University and one of the most ardent antiMalthusian partisans in Communist China,
could not have been more forceful and
forthright:

Wang can be regarded as the representative of the
blindly optimistic school. His great book, Marxist
Population Theory and China’s Population Problems, is nothing but an exercise in the rigid
transposition of dogmas and cannot have any
relevance for China’s existing circumstances.

- Therefore, his population theory has fallen behind
the times and cannot solve any problems.?°®

Wang’s personal indignation must have been
considerable, for he had been suspicious even
of the motives of Shao Li-tzu, whose views
proved acceptable. In the preface of his own
book, Wang declared,

As regards the current birth control propaganda,
. .. it is very possible for people to consider the
question of contraception and the population
problems together, and even to look upon supporters of birth control as the supporters of the
Malthusian population theory. . . . Childbearing,
especially when it is too frequent and too close, is
rather troublesome for the mother in any society.
At the same time, it will be difficult to take good
care of the children already born. This is why there
are no restrictions against the use of various
methods of fertility control (by those who have too
many children or who have had them too closely
together) in the Soviet Union where unemployment has been completely eliminated and where
labour shortage is often felt. I hope this is the
precise motive which led Mr. Shao Li-tzu to
promote birth control. . . . If this is really true,
and if we are able to view this question from the
point of view of Marxism, we shall then not have
to fear that, in the course of the current birth
control campaign, the widespread thought remnants of Malthusianism would be able to resurrect
themselves in a borrowed body.?°

Ch’en Ta, Wu Ching-chao, Fei Hsiao-tung

216

and others evidently misjudged the situation,
even though they had no quarrel with the
argument that childbearing, if unregulated, is
troublesome for the mother in any society.
What divided them and Wang Ya-nan and his
optimistic school lies in their respective extrapolations, into both the immediate and distant
future, of post-1949 trends in industrial and
agricultural developments in this society—the
People’s Republic of China. The dialogue ran
like this:

Wu CHING-CHAO: The employment of an
additional 1-5 million workers each year is not a
small number according to the experience of other
countries. . . . In 1900, there were 28-3 million
job-holders in the United States, and in 1956,
there were 68:8 million. During these fifty-six
years, the increase amounted to a total of 40-5
million, or an annual average of 0-7 million.
... At the beginning of her First Five-year Plan,
a total of 10-8 million persons were employed in
the Soviet Union, but by 1955, 48-4 million were
employed. The total gain of 37-6 million jobholders in twenty-seven years meant an annual
average of only 1-4 million. In our own country,
the increase in the number of employed persons
reached an annual average of 1-1 million during
the period of the First Five-year Plan (19531957). ... The Second Five-year Plan (1958-1962)
calls for an increase of an additional six to seven
million persons, . . . (or) at most, an annual
average of 1-4 million. . . . But, if our rate of
natural increase were still to be twenty per 1,000,
then in 1967 (the end of the Third Five-year Plan)
there will possibly be more than six million people
who will demand new jobs each year!®

WANG YA-NAN: Because [the socialist system]
absorbs and mobilizes a great many more people
in production, and because it can stimulate all
those joining in production to exhibit selfless
enthusiasm and to activate all hidden potentials,
(it) can speedily increase the social wealth... .
Having witnessed the high tide in agricultural cooperation in August 1955, the attainment of the
increases in agricultural production as envisaged
in the First Five-year Plan for the expansion of our
national economy has become a very conservative
goal. According to the National Programme for
Agricultural Development, 1956-1967, agricultural production will be very greatly increased on
the basis of co-operativized agriculture. .. . After
the (1955) high tide in agricultural co-operativization, only about three years will be needed to
bring to full maturity a new form of the socialist
revolution. The elimination of unemployment and
the total utilization of surplus manpower obviously need not wait until the Second and Third
Five-year Plans.?°
BIRTH CONTROL IN MAINLAND CHINA:

The gap between these estimations of future
trends could not have been wider by any
standards... .

The Acrimonious Repercussion

It began with the “exposure” of Chang Nai-chi,
Lo Lung-chi, Chang Pai-chun, Huang Shaohung, Wang K’un-lun, and T’an Pin-shan who
were accused of being anti-Party, anti-people,
anti-socialist, and anti-democratic dictatorship,
and of harbouring political ambitions. All six
were members of the State Council when it first
acted on birth control revisions in 1953, and
belonged to either the China Democratic League
or some other minority political parties. Chang
Po-chun and Lo Lung-chi were the leaders of
this so-called “‘Chang-Lo Alliance.” They and
Chang Nai-chi consequently were removed from
their ministerial posts in the Departments of
Communication, Forest Industry, and Food,
respectively.”

While the ideological conviction of Wang
Ya-nan, and those whom he typified, is unequivocal, their suspicion of Shao Li-tzu is also not
without foundation; for, as Taeuber noted in
passing, Shao is “‘a late convert from the old
regime.” Notwithstanding this suspicion, Shao
was not purged from the government along with
the other rightists. In fact, he joined in the
attack on them.”? In answering the call to go
after the rightists, Shao Li-tzu may well have
acted either to salvage, or forestall the turning
tide against birth control as a national policy.
There were already clear signs of its retrenchment.

As previously noted, in March 1957, Li
Teh-chuan delivered her most vigorous speech
in favour of birth control; at the July 1957
session of the National People’s Congress, however, Li was even more curt than she was at the
1956 People’s Congress, covering birth control
in only one sentence in her report.?4 Shao seems
to have been successful at that juncture as
reports and articles on birth control continued
to appear in newspapers even after the removal
of the rightists, and might well have carried the
campaign further had Ma Yin-chu also yielded to
the same pressures which brought about the
retreat of the rightists. Ma Yin-chu was not
affiliated with any political party or clique,

IDEOLOGY AND POLITICS

and until he was relieved of his post as the
President of Peking University on March
26th, 1960, he was increasingly more aggressive
in spite of all official “‘persuasions”’ to induce a
change in his population and economic views.”®
His refusal to yield may have been the last straw
that decided the final outcome of the previous
attempt at mass education in contraception.
Nevertheless, it does not seem tenable that Ma
Yin-chu could have been connected with the
first wave of reactions against birth control in
the spring of 1957. In his speech calling for a
clear line to separate the rightists from others,
Shao Li-tzu even expressed his basic agreement
with Ma’s “New Population Theory.’?? Wu
Ching-chao, Ch’en Ta, and Fei Hsiao-tung were,
among others, the rightists under attack.

A member of the China Democratic League,
Fei Hsiao-tung was, according to his own
‘“‘admission of crimes,’ involved in various
activities in which the Chang-Lo Alliance had
an interest....7® Wu Ching-chao is also a
member of the Democratic League.

The abolition of sociology departments and
sociology courses took place in China in 1952,
when a re-organization of the curriculum of
institutions of higher learning was made. In
January 1957, Wu published in New Construction
an article ““‘Does Sociology Still Have a Place in
New China?” Fei followed with a statement in a
Shanghai paper, Wen Hui Pao, on February
20th, and also formally requested a change in
the official attitude towards sociology at a conference on propaganda activities called by the
Central Committee of the Chinese Communist
Party (March 24th). On April 10th, New
Construction organized a symposium on sociology, which was chaired by Fei. Less than two
weeks later (April 23rd), Fei, Wu, and six
others were elected at a meeting of the Department of Philosophy and Social Sciences of the
Academy of Sciences, to form an “‘organization
subcommittee.” Its functions were, at the suitable opportunity, to assist in establishing
(within the Department) a committee of research
in “social problems.”

Simultaneously, Ch’en, Wu, and others were
also engaged in a number of other activities: in
a petition to the National Committee of the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference

217
ER—E
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

(March 7th), they urged the establishment
of a population research organization and the
re-introduction of courses in demography at the
university level. In an interview published in
Wen Hui Pao on April 16, Ch’en reiterated his
view about the restoration of sociology. In May,
Ch’en and others wrote a letter to the Ministry
of Higher Education, voicing their opposition
to the previous elimination of sociology departments. And, there was a “private” meeting in
June, which was attended by Ch’en, Fei, Wu
and others and was held at Ch’en’s home. It
was alleged that the name of the research committee on social problems was changed, without
proper authorization, to “Sociology Work
Committee,” and Ch’en was elected the committee chairman. The resolutions of that meeting
included: (1) a systematic recruitment of those
academic colleagues trained in “bourgeois”
sociology, (2) the re-establishment of the Chinese
Sociological Society, (3) the restoration of
sociology departments in universities, . . . and
(4) the tentative appointment of Wu Ching-chao
as the director of a sociological research centre
at the People’s University in Peking.

The “conspiracy” proved a complete failure
as was the attempt of Wu, Fei, and Ch’en to
expand the need for fertility control into a
question of population control. Apart from the
flood of criticism of the state of affairs during
the Hundred Flowers and the allegation that
the Chang-Lo Alliance sought to advance the
status of minority political parties to be at parity
with that of the Communist Party, Fei, Wu,
Ch’en and others were also accused of using the
huge population of China to prove that “‘. . . the
transformation of China into a socialist country
is impossible, it is like the building of palaces on
a sand beach, a totally wasteful effort.”?’ Thus,
it seems that the issue of birth control was
implicated in a _ situation where ideology,
politics, and personalities were poignantly
entangled and where the climate of opinions
once again became hostile to a factual appreciation of population trends.

The Accelerated Solution

But, solutions must still be found to escape the
demographic dilemma in which China finds
herself, irrespective of the party in power. How

218

could her existing millions be effectively . . .
and usefully accommodated? As Mao Tse-tung
has often been quoted by writers in Communist
China since 1957 to have said, “China has a
population of 600 million people. This must
never be forgotten,” it does not seem merely a
coincidence that the Great Leap Forward and
the People’s Commune followed closely the
deflation of the birth control campaign.

Both the Great Leap Forward and People’s
Commune appear to have been in the making
for some time before they were extensively
publicized as formal national policies. Directives calling for some de-centralization of
industrial and commercial enterprises were
issued by the State Council as early as November 1957. In December of the same year, a
National Economic Planning Conference approved the draft of the 1958 economic plan,
which already embodied the Leap Forward
theme—that is, to catch up to or surpass Britain
within fifteen years or so in the output of steel
and other major industrial products. The idea
itself must therefore have been under consideration prior to that conference, though it
was not until May 1958, that the Second
Session of the Eighth National Congress of the
Chinese Communist Party, “guided by Mao
Tse-tung’s thinking, . . . formulated the general
line of going all out, aiming high and achieving
greater, faster, better and more economic results
in building socialism. . . .28

In his report on the proposals for the Second
Five-year Plan at the Eighth National Congress
on September 16th, 1956, Chou En-lai also
referred to a discussion then under way:

In order that the enterprises may be built in a
more rational way, we may, whenever this is
necessary and feasible, establish a large enterprise stage by stage. As regards small and medium
enterprises, wherever resources are plentiful and
other conditions are available, we may draw up a
comprehensive plan to pave the way for future
development. . . .¥

It must be stressed that, even if the intensive
campaign of 1957 had been continued, the
effect of its possible success would not have
become evident until, at least, some fifteen or
twenty years later. That means that birth control
is a long-term investment. Judging from Chou
BIRTH CONTROL IN MAINLAND CHINA: IDEOLOGY AND POLITICS

En-lai’s presentation, the establishment of the
People’s Commune and the Great Leap Forward, particularly the mushrooming of backyard
industries, seem to have been the simultaneous
implementation of the two divergent views
regarding industrial development. They also
assumed. significance in the demographic context. The belief was that the people’s communes
could fully mobilize and make rational use of
rural manpower, and that “the countryside is
like a vast expanse of the sea in which the labour
force is swallowed up.”

Since 1949, though briefly entertaining the
idea of a short-term need for fertility control,
the Party leadership has also consistently maintained a fairly sanguine outlook on the longterm demographic prospects. Typical of this
line of reasoning is the following:

the population of various nations can be grouped
into three categories: (1) Colonial, semi-colonial
countries, or countries whose productive power is
low, or whose development is at the early stage of
capitalism. Fertility and mortality are both high,
but the rate of natural increase is small. Countries
included in this group are Old China, India and
Egypt before independence, Chile, Imperial
Russia before the Revolution, England, France,
and Germany in the 19th century; (2) Countries which have a relatively high productive
capacity, or which have already reached the last
stage of capitalistic expansion. Even though
mortality has declined, fertility has decreased even
further; therefore, the rate of natural increase is
also not very high. England, France, West Germany, the United States of America, Australia,
and New Zealand belong to this second group;
and (3) The third group includes all socialist
countries. Apart from the U.S.S.R., the other
socialist nations are still in the early stages of
socialist construction. In these nations, the rate of
natural increase tends to go up because of the
improved standard of living, a rapid decline in the
death rate, and little changed fertility. And, in
response to further advancement in socialist
construction and a still higher standard of living,
the practice of late marriage and birth control
will emerge. There will be a gradual drop in the
birth rate, but the speed of the decline in the death
rate (which has already approached the minimum)
will also slow down. A reduction in the rate of
natural increase will, in turn, become evident. In
short, in the course of socialist construction,
population numbers will proceed, step by step,
from an initial rapid increase to a stable growth.*°

 

* E.g., irrigation schemes.

This politically flavoured population typology
and prophecy serves to emphasize and outline
the framework within which the question of
population growth was viewed in some influential quarters in Communist China. If (as
seems to be the case) the Great Leap Forward
and the People’s Commune were to be vehicles
for economic development as well as solutions
to the short-term population question in terms
of labour-intensive projects,* questions associated with rapid population growth in the long
run were postulated out of existence as the
Party and government confidently pushed the
plans for accelerated industrialization: economic
development and its concomitant social transformation would, in due course, stimulate the
practice of fertility control and, as a consequence, a reduction in the rate of natural
increase.

Thus, aside from internal politics and political
developments of which the birth control debate
was a part, the financial and ideological costs
also may have seemed too large and unnecessary.
All indications, so it appeared, pointed to a
quick transition from an agricultural and backward nation to an industrialized and advanced
state, implying the automatic emergence of the
practice of fertility control, as it were, at no
extra cost. Up to the end of 1957, both the rate
and volume of economic development were
impressive, and agricultural forecasts to the end
of the Third Five-year Plan (1967) had not been
shattered by the march of events since 1958.

A Quiet Resumption

Nevertheless, even though the vigorous birth
control campaign in Communist China was
gradually brought to a standstill, the population
problem itself has not been entirely or permanently dismissed. The door has been left ajar to
allow the admission of fertility control as a
national policy:

Whether the stable growth in population (a byproduct of socialist construction) will be at a
relatively high or low level is related to whether
or not the Party and government encourage
fertility. In this connection, we know that, in the
socialist countries, if the Party and government do
not adopt a pronatal policy, the birth rate will
decline and become stabilized at a comparatively
low level or that, if the Party and government

219
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

follow a policy designed to curb population num
bers the birth rate then will decrease and become

stable at a still lower level.®°

As late as in March 1959, draft regulations of
one people’s commune contained provisions for
birth control instructions.* And in the bitter
aftermath of the Great Leap Forward, the
National People’s Congress again met after an
interval of two years: among the ten tasks set
for the adjustment of the national economy is
one (the fourth) which reads:

To reduce the urban population and the number
of workers and functionaries to an appropriate
extent by persuading, first of all, those workers
and functionaries who had come from the rural
areas to return to rural productive work and
strengthen the agricultural front.*?

Of course, even if this policy should be
successfully implemented, it would not resolve
the question of population numbers.

But, it has also been reliably reported that,
from March 8th to April 10th, 1962, an exhibition of planned parenthood was held in Canton,
and over 10,000 visitors saw the display of
charts, models and specimens during the first
two weeks.** A few months earlier in January,
the State Council approved a revised schedule of
important duties to allow the importation of
contraceptive appliances and drugs into China
duty-free.** And, since early April 1962, a series
of articles has appeared in the People’s Daily
and other newspapers, arguing that “‘it is not
good to get married and give birth to a child too
early.”’35

Of still greater significance, People’s Daily
has recently (since November 1962) printed
advertisements to promote the sale of publications in which birth control is advocated.
Descriptions of various conventional contraceptives now available in retail stores in China also
appeared in Ta Kung Pao (Peking). In four of
the six recent issues of China’s Women since
December 1962, planned parenthood was promoted. Along with postponement of marriage,
diaphragms, condoms, and jelly, sterilization
(vasectomy and salpingectomy) have been
strongly recommended in recent months.?* No
mention, however, was made of abortion as a
suitable means of fertility control.®’

A resumption of birth control activities clearly
is under way. But, in view of the enormity and

220

complexity and delicacy of the question of
population control in China, it also seems clear
that the road to success in fertility control in
China will be neither smooth nor short.

REFERENCES

. People’s Daily (Hereafter JMJP), March 5th, 1957.

. See People’s Handbook for 1953.

. See Communist China—The Population Problem,
Current Notes on International Affairs, Department
of aa Affairs, Canberra, Australia, November
4. Yang, Ssu-ying: On Malthusianism, Hsueh Hsi

(Study), October 2nd, 1955.

5. See Wu, Ching-chao: A New Treatise on the Problem of China’s Population, Hsin Chien She (New
Construction), March 3, 1957.

6. New China News Agency (Hereafter NCNA), February 2nd, 1956.

7. Chao, Ching: A Critique of Recent Reactionary
Population Theories in China, New Construction,
December 3rd, 1955. This thesis was first stated by
Mao Tse-tung in 1949. See Selected Works of Mao
Te ane Vol. IV, Peking, Foreign Languages Press,

8. Ma, Yin-chu: New Population Theory, The Complete
Report. First National People’s Congress, 4th
session, Peking, 1957. A revised version of this speech
oe appeared in New Construction, November 7th,

9. Kuang-ming Jih-pao (Peking), April 4, 1957. It has
been erroneously repo that Ma first publi
his ‘Population Theory” at the National People’s
Congress on July 3rd, 1957.

10. See China Youth, February 16th, 1955; and New
China’s Women, April 28th, 1955 and May 28th, 1955.

11. The recommendation was contained in Shao’s speech
in The Complete Report. The First National People’s
Congress, 3rd Session, Peking, 1956.

12. JMJP, May 23rd, 1957.

13. Chou, En-lai: Report on the Proposals for the Second
Five-Year Plan for Development of the National
Economy. Peking, 1956. Foreign Languages Press.

14. As quoted in Communist China—The Population
Problem, op. cit.

15. Chung, Hui-man: JMJP, March 17th, 1957. Subsequently, in 1958, Ching was accused of being a
ee expert” and of resisting the leadership of
the p See The Journal of Chinese Medicine,
Octeber Toth, 1958.

16. Micklewright, F. H. Amphlett: The Rise and Decline
of English Neo-Malthusianism, Population Studies,
July 1961, 15.

17. See Wu, Ching-chao: op. cit.; Ta, Ch’en, Deferred
Marriage, Birth Control, and Population Problems
of New China, New Construction, May 1957, and
Fei, Hsiao-tung: What Is Meant by Demographic
Research? New Construction, April 1957.

18. See Davis, Kinsley: Malthus and the Theory of
Population, in Paul F. Lazarsfeld and Morris Rosenberg, eds.: The Language of Social Research: A
Reader in the Methodology of Social Research.
Glencoe, 1955. The Free Press.

19. Chen, Chang-hen: Wen Hui Pao (Shanghai), May

3rd and 4th, 1957.

WN
20.
21.
22.
23.

24.
25.

26.

27.

28.

29. As

BIRTH CONTROL IN MAINLAND CHINA:
30.

Wang, Ya-nan: Marxist Population Theory and
China’s Population Problems. Peking, 1956. Science
Publishing Co.

See People’s Handbook for 1956 and 1957.

See Taeuber, Irene B.: Population Policies in Communist China, Population Index, October 1956, 22.

Shao Li-tzu’s speech delivered before the First
National People’s Congress, 4th Session, Peking,
1957. See The Complete Report {of the conference].

See Li’s speech, ibid.

See Ma, Yin-chu: My Philosophy and Economic
Theory, New Construction, November 1959; and
ie eee oPeat My Request, New Construction, January
Fei, Hsiao-tung: in The Complete Report. First
eas People’s Congress, 4th Session, Peking,
Li, P’u: Do Not Allow the Rightists to Use the
Population Question to Advance their Political
Conspiracy, JMJP, October 4th, 1957.

Tan, Chen-lin: Strive for the Fulfillment, Ahead of
Schedule, of the National Programme for Agricultural Development, in National Programme for
Agricultural Development, 1956-1967. Peking, 1960.
Foreign Languages Press.

quoted in Orleans, Leo: Problems of Manpower
Absorption in Rural China, China Quarterly, JulySeptember 1961.

31.
32.

33.

34.
35.

36.

37.

IDEOLOGY AND POLITICS

Chang, Pai-kun et al.: A Socialist Theory of Population and China’s Population Problem, Economic
Research, August 17th, 1957.

See Jen-min Pao-chien (People’s Health Protection),
March 1959.

Press Communique of the 3rd Session of the Second
National People’s Congress of China, NCNA, April
16th, 1962.

Hang-cheng Wan-pao (Canton Evening), March 25th,

Ta Kung Pao (Hong Kong), January 16th, 1962.
JMJP, April 4th, 1962: Chung-kuo Ch’ing-nien Pao
(China Youth Daily, Peking), April 12th, and May
10th, 1962; and Kung-jen Jih-pao (Daily Worker,
Peking), May 4th, 1962. For a fuller account of these
developments, see Tien, H. Y.: Population Control:
Recent Developments in Mainland China, Asian
Survey, July 1962.

Ta Kung Pao (Peking), April 22nd, 1963, and China’s
Women, December Ist, 1962; February Ist, 1963;
April 1st, 1963; and May Ist, 1963.

For a discussion of the prospects for using abortion
as the principal means of population control in
China, see Tien, H.Y.: Induced Abortion and
Population Control in Mainland China, Marriage
and Family Living, February, 1963.

221
