10 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

family allowances were extremely glad that
the Society was prepared to face up to the
problem and to make available its resources,
first of all for an inquiry, and when the
inquiry was finished, for whatever action
might be necessary.

Lord Horder said that he was very grateful to Mrs. Hubback for what he took to be
in essence a vote of thanks. He was not
unwilling to believe that whatever he might
have done in respect of various activities
which in his judgment contributed to human
health and happiness had been the result
of courage rather than of intelligence! Of the
two qualities it was perhaps of courage that
there was the greater lack. A friend of his—
he called him a friend, but he rather thought
the intention of his speech was not too

friendly—once said of him that he seemed to
be interested in everything from birth
control to cremation. He accepted that
compliment at its face value. He was a
doctor and therefore his interest did begin
with birth, and even before birth, and as to
the disposal of the human body after death,
that also was a matter of sanitation, if
nothing else.

He hoped that those present generally
would agree with Mr. Binney that it had
been worth holding this Luncheon. Although
it might not have made any constructive
addition to their policy as eugenists, it had
demonstrated that they were alive, and that
they were bent upon extracting from this
evil thing, war, whatever good may accrue
to their fellow human beings.

ABORTION—RIGHT OR WRONG?"
By DOROTHY THURTLE

Author of the Minority Statement in the Report of the
Inter-Deparimenial Committee on Abortion

Origin of Inter-Departmental Committee

HE disappointing results of the Matern
| ity and Child Welfare Act of 1918 in
reducing maternal mortality and morbidity led to the appointment, in 1928, of
an Inter-Departmental Committee with the
following terms of reference: ‘‘ To advise
upon the application to maternal mortality
and morbidity of the medical and surgical
knowledge at present available and to
enquire into the needs and direction of
further research work.’’ This Committee
finally reported in 1932, and subsequently
a further investigation was undertaken by
medical officers of the Ministry of Health,
who paid visits to various centres and made
a detailed examination of actual conditions,
and of the working of the 1918 Act. The
results of this investigation were published
in 1937, and although the 1928 Committee
made reference to abortion, the medical

* Substance of a paper read at a meeting of the
Eugenics Society on March roth, 1940.

officers went further and recommended that
an examination should be made into the
influence which abortion may exert on
maternal mortality and morbidity and
future child-bearing.

The Inter-Departmental Committee on
Abortion was accordingly set up in May,
1937. It consisted of fifteen members, of
which five were women. Of these five, four
were titled women and the fifth was myself.
Two were doctors. One of the women
doctors resigned at an early stage, for
domestic reasons, her place being taken by
a male barrister, so that four women only
served on the Committee for most of: the
time. The male members were two barristers,
one being the Chairman, Mr. Norman
Birkett, three gynaecologists, one medical
officer of health, the chief London magistrate,
one coroner, one prosecuting solicitor, and
a representative each from the Ministry of
Health and the Home Office.

Memoranda was submitted by individuals
ABORTION—RIGHT OR WRONG? , Ir

and organizations, and great care was taken
to ensure that every point of view should
- be represented in the evidence before the
Committee. Every memorandum submitted
was circulated to each member of the Committee, although every individual submitting
a memorandum was not necessanly invited
to give evidence.

The Committee sat for two years, meeting
47 times, taking evidence from 55 witnesses.
Its report was issued in June 19309.

Work of the Committee

At this point I should explain that when
I accepted the invitation to serve on the
Committee I had an open mind on the
question of abortion, and in fact knew
very little about it. I have always been very
active in pressing for contraceptive facilities
for all women, and my sense of justice and
equality has revolted against the unfairness
of the existing lack of system which causes
the poorest and weakest women to bear
the burden of constant child-bearing.

The Committee analysed abortion into
three groups—spontaneous, criminal and
therapeutic. It is quite impossible to
ascertain what proportion of the abortions
classed as spontaneous are in fact not
criminal. The 1928 Committee, as well as
the medical officers who investigated the
question subsequently, both laid stress
on the complexity of arriving at the number
of cases intentionally induced. The 1928
Committee reported that ‘‘ when to the
biological aspects are added the problems
due to intentional concealment, it is clear
that the clinician may find it difficult or
impossible in any given case to determine
whether an attempt has been made at

artificial induction or not. . . . Most of the
medical witnesses ... had a distinct impression, gathered from their clinical

experience, that the practice of intentional
induction of abortion is more frequent than
formerly.”

This opinion is supported by those who
have had considerable experience among
groups of working class and other women.
I am of opinion, and I think I shall find
support from other women interested in

public health and contraceptive work, that
among women who have no access to contraceptive knowledge, it is the rule rather than
the exception for efforts to be made to
bring on a period which is overdue. Invariably this is regarded as a sign that pregnancy
may be present, and recourse is had in the
first place to drugs, and when these are
unsuccessful, to other and more sinister
methods.

The majority of my colleagues were so
bold as to report that in their opinion
spontaneous abortion still accounts for a
majority of the total number of abortions
which occur. I did not feel convinced of this,
and find no evidence to confirm it. My
position is somewhat agnostic—I do not
know. Even my colleagues, however, had to
admit that the practice of criminal abortion
appears to be growing.

Criminal Abortion

On the question of criminal abortion, it
is my view that few women, lacking contraceptive knowledge, can escape the charge of
being criminals, for the reason I have already
given. A graphic description of the methods
adopted by women when they fear they are
pregnant, is to be found in the Majority
Report of the Inter-Departmental Committee. This description throws light on the
misery and suffering borne by women in
their efforts to control their natural fertility.
When it is realised that a great proportion
of this unhappiness is avoidable and would
not occur if contraceptive facilities were
generally available, one realizes the heavy
responsibility lying at the door of the obscurantists in this matter, chief among which are
to be found in the Churches and among timid
politicians.

I found a tendency among my colleagues to
restrict the consideration of criminal abortion to those practising in undesirable
conditions among the poor, and I therefore
introduced the question of illegal abortions,
and abortions induced for inadequate reasons
of health, carried out by qualified men in
high positions, in nursing homes and in the
private houses of the rich. The operation
known as dilatation and curettage covers
12 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

a multitude of abortions, and the complaisant practitioner who wishes to oblige his
patient has developed a technique which
would give great difficulty to the police if
they attempted to prosecute him. The
woman who wants to go winter sporting
or who finds that a pregnancy would interfere with her activities during the season has
no difficulty in persuading certain medical
men to perform a suitable operation, at a
price. The working woman on the other
hand, whose condition might call for such
an operation, has the greatest difficulty in
getting it.

Therapeutic Abortion

The law with respect to therapeutic abortion, as laid down by Mr. Justice Macnaghten
in the case of R. v. Bourne has made it
clear that reasons of health must be taken
into consideration as well as the life of the
woman. This interpretation gives wide
scope to medical men. They have in many
cases been in the habit in the past of operating, on grounds of health, on women who
could afford to pay excessive fees, and many
operations have been carried out on very
slight medical grounds which would not
have been considered in the case of poor
women. While welcoming this interpretation of the law, it still does not help the
vast majority of women—it merely makes
less risky the practice of fashionable medical
men. Whether their fees will drop accordingly is a matter on which I am not competent to speak. It is true to say that the
difference between the fee charged for a
dilatation and curettage in the case of a
rich pregnant woman, and that charged for
one performed for certain conditions on a
woman or girl who is not pregnant, is usually
not for the medical risk alone, but for the
surgeon’s risk in performing an illegal operation in the one case, as against his security in
performing the other.

Mortality and Morbidity from Abortion

It would be idle to attempt to establish
an opinion that criminal abortion is not
responsible for the greater proportion of all
deaths arising from abortion, but it would

be true to say that our investigation established the fact that the death-rate is less
impressive than might have been expected.
The Registrar General’s figures for 1937
gave the average risk of death from abortion
as approximately the same as that from
child-bearing. It is generally agreed and recognized that spontaneous abortion accounts
for very few deaths, and the rate in criminal
abortion is therefore correspondingly high.
Notwithstanding this, it came as a surprise
to members of the Committee to learn that
the mortality rate was comparatively low.
The real problem 1s ill-health caused by the
practise of unhygienic manipulation or by
drugs.

As soon as this fact dawned upon me, I
made a practice of asking all witnesses one
simple question which took this form. ‘‘ This
committee has been set up to consider ways
and means of reducing maternal mortality
and morbidity arising from abortion. If all
abortion attempts now being carried out in
secrecy and under bad conditions were to
be carried out by skilled practitioners in
aseptic conditions, do you think a reduction
in maternal mortality and morbidity would
result ? ’’ In every case the answer was in
the affirmative. Even the Roman Catholic
witnesses concurred in this proposition.
Having delivered themselves into my hands,
those witnesses who were passionately
anxious that no relaxation of the law should
be made, then proceeded to argue that if
abortion operations were made easy to come
by, many more women would avail themselves of them, and argued further that
remote morbidity would result.

I confess that I still find the question of
morbidity arising from abortion operations,
even carried out in the best conditions, a
difficult one. The only people who can speak
with authority on this subject are those
medical men who have performed such
operations for slight reasons, or for no
medical reason at all. In the nature of
things they are unlikely to give themselves
away. In addition, in many cases it is
possible that after performing the operation
they never see their patient again and are
not in a position to observe the results. I
ABORTION—RIGHT OR WRONG? 13

was assured by my gynaecological colleagues
that such operations often produce undesirable results later in life. I know women
who have had more than one operation
who appear to be normally healthy, and must
admit therefore that I was not very impressed
by the assurances of my colleagues on this
point. Their attitude on two matters of
which I had considerable knowledge did not
give me confidence in their freedom from
prejudice. The two matters in question were
contraception and the public health work
carried out by local authorities. I heard it
suggested that the practice of modern
methods of contraception led to serious
conditions, and this I could not accept.
With regard to public health services I came
to the conclusion that, with honourable
exceptions, the medical profession still regard
these services as encroaching on their vested
interests, which are of more importance to
them than the health of the people the
services have been set up to help. I should
perhaps qualify this by saying that I believe
that the exceptions are increasing as time
goes on.

Doubtful as I am in this matter of
sequelae to abortion, it seems to me that
almost any condition would be better than
allowing existing practices to continue, and
I reported accordingly.

Enforcement of the law

My colleagues spent a great deal of
time and thought on trying to devise
methods of enforcing the law as it stands,
and made proposals which did not strike
me as likely to be very effective. For
example, they said ‘it is important that
every citizen should co-operate with the
police in the enforcement of the law.”
What could be more priggish and pious
than that? A great majority of people
have a sneaking sympathy with the abortionist, and particularly with the woman
who has had recourse to her or him. One of
the greatest difficulties experienced by the
police is the secrecy with which such cases
are surrounded. My colleagues also recommended that doctors should keep in mind
the importance of the assistance which they

can render to the police. Doctors desirous
of retaining the confidence of their patients
are extremely reluctant to take any action
which will imperil this.

They also recommended the issue by a
magistrate or police officer, on production
of prima facie evidence, of a warrant to
search any house or other place suspected
to be used in connection with the Offences
Against the Persons Act, 1861, that the
words ‘poison or other noxious thing”
should be replaced by the words “any
substance whatever,’ and that coroners
should be circularized to stress the importance of exercising the utmost vigilance in
investigating all deaths following abortion.

They recommended that the sale of
alleged abortifacient drugs should be restricted, or abolished altogether, that
advertisements of female pills should be
abolished, and that all workers and doctors
coming in contact with women should impress upon them the ineffectiveness of taking
drugs, and the danger to health entailed.

I was not impressed by any of these
proposals, because I felt that something
more fundamental was necessary. The law
as it stands is in contempt with modern
public opinion. Great sympathy is felt with
the victims of abortion, even among those
who administer the law, and something less
negative is required to deal with the problem.

I regard the sale of abortifacient drugs as
an evil because in many cases women spend
money they can ill afford on drugs which
cannot do what is claimed for them. In so
far as these sales are taking money under
false pretences, they are to be condemned,
but I should strongly oppose attempts to
restrict the sale of any drug that may eventually be found to bring about abortion, until
such time as every woman in the country is
in a position to protect herself against constant pregnancies by efficient contraceptive
methods.

From this it follows that I dissent from
the recommendation of my colleagues that
if the new oestrogenic preparations now
in an experimental stage eventually become
effective as abortifacients, they should be
controlled and the sale restricted.
14 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

I was disappointed and astonished that my
colleagues would not even go so far as to
propose that contraception should be made
available for all women. In the course of
this discussion, in order to bring home the
point, I asked my colleagues to reveal the
size of their own families. Four members
out of the fifteen admitted to four children
or over. If I had placed the number at
five instead of four, only one member
would have qualified. I could not accept
the argument that advice should be withheld from the majority of working women
because middle-class and rich women are
not prepared to bear their share of maintaining the population at a size considered
necessary for the well-being of the country.
My impression was that the majority of my
colleagues were deeply concerned with the
problem of maintaining the population, but
I pointed out that other methods must be
found for dealing with that problem.

I do not apologize for raising the question
of contraception for it is of vital importance
in considering the question of abortion. An
effort is made in some quarters to make a
distinction between abortion, (sometimes
referred to as ‘‘ murder ’’) and contraception.
The assumption would appear to be that
the seed has no life until fertilization has
taken place. This of course is nonsense.
The law in the Infant Life (Preservation)
Act has recognized the existence of an
individual life after 28 weeks of pregnancy.
In the words of the Act, if a woman has been
pregnant 28 weeks or more, this is prima
facie proof that she was at that time pregnant
of a child capable of being born alive.
Abortion prior to that time would therefore
appear to be merely the removal of developing cells, and to me, is only one step along the
line from methods to prevent conception. I
believe that this is the way many women
feel about it. No responsible person would
advocate an operation for abortion after
this period, and it is very doubtful if any
experienced criminal abortionist would take
the risk of operating after the third month.

Indications for Abortion
I do not doubt that where undesirable

mental and physical characteristics are likely
to be inherited, the Eugenics Society would
agree that abortion is desirable. Incest
would also probably be accepted as a proper
indication. , |

In my report I included rape both in
older women as well as in young girls, and
I made no distinction between what are
sometimes described as wilful girls, who
lead young men on, and innocent girls who
are victims. My colleagues, while expressing sympathy, found the difficulties in the
way of amending the law in this way
insuperable. I do not understand why. In
the first place, the number of cases is small
and cannot affect society, while the effects on
the girls themselves might well be disastrous.

I do not know whether my colleagues were
of opinion that the numbers of young
girls becoming pregnant would increase if
they realised it was possible to dispose of
their pregnancies. This suggestion was
certainly made. I was not convinced that the
difficulties were insuperable, particularly
as many European countries have already
enacted legislation permitting abortion in
such cases.

The indication for abortion in which I am
most interested however, and which may
give rise to controversy, is that women
who have had four or more pregnancies
should be recognized as fit subjects for
abortion operations should they desire this.’
I recommend this for two reasons. In the
first place, such women have done their
share in maintaining the population: An
even more important consideration is that
experience shows that the maternal death
rate increases after the third child and that
the risk increases with each additional
pregnancy. In addition families of more
than four are more frequently to be found
among people of low income, and the illhealth rate among these mothers is exceedingly great, as medical officers of health
in the distressed areas and working class
districts generally can testify. In fact, as
I see it, the problem of maternal ill-health is,
if anything, even greater than that of
mortality.

I may be asked why I do not advocate
ABORTION—RIGHT OR WRONG? 15

facilities for abortion for all women in any
circumstances. It is true that I am one of
the increasing number of people who believe
that parenthood should be voluntary, but
to enable this to become effective I prefer
to continue to press for wide facilities for
the spread of contraceptive knowledge as
an alternative to abortion. The right to
abortion for its own sake is something in
which I have no particular interest. Neither
have I any particular interest in the woman
who wishes to have no children at all. I
believe she is rare, and is usually able to
take care of herself. I fixed the number of
pregnancies at four because I believed it to
be reasonable, and likely to appeal to normal
people as a moderate suggestion, particularly
taken in conjunction with the increased
risks which I have mentioned.

Constructive proposals

The Maternity and Child Welfare Act of
1918 has done a great deal to improve the
health and welfare of infants, and the
reduction in the infantile death-rate has been
progressive. The results among mothers have
not been so marked, although it is true
that after remaining stationary for several
years, an improvement in the maternal
mortality rate showed itself in 1936, and in
1938 it reached a low record. The morbidity
rate is not found in statistics, but is undoubtedly high, and is due to a number of
causes, among which poverty is one of the
most important.

The Departmental Committee which reported in 1932, after examining the records
of 6,000 women who died in childbirth,
estimated that at least one-half of these
deaths might have been avoided. In many
of the cases diagnosis in early pregnancy
would have allowed the condition to be
treated, and the woman and child saved.
In other cases, early abortion would at
least have saved the life of the mother.

One of the greatest difficulties experienced by welfare authorities is to persuade
pregnant women to attend the ante-natal
centres as soon as they become pregnant.
There is a very good and practical reason for
this. After the birth of two or three children,

when she finds herself again pregnant at a
short interval, the woman in very many
cases takes steps to bring on her period.
If she is unsuccessful she may at a late
stage attend the welfare centre, or decide
to let matters take their course until it is
time to book a midwife. If there is any
abnormality, she has probably left it too
late for treatment, and she may eventually
be found swelling the statistics of maternal
mortality.

With the growth of private birth-control
clinics there has grown up a practice among
women attending them, of regular visits at
intervals of one or two years. These visits
are of inestimable value. The examinations
reveal any abnormal condition that may
have arisen without the knowledge of the
woman, and conditions which might have
become serious if neglected are able to be
treated. There can be little doubt that the
gynaecological health of the women regularly
attending birth-control clinics is a great
improvement on that of the average woman
who does not receive such regular examinations.

This experience is one that the Ministry of
Health should weigh very carefully in considering a comprehensive scheme to reduce
maternal mortality and ill-health. The Ministry is alive to the fact that the centres are not
attended as well as they should be, and there
will not be much improvement so long as the
centres are only interested in mothers with
babies.

The Ministry must first recognize the hard
fact that women are reluctant to bear children at intervals of eighteen months or two
years, however robust they may be, and
if proper contraceptive facilities are not
available they will do all in their power to
get rid of pregnancies after the first few.
The first step to be taken therefore is to
permit contraceptive advice to be given
to all women regardless of the state of their
health. The women should be encouraged
to make return visits for routine examinations
and for refitting their appliances.

At the ante-natal clinic pregnancy diagnosis should be available. Many women
dose themselves with drugs unnecessarily
16 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

under the impression that they are pregnant
when in fact they are not. Much misery and
nervous ill-health would be avoided if they
could be properly advised. If a woman is
found to be pregnant after the diagnosis,
unless she is really desperate, she can be
persuaded to go on with the pregnancy
providing she is assured that after it is
over she will be given reliable contraceptive
advice. There will no doubt be exceptions,
but the average woman is sensible, and the
desperate expedients now resorted to are
due to the hopelessness of the position. When
she is pregnant with an unwanted child she
feels like a trapped animal with no one to
help her. The hope of being in a position to
control her fertility after the child is born
would give her courage to go through it
once more, in the knowledge that in the
future she will not be so helpless.

Pregnancy diagnosis is now being carried
on in some public clinics, and this is good as
far as it goes, but it is not a sufficient
inducement to encourage women to attend
as freely as they should. Contraceptive
advice is the necessary pre-requisite.

I hope I have made it clear that while
accepting abortion in certain circumstances
as necessary at present, I do not regard it
as an ideal solution of the problem of a
high individual fertility rate. The ideal
contraceptive has not yet been found, but
the great majority of those now practising
the latest methods have cause to bless
the scientists who have been working on
improvements. When these methods are
available to all women, irrespective of class,
it will be time enough to discuss whether
abortion at the will of the individual is
desirable.

Since the Inter-Departmental Committee
made its report the war has come upon us,
and the future of all social services looks
very black. But if the country is to survive,
the health of our mothers must be maintained, and we can only hope that our
statesmen, recognizing this, will eventually
take the necessary steps to secure healthy,
happy motherhood.

I could find no member of the Committee
to join me in signing a Minority Report,
and on the other hand I could not sign that
of my colleagues, as I felt it necessary to
produce a report which might form a basis
for constructive proposals to encourage those
who are working for a real improvement in
the lives of working women. I remembered
that years ago a Royal Commission was set
up to consider the Poor Law, and that
twenty years after it had reported, the
Minority Report was the basis of subsequent legislation. Who knows, some time
the Report of the Inter-Departmental Committee on Abortion may receive government
consideration. If so, I hope that history may
repeat itself and that the proposals of the
Minority Report may again form the basis of
government action.

I am one of those who do not profess to
understand the purpose or meaning of life.
For me, the achievement of human happiness, and an understanding of human relationships, are sufficient purposes—they are
within my capacity to understand. I have
put forward the Minority Report in the
belief that it will help to increase happiness, or at least reduce avoidable misery,
and it is in that spirit that I commend
the proposals contained therein to you this
afternoon.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXXII, No. 1
