A MEDICAL SERVICE FOR THE TREATMENT
OF INVOLUNTARY STERILITY = |
By MARGARET HADLEY JACKSON, M.B.,B.S., D.R.C.O.G., J.P.*

woman, Councillor Mrs. Rachel Allen,
fought a small battle with a city health
authority to get a grant for sick and needy
patients to receive contraceptive advice free
of charge. Having won her battle to the tune
of 7s. 6d. for each patient dealt with, she
then set about finding premises and staff and
raising funds to start a clinic. In this also
she succeeded, and in January 1930 the
Exeter and District Women’s Welfare Association opened its first clinic in Exeter. It was
always Mrs. Allen’s wish that the clinic
should not only be able to give advice on
contraception to those who needed it, and
could not afford to get it elsewhere, but
should also be able to help those who wanted
but had failed to have children. It is a matter
of regret to me that she did not live long
enough to see the positive side of the work
take root and flourish. In fact this only happened very gradually, and it was not until
1937 that any appreciable number of patients
came for advice because of sterility. It was
our intention in the first place to refer such
cases as needed full investigation and treatment elsewhere, but it soon became apparent
that facilities for getting this done adequately
and in a well-co-ordinated manner were lacking and that, if it was to be done at all, we
had better do it ourselves. Having only small
funds available, and patients with equally
small incomes, we have had to build slowly
and with an eye constantly on expenses.
When we set out to be something more than
a sorting station it became obvious that, in
addition to acquiring some new skill and a
few new instruments, two other things were
essential ; first, access to an X-ray department ; secondly, access to a laboratory and
the help of someone skilled in handling and
examining biological material. The first
*A paper read before the Eugentcs Society on May
23rd, 1944.

A somos of years ago a courageous

difficulty was overcome through the courtesy
of Dr. Charles Wroth, Radiologist to the
Royal Devon and Exeter Hospital, who
allows us to take clinic patients to the
hospital X-ray department for salpingograms; in solving the second, we were
particularly fortunate in having as our clinic
assistant secretary a biologist, Mrs. C. C.
Harvey, who had had special training by Dr.
Baker at Oxford in the handling and examination of semen. Through her husband,
lecturer in biology at the University of the
South West, she had access to laboratory
space, and through the generosity of several
good friends we have been able to acquire
various bits of expensive but essential equipment and apparatus. More recently the
Family Planning Association, to which the
Exeter clinic has been affiliated since 1931,
has allotted Mrs. Harvey a research grant.
It is largely through her efforts that we have
been able to elaborate and gradually improve
our methods of examining vaginal and
seminal fluid and cervical mucus. Her
husband, an experienced cytologist, out of
the kindness of his heart, now cuts and stains
the endometrial biopsy material. In the early
days, before our demands got too heavy and
Mrs. Harvey took on our laboratory work,
Dr. Robb, Pathologist to the Royal Devon
and Exeter Hospital, did an_ occasional
seminal analysis and sectioned the endometrial biopsies for us. He still does our
pregnancy diagnosis tests and, more recently,
has arranged for collection of blood for
Rhesus factor testing. I should like to take
this opportunity of recording our gratitude
to Dr. Robb for his friendly criticism and
advice and for lending us his charming and
long-suffering wife, who has been our clinic
secretary for many years and who guides a
wayward medical officer and our voluntary
secretarial staff with unfailing tact and good
humour. Through the generosity of a number

117
118

of commercial firms, Organon, Boots and
Parke Davis & Co. in particular, we have
been able to obtain supplies of endocrines
either free or at a reduced cost for those
patients needing this type of treatment.
Those needing operative treatment are
referred to the surgical staff of the Royal
Devon and Exeter Hospital or of one of the
North Devon hospitals, who accept our
diagnosis and evaluation of the factors
responsible for the sterility in any given
case, thus saving much time and duplication
of investigation. The hospitals, for their
part, send many cases of sterility which need
investigation to the Devon Family Planning
Association clinics.

Without the co-operation and voluntary
help of all these people this sterility service
could never have come into being; with
their help we are now able to carry out at
any rate some of the tests upon the results
of which rests the diagnosis of the causes of
subfertility, and also to provide or refer for
treatment those cases which in our opinion
are treatable. In the early years many of the
patients came on their own initiative ; now
more than go per cent. are referred to us by
their own doctors, by the hospitals, or by
nurses.

In the fourteen years during which I have
been associated with the work at a birth
control clinic it has repeatedly, and more and
more forcibly, impressed itself on me that
the positive and negative aspects of family
planning should be dealt with under one
scheme and, if possible, by the same doctor
or team of doctors. The ideal family planning centre should, in my view, be a friendly
place where married couples could come for
advice not only on family spacing and
limitation and marital difficulties, but also on
involuntary sterility and minor gynecological troubles ; where pregnancy tests can
be carried out ; where women can be guided
and helped when pregnant, and where they
can come and ask questions about the best
arrangements to make for their confinements,
and so forth. From such a centre they could
when necessary be referred to private
doctors, midwives, or hospitals. I speak from
practical experience of how the work has

location is more controversial.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

developed at the Exeter clinic. This seems
to be what people want and incidentally provides a small contribution to the population
problem. That such centres are required
may be conceded, but the problem of their
. It may be
that in some districts such a centre would be
best run in connection with a hospital, or by
a local health authority ; in others, as in
Exeter, a long-established birth control clinic
may provide its natural home. The leanings
and capabilities of medical staff would presumably tend to settle its habitat. If still
more F.P.A. clinics expand along these lines,
as it is hoped that they will, it is essential
that they should make it their business to be
closely linked with their local hospital and its
consulting staff so that cases may be referred
to and fro and not be, as was suggested by a
correspondent in the B.M.J. of October 23rd,
1943, ‘‘cut off from properly staffed and
equipped hospitals.”” Perhaps we are lucky
in Devonshire, but a less obstructive, less
jealous and a more friendly and co-operative
collection of honoraries it would be difficult
to find.

With regard to the organization of a
service for the investigation and treatment of
involuntary sterility, with which we are more
particularly concerned to-day, a few points
need stressing. The handling of sterile
couples as at present done by many hospitals
is incomplete and slipshod ; it is not work
that can be carried out as a small side-line.
in a busy hospital gynecological or urological
out-patients’ department ; too often women
are subjected to examination and operation
without their husbands having been asked to
submit a seminal specimen for examination ;
and, if both partners are examined, too often
there is no piecing together of the evidence
and no co-ordinated planning of treatment
for the couple as a unit.

The study of human fertility and subfertility is an absorbing and time-consuming
business, and in charge of a sterility service
there should be one medical officer able to
give much time to the matter, who must be
primarily responsible for co-ordinating the
results of examinations carried out by himself and by others, and for discussing and
A MEDICAL SERVICE FOR TREATMENT OF INVOLUNTARY STERILITY 119

planning treatment, for seeing that it is
properly controlled by further tests, and for
organizing a follow-up system in order to
learn as fully as possible the results of treatment. This medical officer, so as to retain an
undistorted judgment, should also constantly
be dealing with fertile, or better still superfertile, couples. Thus a contraceptive and ai
sterility clinic are useful bed-fellows, the
cases coming for advice to the former providing invaluable material for control observations on patients attending the latter.
Returning now to the West Country, it
may be of interest to follow the general trend
of attendance at these small provincial F.P.A.
clinics (7.e. Exeter and its branch clinics at
Barnstaple and Totnes). The total number
of new patients seen each year has increased
more or less steadily during the past fourteen
years (Table I), but most noteworthy is the
marked increase in the percentage of patients
coming for advice because of their inability

to conceive.
. TABLE I
Showing annual total of patients coming for advice on
contraception and involuntary sterility and the
percentages in each group

Years Total For For
Attendances Contraception Sterility
Per cent. Per cent.
1933 146 99.25 0.75
1934 172 98.9 I.1
1935 181 99.5 0.5
1936 186 96.8 3-2
1937 175 94-3 5:7
1938 189 92.6 7.4
1939 198 90.9 9.1
1940 220 90.9 9.1
1941 355 88.8 II.2
1942 413 84.5 15-5
1943 486 66.9 33°1

Our eapetience at these clinics is only a
reflection of a much more widespread movement and indicates a new consciousness on
the part of the public that something can be
done about sterility and a desire to get
something done. How much this is the result
of war conditions, or to the gradual seeping
out of information about scientific and
medical advances in knowledge on this subject and how much to a natural increase in
subfertility, it is impossible to say—there are
simply no figures to go on. But the fact
remains that there is an increasing demand
on the part of subfertile couples to be cured

of their relative or absolute childlessness.

Another fact is equally patent, that adequate
facilities to deal with all these unfortunate
people who want help are at present sadly |
lacking in this country.

The members of the Executive and Medical
and Subfertility committees of the F.P.A. are
fully aware that its clinics, if expanded along
the lines outlined above, can contribute most
usefully to the solution of this problem and,
in fact, that they are in many ways the best
possible places for barren couples to come
in the first instance for encouragement and
advice. At its conference of branches in June
1943 the question of how best to deal with
the numerous cases of subfertility turning up
at the clinics for advice was discussed, and
Mr. Alec Bourne and Mr. Lane Roberts
addressed the meeting. Later in the year a
brief post-graduate course was organized at
which methods for investigating subfertile
cases were demonstrated by Mr. Bourne, Mr.
Lane Roberts, Miss Moore White, Mr. Nixon,
and myself. Still more recently the F.P.A.
has appointed a doctor willing to carry out
the work of examining seminal specimens for
the clinics in the London area, and is arranging and paying for his special training in this
work.

It may be of interest briefly to outline the
procedures we have adopted in dealing with
cases seen in this F.P.A. “ sterility service,”’
and to give a few particulars about the clinics
and the cases themselves. Each clinic has a
waiting-room, a room for history taking, and
an examining room. The Exeter clinic now
has, in addition, a small operating-room.
Most of the patients have been seen at the
Exeter clinic or at its branches in Barnstaple —
and Totnes, some have been seen in private
practice. The majority are in the lower
income groups, nearly all the wives are
working and, since the war started, many of
the husbands are in the Forces. Our aim has
therefore been to keep the procedures ambulatory, simple and inexpensive, incidentally
avoiding the unnecessary use of hospital
beds. The causes of-a sterile or subfertile.
mating, including habitual abortion, have
obviously to be sought in both partners, but
at clinics of this sort it has so far been possible
120 —

only to deal in person and in some detail with
the wife ;
health and fertility has to be arrived at by
questioning her, by getting information from
his doctor, or referring him for examination,
by examining samples of semen, and by doing
repeated post-coital tests on the wife ; manifestly an incomplete procedure, but it is
hoped after the war to establish a session
where husbands can come in person for investigation and advice. Our work has also
been restricted because of lack of funds, time
and space, and much that might have been
done has of necessity been neglected. We
have had to dispense with such things as
estimations of the hormone content of blood
and urine, B.M.R. estimations and testicular
biopsies, and the treatment is therefore to
some extent empirical and improperly controlled. However, the methods of examination and tests which have been adopted do
make it possible to sort out at any rate a

proportion of the cases and to estimate to |

some extent the results of treatment.
Complete and absolute sterility in either

men or women is comparatively rare, but

minor degrees of infecundity appear to be

relatively common ; there is, in fact, a steady
gradation down the scale from extreme hyper-’

fertility to complete sterility with the curve
piled high in the middle regions. The question
may be asked, at what point should a
marriage be labelled subfertile ; when is it
sensible for a couple to ask advice and
justifiable for a doctor to intervene? Obviously there is no universal answer, but as a
very general rule it may be stated that if a
couple have lived together and remaihed
barren for twelve months without using any
form of birth control they will be well
advised to seek help ; such things as dyspareunia, impotence and early miscarriage may
well call for intervention sooner. All cases
do not need full investigation right away, this
becomes apparent after taking a history and
doing a pelvic and perhaps a post-coital
examination. Some quite simple advice and
treatment, such as advice about fertile days,
frequency of coitus, relaxation, or the cleaning-up of an unhealthy cervix, and so forth,
may be all that is needed. If, however, no

an estimate of the husband’s |

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

pregnancy appears in a few months, it is as
well to carry out further investigations. In
doing this it is not always possible or desirable to do things in the same order: the
husband’s leaves and feelings and the wife’s
menstrual cycle have to be taken into consideration, but in an obstinate case it is
essential that both husband and wife should
submit to thorough examination and that
the couple should be dealt with as a unit if
any degree of success is to be attained. The
examination must be planned so as to obtain,
as far as possible, answers to the following
points :

1. Are there any endocrine defects in
either husband or wife ?

2. Are there any toxic factors at work to
depress gonadal functions ?

3. Are there any faults or difficulties in
delivery or reception of the Semen ?

4. Are there sufficient normal sperm being
produced, and is their motility and
viability adequate ? .

5. Do the husband’s sperm survive , we
in his wife’s genital tract and are they
likely to reach the ovum ?

6. Is there any obstruction, complete or
partial, in either genital tract ?

7. Is ovulation occurring and at what
point in the menstrual cycle ?

8. Are conditions favourable for embedding ?

g. Are any genetic lethal factors at work ?

ro. Are any psychological . difficulties
present ?

Record Keeping .

A case card designed by Dr. C. P. Blacker
and members of the medical subcommittee
of the F.P.A. is used both for patients coming
for contraceptive advice and for those seeking
advice because of sterility. This card was
designed partly with a view to collecting
statistics for the Population Investigation
Committee and on it are spaces in which can
be entered details relating to age, parents,
siblings, occupation, education, religion and
income of both husband and wife; date(s)
of marriage(s) ; details about pregnancies ;
use of contraceptives ; sexual habits and
frequency of intercourse ; medical history ;
A MEDICAL SERVICE FOR TREATMENT OF INVOLUNTARY STERILITY 121

_general and pelvic examination ; and records
of subsequent visits and progress of the case.
‘All records are made at the time of making
examinations and tests.

In addition to this the patient is asked to
keep a personal record of menstrual dates ;
dates of husband’s leaves or of coitus, and, in
certain cases, if sufficiently co-operative and
intelligent, a chart of morning and evening
rectal temperatures.
Examination

After having her history taken the patient
is examined and a decision arrived at as to
whether the case warrants fuller investigation or whether the effect of simple treatment and advice, as outlined above, should
first be tried. In the investigation of the
more obstinate cases some or all of the
following examinations are carried out :

Examination of Vaginal Fluid—By
means of wet and stained films and electrical
determination of pH. Material is collected
in a small bakelite spoon and a loopful in
saline is examined microscopically at the
clinic ; the remainder is taken to the laboratory for the rest of the examination. Information is thus obtained about the presence
of sperm and of trichomonas vaginalis and
monilia, about the predominant bacterial
types present and about the character and
percentages of the various cellular elements.

This examination provides valuable corro
borative evidence of endocrine deficiencies,

of certain forms of impotence or premature

ejaculations and, when repeated at intervals,

a means of assessing the effect of treatment.

We have examined between 400 and 500
samples of vaginal fluid both from subfertile
and fertile women and at all times in the
cycle. The pH range has been found to lie
between 4-2 and 7:0; more than go per cent.
of all samples (subfertile and fertile) have a
pH of less than 6-0.

Examination of Cervical Mucus (PostCoital, Sim’s or Huhner’s Test), also by
means of wet films, stained films and electrical determination of pH. This mucus may
be extremely difficult to extract quickly and
in sufficient quantity and many methods and
instruments have been tried. A metal

cannula with a fair-sized lateral hole near
the tip with a stiff rubber bulb or a 10 ce.
syringe to effect suction has been found to.
answer the purpose best. The mucus is expressed on to a slide and is immediately
examined under a microscope withont dilution. The character and amount of the
mucus is noted and the slide is then taken to
the laboratory ; part of the mucus is used
for making films for staining and part for the
determination of pH. This is one of the most
valuable tests and provides information not
only about the viability of sperm and the
numbers in which they reach the cervical
canal, but also about the degree of genital
hypoplasia present in the wife, the state of
her endocrines, and the presence of infection.
Repeated many times in the same patient,
often at different intervals following coitus,
it also provides a most valuable check on the
effects of treatment. We have not yet
arrived at a conclusion as to what is the most
useful and convenient post-coital time interval to make a routine test nor exactly
what constitutes a “ good ”’ or “ bad ”’ result.
In its simplest form (examination of a wet
film) this test has now been done about 400
times on fertile and subfertile women on
most days in the cycle and at times after
coitus varying from 1 hour to 14 days, and
motile sperm have been found up to 150
hours after the last intercourse. The pH
has been determined in some 150 samples,
the range being 6-4 to just over 8-0.
Endometriql Biopsy.—The material is obtained with a Sharman’s biopsy curette and
fixed in Bouin, and serial sections are stained
in hematoxylin and eosin. The procedure
takes a few minutes and is only very slightly
painful unless the cervical canal is markedly
distorted and the internal os almost cartilaginous. It is worth making a note at the time
of taking the specimen of how easily it was
obtained and of its macroscopic appearance ;
the bottle is labelled at once with the patient’s
name and the date of taking the biopsy ; the
dates when the previous and subsequent
period starts are also recorded. A special
register is kept where these particulars are
entered, together with the microscopical
report on the sections. Thus it is easy to see
122

whether any given specimen shows development compatible with the stage in the cycle
when it was taken. This examination does
not provide a complete answer to the question
whether normal ovulation has occurred or
will occur, but it does provide important
information about ovarian function and
endometrial response.

Some 500 biopsies have been taken from
more than 250 women (both fertile and subfertile) at all stages in the cycle. It may be
mentioned in passing that it has been
possible from the specimens of endometrium
in this series to support Sharman’s findings
that anovulatory cycles are comparatively
rare and often spasmodic in their occurrence,
but not his findings of tuberculous endometritis in 5 per cent. of biopsies from sterile
women,* but a further search is being made.
It is noteworthy that in about a dozen cases
no period has followed the taking of a biopsy
in the premenstrual phase (7.e. presumably
after fertilization has occurred). The slight
trauma inflicted not only has not interfered
with pregnancy but, it would seem, has
encouraged dicidua formation.

Tubal Insuffiation—Gordon King’s apparatus has been used and has been found
satisfactory and easy to handle; the kimographic tracing is filed with the patient’s
notes and the date of doing the insufflation,
and the occurrence or not of referred shoulder
pain is recorded at the same time. If there
is indication of spasm, stenosis or blockage
on the tracing, the test is repeated, sometimes after giving atropin. The test provides
information as to the degree of patency and
peristaltic action of the Fallopian tubes. It
would appear to have a therapeutic value in
some cases. More than 250 insufflations have
been done, the majority between the ninth
and twentieth days of the cycle, though later
days have been used. No unpleasant sequelz
have been reported in any of these patients.
Cases showing complete tubal blockage confirmed by two or more insufflations are in our
experience rare (under 10 per cent.). This
fits in with the lower incidence of endometrial
tuberculosis in this series.

* Quoted by Sutherland (1943), J. Obstet. Gynec. Brit.
Emp. 60, 161.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Uterosalpingogram.—tIn, order not to trespass too much on the time and good nature
of the radiologist and his staff only carefully
selected cases are subjected to this examination : those in which a block needs localizing
or confirming, or in which distortion of the
tubal or uterine cavity or cervical canal seems
likely. Some fifty have been done also without any ill effect and in a few cases with
immediate benefit.

It should be noted that these examinations
have been done in the small operating or
examining room at the clinics or in the
hospital X-ray department, all (with the
exception of a few tubal insufflations, which
were done immediately before a D. and C,)
without anesthesia and apparently without
discomfort or damage to the patient. Asepsis
is, of course, observed and the presence of
active pelvic inflammatory conditions excluded.

Seminal Analysis——When we have ascértained that the husband is willing to be
examined he is given a thin-walled glass tube
with a waxed cork, a slip for entering name,
date and hour of collection of the specimen
and date of previous emission and written
instructions of how to collect and deliver the
specimen, to the laboratory. We have found
it important that the tube should be warmed
to blood heat before receiving the seminal
fluid (sperms stand sudden, chilling badly)
and that a sheath should not be used. We
prefer the specimens to be produced as a
result of coitus interruptus, though selfproduced specimens appear to be satisfactory
except from the point of view of a fair estimate of volume. The specimen should reach,
the laboratory as soon as possible after production ; the outside limit for the examination, to be of full value is five hours. In these
days of husbands coming and going on short
leaves we have not found it possible to insist
with any success on an interval of more than
two or three days since the last intercourse.

_ It is sometimes possible to arrange for a speci
men, to be collected on the first. day of the
husband’s leave, but this is often after a
period of abstinence of six to twelve weeks
(with irregular and unrecorded emissions),
and our impression is that it is no sounder, if
_A MEDICAL SERVICE FOR TREATMENT OF INVOLUNTARY STERILITY 123.

-as sound, to judge a specimen after a long
period of abstinence than after a recent
coitus (always provided that this has
occurred more than twenty-four hours previously).

The examination of the specimen includes :
estimation of volume, consistence and ap‘pearance, density and character of sperm
population, and percentage of initial activity
and of viability, under various conditions,
up to forty-eight hours. Two or more specimens are examined in as many cases as
possible, more particularly in those cases
receiving treatment, and we have made an
effort also to obtain specimens from
husbands of women coming to the clinic for
contraception. In all some 350 specimens
have been examined from more than 250
men. <A point of considerable importance
that does emerge from our records is that it
is not safe to pass an unfavourable verdict
on the evidence of one unsatisfactory specimen. It is only after several analyses have
confirmed the first gloomy picture that this
can safely be done. For example, we have
had four samples with counts below Io million
sperm per cc., the last coitus in three cases
being reported as having taken place more
than three days previously ; in three of these
cases counts of 30 to 115 million were
found on other occasions, while in the fourth
it has not yet been possible to repeat the
count, and in all four cases these men have
fertilized their wives, since their unfavourable counts, without receiving treatment.
Clearly our methods of assessing male
fertility are still imperfect. Another small
point : it is important to be tactful in giving
out reports on husbands if they prove to be
subfertile. A happy marriage can be wrecked
and the husband's self-confidence and potency
seriously upset by a too abrupt and final
unfavourable report. The treatment of
inadequate spermatogenesis is uncertain ;
check-up on the results of treatment by
repeated seminal analysis is important,
though the evidence obtained from this not
infrequently conflicts with clinical results.

Other Investigations
Testicular biopsy has been done, so far, in

one case only. Patients needing pregnancy
diagnosis tests and collection of blood for
Rhesus factor testing are referred to Dr.
Robb at the Royal Devon and Exeter
Hospital. Examination of blood for W.R. and
G.C.F.T. and of cervical mucus and urethral
smears for G.C. is done by the city and
county bacteriologists, the specimens having
been collected at the clinic. |

Evaluation of Evidence and Planning
Treatment
Having collected as much evidence as possible about the couple from their history,
menstrual calendar, temperature chart,
general examination and special examinations, an attempt is made to assess which
factors in husband and wife or both are
mainly responsible for the sterility. Only
occasionally is one factor in either partner
solely responsible ; more often both partners
show evidence of subfertility in one or more
directions. Some of the cases respond to quite
simple advice and treatment, and not infrequently one of the diagnostic procedures is
immediately followed by conception; @.g.
biopsy, tubal insufflation, salpingogram.
Others may require much patient work and
frequent reconsideration of old and fresh
evidence. For some the chances of success
are so remote that the couple have to be
advised that there is no reasonable hope, and
that adoption is their best chance of acquiring a child; in a few, one is left in the
exasperating position of saying ‘ conditions
are apparently favourable for conception,
why doesn’t it occur? ’”’ Obviously, one has
missed some point in the diagnostic chain.
No small part of the difficulty in dealing
with these patients is to keep them hopeful
yet not over-anxious, and undismayed by the
many examinations. They like being told
how things are going and what all the tests
are for, and what their chances are. Husbands
are encouraged to write or make personal
contact if they wish. _
At the clinic we are able to carry out or
arrange for most of the treatment likely to
be needed; much of it is purely advisory,
either to the patient by word of mouth or to
the couple’s doctor by letter,’ about such
124

things as diet, vitamins, clearing up of septic
foci, rest and exercise, frequency of coitus
and fertile days. Certificates for husbands in
the Forces, so that their leaves may be timed
to coincide with their wives’ fertile dates,
have met with remarkably sympathetic
response from commanding officers. Psychological treatment may be needed for certain
cases of impotence, or premature ejaculation
and vaginismus ; though many cases with
‘minor degrees of the former can be dealt
with by ordering the husband a short holiday,
building up his self-confidence, or giving him
short intensive courses of Methyl Testosterone, and of the latter by persuasion and
gradual dilatation of the introitus, sometimes
accompanied by treatment with oestrogens
to build up a thin hypersensitive vaginal
mucosa. Discharges (unless gonococcal) are
dealt with at the clinic by local treatment of
one sort or another (including electrical
cauterization of the cervical canal if necessary), supplemented by endocrine treatment
or measures to improve general health.
Uterine misplacements are corrected if possible. Endocrine treatment, if indicated, is
planned for husband and/or wife and supplies
of endocrines and dosage schemes are sent
to the patient’s doctor. Regimental Medical
Officers have been extremely helpful in
dealing with husbands. A few have received
their dosage of endocrines by means of implants of crystalline hormone done at the
clinic. Some of the wives have been sent to
Dr. Wroth for pelvic diathermy, or smalldose X-ray therapy to ovaries or pituitary.
Those needing operative treatment (D. and
C., myomectomy, salpingostomy, etc.) are
referred to the appropriate surgeon. For
cases where there are faults of delivery or
reception, or where the semen is lacking in
vitality, artificial insemination from the
husband is attempted (so far without much
success).

The treatment of habitual abortion is a big
subject and involves the use of endocrines in
adequate doses, diet, vitamins and rest. For
those unfortunate couples in whom a pronounced Rhesus incompatibility has produced a crescendo of foetal disasters artificial
insemination from a donor compatible with

THE EUGENICS REVIEW .

the wife is a possible solution, but has not
yet been attempted.

Findings and Results

No attempt can be made here to discuss
our findings, the groups into which the cases
may be classified, or the detailed results of
treatment. The data we have accumulated
have not yet been fully analysed ; our delay
in doing so is partly due to lack of time, but
mainly because we were determined to accumulate a number of observations on both
fertile and subfertile patients before making
judgments. Some of the early work has been
discarded because of faulty methods or because it seemed to be leading nowhere.
However, one general observation and a few
figures from the groups, subfertile and fertile,
may be of interest. From the point of view
of general health (endocrine deficiency excepted) the women, in the subfertile group
are on the whole a fitter sample than those
in the fertile group. Up to the end of March
1944, 389 women have been seen complaining
of complete or relative barrenness. Taking
this group as a whole, the average ages of
both partners and the average length of their
married life and the number of conceptions
have been calculated from particulars taken
at their first visit. As a control similar
figures have been obtained from a random
sample taken consecutively of 300 patients
attending for contraceptive advice. The
comparable figures for the two groups are
shown in Table II: |

TABLE II

389 SUBFERTILE AND 300 FERTILE WOMEN COMPARED
_ Figures calculated from particulars noted at first visit

Subfertile Fertile

Husband 32°70 32°75

Average age Wife ... 30°30 29°25
Years married (av.) Si ve

No pregnancies before
first visit

Having been pregnant
before first visit

264 (68%) 35 (11°3%)

125 265
(64 LB, 148 M) (726 LB, 77 M)
Live births (LB) per

woman ‘ 0°16 2°4
Miscarriages or stillbirths (M) per woman 0+ 38 0°26

The groups are closely comparable with
regard to age and length of marriage ; per‘A MEDICAL SERVICE FOR TREATMENT OF INVOLUNTARY STERILITY 125

haps the most noteworthy, if not unexpected,
feature about the pregnancy figures is the
close association between subfertility and the
tendency to miscarry which will be seen
again in our table of results. In considering
‘efforts at contraception before the first visit
_it is of interest to compare these two groups
again (see Table III) :

TABLE III

CONTRACEPTION BEFORE FIRST VISIT IN 389 SUBFERTILE
AND 300 FERTILE WOMEN

Contraceptive history Subfertile Fertile
Not used, or used for less than
3 months se sms .-- 108 (28%) 27 (9%)
Used for 3 months or longer—
Coitus interruptus only -. 107 (27%) 115 (38%)

Sheath, cap, and/or chemical 141 (36%) rar (47%)
Inadequate data - 33(9%) 17 (6%)

This does not suggest that the use of contraceptives induces sterility, but rather that
the superfertile woman makes somewhat
fruitless efforts to control her fertility by
using birth control of one sort or another.

We have attempted to keep in touch with
all the patients who have been investigated
or treated in any way, but as always, and
more particularly owing to the mobility
imposed on many wives by war-time conditions, a number have vanished. Of the 389

women in the subfertile group rather more
than 100 have either not been seen since
their first visit or have apparently given up
the idea of continuing investigation and
treatment and have been lost trace of. Of
those about whom we have news 135 have~
conceived on one or more occasions.

Those pregnancies that have terminated
have done so as follows :

Live births—74 (3 the result of artificial insemination).

Still births or miscarriages—46.

29 are at present known to be pregnant (one the
result of artificial insemination).

It is our custom to ask patients who have
achieved a child to send us a photograph of
the offspring. Proud mothers quite often
being their infants to the clinic and take
great pleasure in exhibiting them to the as
yet barren but hopeful crowd in the waiting- .
room. :

The degree of successes as indicated by the
above figures may appear meagre in proportion to the work involved. The compensation,
however, lies in the fascination of exploring
this still incompletely charted territory, the
pathetic gratitude of the parents, and the
gardener’s satisfaction in having made a
blade of grass grow where none grew before. |

SOCIETY OF COMPARATIVE LEGISLATION

“ For the promotion of knowledge of the course of legislation in different countries, more particularly in the
several parts of His Majesty’s Dominions, and in the United States.”
President: The Rt. Hon. S. M. BRUCE, C.H., M.C.
Chairman of the Executive Committee: The Rt. Hon. Lord MACMILLAN, G.C.V.O.
Honorary Secretaries : C. E. A. BEDWELL, Esq.
Professor H. C. GUTTERIDGE, K.C.

Annual Subscription 
One Guinea

Address: 28 Essex Street, London, W.C.2

 
