CORRESPONDENCE

Deterrents to Parenthood
To the Editor, Eugenics Review

SIR,—In the July number of the RrEvizw, the
Rector of Ingoldsby calls attention to the effect of
compulsory education on the birth rate ; and there
is a discussion of the Titmuss’s book (Parents
Revolt); but neither of these writings calls attention to one of the most potent and intractable
causes of a falling birth rate.

Admirable as the book may be, it strikes one as
special pleading for a particular form of social
organization (which, for the sake of brevity, we
can call “‘ socialism ’’).

** The individual must not only feel but know that
he is working and living not for himself alone but
for the community.’”’ And again; “‘ It is absolutely
unthinkable that a co-operative responsible attitude to the population problem can emerge in a
competitive acquisitive society.”’

In other words, a particular form of pseudoreligious emotion must govern those in whose hands
lies the future ; but Mr. and Mrs. Titmuss appear
to ignore the potent anti-social effects of genuine
companionship between husband and wife. It is
in that particular that the education of women
contributes to the fall in the birth rate. The pair
who are really happy will, only too often, refrain
from having children, because they fear (often,

with reason) that children will interfere with their
companionship, both during pregnancy and for
many years to come. It is. nearly two hundred
years ago that the poet (John Trumbull) wrote:

What has posterity done for us,
That we, lest they their rights should lose,
Should trust our necks to gripe of noose ?

I find, in conversation with many young couples,
that such an attitude of mind is common. No
increase of social security against war or want
alters the fact that the couple who have children
are less likely to be close friends than are those who
have none. True enough, there are relatively more
broken marriages in the case of childless couples,
but that is, presumably, simply because a rupture
is less troublesome.

That such an attitude of mind is widespread is a
depressing thought for those who worry about the
future of the human race ; but, much as they must
dislike it, they cannot ignore it.

I have no solution to offer: all I would assert is
that ‘‘ economic man ”’ is a figment of the imagination; and that it becomes more and more difficult
to persuade people to risk (or destroy) present
happiness for the sake of generations yet unborn.

A. Piney, M.D.
22 Basildon Court,
Devonshire Street, W.1.

 

ABC.
CONSTRUCTIVE BIRTH CONTROL

SOCIETY AND CLINIC FOUNDED BY Dr. Marie STOPEs IN 1921

The oldest Birth Control Clinic, the first to establish Birth Control
Case Sheets and collect scientific data; C.B.C. Clinics are still the
only free clinics: the only birth control clinics dealing from the first
with all aspects of birth control, i.e. prevention of detrimental births,
spacing of healthy births and inducing potentially desirable pregnancy
in sterile women, and general marital help.

THE PIONEERS OF THE CLINIC MOVEMENT
Library, Museum and Clinics open daily, 10-6 (except Sats.)
Books and Racial supplies may be obtained direct.
TECHNICAL DEMONSTRATIONS for MEMBERS of the MEDICAL PROFESSION
First Thursday each month

Applications to The Hon. Secretary, Headquarters Clinic,
PP 106 Whitfield Street, W.1

*.

 

105
