FURTHER RESEARCH ON CHEMICAL
CONTRACEPTION*

By JOHN R. BAKER, M.A., D.Phil.

HE work on chemical contraception

done under my direction in the Sir

William Dunn School of Pathology at
Oxford is financed by the Birth Control Investigation Committee, part of whose funds
are derived from the Eugenics Society. For
eight years I have benefited from the advice
and encouragement of Dr. C. P. Blacker. My
co-workers are Dr. H. M. Carleton, who confines his attention to the pathological side of
the research, Mr. R. M. Ranson and Mr. J.
Tynen. Most of our work may be classified
under four heads: the study of the scientific
basis of chemical contraception ; the invention of good chemical contraceptives ; the
testing of proprietary products; and the
making of reports on semen specimens submitted by patients.

Nomenclature

The naming of chemical contraceptives is
rather confused, and I wish to suggest the
following classification, based on the nature
of the vehicle in which the contraceptive is
dissolved or suspended. The words are logical
extensions of terms commonly used in
pharmacy, chemistry and physics.

The product may be solid, semi-liquid or
liquid at room temperature. If it is solid, we
may call it a suppository, and of this there
are three kinds: the gel or jelly suppository
(usually with gelatine as a vehicle) ; the fatty
suppository (often with cocoa-butter) ; and
the tablet suppository (including the types
which produce a foam on contact with water).
The semi-liquid products, which can be
squeezed from a collapsible tube, are pastes,
mucilages and ointments. Pastes are thick
aqueous products, without any considerable
admixture of gums, and the word is particularly applicable when starch is present.
Gelatine is often present in these in the sol

* An address delivered to the Eugenics Society on
March 16th, 1937.

109

condition, and the name “ jellies’ has been
used loosely for such products. This is most
confusing, for the word gel or jelly is only
properly applicable to an elastic solid, such as
a gel suppository. (A few of our own research
products are just solid and elastic at room
temperature, but can be squeezed from a
tube, and we call this limited type ‘ tubejellies.”) If an aqueous semi-liquid has a
considerable content of gum, we may call it
a mucilage. If the product is non-aqueous,
but owes its semi-fluidity to a fat or other
substance insoluble in water, we speak of an
ointment. If the vehicle is wholly fluid, we
speak of a douche.

Pastes may be used in two different ways :
either smeared on the upper (cervical) side of
a rubber occlusive pessary before the latter
is inserted in the body, or inserted by some
mechanical means in the vagina shortly before
coition. In our opinion these two uses require
different properties in the product, and we
suggest that pastes should be called cervical
or vaginal, according to their intended uses.

Gel and fatty suppositories dissolve or
melt at the temperature of the body, and are
therefore unsuited for use in the tropics. It
is likely that vaginal pastes, in collapsible
tubes, will become the simplest means of
chemical contraception in hot climates,
though gel suppositories may be transported
to tropical uplands in refrigerating vans.

Simplicity and Complication

In our own country, elaborate methods of
contraception are often advised. The woman
has to smear a cervical paste or ointment
over a rubber pessary and insert it before
retiring to bed, without knowing whether it
is going to be required or not. If coition
occurs, a suppository is inserted. Next
morning the vagina is washed out with a
douche and the pessary removed, cleaned,
driedand putaway. Thiselaborate technique
IIo

may be all right for some women, who are
very painstaking and have the necessary
privacy and bathroom accommodation, but
even for these the necessity to take precautions without knowing whether they will be
needed is irksome. For the majority of
women these complications are a great difficulty, and for poor women, with almost no
privacy and no proper bathroom accommodation, they are impossibilities. The existence
of complicated methods of contraception will
not prevent the innately careless and foolish
woman from having many children, while the
innately careful and far-seeing ones produce
fewer offspring. This will have a dysgenic
effect, and thus the discovery of a really
simple but effective method is of eugenic
importance.

Our work has definitely eugenical significance also in quite another way, for we are
investigating also the methods of stimulating
sperms to greater activity, and this may be
useful in promoting the fertility of certain
eugenically desirable people.

The only contraceptive that can be used
just when required and which needs no
mechanical help for insertion is the suppository. The fatty suppository has the disadvantage that the spermicide diffuses out
too slowly, while the tablet may not dissolve
sufficiently quickly if the vagina is dry. The
gel suppository cannot fail to become fluid
if it is properly designed, and the spermicide
is in solution in it, ready for immediate
action. If the spermicide is a really powerful
but harmless one, a very convenient method
of contraception is thus available. I claim
that chemical contraception has never really
been tried, because there has not been a
powerfully spermicidal gel suppository on the
market. Until it has been tried, we cannot be
certain that chemical methods alone, without
any occlusive pessary, are necessarily unsafe.
It has not been definitely proved that the
human uterus cannot suck up sperms from
the vagina ; but if it can do that, it cannot
fail to suck up the spermicide also.

Tests of Spermicidal Power

We have designed a series of rather complicated laboratory tests for telling us how likely

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

a given product is to achieve its purpose. In
designing these tests we have had the
advantage of being able to discuss them with
the very experienced clinical workers who
constitute the medical subcommittee of the
National Birth Control Association. My first
tests were designed eight years ago and seem
very primitive now, but we have profited
from criticism and are using a set of tests
which are, I believe, about as good as laboratory tests ever will be. I greatly hope that
the medical profession will accept them as
guides to the choice of suitable products. A
full description of our tests will be published
in the Journal of Hygiene, and only a brief
mention of them is allowable here.

We first test the rate of disintegration of
a suppository. This test is obviously not
applicable to an already semi-liquid paste,
mucilage or ointment. We next titrate to find
the amount of acid or alkali present. It is a
strange fact that nearly every product on the
market is acid. The vagina is probably
usually acid, and no doubt people have
thought it best not to change the reaction ;
but this is really a very thoughtless dogma,
for the vagina normally receives semen and
cervical secretions, both of which are alkaline. No damage is likely to accrue from
weakly alkaline or acid chemical contraceptives on account of their alkalinity or acidity,
and alkaline products would perhaps be particularly suitable for cervical pastes and
ointments.
_ The next test is that of total spermicidal
power on human sperms in alkaline solution.
This test shows how much spermicidal power
can be extracted from the product. We
postulate that in normal circumstances there
are 6 c.c. of fluid in the vagina after coition,
and our standard (S) concentration is therefore one suppository or one dose (2 grams) of
a paste or ointment to 6 c.c. of sperm suspension. There ought to be a margin of safety,
and we therefore do tests also at weaker
concentrations of the spermicide 2 ; 2 5,
etc.). Observations on the activity of the
sperms are made at five and thirty minutes.
The test is also performed in an acid medium,
since the contents of the vagina may be
FURTHER RESEARCH ON CHEMICAL CONTRACEPTION

slightly acid after coition, and some spermicides are less effective in acid solution. The
next test is the extremely important diffusion
test, which measures not the total amount of
spermicidal power that can be extracted
from the product, but the rate of diffusion of
the spermicide out of the (already disintegrated) vehicle into the semen. Observations
are made at 2, 5, 15, 30, 60, 120 and 180
minutes. This test is exposing the reason for
the ineffectiveness of chemical contraceptives
used alone, for although enough spermicide is
sometimes present, it generally remains uselessly in the vehicle and does not come into
contact with the sperms. This particularly
applies to pastes and ointments.

The Pathological Test

The pathological test is on bitches, which
were chosen on account of the general histological resemblance of the vagina to the
human one. The organ is much larger than
one would expect from the relative body sizes
of bitch and woman, and we think it fair to
make the dose half a suppository (or half the
normal dose of a paste or ointment). We
introduce half a suppository into the bitch’s
vagina daily for a fortnight, and then kill the
bitch and make microscopical sections of the
vagina, which are examined by Dr. Carleton.

Pregnancy Rate

Any product which comes out well in our
tests is suitable for clinical trial. It is
naturally essential that a good contraceptive
should work well in practice, though it is
probable that failures will never be completely eliminated, for people will always
exist who will fail to carry out even the
simplest instructions.

When it is desired to compare the efficiency
of different contraceptives in practice, clinical workers should give information which
will make it possible to calculate the pregnancy rate for each method. The pregnancy
rate is the number of pregnancies per 100
100P

V
pregnancies (whether full-term or abortions)
and V is the number of ovulations at which

 

ovulations, i.e. where P is the number of

III

conception might have occurred or did occur.
V=M—A-+P, where M is the number of
menstruations (i.e. the number of ovulations
not resulting in pregnancy) ; Ais the number
of times that the husband is absent from his
wife during one whole menstrual cycle
(starting at any point in the cycle), at a time
when his wife is menstruating regularly ; and
P is the number of pregnancies (i.e. the number of ovulations resulting in pregnancy).
When exact data for M and A are not
available, one may allow thirteen menstruations to the year. It is not possible to make
allowance for the number of menstrual cycles
in which, for one reason or another, coition
did not occur during the most fecund period,
mid-way between two menstruations. The
most convenient way in which to write the
100P
M—A+P
When ovulation starts again after pregnancy, there may be some lack of correspondence with menstruation, but probably
not enough to influence the results greatly.
Clinical workers must be careful to get
information as to when menstruation starts
again after a full-time pregnancy or abortion
(if indeed it does occur before the next
pregnancy). Pearl* allowed only 0-04 year
for the puerperal state in his calculations of
the pregnancy rate of over 30,000 women, the
details of whose menstruations were not
known ; but clinical workers will probably
be able to get the necessary information.
They should confine their studies to married
women and should report the values of M, A
and P for each woman separately. Pearl} has
shown that where no contraceptive device is
used the pregnancy rate is considerably
higher up to the age of twenty-four (except
that girls of fourteen and less who become
pregnant have a low rate). It would therefore be best to divide married women into
two groups, namely those less than twentyfive years old, and those aged twenty-five to
thirty-nine. It would be best to exclude
women aged forty and over. I suggest only
two age groups, because probably only a

formula for pregnancy rate is

* Lancet, 1933, II, 607.
¢ Milbank Memorial Fund Quarterly, 1936, XIV, 1.
IIz

rather small number of women will agree to
test one contraceptive consistently and to
give information on their menstruations,
pregnancies, abortions, etc. Individual
women will, of course, pass from one age
group to the other if they become twenty-five
years old during the period of observation.

Pearl’s figures, arrived at in a slightly different way, indicate that if a contraceptive
were having any effect at all one should
expect a mean pregnancy rate of less than
sixteen for the younger age group and less
than eleven for the older. The figures given
(sixteen and eleven) are roughly those for
American white women when contraceptives
are not used.

Reports on Semen Specimens

We make routine examinations of the
semen of two classes of patients of clinical
workers, namely men who fear they may be

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

sterile, and those who fear that their sperms
are particularly resistant to spermicides, so
that they present particular difficulties for
chemical contraception. We have shown that
there are men with unusually resistant
sperms. We report on the volume of the
specimen, the number of sperms per C.c.,
their activity, resistance to spermicides, and
abnormalities in structure (if any), the pH
of the semen and its buffering power against
acids, and the presence in it of crystals,
prostatic concretions, and cells other than
sperms.

Conclusion

In conclusion, I want to say that I am
hopeful that our research will result in the
discovery of a reliable chemical contraceptive, and that this Soczety will consider that
it has served the cause of eugenics by supporting our work.

  

VOL. 22

Negroes. One text figure.

measuring, instruments and classifications.

American Journal of Physical Anthropology
Published by The Wistar Institute
Ales Hrdli¢ka, Managing Editor, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.

CONTENTS FOR APRIL-JUNE 1937

WM. M. SHANKLIN anv N. IZZEDDIN. Anthropology of the Near East female. One text figure,
P’AN MING TZU. Origin of deep and circumflex femoral group of arteries in the Chinese. One text figure.
D. ROTHMAN. The endocranial course of the middle meningeal artery in American Whites and American

G. LEVIN. Racial and “ inferiority ” characters in the human brain. Eight text figures.
M.S. GOLDSTEIN. Weight. A survey of differences of method, instruments.
A. CIOCCO. Sitting height and sitting height: Stature index in adults. Survey of differences in methods of

W. W. HOWELLS. The designation of the principal anthropometric landmarks on the head and skull.

Proceedings of the Eighth Annual Meeting of the American Association of Physical Anthropologists, held
at the Faculty Club, Harvard University, Cambridge, Mass., April 8th to roth.

Price $6.00 per volume, Domestic; $6.50 per volume, Foreign.
Many early volumes are still available. Prices upon request
Address subscriptions to

THE WISTAR INSTITUTE OF ANATOMY AND BIOLOGY
36th Street and Woodland Avenue
Philadelphia, Pa., U.S.A.

    
        

No. 3

   
      
   
   
   
     
   
        

Issued quarterly

 
   
     
     

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIX, No. 2.
