HARRY L.

SHAPIRO

Ph,D., President, American Eugenics Society

Eugenics and Future Society

history of Europe that eugenics was for
mulated in the nineteenth century. This was
the century of the Industrial Revolution, of
rapidly expanding urban centres, and of a public
concern with the resulting human suffering. Its
very beginning saw Malthus first focus serious
attention on the quantitative aspects of population and the darkly looming problems associated
with its unregulated growth. And it was midway
in its course when Darwin published The Origin
of Species and thereby provided a theoretical
basis for the evolution of man and human
population. Only a little later, while Mendel
was analysing the hereditary behaviour of
sweet peas in his monastic garden, Galton at
about the same time in England was casting
up statistical tables on the appearance of
hereditary genius in England and arriving at
conclusions bearing on genetic quality in human
population. It was the century when Europe
was filled with confidence in the perfectibility
of man and society.

In the context of this unprecedented and growing concern with the problems and the future
of human population, the questions of quality
and its maintenance were bound to occur to
thoughtful men. Out of this emerged eugenics.
As an organized movement or programme,
however, it is typical of the traditions of Western
democracy, and its history can be understood
best in that frame. Based on the conviction
that something could and should be done to
improve the quality of human population,
it is important to remember that eugenics
in the United States was established as an
association of private citizens to further their
views and philosophy. They sought to do this

] SUSPECT ITIS no accident in the intellectual

* The Presidential Address at the Joint Dinner Meeting
of the American Society for Human Genetics and the
American Eugenics Society at Montreal on August 22nd,
1958. Reprinted from Eugenics Quarterly, 1959, 6, 1.

by drawing public notice to the need for
deliberate thought and action to preserve and
even to improve the quality of human population. It was never a science in the sense that it
occupied academic seats in the universities
or had staked out a special restricted field
of research for itself, although from its initiation
it had always been supported by scientific
workers who shared the fundamental beliefs
embodied in eugenics. Eugenics has always been
a joint enterprise of scientists and laymen
interested in applying to population problems
the best scientific knowledge of the time.

One might have expected that a belief in
the possibility of improving the quality of
human population and a faith that acceptably
sound means could be found for doing so might
have attracted from the very beginning greater
enthusiasm, particularly among men and women
dedicated to science and aware of its varied
achievements. But, in fact, eugenics has never
been a widely popular movement. It encountered
opposition from the general public, unaware
of the basic problems to which eugenics was
addressed and fearful of an invasion of their
private lives if eugenics were adopted as a
public policy. It also met with doubt from
academic circles, doubt that the need for a
population policy and action were pressing
or even necessary, and doubt that any of the
suggested means were likely to be efficacious
in any event. It is true that the zeal of early
eugenists not adequately grounded in science,
or of eugenists who were operating in areas
where science had nothing positive to say,
had in the past led to the advocacy of programmes that subsequently were discredited and
shown to be of little value. And this in some
circles did eugenics little or no good. This
points up the difference between science and
a programme. The discredited theories of
science have not discredited science. Instead,

89

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, July 1959, 51, 2
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

they occupy an honourable place in its history
as preliminary and tentative approaches to
the truth. Science, moreover, takes pride in its
ability to learn by its errors. Eugenics, unfortunately, has not always been a beneficiary
of the same tolerance.

Eugenics, like such words as democracy in
the international scene to-day, also had its
name used indiscriminately and sometimes for
purposes of a distinctly biased character.
And this too, I am afraid, did little to advance
its cause. But in the past generation it is possible
to discern a considerable change both in the
attitude towards eugenics, at least on the part
of students of population—both demographic
and genetic, and in the closer rapprochement
of eugenics itself with scientific advances in the
areas pertinent to its interests.

Although these signs are encouraging, eugenics
still has a long way to go in establishing the
public attitude through which it can be effective.
It is this I particularly want to discuss in relation
to the pressure of world conditions we are
facing to-day and are likely to face in increasing
degree in the not too distant future.

The conviction that something can be done
to regulate, control and/or improve human
population is a profound and ancient one.
To achieve these ends only two ways have ever
been suggested: one is by training, which means
in the last analysis a manipulation of the
cultural or social environment; the other
is by genetic selection. Mankind has long been
deeply and more or less consciously committed
to the first. Every society, in fact, is based on the
premise that the values and standards it has
created can be maintained only by conditioning
or training the young, and ultimately by providing the necessary environment to produce
the kind of individuals regarded as desirable.
And society, generation after generation, has
quite readily accepted the burdens and the
responsibility of providing the environment
and the corollary training to carry it on. And
indeed it is difficult, if not impossible, to see
how any society could long endure, preserve
the continuity of its traditions or adjust to
new conditions without some process of training or education through the manifold ways open
to an organized community.

Te)

But man has never been content merely
to stabilize his environment. He has also throughout his history profoundly modified and developed the technological and other cultural
aspects of it. His confidence in shaping his
environment and educating himself to manage
it successfully has never seemed to flag seriously
or for any great length of time.

That society has been so successful in these
efforts rests on the well-known adaptability of
man and his accessibility to education. The very
range of social and cultural patterns demonstrates in itself the ability of the human species
to respond to training and to the environment.
And I need scarcely dwell on the highly significant value of this human trait in the evolution
of mankind. For while human evolution, like
all other episodes of organic evolution, can be
explained biologically as the consequence of
an interaction between the environment and
genetic variation, it also differs from all these
others in having pursued its course under a
new kind of environment—a man-made environment that we call culture. Although some
other animals than man exhibit behaviour traits
suggestive of culture, none of them aside from
man has developed this phenomenon in all its
characteristic phases, especially those of language and tool-making.

Cultural or social environment does not, of
course, completely replace the natural environment. It is supplementary to it, but as culture
becomes more developed and complex probably
exerts an increasing degree of selection on the
genetic variation presented to it. And, indeed,
many more human characteristics than we
commonly realize are adaptations to cultural
rather than natural environmental conditions.
Hence human evolution can in a sense be viewed
as the progress of the human species in acquiring
the ability to learn ever more and more complex
types of cultural behaviour. And culture, the
specifically human environment, can in turn
progress only as men become more adept at
learning. Thus both culture and mankind have
evolved more or less in an inter-dependent
fashion. One can to a certain degree compare
the process with a kind of feed-back system.

While it may be granted that any existing
population has a greater potential of ability
EUGENICS AND FUTURE SOCIETY

than society through inefficiency may actually
utilize, and may therefore be capable at any
particular point of time of sustaining a more
complex culture than it does in fact, nevertheless
it is difficult to see how culture can continue
to evolve very far without corresponding
genetic adaptations in the population that
carries it. I know that students of human evolution are reluctant to place limits on the innate
abilities of earlier types of men, and perhaps
rightly. But the unavoidable inference of human
evolution is that mankind has continuously
increased its genetic abilities for cultural
behaviour as culture itself has evolved. And this
can only have occurred through the selective
pressure of culture becoming more and more
complex and demanding. For obviously selection, one of the mechanisms of evolution,
must also be operative in the cultural as it is in
a natural environment. Thus man by shaping
his environment has effected his own evolution.

I do not, of course, mean to imply that this
process has been a carefully thought-out one
or that either man or his society have been
consciously aware of what they were doing.
But in effect it has been man’s development
of his cultural environment that has kept the
ball rolling.

Selection, however, as an instrument for
enhancing or supporting social or cultural
requirements has rarely, if ever, been adopted
by society. In the few cases that are known of
such practices, it is usually a kind of negative
selection. Typical of most of them is preEuropean Tahiti where infants born with obvious
physical malformations or other anomalies
were allowed to die. Isolated instances are also
known of a more positive kind of selection
within limited groups to reproduce traits considered to be desirable.

I have no hypothesis to explain why society
has so rarely adopted selective practices. This
reluctance, if it can be given so active a connotation, can scarcely be laid to ignorance of
their value. It must have been a matter of common knowledge and of frequent use during
the thousands of years men have been selecting
and improving plants and animals. And, in
fact, individuals from time to time have not
hesitated to point out the obvious applications

of these principles of selection to human
breeding.

In the past, however, the cultural environment of man changed slowly. In the Paleolithic
we know that technologically little or no change
can be observed in human artifacts for periods
of thousands of years. In a general way, however,
the tempo of cultural change since then has
been increasing at a steady rate. As knowledge
accumulated, the process of change and development became more rapid. Within our own
recent history we have seen how vertiginous
this can be, and how profoundly our lives can
be affected by such radical alterations.

It becomes a _ serious question whether
the selective process, which obviously could
and did function in a slowly changing environment, can maintain the balance that has so
effectively advanced human evolution in an
age of rapidly changing culture. I would hesitate
to advance any serious estimates on the time
required for selection to function effectively
in either a primitive society or in an atomic
age, but we must consider the possibility that
as the cultural environment of man develops
with increasing rapidity that the selective process
will be unable to keep pace with it. We have
only to think of our society one hundred years
ago, with its relatively simple scientific technical
requirements compared with the vastly higher
requirements of skill and training necessary
to maintain and advance our present society,
to become aware that the margin of safety
between the pressures of culture and population
potential may become dangerously narrow in
the foreseeable future. This danger seems all
the more imminent if our cultural environment
continues steadily and with increased rapidity
to reach still higher levels of scientific and
technological demand. The pressure to find
more and more people capable of the education
and training that modern society requires has
already become a matter of public attention
and concern, not only in the United States
where such needs are probably maximal but
in other countries as well where serious efforts
are being made to adopt the standards and
achievements of Western culture. I do not mean
to suggest for a minute that we have necessarily
run out of sufficient talent. But I do mean that

g!I
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the time has obviously come when the careful
husbandry of whatever talent and quality a
population possesses is not only essential but
that the adequacy of its supply will have to
be taken into account. It is perhaps no longer
possible to relax in an easy reliance that our
human resources will be sufficient indefinitely
to the demands that may be laid upon them,
or to assume that the effectiveness of selective
processes left to themselves will take care of the
situation with a rapidity that will meet future
requirements.

The urgency of the problem of quality when
seen in this light becomes increasingly significant
for modern societies engaged in deadly competition with each other. Competition between
communities, tribes or nations is no new thing
in human history. Success of one over the other
in the past, of course, turned on a variety of
factors, mostly—according to current interpretations—of such a nongenetic nature as
superior organization, more adequate resources,
More advanced military techniques, superior
training or discipline, and other similar cultural
or environmental conditions. If differences
in the innate qualities of contending populations
played a decisive role, we have little or no
evidence for it. At least, that would not be a

92

widely held view. That cultural environmental
factors may continue to decide such issues in
the near future, I am certainly not prepared
to deny. But it seems to me a distinct possibility
that as the technological and scientific requirements of our rapidly evolving civilization continue to raise ever higher standards, the necessity
for taking thought about the genetic potential
of our population may become a very real
issue in survival.

Now I need not stress that in the tradition
of democracy the problem of guarding and
even improving the genetic quality of our
population must be solved by a programme
that has popular acceptance. Any solutions
that smell of force or duress cannot be admitted.
There is, therefore, a serious and heavy responsibility for those who believe in eugenics. They
must bend every effort to encourage investigations of an impartial and scientific nature to
determine what factors are affecting the quality
of our population and whether or not the
balance between it and culture is sound. And
based in such researches they must develop
a programme of information and action that
will be acceptable to a free, democratic society.
The task is difficult, but it is worthy of our
best.
