214 EUGENICS REVIEW.

Problem is political, and sometimes offensively so, but no harm is done by
presupposing noxious doctrines in order to destroy them, so long as one
does not, purposely or accidentally, associate them with more thoughtful
views. This is perhaps the most serious defect of Dr. Saleeby’s work,
and arises directly out of his easy and superficial presentation of difficult
problems. If Dr. Saleeby had more respect for those who disagree with
him, and would realise that they are equally likely to have thought carefully over a subject before expressing an opinion, it would be possible to
commend his work with far fewer reservations. R. A. FISHER.

Nash, J. T. C. Evolution and Disease. Simpkin, Marshall, Hamilton,

Kent and Co.; 1915; price 3s. 6d. net; pp. 73.

THIS is one of those books that drive to despair the unhappy reviewer
anxious to do justice to his author. All books on science, certainly all
books on evolution, whether scientific or not, have a clearly defined aim.
The writer sets out to describe something, or prove something, and all
through the reader is able to perceive the trend of the endeavour. The
author of the book before us apparently kept a note-book, in which he
recorded the opinions of a great many people, principally eminent
medical men, on a variety of subjects, especially disease. He now gives
us the contents of that note-book and adds, occasionally, some of his own
opinions. He has divided his matter into chapters, to which he has given
titles which bear more or less clearly on their contents. He speaks of the
evolution of ideas, of sanitation, of epidemics, of diseases, of disease
germs. I think he most particularly wishes to demonstrate that diseases,
or disease germs, are not immutable. Of course they are not. It is, for
instance, only necessary to take lymph from a smallpox patient, pass it
through a series of calves, and bring it back to man to demonstrate that
point. The vaccination from which our children suffer to-day is merely
the smallpox, much modified, which afflicted their predecessors.

The following passage is a fair sample of the author’s method. It
is perhaps worth while noting that plants and lower animals have their
diseases as well as men, and that only some human diseases are influenced
by municipal and personal uncleanliness. For instance, uncleanliness,
however much we strain the term, has no effect on the air-borne group
of diseases—e.g., measles, common cold, bronchitis, pneumonia, influenza,
whooping-cough, mumps, chicken-pox, and smallpox.

“Municipal and personal uncleanliness are clearly among the chief
evolutionary factors in disease. I am not one of those who believe that
disease germs entered one by one into the ark to transmit each its own
species unchanged through the ages. It is very questionable if at that
early stage of human history any pathogenic organisms existed, though
probably their prototypes in the form of harmless saprophytes were to be
found. As men began to crowd together and violated the laws of cleanliness, through ignorance or gross neglect, so gradually came into
existence the necessary factors which resulted, as I conceive it, in the
evolutionised forms of organisms which are accountable for disease. It
is, or should be, our business to see, as far as it lies in our power, that
evolution should proceed on favourable lines, that bacteria should evolve
in the direction of usefulness and not of harmfulness. How interesting,
and natural, and (I say it with all reverence) divine, is the working out
of evolutionary law! In life as distinguished from death all processes
are gradual. Death may be gradual, but how often it is sudden and
catastrophic. The processes of digestion, the healing of wounds, the
working out of ideas—all these are slow, sure, and accomplished by
gradual change. The violent earthquake, the rending lightning, the
deadly bullet—these move swiftly working destruction, undoing in a
moment the work of years, of ages, of epochs.”! AR

1P. 58.
