- FAMILY ENVIRONMENT AND
| INTELLIGENCE"

By JOHN NISBET, M.A., B.Ed., PhD.

Lecturer in Education, University of Aberdeen

BERDEEN, as research workers in
Ax fields have discovered, is a good

district for population studies, for its
position as the centre of a comparatively
isolated region and its mixture of farming,
fishing, industry, commerce and administration make it in many respects a representative urban population. Almost all the
children under twelve in the city, in the
Scottish tradition, attend local schools, and
the Education Authority is progressive in
authorizing and assisting research projects.
The investigations described in this paper
could not have been carried out without the
generous facilities afforded by the Education
Authority,f for it was possible in the
administration of tests to achieve an almost
complete coverage of age-groups of children,
only two small primary departments of
private schools being omitted.

In this paper a hypothesis is advanced
which to some extent reconciles certain of
the contradictory results which have emerged
from recent studies of intelligence and family
size. Investigations over the last thirty
years—there have been at least thirty-three
on this problem, among them particularly
the Scottish Mental Survey with its 70,000
cases—have established that in any representative sample of the population there
exists a negative correlation between the
intelligence test scores of children and the
size of the family to which they belong. In so
far as intelligence is inherited this seems to
imply a decline in the level of national
intelligence ; yet two recent studiest have
not found any such decline. Those who have
attempted to predict the amount of the
possible decline in national intelligence are

*A paper read at a Members’ Meeting of the Eugenics
Society on January 21st, 1953.

¢ The Education Authority is not in any way
responsible for this investigation or its conclusions.

t Scottish Mental Survey, 1949 ; Cattell, 1950.

not unaware of the fact that environmental
influences enter into intelligence test scores
and affect the size of the negative correlation
between intelligence test score and family
size. They have attempted to allow for the
influence of environment in two ways, both
of which seem to have serious weaknesses.
Some have tried to measure relevant environ-’
mental factors, such as parental occupation
or overcrowding in the home, and then have
observed the effect on the negative correlation when these environmental factors are
held constant. Such a method, however,
does not give accurate results if (as is suggested in this paper) one of the environmental factors is the size of family itself, the
amount of contact between adult and child
and the consequent stimulation of the child’s
verbal development. Again, other investigators have made allowance for environment by
first estimating the future trend of intelligence as if intelligence test score were determined wholly by heredity, and then halving’
that estimate, since at least half the variance
of intelligence is attributable to heredity.
This, however, is not altogether a valid procedure : for it does not follow that if half the
scatter of intelligence is due to heredity, then
the negative correlation of family size and
intelligence is half attributable to hereditary

factors. If a variable X (e.g. intelligence test

31

score) is determined by two factors A and B
(e.g. hereditary and environmental factors),
then the correlation of X with any other
variable Y (e.g. family size) may be due to an
association of Y with A or with B or with
both A and B together.

The Hypothesis

The hypothesis which is advanced in this
paper is that family size has a direct effect
on the environmental aspect of mental
development. This hypothesis derives from
the view that language and words afford a
ge THE EUGENICS REVIEW ORE RT

system of symbols 1 which greatly increase the |
efficiency of abstract thought. Limitation of .
opportunities for verbal development is

therefore likely to exercise a depressive
influence on ability to score in a test even of
general mental ability. It has been established that the only child enjoys a much
greater verbal development than the child
from an orphanage, because of greater opportunities of contact with adults and of
acquiring adult vocabulary. The large family
is considered here as an environment midway

between that of the only child and the

orphanage. The mere fact of belonging to a
large family implies restricted contact with
adults and fewer opportunities of acquiring
adult habits of speech and thought, a disadvantage which enters into the intelligence
test performance of children from large
families. If this hypothesis is correct, if this
is a factor in the negative correlation of test
score and family size—and it is not suggested
that it is the only factor—then a reduction in
the average size of families will mask any
decline in national intelligence which may be
occurring. From the point of view of future
research one important conclusion would
result if the present hypothesis were confirmed: im any comparison of the mean
intelligence scores of two generations, such
as is strongly urged in the Report of the Royal
Commission on Population (1949), the advantage would tend to be with the generation
with the smaller family units, and some
allowance for this would have to be made.
‘This is the sense in which the phrase
“family environment ”’ is used in the title
of this paper; it is not concerned with
income or nutrition or the number of rooms
in the house—though of course these may be
important factors—but only with the contact between child and adult, which is on
average proportionate to the size of the
family, except that in a large family the first
and the last perhaps have some advantage
over the others. (And, in fact, a tendency
towards slightly higher test scores among
first--and last-born has been observed.)

. A summary of investigations of the language development of children is given by
McCarthy (1946), who concluded that lan
guage development is affected by « age of .
associates, children who associate most with

adults being: superior.to others: thus only

children show a striking superiority in
language development, and children from
institutions a marked retardation. This
finding was based on her own work (1930) on
the subject, and was supported by a number
of studies reported from Iowa University. A
conclusion in accordance with these was that
of Smith (1933), that pre-school children use
longer sentences and ask more questions
when alone with an adult than when in a
group of children. Day (1932) and Davis
(1937) found a retardation in verbal development among twins; since this retardation
was less marked after school attendance
began it was suggested that the inferiority of
twins to non-twins was due not to any prenatal handicap but to their family environment, in which twins are at first inclined to
communicate non-verbally with each other
and to have less verbal association with
adults. In the ‘Scottish Mental Survey
(Mehrotra and Maxwell, 1949), the average
test score of twins was slightly below that of
non-twins, a phenomenon which may have
been associated with a verbal handicap. /In
view of all these findings, it seemed probable
that children from small families would have
better opportunities for language development than children from large families, who
have relatively less contact with adults and
would Petts suffer a slight environmental
handicap. ’

Such an influence of family environment on
verbal development could reasonably be
expected to affect scores in a verbal test of
intelligence, merely through the words used
in the test.. However, the effect may be more
direct than this: ability to manipulate
verbal symbols seems to play an important
part in the process of thinking, and particularly in problem-solving. This is the point
of view of Terman (1937), who wrote :

Language, essentially, is the shorthand of the
higher thought processes, and the level at which
this shorthand functions is one of the most

important determinants of the level of the
processes themselves. (p. 5.)

This is not by any means a new idea. It
o

'r

pees FAMILY ENVIRONMENT

oe

Ee appears in the. writings of Dewey (1909),

Thomson (1924), Ballard (1934), Watts
(1944) and others, even of widely different
background: for example, Head (1926),

writing on aphasia, noted that speech dis
--turbances sometimes impaired ability to

perform mental operations which required
the use of symbols. The problem of the relation of language and intelligence is not an
easy one to put to the test of experiment,
since in most cases verbal ability and
general mental ability develop normally side
by side. However, in two situations, those
of deaf children and bilinguals, an experimental design has been set up by nature and
throws light on the problem.

Children who have been deaf from an early
age afford one situation in which mental
development must occur without the usual
accompaniment of language growth. These
deaf children who have not learned to use
words show retardation in mental development and even in their performance in nonverbal tests of intelligence. This is the
general finding : of twelve studies from 1915
onwards, summarized by Pintner, Eisenson
and Stanton (1941), all except one found that
deaf children were on average mentally

‘retarded. A recent investigation by Blair

Hood (1949), using Alexander’s Performance
Test as a measure of intelligence, did not support this view ; but Watts and Slater (1950)
have shown that the standardisation of this
test is misleading. In Aberdeen, on a small
sample, Smith (1952) reported that the
mental retardation of deaf children appeared
to become progressively more serious as age
increased. Pintner and his colleagues also
summarized five studies of the language
developmnent of the deaf, all of which confirmed the very severe retardation suffered
by these children.

Other children whose language development is unusual are the bilinguals, whose
average performance in verbal intelligence
tests is inferior to that of monoglots. Smith
(1923), Saer (1923) and others have found
this result in Wales, though Barke and
Williams (1933, 1938) found no inferiority of
bilinguals on a non-verbal test of intelligence.
Smith (1948), using a non-verbal test among

a ef 33

so

the Gaelic-speaking population of ‘Levin

_ found the average performance of the bilin
guals to be below normal. Christophersen

_ (1949) suggested that in the case of mono
glots, “after early youth...a_ linguistic

‘crystallization’ sets in: their speech
organs become. fixed in certain grooves, and
their thoughts become inseparably linked
with the words of their mother tongue ” ;
but in the case of a bilingual person his
“mental processes are not immediately
linked with either of his languages,” a theory
which ‘ will account for that hesitancy of
speech that one sometimes notices in bilin- |
guals.” A bilingual person, he suggested,
may become as competent as a monoglot if
he is prepared to concentrate on one of his
languages, as for.example Conrad did, until
that language becomes the natural medium
of his thought.

“ On the basis of these findings it is suggested
that restriction of the normal language
growth of children may depress the standard
of their performance in an intelligence test.s

The hypothesis to be tested then is that a
portion of the observed negative correlation
between family size and intelligence test
score is due to the limiting influence on

‘general mental development exerted by an_

environmentally restricted development of ~
verbal ability. If this hypothesis were justified it might afford a clue to a partial resolution of the paradoxical results of the Scottish
Mental Survey, in which a negative correlation was established but no decline in intelligence observed. If part of the negative.
correlation were due to the effect of family
environment, then a general reduction in the
size of families would result in an artificial’
rise in mean score which might be sufficient _
to mask a real decline : a genetical loss would ©
nevertheless be occurring in proportion to
the extent to which intelligence is inherited.

‘and the extent to which the negative correla
tion is due to the limiting of familieS by
intelligent parents. Other explanations of
the situation have, of course, been made—
for example, the explaining of the observed
rise in score in terms of the test-sophistica- _
tion of the 1947 children—and such influ- .
gg ws THE EUGENICS REVIEW

ences ‘as this may well be operating to
complicate the situation still further.

Evidence for or against the hypothesis was
sought in three ways: firstly, by finding if
the method of partial correlation showed a
negative correlation between verbal ability
and family size independent of any association with general intelligence ; secondly, by
finding if the correlation between test score
and family size differed from test to test
when several tests affected in varying degrees
by verbal ability were applied to a single
group of children ; and thirdly, by checking
the prediction rom the hypothesis that, if
verbal intelligence tests were applied to
children at different ages, the negative correlation between family size and intelligence
test score would be more marked at later
ages when the cumulative effect of environment began to show itself.

Partial Correlation

_ The first test of the hypothesis, then, involved determining whether a negative correlation between verbal ability and family size
existed independently of any association
with intelligence. The method of partial
correlation was applied to the test scores of
two large groups each of. about 2,500 children. These were children at the stage of
transfer from primary to secondary education in Aberdeen. Such transfer groups are
approximately equivalent to a cross-section
of the child population of the city.

The first of these transfer groups, the 1949
group, numbered 2,709 in all, and for 2,561
of these it was possible to obtain data on size
of family, position in the family, and scores
in two intelligence tests (Moray House Tests
39 and 4o) and a test of English attainment
(Moray House English Test 18). This was a
94 per cent coverage of the group. Their
ages ranged from 10-5 to 12:10, but more
than go per cent of them lay between the
ages of II-I and 12:3, the mean age being
11-7. The mean family size was 3-41.

The 1950 transfer group numbered 2,638
in all, and by giving a second opportunity of

testing to those who were absent on the

‘appointed date it was possible to obtain full
information on 2,607, or 99 per cent of the

total. Their ages ranged from 10-2 to 13:5,
but again more than go per cent of them lay
between I1I-I and 12-3, and the mean age
was I1-7.. The mean family size was 3-38.
The tests used were Moray House Tests 41.
and 42, and Moray House English Test 109.
The possibility of excluding all those whose
ages lay outside a twelve-month range (to
make the groups more strictly comparable
with the eleven-year-old group of the
Scottish Mental Survey) was considered ;
but-it was thought inadvisable because of the
fact that test scores were expressed as
quotients to eliminate the effect of age, and
because such a course would have excluded
the brightest and the dullest sections of the
group instead of making it more representative. .

The tests in this part of the investigation
were those used by the Education Authority
for its transfer procedure, and so were not .
altogether suitable for the present purpose.
The tests of intelligence were verbal tests,
so that to use these for the holding constant
of intelligence made likely an under-estimate
of the relation between verbal ability and
family size. Tests of English attainment
were used for the measure of verbal ability ;
though scores in such tests are corrupted by a
schooling factor, they do have a considerable
verbal loading. It was clear that a certain
negative correlation between the. English
score and family size would be attributable
merely to the dependence of English attainment on intelligence. But if the hypothesis
were correct, if the largeness of certain
families operated to limit the verbal development of their members, the holding constant
of intelligence test score would still leave a
negative partial correlation between family
size and English score. If, on the other hand,
the environmental influence of the size of
family were negligible, and if the negative
association of intelligence and family size
were due only to the limiting of families by
intelligent parents, then one would expect
no association between family size and English score except such as was due to the
correlation of English score and intelligence.
In that case the partial correlation would be
zero. It is maintained in this study that both
_ FAMILY ENVIRONMENT

_ causes are at work. If this were so, the result
which might be predicted would be that the
partial correlation of family size and English
score, with intelligence test score held constant, would be substantially smaller than
the zero-order coefficient (due to the second
of the causes mentioned above), but would

still be negative and significantly different
from zero (due to the first of the causes).
This prediction was confirmed by the analysis
of results.

The means and standard deviations given
in Table I show that the groups are repre-sentative samples. |

TABLE I. MEaAns anpD STANDARD DEVIATIONS OF QUOTIENTS

1949 Transfer Group
2,561 cases

Test Mean S.D.
M.H.T.39 “IO1*37 13°8
M.H.T.40 106:30 14°8
M.H.E.18 105°33 15°3

The mean scores in each test for each size
of family were calculated, grouping together
all sizes of eight and above because of the
smallness of their numbers. The tendency
for mean score to drop with increasing size of
family can be seen in the results of all the
tests, as is shown in fig. I.

MEAN TEST SCORES AT DIFFERENT SIZES
OF FAMILY

Fic. 1.

Quotient Family Size —>

Y 132345 678123456 73+1234 5678+
12 Boer HE
to LLL TI Popa | IMA. TL tT TT EH
oa LLL TIN TT 40 TOA

106 | COCO ECE
oa PETC
ie8 CoN oe BREE AEE
100 SSE Ne ECE AEBS HE SRE

PaE ESSE

4
92 re rN geeeeeeceseenens
90

PCEEEETTY MP EEEEEEH ETE

123456 7%1232456078 1234 5678+

Mt
Mo SPREE ras HAE rae
Sree tt | M.H.E,

ioe
oat TN

SH 345% = 9 a 4,
te Ni

92 c

PEEPS

The figures give the number of cases for each
group of tests

The same results are expressed as correlation coefficients in Table IT.
Before applying the method of partial

1950 Transfer Group

2,607 cases
Test Mean S.D.
M.H.T.41 I102°59 13°8
M.H.T.42 106°31 15°2
M.H.E.19 103°35 15:6

correlation a check on linearity of regression
was made. The partial-correlation coefficients are given in Table III. All these
partial correlations are negative and significantly different from zero. They are,
however, substantially smaller than the
zero-order coefficients.

Though this first prediction was sotlirmed
there are too many sources of ambiguity in
the method of partial correlation for it to be
altogether satisfactory ; and it was clearly
desirable that alternative methods of
approach to the problem should be tried to
see if further support could be obtained for
the hypothesis.

Different Verbal Loadings .
In the second part of this investigation a
number of tests, depending in varying
degrees on verbal ability but otherwise as
far as possible comparable with each other,
were applied to a single group of children.
The argument at this stage was that if the
negative correlation of intelligence test score
and family size was seriously affected by the
family environment operating on verbal
development in the, manner suggested, the

, negative correlation would probably be
- greater with tests much dependent on verbal

ability, and would tend to be less with tests
more nearly independent of verbal ability,
provided that the tests were comparable in
other respects. Thus a test of vocabulary
should show a relatively large negative
correlation with family sizé ; a verbal test of
intelligence should show a certain negative
correlation with family size; and a nonTHE EUGENICS REVIEW

TABLE II. CorrELatTion oF FAMILY SIZE AND TEST SCORES

Correlation of family size-and :
Verbal intelligence test M.H.T.39 ...
M.H.T.40_ ...
M.E.T. 39 and M.H. T. 40 combined ...
English attainment test M.H.E.18 ...

Verbal intelligence test M.H.T.41 ...

M.H.T.42 ..
M.H.T. 41 and M.H.T. 42 combined ...
English attainment test M.H.E.19 ...

— "320 1949

—*335 Transfer

— +333 Group

—-318 N=2,561

— "323 1950

— +334 Transfer
_—'334 Group

— +342 N=2,607

TABLE III. Partiat CORRELATION COEFFICIENTS

Partial correlation between family size and :
M.H.E.18 (English) ‘ms ame

M.H.E.19 (English)

a?

verbal test of intelligence, being only slightly
influenced by family environment, may ‘be
expected to show a small negative correlation
with family size. If, on the other hand, the
negative correlation is relatively independent
of this verbal environmental influence the
variations in the verbal loadings of the different tests will not be accompanied by
parallel variations in the size of the correlation.

With the limited facilities available, however, increasing the number of tests necessarily involved reducing the number of
subjects tested. Consequently it was decided
to apply as wide a variety of tests as possible
to a small group which would be a random
sample of the population, making sure that
the sample was genuinely representative of
the population and was fully located and
covered by the testing.

The sample selected consisted of all the
children in Aberdeen who were born in the
month of April 1939—a total of 206. The
choice of a single month avoided the necessity
of age allowances and made possible the use
of raw scores in calculation. The locating of
the sample was done through the co-operation of the headmasters, and was checked
during personal visits to the schools, against
Education Authority records and by personal letters.

Test results were obtained for 198 of these
children ; and two others, in a special school
for the mentally handicapped, whose intel
Holding constant :

M.H.T. 39 (Intelligence) —-o81

M.H.T. — +046

M.H.T.39 and M.H.T.40 — +044
Number of cases 2,561

M.H.T. 42 (Intelligence) —-*I31

M.H.T.4 —-ogi

MELT 41 and M.H.T.42 — 109

Number of cases 2,607

ligence quotients were below 50 (StanfordBinet), were included in the lowest class
interval of the distributions of scores, in
accordance with the practice of the Scottish
Mental Survey. This made the number for
whom results were available exactly 200.
The missing six were: three children from
private schools, one deaf child, one invalid,
and one with an irregular school history.

Among the twelve measures which were
obtained for this sample of Zoo, there were
four tests of intelligence, two non-verbal—
Progressive Matrices (1938), untimed, and
Jenkins’ Scale of Non-Verbal Intelligence I
—and two verbal—Moray House Tests 41
and 42. The vocabulary items of Moray
House English Test 19 were scored separately
to give an estimate of range of vocabulary ;
and the remaining measures were of various
aspects of scholastic attainment.

The scores in the standardized tests were
at first expressed as quotients in accordance
with the published norms ; but considerable
differences emerged between the mean

‘quotients in the four intelligence tests, in

spite of the fact that the group was a
random sample of the population and all the
tests were applied in the same order at the
same time, or at nearly the same time. Since
correlational analysis of these results was
proposed it seemed desirable to impose new
normal distributions on the raw scores in all
the tests, giving each a mean of 100 and.a
FAMILY ENVIRONMENT - «BF

standard deviation of 15. Means and standard deviations are shown in Table IV:
grouping of scores has introduced small

tions in the Jenkins Test are printed in small

type and difficult to interpret. This explanation is supported by the comparatively high

TABLE IV. MEANS AND STANDARD DEVIATIONS OF QUOTIENTS

Test
Progressive Matrices (1938) ...
Jenkins’ Non-Verbal Scale I
Moray House Test 41
Moray House Test 42
Moray House English 7 Test 19.
Vocabulary :

deviations from the imposed statistics. The
mean, family size was 3-18 and the standard
deviation of family size was I-90.

Using the new quotients, correlations were
calculated between family size and scores in
these measures, and are given in Table V.

TABLE V
CORRELATIONS OF FAMILY SIZE AND TEST SCORES
Correlation of family size and :

Progressive Matrices (1938) —*197
Jenkins’ Non-Verbal Scale I — +249
Moray House Test 41 — +298
Moray House Test 42 : — +303
Moray House English” Test 19 — +289
Vocabulary — +286

The main interest in these results lies in
the difference in the correlation between
family size and intelligence test score with a
non-verbal test (Matrices —-197; Jenkins
—-249) and that with a verbal test (M.H.T.41
—-298 ; M.H.T.42 —-303). The significance
of these differences cannot be calculated
exactly, for the family size measure is discrete; but it was tested by Cochran’s
formula* for a difference between two correlation coefficients based on the same random sample. The difference between the
correlation involving the Matrices Test is
significantly different at the -05 level from
the correlations involving Moray House
Tests 41 and 42. None of the other differences reaches the -05 significance level.

For the most part the results are in accordance with the prediction that the non-verbal
tests would show a smaller negative correlation with family size than the verbal tests.
The Jenkins Test is intermediate between the
non-verbal Matrices and the verbal Moray
House Tests, perhaps because the instruc
* Lindquist, 1940, p. 218.

Old Quotients New Quotients
S.D. S.D.

ean Mean
102+50 13-0. 99°98 14°6
107°95 14°3 100°05 14:6
103°55 + —«13°5 99°72 14°8
108-30 15*4 99°90 14°9
104°28 15°5 99°80 14°6
— —_ 99°72 14:6

correlation between the Jenkins Test and the
Vocabulary Test of -73, compared with a
correlation of ‘56 between Matrices and
Vocabulary.

However, there are at least two alternative
explanations of why the correlation involving
the Matrices Test should be smaller than the
others :

(i) It might be due to differences in reliability between the tests : unreliability
of any of the tests would depress the
correlation of that test with any other
measure ;

(ii) It might be due to differences in
validity between the tests : it might be
argued that the “ intelligence ’’ measured by the Matrices Test is a different
type of ability from that involved in
the Moray House Tests,.and that the
reason for the differences in the correlations is that the tests are measuring
different abilities.

The first of these possibilities can be tested
quite simply by means of correction for
attenuation : such correction had virtually
no effect on the difference between the correlations. The second is rather difficult to
test, but a factor analysis of eight of the
measures made possible a comparison of
the “‘g ” loadings of the various tests. From
the results there seemed to be no basis
for the suggestion that the differences between the correlations could be attributed
to differences in the “g’”’ loadings of the
tests.

There remains the second part of the prediction, that the vocabulary test would show
the highest negative correlation with family
size. This was not supported by the results :
38°C THE EUGENICS REVIEW

all the correlations involving verbal tests,
both verbal intelligence and English attainment, are of approximately the same magnitude. The vocabulary test, however, was
shorter than any of the other tests. In case
it might be thought that the test form of all
these measures was introducing spurious
results the correlation was calculated between
family size and marks’ in a composition
written by these children, and was —:253.

Different Ages

A third method of testing the hypothesis is
to find if the age at which the intelligence
test 1s administered affects the size of the
correlation. A preliminary prediction may
be made that the negative correlation, if it is
subject to marked environmental influence,
will tend to be greater at later ages when the
cumulative effect of environment begins to
show itself.

Ideally to test this prediction one should
apply the same test to the same children at
different ages. However, at different ages the
children would score on different parts of a
test and therefore would in effect be taking
different tests, although these might be
printed all in a single booklet. Consequently
the need to use different tests at different
ages is a weakness in the design of this part
of the investigation. The performance of a
small number of children was studied over a
period of years ; and the.results from this
small group were checked against the testing
of large numbers at different ages.

Scores in verbal intelligence tests at ages

seven, nine and eleven were obtained for
178 of the 200 children in the random sample
described above. The test at age seven was
Moray House Picture Test; at age nine,
Schonell’s Essential Intelligence Test. These
were compared with the results of Moray
House Test 41 at age eleven. The means and
standard deviations given in Table VI show
that the group is representative of the
population.

The intercorrelations of the tests were:
between Moray House Picture Test and
Schonell’s Test, -738; between Schonell’s
Test and Moray: House Test 41, -856; and
between Moray House Picture. Test and
Moray House Test 41, -748. ,

The correlations of family size and intelligence test score at the different ages were :
at age seven, —-209; at age nine, —-226;
at age eleven, —-289. The correlation is
smallest at age. seven and increases as the
children grow older. Because of the small
number of cases the differences are not
significant. |

Significant differences emerged from the
testing of large groups at different ages. In
Aberdeen a representative group of about
1,200 children enter the primary schools
every six months. Moray House Picture
Test was applied to one such group of 1,236
children at age seven ; and Schonell’s Essential Intelligence Test to one group of 1,270
children at age nine. These two groups were
compared with four groups tested at age
eleven plus and described previously as the
1949 and 1950 Transfer Groups. This

TABLE VI. MEANS AND STANDARD DEVIATIONS

Small group :
Moray House Picture Test ...
Schonell’s Essential Test
Moray House Test 4
Family size +
Large age-groups :
Moray House Picture Test ...
Schonell’s Essential Test
Moray House Test 39
Moray House Test 40
Moray House Test 41
Moray House Test 42
Family size .

N Age Mean S.D.
178 7 99°22 14°5
9 IOI-Ig 16°8
II 102:79 13°8
7 3°00 1°93
9 3°15 1°94
II 3°28 1°94
1,236 7 104°50 15°5
eee 1,270 9 104°63 17°I
7 IO1I*37 13°8
ny 2,561 tT 106-30 14°9
wes 102°59 13°8
wf 2,607 tT 10631 15'2
1,236 7 2°77 1°54
1,270 9 3:00 1°70
2,561 | II 3°41 1°87
2,607 II 3°38 1°87
eleven-year-old group numbered 5,168 in all,
2,561 tested on Moray House Tests 39 and
40, and 2,607 on Moray House Tests 41 and
42. The means and standard deviations
given in Table VI show that all the groups
are comparable and representative samples.

In the large age-groups the correlation of
intelligence test score and family size was:
at age seven, —-256; at age nine, —-287;
and at age eleven, —-333. These coefficients
are all larger than the corresponding coefficients in the small group, but they repeat the
same pattern. The negative correlation is
greater when the test is applied at a later age.
The difference between the correlation at age
seven and at age eleven is significant at the
OI level.

It is difficult to see why the coefficients
from these large groups should be greater
than the corresponding results from the
small group. Vernon (1951) reported a correlation of —-34 between intelligence and
family size in a group of 10,000 recruits aged
18 : however, the tests in that investigation
were both verbal and non-verbal tests, so
that his results are not directly comparable
with these.

The differences between the correlations at
age seven and at age eleven may be due to
any of three causes. They may be due to:

_ (i) Differences on the szze side of the
correlation, because the families are
| most nearly complete at age. eleven ;
(ii) Differences on the fest side of the
correlation, either (a) differences in
test reliability, or (b) differences in
validity ;
Genuine differences in the degree of
relationship, through the increasing
effect of environmental influence.

(iii)

It is only in the small group of 178 cases
that the nature of the data allows a precise
testing of these alternative explanations.
The first alternative, attributing the result
to differences in the completeness of families,
may be tested easily. The family size at age
eleven is the nearest available estimate of the
completed size, and if the test scores at age
seven and nine are measured against family
size at age eleven, this will eliminate dif
FAMILY ENVIRONMENT | os : 390

ferences on the family-size side of the
correlation. |

The result of such a process was to raise
the correlation at age seven from —-209 to

—'225 ; to raise the correlation at age nine

from —-226 to —-232 ; while the correlation
at age eleven remained —-289. This brings
the coefficients slightly closer, but the
differences remain. .

The second alternative explanation, attributing the results to differences in test
reliability, may also be tested simply. Correction for attenuation, using the reliability
coefficients given in the test manuals, was
applied to the revised coefficients which have
just been obtained. The result was to raise
the coefficient at age seven to —-230, at age
nine to —-242, and at age eleven to —-293.
This has very little effect on the differences
between the correlations.

The question of differences in validity is
not so easy to handle. Moray House Test 41
was selected for this comparison because it
appears to resemble the other tests more
closely. It is certainly similar to Schonell’s
Essential Test ; and it differs from Moray
House Picture Test principally in that the
latter does not require reading ability,
although the oral instructions of the Picture
Test are just as verbal as those of the other
tests. It is clear from results mentioned
earlier in this paper that if a non-verbal test
had been chosen at age eleven for this comparison the correlation between test score
and family size would have been much
smaller. However, it is the verbal element
that is of chief interest in this investigation.

It remains to be said that since all these
calculations were based on the 178 cases of
the small group the numbers are too small to
yield significant differences at any point.
Significant differences might be expected to
emerge from numbers as large as those in the
age-groups ; but since these are separate
samples of the population it is not possible
to make an accurate calculation of the effect
of incomplete families. A new but rather
complicated method of estimating the degree
of incompleteness of family among an agegroup of children (which will be described
elsewhere) suggests that the effect of incom40 9 ot,

plete families in the large age-groups is
approximately the same as that found in the
small group. If this assumption is valid, and
corrections for incomplete families and un
reliability of tests are applied to the cor
relation coefficients obtained from the large
age-groups, theresulting corrected coefficients
at age seven and at age eleven show a difference which is still significant at the -05 level.

The disposal of two of the alternative
explanations suggests that the third explanation is the correct one, that the differences
between the negative correlations of intelligence test score and family size at different
ages are due to the cumulative effect of
environmental influences.

Summary and Conclusions

A hypothesis has been advanced that the
environment of the large family—the limited
amount of contact between parent and child,
and the consequent retardation of the child’s
verbal development—tended to depress the
environmental component of a child’s test
score. This was based on previous work on
the comparison of orphanage children and
only children, on studies of bilinguals, deaf
children and twins. It was not suggested
that this cause alone operated to produce the
negative correlation of family size and
intelligence test score, but only that it contributes to the correlation to an extent
sufficient with other influences to mask any
possible downward trend in national intelligence and to prevent the use of test scores of
age-groups of children for predicting future
intelligence levels in the nation.

. Predictions from this hypothesis were
tested by three methods : by partial correlation of family size and verbal ability with
intelligence held constant ; by correlation of
family size and several tests with different
verbal loadings ; and by correlation of family
size and intelligence at different ages. The
fact that the hypothesis has survived these
three tests does not, of course, mean that it
is correct: there are still other possible
explanations of the results. But it seems that
part of (though not. all) the negative correla
tion of family size and intelligence test score .

may be attributed to an environmental

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

influence of the size of family on verbal

development and through it on general
mental development. At the same time, at
each stage of the investigation it seemed clear
that the whole of the negative correlation
could not be explained in terms of this
environmental influence. Others who have
worked on this problem on a nation-wide
scale do not deny a certain amount of
environmental influence, and would probably wish attention to be drawn to the
substantial negative correlation which remains when the environmental influence is
allowed for. Such remaining negative correlation, it would seem, must have the effect
of depressing the trend of national intelligence, a tendency which may easily be
masked by environmental influences.

REFERENCES

Ballard (1934), Thought and Language. Universtiy of
London Press.

Barke (1933), Brit. J. Educ. Psychol., 3, 237-50.

Barke and Williams (1938), Brit. J. Educ. Psychol., 8,
63-77
Cattell (1950), Eug. Rev., 42, 136-48.

Christophersen (1949), Bilingualism. Methuen.

Davis (1937), Inst. Child Welfare Monog. Series, 14,
University of Minnesota Press.

Day (1932), Child Development, 3, 179-99.

Dewey (1909), How We Think. Heath.

Head (1926), Collected Papers on Aphasia and Kindred
A ffecttons. Cambridge University Press.

Hood (1949), Brit. J. Educ. Psychol., 19, 210-19.

Lindquist (1940), Statistical Analysis in Educational
Research. Houghton Mifflin.

McCarthy (1930), Inst. Child Welfave Monog. Series, 4.
University of Minnesota Press.

McCarthy (1946), Chapter X, Manual of Child
Psychology (editor, Carmichael). Wiley.

Mehrotra and Maxwell (1949), Population Studies, 3,
295-302.

Pintner, Eisenson and Stanton (1941), The Psychology
of the Handicapped Child. Crofts.

Royal Commission on Population (1949),
Cmd. 7695. H.M.S.O.

Saer. (1923), Brit. J. Psychol., 14, 25-38.

Scottish Mental Survey (1949), The Trend of Scottish
Intelligence. University of London Press.

Smith, C. (1948), Mental Testing of Hebridean Children
in Gaelic and English. University of London Press.

Smith, D. (1952), Brit. J. Educ. Psychol., 22, 71-2.

Smith, F. (1923), Brit. J. Psychol., 13, 271-82.

Terman and Merrill (1937), Measuring Intelligence.
Harrap.

Thomson (1924), Instinct, intelligence and jharachere
Allen & Unwin.

Vernon (1951), Eug. Rev., 43, 125-37.

Watts (1944), The Language and Mental Development
of Children. Harrap.

Watts and Slater (1950), The Allocation of Primary
School Leavers to Courses of Secondary Education.
Newnes.

Report.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLV, No. 1
