THE EUGENICS SOCIETY

r | =: ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING
was held at 69 Eccleston Square,
S.W.1, on Tuesday, June 16th, 1942,

at 5 o'clock, with the President, Lord

Horder, in the Chair.

MinuTES. The Minutes of the Annual
General Meeting held on Tuesday, June 17th,
1941, which were contained in the Annual
Report for 1941-2 (copies of which were
distributed at the Meeting) were taken as
read and signed as correct.

ANNUAL Report. The Chairman presented the Annual Report, the formal
adoption of which was seconded by Mr.
Titmuss and carried unanimously.

STATEMENT OF ACCOUNTS AND BALANCE
SHEET. The Honorary Treasurer presented
the Statement of Accounts and Balance
Sheet for the year ended December 31st,
1941. These were unanimously adopted.
The Honorary Treasurer said that he would
like to point out that for the past year the
Society had been able to live within its
income, partly because its activities had
been greatly reduced on account of the war.
Arising out of this statement, Mrs. Hodson
asked if the question of lectures to members
of H.M. Forces from the Society had been
considered. Dr. Lewis said that a panel of
lecturers, on various subjects, to H.M. Forces
was in existence, and undertook to find out

more about this, and those Fellows and

‘Members who were present were asked to

send in to him the names and addresses of
anyone whom they considered would be
suitable speakers. It was agreed that a
special meeting of the Emergency Committee should be held in July, on a date to
be arranged, in order that the matter could
be discussed.

HONORARY OFFICERS AND COUNCIL FOR
THE YEAR 1942-3. Following the procedure
of the two previous years, it was proposed
by Miss Robertson, seconded by Mrs.
Jenkins, and carried unanimously, that the
Honorary Officers and Council should remain as appointed on May 16th, 1939, with
the exception of the following: Lord
Salvesen (whose death had been recorded),
Sir Charles Arden-Close (who resigned last
year), and Professor Fisher, Dr. Fraser
Roberts, and Dr. Thornton (whose resignations had already been reported and accepted) ; and that the Emergency Committee for the ensuing year should consist of the
following: The Lord Horder, Mr. Cecil
Binney, Mr. B. S. Bramwell, Mr. C. F.
Chance, Miss E. Corry, Hon. Mrs. Grant
Duff, Mr. W. T. J. Gun, Mrs. E. M. Hubback, .
Dr. A. J. Lewis, Mr. R. Martin, and Mr.
R. M. Titmuss.

ELECTION OF AUDITORS FOR THE YEAR
1942-3. Messrs. West & Drake were unanimously re-elected.

ANNUAL REPORT, 1942-3

In this Report, the accounts relate to the
period December 31st, 1941, to December
31st, 1942. The rest of the Report covers
the period from March 31st, 1942, to March
31st, 1943.

The Report has been made as brief as
possible owing to existing conditions.

General.—During the past year, the affairs.

of the Society have been carried on by an
Emergency Committee formed from the

22

Council. The names of the members of this
committee are starred in the list of the
Honorary Officers and Council which is given
on the inside of the front page of the cover.
Six meetings of this committee have been
held in the period under review.

It has been the general policy of the
Emergency Committee to reduce activities
and expenditure during the war. In the last
six months, however, there has been a revival
ANNUAL REPORT,

of certain activities which have been suspended since September 1939. These are
described below.

In October 1942, Dr. C. P. Blacker, the
Society’s General Secretary before the war,
returned to London, having been temporarily
seconded from the army, in order to work
under the Emergency Medical Services.
During this period he will act as the Society’s
Honorary Secretary.

Population.—The Population Investigation Committee, of which Mr. A. M. CarrSaunders is Chairman and Dr. Blacker
Honorary Secretary, has been revived. Dr.
M. J. Elsas has been appointed its General
Secretary. Its headquarters will continue to
be at the Society’s house, at 69 Eccleston
Square. The Society has made a grant of
£500 a year for two years.

The Population Policies Committee, which
before the war was jointly composed of
members of the Council of the Soczety and
of P.E.P., and was financed by the Soctety,
has also been revived. Mr. Francois Lafitte
continues to act as its secretary and he will
be assisted by Mr. Julius Isaac. The Society
has made a grant of up to £450 for a period
of a year.

Family Allowances.—Sir William Beveridge, in his report, recommended a flat-rate
scheme of family allowances, beginning with
the second child, payable to families in all
income groups. In his Galton lecture, Sir
William made it clear that it was in his view
not only possible but desirable that graded
family allowance schemes, applicable to
families in the higher income groups, be
administered concurrently with his flat-rate
scheme.

The graded family allowance has long been
advocated by the Society, and has been
espoused since the publication of the
Beveridge report by the Family Endowment
Society, to which a grant of £250 has been
made.

Soctety’s Premises.—The second floor has
continued to be occupied by the Family
Planning Association rent free.

The self-contained maisonnette on the
third and fourth floors, which suffered some

1942-43 23

damage from enemy action in 1941, has been
put in order.

Galton Lecture —The Society was fortunate
in securing as the Galton Lecturer Sir
William Beveridge, who, on February 16th,
1943, addressed a meeting of Fellows,
Members and guests at Manson House, on
Eugenic Aspects of Children’s Allowances.
The lecture was followed by a spirited
discussion. A full report appeared in the
January 1943 issue of the EUGENICS REVIEW.

Major Leonard Darwin.—The Society has
suffered the grievous loss of its honoured and
beloved Honorary President, Major Leonard
Darwin, of whom appreciations were published in the EUGENICS REVIEW of January
1943.

Lectures.—Seven lectures have been given
on behalf of the Soczety, four by Mrs. Poole
and one each by Mrs. Grant Duff, Mrs.
Tamplin and Mr. B. S. Bramwell. The
Society’s film, From Generation to Generation,
has been out on loan six times. The Paddington Health Week was held at Whiteley’s
Store from April 2oth to 25th, and Mrs.
Poole was in attendance at the Soctety’s
exhibit.

Finance.—The usual statement of Income
and Expenditure, Balance Sheet and List of
Investments will be found at the end of this
Report, with corresponding figures for the
previous year. It will be seen that last year
there was an excess of income over expenditure of £1,484 12s. The Society has received
notice of a legacy of £2,000 from the late
Mr. J. H. Curle, whose death is recorded
elsewhere in this Report.

Library.—Twenty-seven new books have
been added to the Library during the year.
The Soctety is again indebted to Miss Corry
for her valuable services as Honorary
Librarian.

EuGENICS REVIEW.—The circulation of
the REVIEW has again dropped slightly
during the year, due chiefly to a reduction
from 100 to 50 in the copies sent each
quarter to the Eugenics Society of Victoria.
Dr. Newfield’s improved health enabled him
to resume the editorship of the REVIEW in
the early summer of 1942; and the Soctety
24 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

is most appreciative of the able editing of the
issues for January and April 1942 by Mr.
R. M. Titmuss during Dr. Newfield’s absence.
Obittuary.—We regret to record the deaths
of the following: Mr. F. L. Bland, Mr. J. H.
Curle, Major Leonard Darwin, Sir Daniel
Hall, Miss Marion Holmes, Mrs. Lethbridge,
Rao Bahadur Natesa Aiyar, Dr. Charles
Pinching, Mrs. Standfield, and Dr. Styles.

Register of Fellows and Members.—An
analysis is presented of the Soczety’s Register

for the period April rst, 1942, to March 31st,

1943 :
Life

fe
Fellows Fellows Mors.

Total, March 31st, 1942 67 185

 

 

Elections, 1942/3... 4
68 189

Less—
Deceased ... aon 3 4
Resigned ... 5
Lapsed or Suspended —_ 9

Total, March 31st, 1943 65 171
Affiliated Societies... —

219
15

234

Total

471
20

491

10
Ir
18

 

452
3
