212 EUGENICS REVIEW,

Reinheimer, HERMANN. Symbtogenesis—The Universal Law of Progressive Evolution. Knapp, Drewett and Sons, Limited; 1915; pp. 450.
IN this book the author attempts to amplify the thesis previously put
forward in his Evolution by Co-operation, which was noticed in a recent
number of this REview. This thesis is stated in the introduction as
follows :—“I claim the great principle underlying all Creative Life, all
Progressive Evolution to be that of ‘Symbiogenesis’; ¢.e., the mutual
production and symbiolic utilisation of biological values by the united and
correlated efforts of organisms of all descriptions.” The author, in his
preface, quotes an unnamed “ well-known and distinguished writer” as
saying “ That there is something in it is absolutely undeniable.” We do
not deny that there may be something in it, though we think there is less
than Mr. Reinheimer would have us believe, but the pity of the book is
that it is so written as to make it almost hopeless to get that “ something ”
out of it. It is possible to read page afer paye and have scarcely a
glimmering of what the author really means. Sentences such as the
following—they are chosen almost at random—occur in nearly every
paragraph: “Again, we thus see how everything points to a deep-seated
qualitative change, 2.é., to a change of bio-economic (and associated
physiological and bio-chemical) value as a necessary preliminary to or
concurrently with the formation of new species” (p. 132). “ Certain it is
that nothing is more detrimental to the ‘occurrence’ (production) of
highly-specialised alternative sex ‘characters,’ as also to the production
of values generally, than cessation of work” (p. 170). The word
“symbiolic” or “symbiogenetic” is thrown in (in brackets) apparently
almost at haphazard into many sentences, sometimes in such a way as to
make them almost meaningless, thus: “If intelligence, however incipient,
was concerned in the (symbiolic) integration of form, those Greek philosophers (who forestalled so much of modern science) who held that Mind
formed the Body and that it was wrong to say that the mind was in
the body: the body being in the mind, may not have been far wrong”
(p. 24). A considerable portion of the book is occupied by quotations,
from the most varied writers and in at least five languages. But the
author seems to have no critical faculty; he quotes, apparently as of
equal authority, recognised leaders of thought and obscure writers of
magazine articles, some of whom, we fear, can only be described as
cranks. Faced with difficulties such as these, we doubt whether many
readers will have the courage and perseverance needed to get at the true
inwardness of Mr. Reinheimer’s theory of symbiogenesis. We at least
frankly admit that we have failed to do so, in spite of repeated attempts,
and yet we feel that if only it were expressed in words that we could
understand, there may perhaps be “ something in it.” L. D.

Hildersheim, O., M.D. The Health of the Child: A Manual for Mothers
and Nurses. Methuen; 1915; 1s. net; pp. 111.

IN the introduction to this book Dr. Still remarks that the need for
instruction grows more instead of less as civilisation advances and the
complexity of modern life increases. The exigencies of modern social life
intervene increasingly between mother and child; and there is a diminishing capacity for suckling. The object of the writer is to give a simple
account of the principles on which children should be brought up to make
of them good citizens, both physically and morally. Good advice to the
mother is given in the chapter “ Health of the Child before Birth.” Dealing with “training ” the author remarks that the character with which the
child is born and the characters of those who care for him are the things
which count. What is in the child is more important than the method of
bringing it out. “Systems of education come and go.” The style is
admirably concise and clear.
