REPORTS.

TRANSACTIONS OF THE EIGHTH ANNUAL MEETING OF THE AMERICAN ASSOCIATION FOR STUDY AND PREVENTION OF INFANT MORTALITY. Richmond; 1917.
THE eugenic section of these Transactions contains the Report of the Committee on Venereal Diseases and Marriage, with recommendations that
run, mutatis mutandis, on lines similar to those of the Royal Commission
on Venerea] Diseases. It is interesting to note that the Committee advocates two measures of propaganda which are being carried out by our
National Council for Combating Venereal Diseases—the insertion of
advertisements in newspapers and the posting of placards in public
lavatories. From the Report it appears that there is the same lack of
venereal statistics in America as in this country. It quotes the estimate
of the Health Department of New York City (March, 1915) that one-tenth
of the adult population of that city is probably syphilitic, and that of Dr.
Edward B. Vedder, Captain in the Medical Corps of the United States
Army (Soctal Hygiene, July, 1916), that as much as 20 per cent. of the
adult male population of the class from which the Army is recruited in
times of peace is infected with syphilis. The Committee expresses the
emphatic opinion that “reporting laws,” as notification is called on “the
other side,” would drive patients into the arms of quacks—a more
numerous tribe in America, I believe, than here.

The section contains a paper by Mr. Robert D. Dripps on the prevention of venereal diseases as a war measure, and another on the effects of
these diseases on infant mortality by Dr. Frederick H. Bartlett, of New
York, who avails himself of statistics published in the Report of the
Royal Commission, and copies two of Dr. Mott’s illuminating diagrams
from that document. But the most important of the papers from the
eugenic standpoint is that of Dr. Michael F. Guyer, of Madison, Wisconsin, the Chairman of the Eugenics Committee, dealing with the
Wisconsin eugenics legislation. He reviews the much discussed law of
1913, amended in 1917, which forbids marriage to all male persons who
have not submitted themselves to medical examination and obtained a
certificate declaring them venereally uninfective, the examination including both laboratory and clinical tests if, in the judgment of the physician,
these are necessary. Dr. Guyer asserts roundly that public opinion in
Wisconsin is strongly in favour of this measure, although opposition has
had to be encountered, and that while a small but very vocal] number of
physicians still condemn it, the majority are conscientiously endeavouring
to carry it out. With regard to the law of this pioneering State authorising the sterilisation of criminals and of the insane, feeble-minded and
epileptic, he records that up to date about 100 feeble-minded persons had
been rendered sterile, some 60 females by salpingectomy and some 4o
males by vasectomy, and that all of them had made a speedy recovery.
He adds that no serious opposition to the operation had been encountered.
“On the contrary, some of the more intelligent parents of the parents
have favoured it.” M. M.

RECONSTRUCTION PROBLEMS. THE FINANCIAL AND ECONOMIC FUTURE, by
the Hon. R. H. Brand. National Economy Series, No. 2. His
Majesty’s Stationery Office; 1919; 2d.; pp. 23.

THE war has absorbed over £2,000,000,000 of the nation’s capital, i.e.,

one-seventh of the pre-war savings of the people. One of the first steps

which must be taken for making the loss good is that of restoring the
84 EUGENICS REVIEW.

gold standard by contracting currency and credit, abandoning* the policy
of raising loans at home and abroad, limiting imports and keeping taxation at a high level. Further, out of their savings the public must pay
off the money they have lent to the banks. The State-guaranteed credit
which is advocated in many quarters is a dangerous panacea for unemployment. This expansionist policy was the one which Mirabeau adopted,
and it was pursued until a pair of boots cost £100 in the depreciated
currency. Other prices were on the same level, and a financial crash was
the consequence. By hard work and economy alone will the nation escape
bankruptcy.

RECONSTRUCTION PROBLEMS. PUBLIC HEALTH; 2 vols. TOWN PLANNING,
DoMESTIC SERVICE. His Majesty’s Stationery Office; 1919; 2d.
each.

“THE whole field of health provision” used to be “staked out in
the form of claims or vested interests on behalf of one or another of the
numerous sets of competing local authorities.” For instance, the centres
for the treatment of venereal diseases which, in 1916, the Local Government Board empowered local authorities to establish, could be of no
service to large mumbers of patients who required treatment there,
because they were managed by a different authority from that under which
the National Insurance doctors did their work. The Ministry of National
Service, by allocating doctors to the various groups of people, both civil
and military, by whom they were most needed, at once brought into a
strong light the disadvantages of the old “system,” with its overlappings
and lacunez, and prepared the way for the Ministry of Health. To this
body the health work which has hitherto been dome by the Insurance
Commissioners and the Local Government Board has now been transferred; and the Ministry of Health Act provides for the gradual
transfer of al] duties of a similar nature which are now performed by
other branches of the public service, e.g., the Pensions Ministry and’ the
Home Office.

“In Greek and Roman times the plans of towns were dictated largely
by military necessity. After the Renaissance the governing factor was
the desire of the ruling prince to beautify his own palace and its surroundings. In later times it was the bourgeois love of embellishment and
display. Now, for the first time in this country, is the opportunity given
to plan the development of town and village in the interests of the community as a whole.” The Town Planning Bill of 1919 proposes to
shorten the procedure which was authorised by the Act of 1909, and to
compel every local authority to undertake a housing scheme. From the
ratepayers’ point of view these provisions ought to be very acceptable.
Between 1904 and 1914 Birmingham spent '£8,000,000 on street widening
which would have been saved had the houses been built in view of the
probable expansion of the city; and Liverpool reckons that by levying a
rate of 24d. in the pound for re-housing slum folk it has avoided a rate
of double that amount for the upkeep of dispensaries, prisons, infirmaries
and similar institutions. The faithfulness of this estimate to fact is
corroborated by a comparison of the children of Liverpool with those of
Port Sunlight. In the former place the average weight and height of
boys of 14 are 105 Ibs. and 60.7 in. respectively, and in the latter 75.9 Ibs.
and 56.2 in. But town planning will be of economic benefit not only to
the public, but also to the landowners. The present byelaws permit
builders to erect 40 houses to the acre. If only 12 are allowed the landowner will sell more land and realise the returns from it more quickly.

“The professional man’s wife with a small fixed income and
thousands of others who have similar or smaller incomes make up the
REPORTS. 85

bulk of the British nation and rear the children who are to man the
country. Their health and prosperity is of more vital importance to the
future of the race than satisfying all the demands of a single body of
workers, Their voice must be heard and listened to sympathetically
before we finally make hard and fast rules for domestic workers. For
the real problem before us, which so far remains entirely unsolved, is
how to create and keep up a sufficient supply of the kind of domestic
help required to make the bearing and rearing of healthy children possible to the bulk of middle and lower class women. Till that is accomplished we may have the most carefully drawn up rules, and the most
contented maids in a few rich families, but our reconstruction problem
has not even begun to be touched, and New Jerusalem is as far as ever
from being built in our land.” The relation of mistress to maid is a
personal one which cannot be standardised like that of the factory hand
to the manager. Therefore a trade union would not be of much use to
domestic workers. But certain other organisations, such as local clubs,
hostels and bodies like the Corps of Commissionaires, would put the
industry on a high social plane. The Women’s Legion and the Women’s
War Workers’ Reserve are setting an example of corporate effort which
might be followed by domestic servants; and the Employment Exchanges
might be used as a meeting-place for employer and employed in such a
way that the latter would feel that they belonged to the great national
army of working women, and were not isolated individuals engaged in an
unpopular occupation. The training in the domestic arts of both mistress
and maid would be essential for the success of any scheme of organisation.

MINUTES OF DISCUSSION AT AN INFORMAL CONFERENCE TO CONSIDER
GENERALLY THE SUBJECT OF “ PEDIATRICS,” held at the Local Government Board March 6th, 1919. His Majesty’s Stationery
Office; 6d.

At this Conference Dr. W. R. Ramsey said that a Department of Pediatrics
had been started in connection with the Medical School of the University
of Minnesota. It was managed by a whole-time professor, an associate
professor and a staff of clinical assistants; and there were 30 beds. The
work was much needed, because the ordinary physician judged the normal
by the diseased child, and looked on a baby as a ‘small adult. The doctor
who had learnt the importance of breast-feeding was much better prepared for dealing with infants than he who knew how to discover diseases
and abnormalities in them. The doctors of to-day were quite uneducated
in the care of young children. They were hardly on a higher level, in
that respect, than the ordinary grandmother or midwife. Consequently
they perpetuated many superstitions, ¢.g., that a baby should be bathed
immediately after birth, that the mouth of a newly-born child ought to be
washed out every day, and that a dose of castor oil should be administered
on the third day.

Lieut.-Colonel Strathy said that special classes in pediatrics were
instituted in Toronto ten years ago. To-day several pediatricians were
at work there who spent part of their time in training students and part
in giving information to the general public. All the students devoted
six weeks of the fifth year of their course to the subject, to which they
gave intensive study in out-patient clinics and in the children’s hospital,
where 50 beds were reserved for infants of less than 12 months.

Dr. H. C. Cameron gave an account of the pediatric work which has
been done at Guy’s Hospital since the Children’s Department was founded
in 1911. He pointed out that physicians had always paid more attention
to decay than development, and that they could not set up the highest
standards of health as long as they thought more about the former than
86 EUGENICS REVIEW.

the latter. Dr. Truby King told the story of pediatric progress in New
Zealand; while Captain Richard Bolt brought forward much information
with regard to the effects of the war on the child population of Italy, and
to Professor Tedeschi’s plan “for the co-ordination of the study of
pediatrics with the national child welfare work.” The facts and schemes
of which Captain Bolt spoke are set forth in two useful appendixes. In
another appendix all the existing facilities for promoting the - welfare of
babies and their mothers in England and Wales are mentioned under
headings that make reference very easy.

The chief difficulty which the Conference brought into prominence
was that of making room for pediatrics in the already overburdened
curriculum of medical students; and the principal recommendations were
that all imfants should, if possible, be breast-fed, at intervals of four
hours, with a seven- or eight-hour rest at night; and that public
authorities should standardise their teaching with regard to infant care
and maternity. All the conclusions were unanimous.

REPORT OF THE WAR CABINET COMMITTEE ON WOMEN IN INDUSTRY. Lon
don: His Majesty’s Stationery Office; 1919; price 1s. 6d.; pp 341.
THERE are two or three outstanding facts in this report which are not
generally known. One is that the employment of pregnant women in
factories is not necessarily harmful to them if the hours are moderate,
the wages adequate and the sanitary conditions good. Indeed, the wellbeing of mother and child alike is actually promoted by the employment
of the former, not only because the woman who earns money obtains
better and more abundant food than she who depends upon the wages
of her husband, but also because the work is often more stimulating to
the mind, and gives the worker more hopefulness and confidence in herself than the perpetual drudgery of life at home. “Ought protective
legislation for women to be abolished?” some investigators have asked
who have noted that well-fed women doing quite heavy work in the
factories have proved themselves, during the war, to have greater
reserves of strength than they have usually been supposed to possess.
Dr. Jane Campbell, who writes down this question, does not give an
affirmative answer; but she suggests that in workshops where the best
welfare conditions have been established women may be able, in spite of
childbearing, to do more arduous work in the future than the managers
have expected them to do in the past, and that the results will be beneficial to both mothers and babies. One of the facts by which this conclusion is supported is the low infant mortality rate of 1916 and 1917,
when more women were employed in factories than at any previous time,
and wages were good and the surroundings of the operatives at work
were, for the most part, healthful. Another is the rapid fall of the deathrate among infants within the last ten years, during which more and
more women have become industria] workers. Another is the very high
rate of infant mortality in the mining districts, where the women seldom
go out to work, but the housing is poor. On the other hand, the rate is
almos: as high in the textile and pottery as in the mining regions. In
the former large numbers of women earn high wages, but their hours of
work are long and their homes are not well managed. The rule seems
to be that even severe toi] in a workshop has a less injurious effect upon
the health of a mother and her children than the poverty which falls to
her lot if she is not a wage-earner. Another important piece of information which the report brings out relates to the minor ailments and
apparently insignificant fatigue from which industrial women suffer in
carrying out their daily tasks. These undermine health insidiously, and
are more dangerous and more frequent than direct injuries, which are
comparatively uncommon, at any rate among unmarried women. Dr.
REPORTS. 87

Campbell intimates that the cumulative effect of the less noticeable weaknesses may be widespread degeneration.

AN INQUIRY INTO THE PREVALENCE AND AETIOLOGY OF TUBERCULOSIS AMONG
INDUSTRIAL WORKERS, WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO FEMALE MUNITION WORKERS. National Health Insurance: Medical Research
Committee. Special Report Series, No. 22. His Majesty’s Stationery Office; 1919; price 1s. 6d.; pp. $9.
IN the towns the death-rate from tuberculosis of men between 25 and 65
is double that which prevails in the rest of the population. In the country
districts women suffer and die from the disease in about the same numbers as the men, but in thickly-populated places they are afflicted by it
in much fewer numbers. The virulence, if not the cause, of the malady must
therefore be largely occupational. The greatest number of victims belong
to callings in which but little muscular exertion is required, and in
which workers can remain, therefore, when the disease is far advanced
and readily communicated.

In 1914 a considerable increase took place in the deaths from tuberculosis among women. For many years there had been a steady fall in
the death-rate, which reached its lowest point in 1913, when it amounted’
to 1,154 per million females living. From that level there was a rise of
7 per cent., to 1,235 in 1915 and 1,254 1n 1916. Women over 45 years of
age were not affected by this movement. Therefore health officers
suspected that the cause lay in the employment of larger numbers of
women in factories during the war. A detailed inquiry confirmed this
conclusion. The investigators did not consider that the increase of the
cases could be attributed to insanitary housing, trade habits, or poor
physique and natural susceptibility to infection on the part of the
sufferers. About heredity they were doubtful. Forty-three, or 26.54 per
cent., of the victims belonged to families in which other cases had
occurred, but the data were too scanty to afford a basis for a decisive
opinion. “Soil” is held to be an important factor in the causation of the
disease, but no one, perhaps, is entirely immune. The difficulties of
arriving at the truth are great. “Since infection is possible at any age,
and the possibility of latency being admitted, it is obvious that until all
the offspring of any tuberculosis-tainted union have completed their span
of life our information as regards heredity (even for such single unit of
a generation) cannot be complete.”
