at us BL nt ee ein eeiliy  ain a mm. ih. . : «
e Pai ay ns on e en ap eo . 7 J . 4 . :

N * oes oe ae i fd y Sy x. ~

. " on ns ee ps ay ¥ : , .

Sy Ls 4 7 ech : ie “ - ¥ .

Cf ee ee wen ae Mee ee . - mr ‘* :
Pip bf cals é Bees ae ‘ Coe oo ‘ . . 3 . :
¥ peel Le ‘ :

 

earch Oe By ER ANCOIS LAFITTE

nivoductiom a
OVERTY and. high fertility are tradiD tionally associated phenomena. Are
they likely to remain associated in the
ture? Wedo not know, but there are
asons for suggesting that the association
ny be progressively broken down. In the
st place social progress has resulted. in
yher standards of child-welfare, education
ts and. labour legislation, which have
averted the child from a potential economic
set into a certain financial burden. In the
ond place, aiid perhaps. more important,
> development of. birth-control seems to
e brought us to the threshold of a new
loch in social history—the epoch of
luntary parenthood. The poor man to-day
definite economic reasons for not wanting
large family, and.in addition the means of
niting his offspring are at his disposal. If
eaper and. improved contraceptive. devices
me into general use among the mass of
dinary manual wage-earners there appears
be no reason why, in the years ahead of us,
e poorer classes should not succeed in
oiding unwanted children to. the same
ent as their social superiors. The uppers “invention of sterility,” with its
alitatively undesirable effects, may: spread
all classes in the community, and. bring
entitatively undesirable effects in its train.
gt follows. that. voluntary parenthood—
f the end-product:of social developments
h have made: a financial liability of
d-rearing—may, as time passes, enhance
importance: of economic considerations
an: impulse..to birth restriction. While
jomic.factors, even on the broadest
Fpretation,, are by. no means. the only
ses of ‘the decline in fertility, they are
ortant. ‘enough .to. merit careful con
  
    

    

he following analysis of the standard of

—
s :

ng of families on unemployment pay
usses some of the economic circumstances

f
a

(245,500 with 578,500 children).
_Mmajority of the men on insurance benefit

which may lead common folk to attempts at
family limitation. It throws light indirectly
upon the conditions of millions of British
families whose breadwinners, subject to the
vagaries of the economic system, inevitably
pass through spells of unemployment of
varying duration. In a typical year some
6 million claims for unemployment benefit
are lodged,* and it is estimated that in 1937
one-tenth of the whole population was, at

one time or another, living under conditions

determined by the Unemployment Assistance
Board.t Consequently the following study
is the study ofa more or less inevitable phase

in the lives of most industrial workers’
families.

Numbers of Unemployed and their Dependants

The 1937 Reports of the Unemployment
Insurance Statutory Committee and of the
Unemployment Assistance Board provide
materials for a rough sketch of conditions in
December 1937. At that date the registered
unemployed _numbered 1,665,000, among
whom were some 475,000 men with families

including dependent children under 14.

These men were divided between Unemployment Insurance (229,000 with 438,000
childrenf) and Unemployment Assistance
| The

were either “‘ temporarily stopped ”’ or out

of work for relatively short periods, whereas

half the men on assistance had been out of
work for a year or longer. The family
responsibilities of the men on assistance were

greater than those of the men on benefit (see

Table I), partly because their average age
was higher, partly because they contained a
larger proportion of men from the lowest
and most fertile strata of manual workers.

* Ronald C. Davison (1938), British Unemployment

Policy, p. 58.

t Richard M. Titmuss (1938), Poverty and Population,

Pp. 243. |
_ $= My. own estimate.

275
276 THE EUGENICS REVIEW |.

: TABLET.
Tue BurpEN or DEPENDENCY, DECEMBER 1937

r child

percentage | percentage
of men of children

Men on Assistance

Men on Benefit*...

I2

24

 

percentage | percentage | percentage
of men of children of men

2i

 

a

Scales of Benefit and Reltef

What provision did unemployment pay

make for dependants? Unemployment
benefit was originally designed to be an
insurance payment against loss of wages
rather than an allowance adequate for the
basic needs of the applicant and his family.
While dependants’ allowances are paid,
payments are made at flat rates, of 17s. for a
man, gs. for his wife,f and 3s. for each child,
subject to no adjustments either upwards or
downwards in accordance with the applicant’s
needs or resources. When an unemployed
worker has exhausted his benefit rights he
passes on to the U.A.B. Assistance allowances are determined in accordance with a
scale intended to be adequate for the human
needs and welfare of the recipient and his
family, at a level somewhat above a bare
subsistence minimum. The Scale was worked
out after a consideration of such standards
as were used in the Nutrition Reports of the
British Medical Association and of the
Ministry of Health Advisory Committee on
Nutrition, and by the various local social
surveys and local relief authorities. It is
designed to cover the fundamental necessities of life: food, clothing, light, fuel,
cleaning materials, household equipment,
and net rent, provided the latter does not
exceed one quarter of the total scale allowance for all members of the household,
dependent or not. In other words, the Scale
embodies a “ standard of living ”’ which is
deemed to be the minimum adequate.

In assessing the actual aliowance in a given
case, account is taken of the household’s
resources, if any, part being disregarded, and

* My own estimate. f Raised to ros. in April 1938.

of any unusual circumstances (high rent, lay
of bedding, etc.). Needs are assessed und,
the standard scale and are then offset againg
such resources as have been taken in,
account.- A high rent, “special circu,
stances,” or “‘ exceptional need ’’ may justify
an increased allowance ; resources or a lq
rent may justify a reduction. But the py.
pose of this flexibility is apparently to ensur
whatever the size of the allowance paid j
individual cases, that all families, howevg
much they deviate from the ‘‘ normal,’ sha
be receiving an income adequate to maintay
them at the level envisaged by the Scale. |
“ wage stop ”’ is, however, applied in certaj

may be reduced for this reason.

The Measurement of Poverty |

How does unemployment pay compar
with other accepted assessments of minimu
human requirements? Mr. R. F. George i
1936 worked out a Poverty Line designed t:
establish a bare subsistence’ minimum!
Based on London prices for July 1936, it take
account only of food, clothing, fuel, light, ani:
cleaning materials. Rent is omitted and d
other items are ignored. Food requirement
based on the B.M.A. ‘‘ minimum adequate’
diet with an augmented milk allowance, ar
assessed at 6s. gd. for an adult male, 5s. 9d
for an adult female, 5s. 5d. for.children aged.
6 to 14, and 3s. rod. for children under 6.
The- Poverty Line, writes Mr. George,
“seeks to assess the cost of a standard of
living so low that, while persons below it are

 

* Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, 1937, 1, 14.
Eving in.extreme poverty, those just above
+ would:.commonly .be regarded as. very
oor.” Reducing the U.A.B. scale allowance
y 25: per dent, to, eliminate the standard

pnt allowance, it‘is possible. to compare the

    

ue

ale with: Mr. George’s minimum in cases
yhere there are no resources (see Table II).

-.-. TABLE IL.

CoMPARISON OF U.A.B. ScaLe witH R. F. GzorcGeE’s
SUBSISTENCE. MINIMUM IN DECEMBER 1937

Masried couple with _R. F. George’s U.A.B. Scale in

following number of Subsistence cases without

dependent children Minimum resources

/ underiq4 (July 1936)* |

| og s. ds. d._os. d,
oOo. 2.178 - 19 6 .
Ir 22 3to023 10 21 9
2 26 10,, 30 0 24 oto24 9
3 32 1,, 36°10 26 3,, 28 14
4 36 6,,42 10 28 6,, 31 6
5 _ 40 11 ,, 48 10 30 9 ,, 34 103

The comparison shows clearly that, even
m the U.A.B., the possible standard. of
iving declines as the size of the dependent
amily increases. Instead of one uniform
evel of living for all resourceless families on
assistance, the Scale appears to enforce a
lifferent level for families of each size and
penalizes the children in the process.

A comparison of benefit (at that date) with
he U.A.B. Scale in resourceless cases is
equally revealing. In such cases, when there
are dependent children, the U.A.B. minimum

is always the appropriate benefit rate but the
scale allowance may exceed the benefit rate
See Table ITT). Oo
_ In addition assistance allowances may be
supplemented for a variety of reasons.
Benefit ‘was very rarely supplemented in
“Although a.worker's food requirements are
probably smaller when he is inemployed than
when he is in work, a comparison of these
assessments for the unemployed with’ Mr.
Rowntree’s minimum wages adequate for
e “human needs of labour ” (which also

   
   
   
  
 

"Since London. prices are somewhat high, Mr.
Sg eek Fm ee a ee gg ae
orge’s Minimum has not been adjusted up to Decemper 1937. The’ U.A:B. rent: rules often allow some
argin, ass Shown later in thisarticle.. The minima and
laxima depend . upon the age.

of the children, the
ely ‘adjusted: ~~

“see: UNEMPLOYMENT AND CHILD-BEARING

277

— . TABLE III. oan
COMPARISON .oF BEengrit Rates wit ASSISTANCE
RatTEs In ResSOURCELESS Caszs, DECEMBER 1937

Benefit (= Amount by
' U.A.B. which U.A.B.
Minimum rate may ex
Rate) ceed benefit

| s. d. s. d.
Man and wife oes --- 26 0 —
_ 99 99 » andi child ... 29 O me

» a9 » vs» 2 Children 32 Oo i oOo

a? 9 »» oo 3 3 35 oO 2 6

9? a» op pp 4 99 38 oO 4 =O

99 99 o» ow JF 99 4I 0O 5 6

(U.A.B. rates for children under 14)

embodies: the B.M.A. diet) is even less
favourable.* Adjusted to December 1937;
Mr. Rowntree’s minimum wage would have
allowed a family with three children from
Ios. to 15s. more than Mr. George’s minimum,
19s. more than the maximum assistance
allowance, and 21s. 6d. more than benefit.
Yet there is no doubt that the Rowntree
standard involves, as its author points out,

life on a “‘ fodder basis,” if health is not to
be sacrificed. : |

M odifying Factors |

The foregoing comparisons suggest that
unemployment pay is definitely inadequate
for human needs in family cases. Does it
follow that all workers with dependent
children are condemned to a life of “‘ extreme
poverty,” even if they live on a ‘“ fodder
basis,’’ when they fall out of work ? In order
to answer this question it is necessary to
consider two modifying factors: the extent
to which personal resources contribute to the
incomes of unemployed families, and, with
regard to families on assistance, the extent
to which the Scale is actually operated. _

As far as the families on assistance. are
concerned, two factors may raise the iticome
level, whether they possess resources or not.

(2) The majority of U.A.B. Committees
have ‘adopted rent rules which make it
possible, where rent is below the standard
allowance, for a family to retain a margin of
two to three shillings before any deduction is

made from: the total. assessment. Generally

-* Seebohm Rowntree (1937), The Human Needs of
Labour.
278

speaking, the rent allowances seem to have
been sufficient, and where rents fell short of
the standard there may have been an
additional income of up to 3s. weekly.

(6) Free school meals or milk are normally
disregarded by the U.A.B. But in 1936-37
not more than 2 per cent. of all elementary
school children were receiving free school
meals of any description, and meals were not
restricted to the children of unemployed
parents.* Except in certain areas where the
local authorities provide substantial meals
and interpret the term “ malnutrition ” in a
generous spirit, free school meals do not

appear to be a factor of any but minor.

importance.

Personal resources make a great difference
to families on assistance. Of all families with
dependent children (under 14) on assistance
in December 1937, 54 per cent. had no
resources and 46 per cent. had resources of
some kind. Resources made a difference to
them, because resources are never wholly
taken into account by the U.A.B., which is
obliged to disregard certain amounts and
certain types of income. About 70 per cent.
of these resources consisted of the earnings
of sons, daughters, brothers or sisters at
work. Most of the remainder came from
official funds (unemployment benefit, pensions, and disablement grants).

In the Pilgrim ‘Trust- study of the longunemployed at the end of 1936, the investigators found that 44 per cent. of the families
in their sample were on or below Mr. George’s
bare subsistence level, 30 per cent. actually
being below. Of the latter, four-fifths were
families with no resources.t A careful comparison of the Pilgrim Trust data with those
in the last Report of the U.A.B. suggests that
the findings of the Pilgrim Trust survey of
the long-unemployed (totalling half of the
families on assistance) may have been very
nearly true of all families on assistance. The
comparison suggests that 28 to 30 per cent.
of all families on the U.A.B. in December
1937 must have been living in ‘“ extreme

 

* M. E. Green (1938), in the Report on Nutrition of the
British Association for Labour Legislation.
T * en Without Work : A Report.to ihe Pilgrim Trust
193

poverty;”” some 22. per cent. having , .

‘probably above the subsistence level if 4

    
   
 
   
  
 
  
  
   
  
  
 
   
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
    
 
  

resources and 6 per cent. pumeaiing Tesourg |
of some description. —— :

_ The poverty of the large families i is great
than that of the smaller.. The U.A.B. Rep,
provides an analysis of households accord;
to size and to presence or absence of resourg
This analysis, bearing in mind the reiat
importance (ascertained above) of resoung
to families on assistance, the gap betwa
Mr. George’s standard and the Scale all
ance, and the possibilities of additic
income from the operation of the
regulations, makes possible a. very rol
assessment of the relation of families of oil
size to Mr. George’s subsistence level.

Subsistence Value of U.A.B. Scale
According to this assessment, «chil
couples or couples with oné child were us
above the subsistence level, though the lag™
may have been near to it if they had
resources. Couples with two children y

had resources ; some of them may have}
more or less near to it. Without resow
they probably were living at the subsist;
level, but in many cases may have bei
little below. Couples with three or
children were probably in most cases bd
the subsistence level if they had no resou:
If they possessed resources, the best that
be said is that most of them were prob@
living near to the level and some of t§
below it.
It appears, in consequence, thigt, of J
families without resources all those in wl
there were three or more dependent chil
were living either below or, at best, on
subsistence level ; and that most of the !
child families were living probably mor
less on the subsistence level or a little al
it. With regard to the families with resou™

‘the situation seems to have ‘been m
_ better. . Probably. only in the cases of fami

with four or more children were most of t
definitely below the subsistence level ;
most of the families with three. chil a
would seem to have ‘been: “on the subsist
level rather than above it. Core

To appreciate the full: sig ni

 
 

onclusion ifjhust..be recalled that_ twoirds of. the dependent children of U.A.B.
ayees were shown to be in’ families with
hree or foore:;, dependent children.. Con
ntly ‘it.seemS certain that well: over

wots

equently - it.

the dependent children of men on the
J.A.B. were at ‘best -living in the “‘ very
oor” conditions of George’s bare substence level and: at worst in ‘“extreme
overty |
This conclusion is, of course, only a rough
pproximation ‘to the truth, but no facts are
scoverable which suggest that it is erroneis. Mr: George’s. standard was based on
ondon prices for July. 1936, but it seems
aprobable that local price divergencies were
sufficient magnitude to modify the consion that the majority of the children of
en on assistance must have been living at
| below Mr. George’s subsistence level.

m The Pilgrim.Trust Survey provides a mass
| confirmatory evidence. One instance
ay be quoted:. In the families in their
mple from Liverpool the investigators

d that 53 per cent. of those with one
pendent child, 68 per cent. of those with
o children, and. 94 per cent. of those with
ree or more children were below George’s

@verty Line. Summing up the position as
whole, the Report concludes: ‘‘ Where
ere are more than one or two children,
ere is almost always evidence of hard
It seems clear, therefore, that the U.A.B.

ale favours the childless couple or the

muple with only one child, but is unfavourle—even on the. Spartan standards of
. George—to the large family.
miles on Benefit

Information’ concerning the conditions of

- of men on benefit is more scanty, but it
ufficient to enable a general impression

be formed.: It is likely that they had more

   
  
    
 
 

ce, since their. better employment records
id smaller family responsibilities would
ve given them greater opportunities for
For families’ with some resources benefit
variably

At

 

28. above the minimum assist
a
ra

MPLOYMENT AND CHILD-BEARING

rsonal resources than the men on assist
279

ance scale, but for all families it falls increasingly below the maximum rate, and, in
the case of resourceless families, below the
average assistance rate paid. For a family
with five ‘children under 14 the difference
may be as much as 5s. 6d: (see Table IIT).
The family without resources will clearly be
at least as well off on assistance as on benefit
and probably in most cases somewhat better
off. This is so because, whilst adult dependants are well provided for by the insurance
scheme, the benefit rate of 3s. for a child is
less than the U.A.B. allowance for any child
aged five or over. This means that nearly
three-quarters of the children of men on

benefit who had no resources (i.e. almost all

children in resourceless families with two or
more children) must have been living at or
below Mr. George’s subsistence minimum.
But probably the maj ority of children were
in families which had resources of some
description, and, since on the whole it is
likely that they were somewhat better off
than they would have been on assistance,
most of them were probably living above the
poverty line. Possibly only in the case of
families with four or more.children would the
standard of living been at or even below the
subsistence level.

To sum up, it appears that in December
over one half of the children of the men on
the U.A.B. and a large minority of the men
drawing unemployment benefit must have
been passing through a phase of. great
impoverishment, living at best at a bare
subsistence level, whilst their fathers were
out of work. The great majority of them
must have been living at a standard below
the minimum regarded as adequate for a

healthy existence on a “ fodder basis ”’ by
Mr. Rowntree. Little has occurred in the

subsequent twelve months to suggest that

this is not a substantially true statement of

the position to-day. .

This conclusion remains - substantially
correct even if Mr. George’s minimum is cut
down by reducing the milk allowance to that
prescribed by the B.M.A. diet—a weekly
saving of 7d. for a married couple, of 53d.
for a child under 6, and of. 7d. for a child
over 6. a |
280

Problem of the ‘* Overlap ”’

But the full dimensions of the problem

can only be grasped if it is realised that the
great majority of working-class children are
doomed to phases of existence at such a level
at one time or another in their childhood
days, and that a considerable number of
working-class children are normally born and
brought up in families whose income from
wages may be no higher, or very little higher,
than the income they might expect if they
were on assistance or on benefit. | |

The greatest obstacle to the raising of the
rates of unemployment pay is fear of a total
abandonment of the principle of “less
eligibility.”” Public authorities are faced
with the dilemma of keeping down unemployment pay at a level.that cannot
easily be defended on human grounds, or of
greatly increasing the extent to which
workers with dependent families would find
themselves as well off out of work as in work.

Benefit and assistance are normally
deemed to “overlap” wages if the gap
between unemployment pay and wages is
less than 4s. Both unemployment authorities
‘made surveys in 1937 of the extent of this
““overlap.”” The study of wage levels and
benefit rates in August 1937 showed that
only 2:3 per cent. of the men on benefit and
5°2 per cent. of the women, were as well off
on benefit as in work. But this average
conceals a far greater ‘“‘overlap’’ where
workers had large families. Thus Io per cent.
of the men drawing 41s. benefit, 26-1 per
cent. of those drawing 47s. benefit, .and
34°6 per cent. of those drawing 50s. benefit
were deemed to be as well off or better off on
benefit than in their normal employment.
As might be expected the U.A.B., in December 1937, found a greater average ‘‘ overlap ”
among its clients, for 6-2 per cent. of the men
and 14°4 per cent. of the women were
receiving allowances which were less than 4s.
below their declared wages. There are no
published data which would enable a
differential analysis of the extent of the
“ overlap”’ in families of each size to be made,
but the Board’s report suggests that the
situation is similar in broad outline to that
of the families on benefit. |

THE EUGENICS REVIEW.

   
   
  
   
   
 
 

The extent of this “ overlap” presents,
serious problem. It is serious not primar}
because it means that some of the une,
ployed may grow into workshies and loafey
but rather because of the light which }
throws upon the standard of living of thy
considerable body of men with large famili,
who are actually at work. and earning j
more than the U.A.B. would give them. Any
survey of existing wage rates in certai
trades and industries shows that earnings jy
a vast number of cases must appear a poy
compensation to a man for a hard week,
work when he could receive an equivaley
sum, or a little less, without working at al)
if he were on assistance .or on benefit. |

The Pilgrim Trust report provides many
instances of such conditions in various part;
of the country. It points out that the bul
of the children of unemployed miners in th.
Rhondda and in Crook (Durham coalfield.
would probably not have been hetter off ij.
their fathers had been in work. In such area;
the family man is equally poor whether he
works or not ; and poverty is normal for his
children, not a passing phase in their life
but possibly an unchanging event through.
out the whole of their childhood.

With all the goodwill in the world the two
unemployment authorities. are unable t
risk a complete abandonment of “les
eligibility ’’ .in favour of the ‘“ huma
needs ” of the unemployed. The Unemploy.
ment Assistance Board felt itself justified, in
view of the undoubted misery of many of the
large family cases dependent upon it.
allowances, to instruct its officers in 193.
that : “ a family of five or more children may
in itself be regarded as a sufficient departure
from the normal to justify consideration of.
waiving or mitigating the application of the
wages stop on the ground of special circumstances ’’; but at the same time the Board
had. to urge its officers to exercise their
discretion in‘such cases with ‘‘ special care,”
and to “ look with special closeness at cases
where allowances of 45s. or more would be
payable—an amount upon which many
families do actually maintain themselves
fully while the head of the household is in
employment.” rarer
 
     

 
   
   
      
     
 
  
  
 

employment . Insurance Statutory
“ommittee :in.:1937 found that. to increase
e child's dependants’ benefit by is. (up to
1s.) would increase the proportion of families
well or better. off on benefit than in work
y over one third. To increase: the adult
ependants’ benefit by the same amount (up
o 10s.) would only increase the “‘ overlap ”’
just under one tenth. The Committee—
“though not without some hesitation and
ot unanimously “therefore felt obliged,
‘taking the Insurance Scheme and the wage
ystem as they are,” to recommend the latter
measure: Both authorities are fully conscious
f the dilemma confronting them: Lord
Rushcliffe, Chairman of the U.A.B., in the
Board’s Report for 1937, stressed the ‘ farreaching implications ’’ and the ‘ questions
of very serious social consequence ” involved
in the existence of this “ overlap.”
Statutory Committee pointed out in 1935
that ‘‘the growing direct provision ‘for
families, under Unemployment Insurance
and Assistance, is beginning to raise acutely
the general problem of dependency under a
wages system which makes no similar
provision.”” And in 1937 they more explicitly
stated: “As was urged by the Family
Endowment Society ... the problem of
dependency needs to be considered asa
whole. To consider it only in relation to
persons who are unemployed leads to an
impasse in one direction or another.”
Poverty and Fertility ——
Human beings in Britain will not, in any
case, live on a “‘ fodder basis.” Even if they
were willing to do so, it seems clear that a
substantial. proportion of the families on
unemployment pay, and many families
dependent upon wages, could not, under
prevailing‘ conditions, maintain themselves
even in bodily fitness. Present standards are
undermining the physical health of hundreds
of thousands of British families: A great mass
of evidence has been accumulated -in recent
years which::leaves no doubt of the close
connection between poverty and excessive

ill health and premature mortality.* Within

 

*See Richard M. Titmuss, of. cif.

ORR UNEMPLOYMENT AND CHILD-BEARING

281

the unemployed worker’s family it is the
mother who usually bears the brunt. “A
feature that was noticeable in almost every
household,” says the Pilgrim Trust Report,
“ was the refusal to economise on the food
or clothing of the children, though the
parents would go short... .In several
instances great efforts were being made to
keep the children at school until sixteen,
' even if we have to starve for it. Education
is the only thing that matters now.’ ” :

‘Both parents make sacrifices, but the
husband is the breadwinner and must be
kept fit. The wife stints herself. Many
women who are potential mothers are not
in a physical condition to. give birth to
healthy children, or often even to stand the
strain of child-bearing at all. The striking
results of Lady Juliet Williams’s well-known
experiment, in South Wales and Durham, of
providing expectant mothers with additional
nutrition, have confirmed the suspicion that
malnutrition is an important cause of
maternal and neo-natal mortality.

Can it be assumed in such circumstances
that the relatively high fertility of the lower
classes is likely to be maintained ? Poverty
is not a new feature in British life. What is
new is the fact that birth-control is to an
increasing extent becoming accepted as the
means of avoiding greater poverty. Every
birth-control clinic which has inquired of its
working-class clients the reasons why they
limit their families has found one main
reason given: “we can’t afford any more
children.” The small family to-day is the
fashion. Parents have a sense -of responsibility towards their children which would
have delighted the social reformers of half a
century ago. When the working man expects
more of life than in any previous epoch, when
economic circumstances impel, fashion encourages, and. the means are accessible, a
generalization of family limitation among the
lower classes—apart from the “ social problem ’’ group—seems only to: be expected in
the course of time. . Every improvement in
contraceptive technique, every increase in
the accessibility of reliable contraceptives,
may therefore tend to accelerate the rate of
decline of working-class fertility, unless (a)
282

the small-family fashion can be changed, and
people persuaded to use birth-control for
spacing rather than for avoiding births,
and/or, (0) some of the economic circumstances which may act with increasing force
as checks upon fertility are mitigated.

A positive population policy must take into

account the possibility of voluntary parent- .

hood becoming general in the future. It
might even decide, for eugenic reasons, to
encourage voluntary parenthood. In any
case it will have to devise means of ensuring
that voluntary parenthood does not become
a synonym for voluntary childlessness for
a large number of married couples, and of
ensuring that the desire for children is not
frustrated by economic circumstances.
Fashions have their roots in the solid facts
of life; the small-family fashion cannot be
changed by propaganda and exhortation
alone. Measures to mitigate or eliminate the
financial handicap of parents as compared
with the childless within each income
group, measures to enhance security, to make
child-bearing and child-rearing safer, are all
needed as a basis for effective propaganda.
It may well be that far-reaching measures of
such a character will be necessary before the
working man of to-day—no longer like his
grandfather driven to drink through inordinate working hours and degrading conditions, literate, and sufficiently familiar with
material comfort and the “ good things in
life *’ to want more of them—can be persuaded once again to undertake the responsibilities of a large family, when all his
interests encourage him to limit his offspring
and his social superiors have set him an
example which he can hardly be blamed for
following. .

Summary

1. An analysis of the standard of living of
families on unemployment benefit or assistance in December 1937 suggests

(a) that most families were below Mr.
Seebohm Rowntree’s “ human needs of

THE EUGENICS REVIEW sit

Jabour ”. standard, and that: over hay
the children of men on assistance and, [im
substantial proportion of the childre,
-of men on benefit must have been livin,
below Mr: R. F. George’s “‘ bare su}.
sistence level.” |
that similar conditions were normal {yim
many large families whose — breaifl
winners were in employment in occupy,
_ tions paying low wages. . |
2. Although unemployment pay is low iff
family cases, the existence of low wage-rataf
has created an “overlap.” between unenil
ployment pay and wages, with the resuhi
hat — ne |

)

(a) public authorities find it difficult 1,
raise benefit and assistance rates wit
out substantially increasing the pn
portion of persons who are as well
out of work as in employment. §
the problem of the financial burden
dependency has to be considered ay
whole, and not merely in relation |
_ those families who have fallen outsiii
_ the framework ‘of the wage systy
through the unemployment, sicknyl
or incapacity of the breadwinner.

3. It is suggested that the low standard(
living necessitated by present rates |
unemployment pay and by low wages i
certain occupations constitute a’ power
potential reason for family limitation amoy
manual wage-earners. Improvements ¥
material conditions in the past. half-century
the growth of popular education, the achiev
ment of higher standards of. child health aul
welfare have all encouraged. the working ma
to “ expect more of life.”” The new factor @
voluntary parenthood through contraceptic
may therefore liquidate in the future th
traditional association of poverty with hig
fertility by reinforcing economic incentive
to family limitation, unless measures hav
been set in operation to mitigate or eliminat
‘the financial burden of parenthood. |

(0)

\

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXX, No.
