EUGENICS SOCIETY,

Honorary President :
Mayor LEONARD DARWIN, Sc.D.

Past Presidents:

Honorary President:
SIR FRANCIS GALTON

SIR JAMES CRICHTON-BROWNE, M.D., D.SC., LL.D., F.R.S.
Mr. MONTAGUE CRACKANTHORPE, K.C.

Major LEONARD DARWIN, SC.D.
SIR BERNARD MALLET, K.C.B.

1938-1939

 

r
it
ae a3
peed)
B
mera
eae
Lx:
SaRTA
. =e ‘
BS
aed sh
ees
RA SY
~ Va 8
ous ~
TY See
ano
2 Oe Fy.
»-=2 enh
= we
!
AR
. 2
a
* s he
i:
a
. ae
. ae
a a
‘oe
- ws
ay * 3
4Y
=.
na
8
“Ht
os
>
a

hb ait

1908-11

1908-1909
I909-I9QII
IQII-I9I19
1929-1932

4 aig aoe oh
a tad A alate Ta

StIR HUMPHRY ROLLESTON, BT., G.C.V.O., K.C.B., M.D., D.SC., LL.D. 1933-1935

President:

THE Lorp HORDER, G.C.V.O., M.D., F.R.C.P.

Chairman of Council:

B. S. BRAMWELL, M.A., LL.B.

Vice-Presidents:

A. M. CARR-SAUNDERS, M.A.
JULIAN HUXLEY, M.A., D.Sc., F.R.S.
J. M. KEYNEs, M.A., C.B.

Mrs. NEVILLE ROLFE, 0.B.E.
PROF. R. RUGGLES GATES, M.A., PH.D., D.Se.,
LL.D., F.R.S.

ProF. J. A. RYLE, M.D., F.R.C.P.

Honorary Treasurer :
C. F. CHANCE, M.A.

Honorary Librarian :
Miss E. Corry.

General Secretary :

C. P. BLACKER, M.c., M.A., M.D., F.R.C.P.

MEMBERS OF COUNCIL, 1938-1939

SIR CHARLES ARDEN-CLOSE, K.B.E., C.B.,
CECIL BINNEY, B.A. [C.M.G., F.R.S.
L. J. CADBURY.

Dr. STELLA CHURCHILL, M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P.,

THE LADY DENMAN, D.B.E. [D.P.H.
PROFESSOR R. A. FISHER, Sc.D., F.R.S.

E. B. FORD, M.A., B.Sc.

R. AUSTIN FREEMAN, M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P.

D. GRAHAM HUTTON.

Hon. Mrs. GRANT DUFF.

Str MARK GRANT-STURGIS, K.C.B.

W. T. J. GUN, F.R.HIST.S., F.S.G.

Mrs. E. M. HUBBACK, M.A.

D. CARADOG JONES, M.A.

S1R WALTER LANGDON-BROWN, D.Sc. M.D.,

R. LANGDON-DOWN, M.B. [F.R.C.P.

AUBREY J. LEWIS, M.D., F.R.C.P.

E. M. H. LLoyp, B.A.

EDWARD MAPOTHER, M.D., F.h.C.S., 1 .%.C.P.

Mrs. E. E. Potron.

J. A. FRASER ROBERTS, M.A., M.B., D.Sc.,
[F.R.S.E.

RT. Hon. LorpD SALVESEN, K.C., LL.D.

H. G. THORNTON, M.A., D.Sc.
NOMINATIONS TO THE
COUNCIL

FELLOWS are reminded that they have the right to nominate any
Fellow of the Society to serve on the Council for the coming year.
If they wish to exercise this right, they should apply to the office
for a nomination paper which must be completed by them and
lodged at the office before March 1st, 1939. Each Fellow is entitled
to propose not more than two Fellows for election to vacancies on
the Council, and to second two other Fellows. No Fellow shall be
nominated unless he has consented, if elected, to act. Each nomination must be proposed and seconded respectively by a Fellow of the
Society, and the nomination paper must be signed by such proposer
and seconder.
C. P. BLACKER.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

VOL. XXX, No. 4

CONTENTS

Notes of the Quarter Intelligence and Family Size 
J. A. FRASER ROBERTS, MA., M.B., DSe.,

‘Intelligence’ Tests = 
C. SPEARMAN, PhD., LL.D., F.R.S.
The Latest Revision of the Binet Intelligence Tests 
CYRIL BURT, M.A., D.Sc.

The Chemical Composition of the Volpar

Contraceptive Products, Part I 
JOHN R. BAKER, D.Se., R. M. RANSON and J. TYNEN

Population Investigation Committee

Unemployment and Child-Bearing
FRANCOIS LAFITTE

Notes and Memoranda Reviews of Books

POPULATION - MEDICINE AND MAN_~ 
GENETICS s SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY PSYCHIATRY - STATISTICS - Other Notices - - .
Periodicals - . .
List of Lectures - - Correspondence - - .

os

)

F.R.S.E.

o-~

JANUARY, 1939

PAGE

231
237

249
255

261

269
275

283

289
294.
296
297
298
298
301
305
309
310

The Eugenics Society is not responsible for statements made or opinions expressed by authors of

articles, reviews and letters.

The EUGENICS REVIEW is regularly indexed in the International Index to Periodical Literature.

Published Quarterly.
London: Macmillan & Co. Ltd., St. Martin’s Street, W.C.2.
New York: The Macmillan Co.

Price: Three Shillings per issue and Twelve Shillings per annum, post free.

Issued free to Fellows and Members.
 

Se ow 5 ges . oo ° ‘ .
ogy Coggins Ss roby - .
Be EM EE gE at | ‘ 3
ee ep ‘ 5 a z :
“aa Vly ea yey ee’ gt f Ph _ © .
‘ : oO si Ou
‘ . 7 s 5 ‘
t ‘ . % wa St ye 4 i ° 4
y > poe, : ° : . ‘ .
' . , ‘

Spinal Regions tn: Primates.—By A. H. Schultz.—
This shows that the higher catarrhines, including
man, have the..cervical and sacral regions much
longer, the thoracic slightly longer and the lumbar
and caudal much shorter in relation to the’ trunk
length than is. the case in the lower catarrhines.

ng the higher forms man has the relatively
jongest cervical, thoracic. and lumbar regions.

Women have relatively slightly shorter cervical]
and thoracic and. slightly longer lumbar regions
than men. The:length of the cervical region in all
forms tends to decrease with age, that of the lumbar on the other,hand to increase in man but not in

most other primates. Changes in relative lengths

in the course of evolution

are not accompanied by
change in the number of cervical vertebrz, but the

long sacral region of the gibbons has an increased

number of vertebrae... - |
The Cranial Equilibrium Index.—M. S. Senyiirek
studies the position of the cranial fulcrum which
lies further forward in higher than in lower forms
and in females than in males. The most marked
forward shift occurs in the evolution of Homo.
Accessory Sacro-Iliac Articulations. —T. D.
Stewart shows that these are found among the
higher primates, among whom the pelvis is in
course Of-specialization especially to the stresses
and strains of the bearing of the weight of the
body. Pe | |
Symmetry of Papillary Patterns —J. Dankmeijer
and R. C. Renes show that the influence of a
tendency towards symmetry of finger patterns is a
general morphological phenomenon which is not
affected by.sex or race considerations. | |
Blood Groups and Ageusia of Indians.—G. A.
Matson shows.that the full-blood Blackfeet are
predominantly group A while their neighbours are
nearly all O. In taste-reactions and the incidence
of M and N. factors no. difference was found. :
Birth Ordey and Incidence of Mental Disease, by
B. Malzberg; isa statistical study. It analyzes
critically the’ work of D. Heron which it finds
suffers from mixture of categories, while some of the
conclusions of Karl Pearson are considered to be
statistical artefacts. It is not disputed that, among
first-born ‘children, length and. weight may be
lower, and some physical and mental difficulties,
including infantile epilepsy, appearing at birth or
soon afterwards miay be commoner, but, as regards
dementia pretox. and manic-depressive psychoses
and probably other troubles appearing years after
birth, the: author. does not think the first-born or
carly-born ate-any more liable to suffer than are
el ter: MIT) ee Th ee, agilz ": ae

_ A reviéw- ‘of classifications of hair by Mildred

ev

 

395

- é s + 5 P * 3 ‘ me / ; i.
oo. Logon oa _ ‘ . ¢
. a! 4 SS RIL Ly eae, NG Mow . Bone : , :
EO RS Me Ba Ty be ie ABR” so :
- 4 ny Va. - ta CS . . 2 . ¥ . . . . *, \ . :
tae ag 3 Teg ee tr oo: “4 5 ; .
- cae kar a a Pe at Bytes eo P ere ‘ 5 ‘ r
Le see Seay” gS) PS «ME gs Oa
we Ge re de : ~ 2 .
thea he ett wats 5 : an ma ‘ .,
3 } ‘ ‘UA tN, a . z *
. ‘ an, e

Trotter will be found useful by students of questions relating to human biotype.

H. J. Freure.

British Medical Journal

October 8th, 1938.—Identical Cancers in Identical
I'wins.—In the Proceedings of the M ayo Clinic,
1938, 13, 209, is recorded the occurrence of carcinoma of the breast in identical twins, followed after
radical operation by bilateral papillary adenocarcinomata of the ovaries of one of the twins.
Prophylactic oophorectomy or deep X-ray treatment for the other twin is discussed. An annotation
in the British Medical Journal remarks: “ Usually
if a cancer develops in one of a pair of identical
twins, the other twin has a cancer of the same type
in the corresponding organ, either at the same time
or soon after, but Phillips quotes a case of Kaplan’s
in which a carcinoma of the breast had not been
reproduced in an identical twin after six years. In
the future drastic preventive measures may be
advised without hesitation. The accumulation of
carefully observed instances will supply the guide.”’

In the issue of October 1 5th, Dr. Denys Jennings
doubts the accuracy of this opinion. After allowance is made fot some inevitable cancers, ‘‘ there
is little evidence that heredity plays much part in
the general incidence of cancer.”’
November 12th, 1938.—Congenital Deformities o if
Hands and Feet.—Poston records, with X-ray
photographs, the case of a child of 12 showing
deformity of the interphalangeal joints of the hands.
Callum gives an account with X-ray photographs of
claw hands and feet in an Egyptian boy.
November 19th, 1938.—Capon notes that cases
similar to that described by Poston have been seen
in the Liverpool district, and that the condition is
fairly common in East Russia. Brailsford observes
that it is a congenital familial defect, for it has been
recorded in a father, three brothers, a sister, and in
former paternal generations. He considered that
the cases recorded by Callum are identical with the
“ split foot or lobster. claw’ described by K.
Pearson. | ——
November 26th, 1938.— Problems of Human Congenital Disease.—In the Lloyd Roberts Lecture at
the Royal College of Physicians, Professor J. B. S.
Haldane dealt with the subject of congenital
disease. A full account of the lecture is given.
Some instances of sex-linked inheritance are
quoted, including hzmophilia in descendants of
Queen Victoria. | | |

A. A. E. Newrn.

Character and Personali |

September 1938, Vol. VII, No. 1.— The Psychotic and
Pre-psychotic Chavacter.—By T. V. Moore.—A brief
report is given of a study of the relations between
306

psychotic syndromes and pre-psychotic temperament and character traits, in which carefully controlled observation, ratings and statistical methods
were applied. A definite tendency was found (how
definite is not stated) for catatonic. dementia
precox patients to be ‘‘ introverted ’’ in earlier life,
for manic patients to have shown social traits, and
for cases of depression to have been characterized
by anxiety and worry. No special traits were found
to have preceded paranoid or delusional states.

A further article of interest to students of the
psychoses deals with the drawings which schizophrenic patients produce under controlled conditions. The author, Dr. T. M. Abel, got large numbers of patients, and normal persons, to draw a
design on a rectangular sheet, which had to be
composed of nineteen straight and six curved lines.
Under these conditions characteristic differences
appeared between the schizophrenic and normal
drawings. The test seems similar to Dr. Lowenfeld’s Mosaics Test, but is decidedly more limited in
scope and in its diagnostic indications.

Dr. R. W. Pickford shows that the nonsense
syllables which psychologists use in their experiments on memory may act as stimulus words in a
free association test. He gives some striking
instances of the way in which the meanings that
subjects read into these syllables may be traced
back to the subjects’ personal complexes. P. C.
Squires contributes a psychological analysis of the
creative processes of the composer, Cézar Franck.

P. E. VERNON.

Journal of Contraception

October 1938, Vol. III, No. 10.—An account of the
effects of family overcrowding upon health and life
and of the social welfare work done among the
workers in the sugar plantations in Hawali is
given by Dr. Nils P. Larsen. The workers, mostly
Javanese and Filipinos, earn an average daily
wage (including perquisites) of 2-67 dollars. The
plantations have so staggered work that there is
employment all the year round and there is in
general a sense of family security. Yet despite this
more or less uniform and relative plenty, there are
among this labouring community a certain number
of poverty-stricken families. On investigation the
cause of this sporadic poverty was found to be
large size of family. The percentage of wage spent
on food is probably the best single criterion of
material status ; a family spending 20 per cent. or
less of its total income on food can be considered
as having plenty, one spending 50 per cent. is
“ getting by,” one spending 70 per cent. is poor,
while 80 per cent. spent on food means ex‘reme
poverty. In the Hawaiian plantations where wages
are more or less stabilized and difficult to ‘ncrease
because of economic conditions it was found
inevitably that as the numbers in a family went up
so did the percentage of income spent on food ;
while concurrently the adequacy of the diet
decreased, the incidence of sickness increased and

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the general health of the family deteriorated. 1; ;,
probably tzue that no sane parent would willingly
plunge a whole fami'y into poverty and sickney
but these people had little or no sound knowled,,
of how to limit the size of their families. In 19,,
the experiment was begun on one plantation ¢
teaching birth-control, with encouraging result |
The number of births per annum was reduced froy,
233 (in 1926) to 50 (in 1936), and the infay
mortality from 32 to 3, with a simultaneous redy,.
tion in child illness and general family ill heal, &

The methods of contraception placed at the dis,
posal of workers on this plantation. were :

1. Rubber caps—which were found unsatisfa,, §
tory owing to lack of intelligent co-operation any
rapid rubber deterioration. |

2. Foam Powder (Stoughtons). A hundred an
thirty three were given this and forty-seven becam,
pregnant in the course of. two years. All of they
forty-seven failures admitted irregular use of th
method, but whether this irregularity was due ty
frank carelessness or to dislike of the method is no
stated. — .

3. Condoms—good quality sold for 3 to 10 ceny
proved to be the most popular and successfj
method.

4. Grafenberg Silver Ring was inserted
approximately 200 cases. In the author’s opinin
this is, in certain selected cases, a useful an
harmless method—in spite of the fact that seven ii
women became pregnant either with the ring 27 sii
or after it had fallen out.

5. Sterilization : (a) of the male, (b) of the femak
during the puerperium using Madlener’s techniquiy

Alexander Lindey gives a brief history of lay
suits fought in the U.S. Federal Courts on the righ
to import contraceptive literature and materia
The substance of the latest decision, given by th
Circuit Court of Appeals in June 1938 is that
contraceptive literature and materials may lav.
fully be imported, transported and mailed, pro
vided that the consignee is a physician or othe
person of special standing qualified to receive then
November 1938, Vol. III, No. 11.—In an articl
based on a paper which he read before the Americar
Eugenics Society, Dr. F. I. Kallman pleads strong)
for eugenic control of fertility in schizophrenw@
families. To defer control until the mental troubk
has manifested itself or the patient enters 2
institution is to lock the stable door after most d
the horse has gone, because more than 50 per cen
of such psychotics marry and breed before the!
malady reveals itself. Thus to sterilize or otherwis
attempt to control the propagation of schizc
phrenics after the first appearance of the disease if
eugenically speaking, useless. What is needed @
control of their children and siblings before thes
begin to propagate. This, the author. suggest:
should be done by a eugenic programme of bic
logical education during adolescence, by obligaton
health certification for all couples applying fo
marriage licences, by voluntary sterilization, and

   
 
  
  
  
 
. aa? wrote NN we coms .
a RG AR RI OER LOT PEE WN Toe oes 5's
Ree 2 eA TES MT a ot, i.
oo L : .

: * , “ . ‘ a :
ae Ba : ae aM
tg gets
see ag

 

4 me Sa
rs ee gas
Fe vehi ss

~’
4

by the teac of birth-control. Thesz last two are

pY ticularly urgent in¢ases where both parties to

he marriage.come.of tainted stock, and Kallman
jaintains that ‘many such persons are able and
willing to co-operate in this way.

| Ina short article Dr. Le Mon Clark describes two

-ypes of vaginal diaphragm cap commonly used in

smerica—one with a coiled spiral spring, the other
ith a flat watch-spring wire in the rim—and

Mndicates, with the aid- of excellent diagrams, in
hat kind of case each is preferable.

’ Dr. J. R. Baker’s new. chemical contraceptive
yolpar (P383) is cordially welcomed in an editorial,
snd an abstract of Bakér’s paper in The Lancet of
Dctober 15th, 1938, is included.

The celebrated Massachusetts case is described

2

 
  
  
 
  

snd discussed. In June ‘1937 the police raided the |

Salem birth-control clinic, seized the clinic records
ind equipment and took into custody the clinic
joctor and three members of the staff. This was
jone in accordance with legislation enacted in ~879,
orbidding the sale or manufacture of any drug,
mstrument or article for the prevention of concepion even by qualified physicians. A fine of $100
was imposed on the defendants by the Salem Disict Court and the clinic records and equipment
onfiscated. This judgment was upheld by the
supreme Court of Massachusetts and the US.
bupreme Court having, mivabile dictu, refused to
hear an appeal, the judgment still stands.
The usual abstracts, book reviews and items of
hews are appended. |
- MARGARET C, N. JAcKSON.

' aciological | Review

guly 1938, Vol. XXX, No. 3.—In this issue Dr.
uczynski continues a world-wide investigation of
phildless marriages. It is not easy to draw concluions from the data, particularly since in countries
uch as Spain the figures are obviously inaccurate.
But one thing stands out clearly—the increased
proportion of childless marriages as the standard of
material civilization rises.

Mr. Michael Daly attempts without complete
success to answer the objections to the policy of
ransferring industrial workers from one part of
F-ngland to another. He stresses the stimulus given
o development in the south without really facing
he fact that to duplicate what already exists in
a the north is not to increase but to lessen national
wealth. On the human side he is at pains to show
hat no local “ culture ” is being destroyed : but
he ignores the more obvious social evil of the il]eeling which always exists between transferees and
patives. He points out that there is a considerable
movement in population apart from government
schemes, This is amplified by Mr. R. S. Walshaw
who shows that there is a drift away from the
lepressed areas corresponding with the prospects
bf employment outside but subject to a time-lag of
About Six months. Mr. Adam Collier concludes his
Pnqulry into the social origins of entrants to Glasgow

PERIODICALS

307

University. It appears that a degree in Arts is
there regarded (as are degrees in theology, medicine
and law) as a means of entry into a profession,
namely the teaching profession. This profession
has become overcrowded and this, more than the
slump of 1931, caused a reduction in the number of
those entering for an Arts degree. Obviously,
higher education must be regarded as an end in
itself and not as a means of rising economically and
socially, if it is to become general. It is interesting
to observe the number of sons of doctors who adopt
their father’s profession, no doubt because it offers
the certainty of inheriting a practice.

Dr. Hans Rothfels completes his very interesting
article on Bismarck’s social policy, explaining how
the Chancellor combined such typical measures of
State socialism as factory legislation, workmen’s
insurance and railway nationalization with an
autocratic government—a compromise between the
Western democracies and the absolutism of the
East. In Germany, unlike England, the end of
latssez-faive in industry coincided with increased
protection of commerce, Bismarck observing that
though free trade was suited to England a system of
tariffs was necessary for Germany.

C. BINNEY.

Journal of Criminal Law and
Criminology

September-October 1938, Vol. XXIX, No. 3.—
H. L. Freedman, Psychiatrist-in-charge, Clinton
Prison Classification Ciinic, writes on The Role of
Psychiatry in Prisons. He considers the Classification Clinic has a definite place in the prison system
which is both important and promising, and is able
to guide the inmate in the direction that aims to
bring out the best in his personality that will effect
his socialization or resocialization. Dr. Freedman
believes the Classification Clinic should utilize
psychotherapy for personality disorders, and
remedial teaching for special academic Gefects. He
considers psychotherapy should include direct
psychotherapy and adjustment therapy by vocational and academic placement and follow up. It
may be of interest in this connection to add that as
a result of a four-year investigation at Wormwood
scrubs Prison into the psychological treatment of
crime Dr. W. H. de B. Hubert and the reviewer
found, inter alia, psychotherapy was useful in a
certain number of offenders showing mental
abnormalities: that skilled direction, management, specialized training and other general
psychiatric methods of treatment are applicable to
a very much larger number of cases and to a wider
range of conditions than is psychotherapy alone ;
and that the study of the heredity and environmental causes of crime, and investigation of the
special disorder of behaviour found amongst
criminals, may produce far more valuable results
than could be obtained by confining attention to
the reformation of any particular individual. _
ae W. Norwoop East.
  

F' ADDRESSES DELIVERED BY

 

RE! RRS OF THE EUGENICS SOCIETY
~ OCTOBER—DECEMBER 1938

 

 

 

309

 

 

Date. Society or Organisation. Number Present.
tober 3rd. | Upminster Townswomen’s Guild. Heredity and the Race. 145
tober 4th. Round TableNo. 19, Kingston-on-Thames.| Eugenics. 35
tober sth. Mrs ‘Tampla City of London Internatio. ul Friendship} Heredity, Our Responsibility as Citizens. roo

League. tober 7th. Miss Pocock. ; Bromley National Council of Women. Future of the Population. 60
ct. roth-rsth. | ‘Mrs; -Tamplin. ‘Shoreditch Health ‘Week. 7,000
tober1zth. |° Dr. Blacker. . | Shoreditch Health Week. Heredity and Man. x50
tober x1th. Miss Moore. a Oakthorpe Park Co-operative Women’s} Heredity, Healthy and Unhealthy 45

Guild. Families. |
tober 18th. Mrs. ‘Tamplin. College of Nursing, Leeds. Heredity. 90
tober r9th. Mrs. Tamplin. _ Soroptimist Club, Blackburn. Heredity. 22
tober 2oth. Mis. Tamplin. Public Hall, Blackburn. Film, From Generation to Generation. 350
tober 25th. Miss Moore. _ Stoke Newington Conservative Assn. Heredity. 40
tober 26th. Mis, Tamplin. Luton International Friendship League. | Heredity and Citizenship. 16
Bctober 27th. Miss ‘Pocock. |. The Bookhams Women’s Institute. | Heredity and the Race. 100
tober 30th. Mrs. Tamplin. South London Branch National Secular| Sterilization of the Unfit. 36
Society. |

ovember 2nd. Mrs. Poole. Stoke Newington | Conservative Assn. Heredity, Our Responsibility as Citizens. 40
jovember and. Miss Pocock. South West London Branch, Soroptimist) Heredity and Eugenics. 30

: mo Club. .
Bov. and-26th. if: Mss. Tamptin Woman’s Fair, Olympia. (The Hai of 10,000

Achievement.) |
Movember 3rd. Miss Moore. Leatherhead Townswomen’s Guild. Heredity. 150
ovember 8th. B.S. Bramwell, Esq.,| Lewisham Congregational Church, Men’s| Heredity, Our Responsibility as Citizens. 23
oo M.A., LL.B. Circle.

ovember 9th. Miss ‘Pocock. Faygate Women’s Institute, The Future of our Population. 40
ovember roth. Dr. Blacker. Osler Society, Oxford University. Some Problems of Population. 50
Sovember 15th. Miss Pocock. Soroptimist Club, Sevenoaks. Heredity and Eugenics. 25
ovember 16th. Miss Pocock. ‘League of Fever Nurses. _ Heredity and Citizenship. 40
ovember 17th. _ - Woman's Fair, Olympia. Film. 600
ovember 22nd. Mrs. Poole. -Greenwich International Friendship Heredity, Our Responsibility as Citizens. 45

| . - League...
ovember 25th. Miss Moore. . Barking International Friendship League. Heredity, Our Responsibility as Citizens. 24
Movember 25st. | Mrs, Tamplin. _ Welfare Centre, Shoreditch. Heredity. (Silent Film.) 16
ovember 2gth. | Miss Pocock. ' Brighton College of Nursing. Film, From Generation to Generation. 40
ovember 29th. | Dr. Blacker. “| North Kensington B.C. Clinic. Future of B.C. Clinics and the Population 30
ovember goth. | Miss Pocock. . Teddington Women Citizens’ Association.| The Future of our Population. 30
ecember 4th. Dr XK. B. Aikman. Maneford Street Unitarian Church Men’s| Eugenicsor Race Improvement. 15

a ys 4. Meeting.

ecember rath 7 Mrs. =: Tamplin. ‘Bromley International Friendship Leagne.| Heredity and Citizenship. am 4,3
