EUGENICS, ACADEMIC AND PRACTICAL"
By PROFESSOR R. A. FISHER. s-b., ERS.

Society at this Annual General Meeting

is ‘‘ Eugenics, Academic and Practical.”” I cannot claim to have chosen this
particular title, but the attempt to fathom
the intentions of its originators has been productive of some reflections which may,
perhaps, justify its choice.

In the first place, I am reminded that the
word ‘‘ academic ’’ possesses in our language
two distinct meanings. In the one sense, that
is academic which pertains to an academy or
institution devoted to higher education. In
its other and more familiar sense, the sense in
which it is used by the man in the train, it
means ‘impractical,’ ‘pedantically obscure,’ ‘irrelevant,’ ‘far-fetched,’ and
“ negligible for purposes of decision.’ I need
hardly say that, for every one time in which
the word is used in the first sense, it occurs
fifty times in the second, in common speech
and on subjects of common interest. This, in
fact, is its practical meaning: the other
meaning is merely ‘ academic.’

To a Society which sets itself to achieve a
national task, and seeks to gain national
support, the psychological reactions of the
man in the train are not to be neglected. If
eugenics were thought to be academic, in the
sense in which he uses the word, that would
be a fault, for which this Society would be to
blame, and a fault which this Soczety must
correct. For I submit that, in using the word
as he does, the man in the train shows considerable penetration. He is not, and does not
often pretend to be particularly well-informed about our educational institutions,
yet his attitude proves one point decisively—
that the pretentiousness of pedantry has
made a far wider and deeper impression on
the English population than have the realities of learning.

, ‘HE title chosen for my address to the

* A lecture delivered at the Annual General Meeting
of the Eugenics Soctety at- Burlington House, on May
14th, 1935.

Now, has the eugenics movement in this
country, as represented by the Eugenics
Society during the last twenty-odd years,
really deserved the opprobrious epithet
“academic ’’’? Looking back over past
numbers of the EUGENICS REVIEW, it is not
easy to find examples of the elaboration of
barren distinctions, so dear to the academic
mind, nor of that suave but dogmatic insistence on trivialities by which the same
type of intellect may be recognized. Looking
over these pages, we do not seem to have been
oppressed by that intolerance, directed
against originality of outlook, characteristic
of uncreative minds when expected or allowed
to pose as authorities. The volumes are, in
general, a record of freedom of discussion,
even of individual prejndices, and of fruitful,
though often incoherenc, planning for racial

betterment. I think any impartial reader

would conclude that eugenics is not an
academic subject. The only thing about it
which strikes one as academic is, perhaps, its
name, eugenics, which has certainly a pedantic ring to some ears, and is perhaps partly
responsible for the undoubted fact that, of the
many thousands of our countrymen who are
already inclined to take racial dangers somewhat seriously, only a small minority have
become Fellows or Members of our Society.

GALTON LABORATORY AND EUGENICS
SOCIETY

In scientific subjects, the natural remedy
for dogmatism has been found in research.
By temperament and training, the research
worker is the antithesis of the pundit. What
he is actively and constantly aware of is his
ignorance, not his knowledge; the insufficiency of his concepts, of the terms and
phrases in which he tries to excogitate his
problems: not their final and exhaustive
sufficiency. He is, therefore, usually only a
good teacher for the few who wish to use
their mind as a workshop, rather than to

95 es
96 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

store it as a warehouse. It was, perhaps, some
such considerations as these which led Francis Galton, in considering how his fortune
should best, after his death, further the aims
of eugenics, to establish a Laboratory for
eugenic research in the University of London.
For many years this Laboratory was incorporated in the same department as the
teaching of statistics, and it was only some
eighteen months ago, on the retirement of
my predecessor, Professor Karl Pearson, that
its duties were disentangled from the business
of teaching, and freed for that of learning.

Now that the Laboratory is, if I may so
put it, united in interest with the Soczety,
which is the other product of our founder’s
life work, it may seem appropriate that I
should, from time to time, give an account of
the work in progress, or in preparation, to
the Members of this Soczety. This, perhaps,
was one of the intentions of those who
framed the title of my address.

LEONARD DARWIN STUDENTSHIPS

But first I should like to congratulate the
Society, and all those responsible for the
project, on the-recent decision of the Council
to establish one or more research studentships, in the name of our Honorary President
Major Leonard Darwin, tenable at any one
of a number of universities and research
institutions where facilities exist for research
of value to eugenics to be carried out. This,
I believe, is a step of profound importance,
the fruits of which may be slow in maturing,
as the fruits of research invariably are, but
which is destined, I believe, to exert a cumulative effect; by bringing the subject of
eugenics before the minds of a large number
of able candidates ; by initiating them, at an
early stage in their career, in the problems
practically in need of solution, and in the
methods available for overcoming their
difficulties ; and finally, by adding, year by
year, some substantial item to the body of
ascertained fact by which our policy must be
guided.
AIMS AND METHODS OF EUGENIC
RESEARCH

The controlling aim of the studies at the
Galton Laboratory, tracing back, as they do,

to Galton’s own researches, is the study of
man as an evolving organism. Many profound thinkers have formed the opinion that
civilized man, by his very success in controlling his environment—by the influence
he has achieved over the incidence of death
and the occurrence of birth—is encountering
through evolutionary agencies, through the
same types of cause which have brought him
into existence, a relatively rapid decadence
of his highest attributes and powers. The
thesis may be argued with eloquence, for or
against, on historical, biological or genetic
grounds. Very diverse opinions may be held
with equal conviction, and it is, I think, clear
that agreement can only be approached, and
the way paved for concerted action, by an
understanding of the evolutionary forces at
work, and of their quantitative efficacy in our
existing population. That, I believe, has
always been the aim ; the means of research
have changed with change of opportunity,
and with the advance of scientific knowledge
in other fields. These fields must be laid
under contribution if the situation in man is
to be elucidated.

We cannot experiment in human heredity,
so the experimental side of the work must be
performed with animals, where the matings
can be controlled and the results followed
through a long series of generations. Men
can only be observed, their relationships
recorded, and numbers of cases counted. The
rest is inference. Our only means of knowing
that such inferences are scientifically valid is
by demonstrating the validity of the arguments used in analogous experimental
material, in which conclusive verification is
possible in subsequent generations. That, in
a nutshell, is the principle on which our
knowledge of human genetics is being built
up. For each type of problem which the
human data present, we must find the
appropriate experimental material which
may supply the key to the puzzle.

For example, our practical interest in the
well-being of human populations turns
predominantly on what are known as quantitative characters, such as exhibit themselves
in intelligence tests, or in resistance to disease. What matter here, above everything,
EUGENICS, ACADEMIC AND PRACTICAL 97

are the agencies which are capable of
influencing the average of the population in a
desirable or an undesirable sense. We are,
therefore, much concerned with the theoretical and practical study of quantitative
inheritance, with cases in which many
Mendelian factors contribute to a single
measurable effect, an aspect of genetic study
which, owing to its difficulty, has been
avoided in most centres of genetic research,
but which plays such a central part in all
human problems that, with us, it must
constitute a major objective.

PROBLEMS OF MENDELIAN DOMINANCE

Many years ago, when I first attempted
the interpretation, in genetic terms, of my
distinguished predecessor’s studies in the
correlation of human measurements, it
became clear that one of the largest elements
of uncertainty in their interpretation lay in
our ignorance of the manner in which the
Mendelian phenomena of dominance affected
the factors involved. At that time, dominance was regarded as a bare fact of observation, apparently causeless, about which
nothing could be known, save by isolating
the factor concerned by continued experimental breeding. During the last seven
years, however, a study of the incidence of
dominance in the known factors of experimental animals seems to have thrown light
on the manner in which dominance comes
into existence, and the causes by which it is
produced. -If these theories may be relied on,
then the general character of the dominance
phenomena to be expected in human inheritance is no longer an unobservable unknown. But we could apply to man such
theories, based on animal genetics, with the
degree of certainty that is required, only on
the condition that they are supported and
confirmed in detail by a wide range of different organisms. We have, therefore, at the
Galton Laboratory, quite a selection of divers
animals, snails, for example, and the grouse
locusts, chosen for the facilities they offer in
this study, which may confirm, or may enlarge, the views as to dominance which were
originally derived from that invaluable
experimental fly, Drosophila, and which my

experiments with poultry, during the last
six years, have already confirmed in that
species.

On the clinical side, we are concerned, not
with the average of the great mass of the
population, but with the special pedigrees of
a number of hereditary defects and abnormalities, each in itself comparatively rare.
In this field Dr. Julia Bell is continuing her
investigations for the Medical Research
Council, the results being published from
time to time by the Laboratory, in those
large pedigree collections which many of you
will know as the ‘Treasury of Human
Inheritance.” Attention is being particularly directed towards hereditary defects of
the nervous system, and the last issue contains the material so far available on that
terrible, though fortunately rare type of
hereditary insanity known as Huntington’s
chorea—not, let me say, to be confused with
the chorea of childhood, which is a frequent
symptom of acute rheumatism. In these
clinical studies, the difficulties introduced by
variable dominance form one of the great
pitfalls in the way of accurate prognosis, for
even the most reliable of the so-called
“dominant’ defects, which are usually
transmitted in the direct line from parent to
child, have been known, on occasion, to skip
a generation, or, in other words, to be hidden
in transmission as though they were recessive. It is, however, another peculiarity
brought to light by genetical research,
namely linkage, which is likely in the future
to revolutionize the methods of individual
prognosis.

LINKAGE AND INDIVIDUAL PROGNOSIS

Apart from sex linkage, we know almost
nothing at present of linkage in man. Yet it
is certain that every defect determined by a
single factor must be located in one or other
of twenty-three linkage groups. Each defect
must therefore be linked in inheritance with
numerous other observable traits, and with
some of them it is probably linked closely.
The search for such linkage will certainly be
lengthy, and at first, disappointing. For the
simple, harmless characters which are our
tools in this work have not in the past
98 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

received the attention which they deserve.
Yet they are probably very numerous, and
must be observable, by an observer who
knows what to look for, in the majority of
families. There is probably no way in which
an observant amateur can do so much to
further eugenic progress as by detecting such
small but definite distinctions among his own
neighbours and acquaintances. Any such
trait as the possession of red hair, ear lobes
free-hanging or attached to the cheek, the
presence and absence of hair on the second
joints of the fingers, and innumerable other
differences may, if found to be diagnosable
with confidence, supply one more of the test
factors so badly needed in the detection of
linkage with the rare abnormalities.

What such a detection may mean in practical prognosis I may illustrate in the case of
such a dominant defect as Huntington’s
chorea. This disease attacks many of its
victims late in life. Uncontrolled, involuntary movements, formerly often called St.
Vitus’s dance, increasingly afflict the patient,
and are followed, after years of distressing
illness, by partial or complete loss of the
reason. Children may have been born before
any recognizable symptom appeared, and
these, in adolescence, may show no sign of
the defect, yet 50 per cent. of such children
ultimately fall to the disease. At present, if
a young man with such a family history were
to present himself for eugenic advice, we
could only say :
Perhaps, like your father or mother, you have
received the fatal defect ; there is no known
remedy. You should undertake no family
responsibilities, nor run the risk of transmitting such an affliction to your children.
Perhaps, on the other hand, you are free
from the defect. In that case there is no
danger, or even possibility, of your transmitting it to any child or descendant. The
probabilities of these opposite alternatives
are, so far as we know, exactly equal.’”’ That
is the position of eugenic prognosis in such a
case to-day. But suppose we knew that one
or other of these harmless traits which I have
mentioned were closely linked in inheritance
with Huntington’s chorea, such knowledge
might altogether change the situation. It

‘* There are two alternatives. .

might enable the geneticist to say to some of
the children of such parents: ‘‘ The chance
that you have received the hereditary defect
is only about one in twenty,’ while in other
cases they would perceive that it was nine
teen in twenty. The degree of certainty

attainable by this method depends on the
closeness of the linkage ; but those who find
themselves under the shadow of such an
hereditary disability would not underesti-.
mate'the value of any objective guidance in
the uncertainties of their case.

At the Galton Laboratory, therefore, we
are endeavouring to introduce, step by step,
the examination of these auxiliary traits into
the work of pedigree collection. One such
test which we use depends on the capacity to |
taste certain organic compounds, which was
discovered, I understand, from the observation that, while most people observe a~
bitterness in the pulp of grapefruit, others are
unconscious of any such flavour. A number
of other such innocuous factors may be
detected through the reactions of the blood.

STUDIES OF SEROLOGICAL
INHERITANCE

That the serum of some persons has the
power spontaneously of agglutinating the
blood-corpuscles of others, and that these
differences are readily detected and simply
inherited, has been known for many years.
By means of this spontaneous agglutination,
four types of men and women may be distinguished. More recently Landsteiner, in
America, has shown that another distinction
may be drawn, using immune serum from
rabbits, which increases the number of distinguishable types from four to twelve.
Already it is possible, by blood tests, to
settle disputed paternity in the majority of
cases. In at least one case, the error of a
maternity centre in interchanging two babies

has been corrected by this means. But the

rabbit is not the only animal which can be
used. Further distinctions, of which, so far,
less is known, can be drawn by means of
serum from horses and from sheep; and
every new distinction which can be established multiplies the number of types which
EUGENICS, ACADEMIC AND PRACTICAL 99

can be identified, and the prospects of detecting genetic linkage.

I believe I can say with confidence that the
study of serological inheritance is only at its

beginning. A few years ago, Dr. Todd, of the 
National Research Institute, published some
remarkable researches on the immune reactions of chickens, in which he had found it
relatively easy to prepare a serum which
would identify the blood corpuscles of any
individual bird from those of all other birds.
He showed, too, that the reactions responsible for these tests were definitely genetic,
while the factors concerned were certainly
very numerous. I see no reason, personally,
to doubt that they are equally numerous in
mankind, or that ultimately, at the end perhaps of prolonged and disappointing researches, it will be possible to use the serological reactions of human blood as a direct
means of investigating the genetic potentialities of a human being. That, perhaps, will be
the final solution of the problem of the normal
carrier of a hidden defect. However that may
be, it is my business this afternoon to explain
our aims, and not to make promises. What I
have said of the recent progress of serology
will at least explain why it is that, through
the munificence of a great scientific Foundation, we shall be able, before the end of the
year, as I have just heard from America, to
establish a laboratory for serological genetics
in addition to our previous activities.

WHAT IS “PRACTICAL EUGENICS ’’?

I have not attempted to give a full account
of the work at the Galton Laboratory, and
especially, I have left aside the scientific
detail—the tactics, as it were—of our attack
upon special problems. For these I must
refer the curious to the Annals of Eugenics
which, through the co-operation of this
Soctety, it is now possible to publish quarterly. I have only hoped to give a sketch of
the controlling strategy of our work, the aim
of which is to supply a solidly established
body of fact which may be of service to the
statesman in framing our laws, and to the
administrator in working our institutions.

Science is international, and of universal
application. The task of applying its general

B

truths to the needs of a particular nation at a
particular period is one for the legislator, and
when we speak of ‘ Practical Eugenics’ I
hope that we shall always mean practical
action in the legislative sphere, based on and
prepared by educational propaganda appealing directly to the eugenic conscience of the
nation. Only by framing legislative pro-.
posals, as in the advocacy of voluntary
sterilization, and by preparing ourselves to
mobilize our political influence, can the
Society, I believe, achieve aims which
deserve to be called practical.

In doing this there are, of course, lions in
the path. I have said that I believe that there
are thousands outside the eugenic movement
fully prepared to take our racial dangers
seriously. No effort should be spared to gain
the active support of this body of opinion ;
and I do not think that it is merely the somewhat pedantic flavour of the word
‘eugenics’ which has made it, hitherto,
hold aloof. The great obstacle to our gaining
the support of this body of sane and solid
opinion seems to me to be the fear of
crankery. Just as the pedant, even when
learned, makes of himself an obstacle to the
advance of knowledge, and by his vanity has
brought the pursuit of knowledge itself into
some disrepute, so it is the temperamental
weakness of the crank which makes him the
deadly enemy of the statesmanlike use of the
existing machinery for public co-operation.
Combine in one person, personal vanity, a
passion for interference, but little knowledge
and much zeal, and you have a potential
crank. The crank acquires, for example,
some little item of scientific knowledge—such
as that Dr. Helen King’s white rats have
been bred brother to sister for over a hundred
generations, and are still as healthy as ever :
immediately, driven by the other elements of
his character, he becomes an advocate of
incest, on “‘eugenic’’ grounds. To him,
eugenics becomes the advocacy of incest. Or,
again, he may hear that artificial insemination can be successfully practised on many
farm animals. It matters little to him that
the number of advantageous births which
could be brought about by this method is
ludicrously insignificant. It seems positively
I00

to attract him that human generation by

this process would be abhorrent to the feel-.

ings of the thousands of sane citizens, to
whom the eugenics movement might otherwise appeal with success. It is enough that
notoriety can be based on offended sentiments: and he becomes an advocate of
“eugenics,” by artificial insemination.

I need not enlarge upon the reactions of
experienced politicians to activities of this

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

character. My imaginary examples will serve
to emphasize my point that any element of
crankery in any society’s policy is deadly to
its political influence; and, on the other
side, that the serious organization of the
Soctety’s political activities is to be welcomed, quite apart from its other effects, as
closing the door, once and for all, on the use
of our Society for the self-advertisement of
irresponsible monomaniacs.

 

CHARACTER anp PERSONALITY

An International Psychological Quarterly
Edited by ROBERT SAUDEK

Contents of June 1935 issue

Robert Saudek: An Obituary, by A. A. ROBACK (Cambridge, Mass.).
On the Nature and Structure of Character, by WILLIAM STERN (Duke University).

Personality Characteristics of Happily Married, Unhappily Married, and Divorced
Persons, by WINIFRED BENT JOHNSON and LEWIS M. TERMAN (Stanford
University).

Some Fundamental Laws of the Psychology of Needs: Hunger, by DAVID KATZ
(University of Manchester).

Involuntary Self-expression in Gait and Other Movements, by WERNER WOLFF
(Barcelona).

Subscription, 75. 6d. per annum; single copies, 2s.

LONDON : GEORGE ALLEN & UNWIN LTD.

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVII, No. 2.
