PASSPORT TO TOKYO:
THE FIFTH INTERNATIONAL
CONFERENCE ON PLANNED

PARENTHOOD, TOKYO, 1955
By L. N. JACKSON, M.C., D.M.*

EITHER trouble nor expense was
spared by the hospitable Japanese to

ensure the success of the conference.
Meetings, held in the spacious Masonic Hall
cooled by electric fans, though fully attended
(some 300 or more being present at every
session) produced no sense of congestion or
overcrowding. The names of speakers and
the titles of their papers were adequately
displayed. Posters and literature were exhibited in abundance and lunch in both
Eastern and Western styles was available on
the premises.

The conference suffered from a few of the
largely unavoidable defects common to such
meetings. Among these was the overloading of the programme. Too much material
had been presented, so that contributors,
some of them distinguished scientists who
had travelled long distances to attend the
conference, were not given time to read
their papers in full. Instead thev were
circulated beforehand and each author was
allotted but a few minutes in which to summarize his paper. Even so, by the time each
summary had been translated into Japanese
too little time was left for adequate dliscussion.

No praise could be too high for the interpreters, who worked tirelessly, and a word of
sympathy is due to the rapporteurs whose
unhappy function it was to bring each session
to a close by summarizing the summaries
themselves. It is no reproach to the excell
 

* Reprinted from Lamzly Planning, January 1956,
4, 4, by kind permission of the author and of the Family
Planning Association.

4

ent organization of the Japanese to suggest
that future conferences should not be thus
presented with a surfeit of riches ; better
results might be achieved by a more thorough
consideration of far less material.

Japanese Misgivings

The Japanese contributed some thirty
papers. Dr. Tokuma Terao was at pains to
define the meaning of population policy and
concluded that so far as Japan was concerned it was at present synonymous with
birth control. Professor Juitsu  Kitaoka’s
paper on the over-population of Japan was
full of grim facts: though 95 per cent of
the cultivable land in Japan is already being
cultivated 25 per cent of the national food
supply has still to be imported, yet the population is increasing by more than a million
each year ; without a revolution in methods
of agriculture Japanese food production cannot be increased ; family limitation is at
present achieved mainly by abortion, the
figure for reported abortions in 1954 being
1,143,000, and probably another million are
procured but not reported; vital export
markets are dwindling ; ten million are unemployed or under-employed ; though public
opinion is anti-militaristic many young
people would welcome a communist revolution in the preposterous hope that it might
solve all Japan’s problems ; lastly, there is
no guarantee that Japan will endure indefinitely either mass starvation or a miserably
low standard of living.

Professor Kitaoka proposed certain remedies : a completely safe and reliable contraceptive to be invented and distributed free ;

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, April 1956. 48, 1.
42 ss THE EUGENICS REVIEW

a tax on all children after the third in the
family ; trade barriers to be removed and
undeveloped land transferred, with adequate
safeguards, to the Japanese. More grim
facts were added by Professor Shozo Toda,
who described Japan as a country without
a safety-valve. Juvenile delinquency in
Japan has greatly increased since the war ;
more than four million tons of food must
now be imported annually ; three million
houses were destroyed during the war and
even the small dwellings now in mass production are sometimes too expensive for
professors and others engaged in intellectual
work.

Family Planning in Three Villages

More encouraging was Dr. Yoshio Koya’s
account of a family planning experiment
carried out over a period of five years in
three Japanese villages ; Kamifunaka Mura,
a village of rice cultivation in a flat country,
Minamota Mura, a mountain village of dry
field farming, and Fukuura Mura, a fishing
village. Opposition to contraception, based
not upon religious belief but upon Kodakara
(“‘ children have value as property and some
one of them will provide for one’s old age ’’),
had first to be overcome. In this the help
of the trusted village midwife was enlisted
who visited and talked to the families in
their own homes. During the early stages
of the experiment a specially trained doctor
visited the village clinics every month and
afterwards at longer intervals. The experiment is succeeding. The birth-rate in the
villages has fallen to 13.8 per thousand as
compared with 20 for all Japan, the reproductive index has fallen from 1.51 to 0.84
and, best of all, the number of induced abortions has markedly decreased. The condom
has proved the most acceptable contraceptive
device, being chosen by more than half the
subjects of this experiment.

In a joint paper by Drs. K. W. and F. Y:
Amano it was pointed out that the structure
of Japanese houses is not convenient for the
employment of elaborate contraceptive techniques. In their view the use of intrauterine rings is becoming more popular.

Dr. Tenrei Ota also favours the use of intrauterine rings of various types for which he
claims an 85 per cent success rate, increasing
as patients grow accustomed to it, to 95
per cent. Drs. Takenori Suzuki and Teruo
Yashida denied that harmful changes
occurred in the endometrium from the use
of intra-uterine rings in histological study of
700 Cases.

A Million Abortions

Further observations on the subject of
abortion were made by Dr. Yasuaki Koguchi.
Induced abortion, he said, had become
almost a fashion in Japan. From the calculations of Professor Koya and others it was
likely that the actual number of abortions
induced in 1953 was between 1,800,000 and
2,300,000 as compared to the 1,060,000 reported. Among the remedies he recommended were to educate the public in the
dangers of abortion and to make doctors
responsible for teaching their patients efficient contraceptive techniques.

A paper by Dr. Hiroshi Mizuno described
a test for the spermicidal efficiency of contraceptive products. Dr. Minoru Muramatsu
pointed out that, whereas in Western
countries limitation of births after conception
was not a socially accepted practice, in Japan
induced abortion was at least tolerated, as
infanticide used to be until comparatively
recently.

A paper by Dr. Masaomi Ishikawa and
others described animal and clinical experiments on the control of fertility by the use
of oral progesterone.

It'is obvious that the Japanese are deeply
concerned about their population problem.
It is no less obvious that their main method
of coping with this problem at present is by
inducing abortion, followed in a large number’
of cases by sterilization.

The Rest of the World

A number of papers were concerned with
population and resources and there were
others on field and clinical studies of family.
planning projects. Defining population pressure as “‘ the way a people feels about. its
PASSPORT TO TOKYO " 43

own economic situation as compared with
that of other peoples ’’ Professor Warren S.
Thompson (U.S.A.), gave reasons for expecting this to increase in the next few decades.
In his view population pressure was one important cause of, but did not lead inevitably
to, war.

In the opinion of Dr. William Vogt
(U.S.A.), most Latin American countries are
over-populated in the sense that they are
only able to maintain even their present low
standards of living by using up their resource
‘capital. Over-population is a grave problem in the New World as well as in the Old.

Dr. Elmer Pendell (U.S.A.) betrayed a
certain ruthlessness. In his view the concept of ‘‘ the dignity of the individual ” can
be carried too far. Not only must the
quantity of a population be controlled ; its
quality must be maintained and this is best
achieved by a judicious policy of sterilization. On this topic there were three papers :
two on sterilization by electro-cautery of the
uterine cornua by Dr. Shuhei Yasui of Tokyo
and by Professor B. H. Sheares of Singapore
and a report by Dr. Hem Samwal (India) on
female sterilization in Uttar Pradesh. Dr.
Axel Westman reviewed cases of legal abortion in Sweden. Morbid sequele were rare
and in about 80 per cent of cases no psychological ill-effects were observed.

Discussing the genetic aspects of population replacement Mr. Frederick Osborn
(U.S.A.) pleaded that society should provide
conditions favourable to early marriage and
large families for socially valuable stocks ;
i.e. those conspicuous for vitality and early
achievement. Dr. Edward Ackerman (U.S.
A.) shared the opinion that population
pressure in the resource-needy countries is
likely to continue despite modern technology, in addition to which political and administrative measures must be used with
intelligence and vigour if the difficulties of
the present and visible future are to be
surmounted. In Asia, the main area of
crisis in the world population problem
according to Professor E. Stuart Kirby
(Hong Kong), family planning must go hand
in hand with development on urban and
industrial lines.

The Underprivileged

Dr. S. Chandrasekhar (India) drew attention to the fact that it is the poor and underprivileged with large families in semi-developed countries who desperately need assistance in family planning but who are denied
access to it because of ignorance and cultural
inhibitions.

Dr. Sohan Singh (India) presented a paper,
in which he and Dr. J. B. Wyon had collaborated, describing an epidemiological study
of the population problem in the Punjab, the
crux of which was how to restore the lost
balance between birth rate and death rate.

In a paper on active research in family
planning Dr. Baljit Singh concluded that
though mothers in Indian villages do not
want to bear so many children they don’t
seem to be keen to do much about it.

In a review of development programmes in
Asian countries Mrs. Avabai B. Wadia
(India) emphasized that if these great efforts
to raise living standards are to succeed they
must be accompanied by properly organized
population control.

An interesting paper by Dr. C. P. Blacker
(U.K.) reviewed the family planning and
eugenic movements from 1830 up to the
present and outlined some of the problems
which may present themselves in vears to
come.

Scientific Papers

Perhaps the highlight of the conference
was the day allotted to scientific papers
bearing mainly on reproductive physiology.
Indeed it was a landmark in the history of
the [.P.P.I., thanks largely to the vision and
persistence of its President, Margaret Sanger,
that so many distinguished scientists were
present at the Tokyo Conference. Many of
the papers were highly technical and they
will be only briefly mentioned. .

In masterly fashion Dr. Warren Nelson
(U.S.A.) summarized the stages of mammalian reproduction and attempted to select
points in that process most susceptible to
designed interference. Dr. Gregory Pincus
(U.S.A.) discussed the possible role of provesterone and kindred substances as_ oral
44 | THE EUGENICS REVIEW

contraceptives. Dr. A. S. Parkes (U.K.)
also indicated various targets in the reproductive process that might be attacked or
upon which attacks had already been made
with no marked success.

Dr. M. G. Shelesnyak (Israel) was of the
opinion that a highly vulnerable point in
the reproductive process, and one most susceptible to disturbance, is the implantation
of the blastocyst. Dr. S. Zuckerman (U.K.)
pointed out that in the normally fertile male
spermatogenesis is a continuing process. In
the female, however, oogenesis ceases at
birth or soon after so that the number of
oocytes is finite. If some agent could be
found to accelerate atresia of the oocytes the
fertility of women so treated could be reduced. |

Dr. J. B. Thiersch (U.S.A.) gave some
account of his attempts to control reproduction in rats by means of various antimetabolites given either just before implantation or
at intervals during gestation. Ina paper by
Dr. William O. Maddock (U.S.A.) and others
it was reported that, the administration of
various forms of gonadotrophic hormones
tended to produce antigonadotrophins in the
patient’s serum which in turn combined with
the naturally circulating hormones.

Pleasantly punctuated with receptions

every evening and interrupted only by one
all-day excursion to Hakone, the conference
ended with a dinner at the Imperial Hotel
on October 29th at which Mrs. Margaret
Sanger, the guest of honour, was the worthy
recipient of many gifts and compliments.

The following week was devoted to a tour
of Japanese shrines and temples and of such
beauty spots as Nikko, Kyoto and Nara and
of places of interest in Tokyo itself. For
Western delegates it was a new experience
to travel in a bus decorated with freshly-cut
flowers and to be entertained by a conductress who sang sweetly into a microphone.

Bombay Aftermath

After the Tokyo Conference a highly
successful seminar was held in Bombay
attended by several of the scientists who
had been in Japan. Among many interesting papers and much lively discussion was a
report from Dr. S. N. Sanyal on the pea,
Pisum sativum. He has permitted clinical
trials from which some evidence has emerged
that the pregnancy rate is reduced.

To India, no less than to Japan, thanks
are due for measureless kindness and hospitality.
