246 EUGENICS REVIEW.

small towns than in large, and leads one to question whether the agricultural labourer is so badly off as he is sometimes represented.

Another interesting application of the method is to the study of
the effects of child labour on the development of the child. In Bradford
children of the age of twelve are allowed to spend half the day in school
and the other half-day earning wages. This is known as the half-time
system. Mr. Greenwood shows that the average of the height and weight
indices (the combined index number) is low in Bradford for children
of twelve years old. Its value is actually 95°7, whereas for children of
eleven in Bradford it is 99'2, and for children of twelve in Leeds, Sheffield,
and Wakefield, where the half-time system is not in use to so great an
extent, it is 97°4, 97°8, and 96°8 respectively. He argues from these
figures that the half-day’s labour has a deleterious effect on the physique
of the child, a result which seems natural enough and is supported by
evidence of another kind brought forward in another section of the work.
But he makes no mention of the fact that at thirteen years the combined
index number goes up again in Bradford to 987, which is considerably
higher than the corresponding index in Leeds, Sheffield, or Wakefield.
In presenting the figures without mentioning this Mr. Greenwood shows
a certain bias, at any rate a strong desire to arrive at his conclusion
rather than let the statistics lead him where they will. In Oldham the
material allowed a direct comparison between the half-time children
and those who spend the whole day at school. But the half-timers are
throughout larger and heavier than the full-timers. The explanation
of this unexpected result is given by the medical officer for Oldham as
follows : “ (1) That those working half-time are on the average older than
those not working; (2) that the tendency would be for the stronger and
better developed children to go to work, while the weaker and delicate
children would be kept at school; (3) that the worker, as he is bringing
in a wage, is better fed than those who are not wage earners.” Possibilities which might have an opposite tendency, as for example, that the
children of the poorer parents were more likely to be sent to work, are
not considered. The question is thus seen to be a complicated one,
which will not be solved without the collection and reduction of better
data. This should present no particular difficulty, as the exact age of the
children in the two groups, their physique, and home conditions might
without difficulty be removed from the realms of conjecture and properly
allowed for. But though the simple comparison made in the work under
review cannot be said to have led to a definite conclusion, it is not for that
reason without value as it serves to point the way for future work.

We will conclude by tempering the wind of general commendation
which issues naturally from us, by the question, “ Why are the diagrams
so very sketchy ? ” EDGAR SCHUSTER.

Pearl, R. A Contribution towards an Analysis of the Problem of Inbreeding. Amer. Nat. XLVII.; 1913; pp. 577-614. Genetics and
Breeding. Science XXXVII.; 1913; pp. 539-546; and Parshley,
H. M. Data on Sex-Determination in Cattle. Biological
Bulletin XXIV. ; 1913; pp. 205-225.

In the first of these papers Dr. Pearl presents a method for determining

the intensity of inbreeding. He points out that it is important to start

from the individual and work backwards into the ancestry, rather than to
start from the ancestry and work downwards. The method adopted consists in finding a coefficient which shall represent the ratio of actual
ancestors in any generation to the total possible number of ancestors.

For example, if brother is mated with sister for three successive genera
tions, the offspring will have only two great-grandparents instead of the

eight which they would have if there were no inbreeding. Three-quarters
of the ancestors in that generation have thus been eliminated, and the coefficient of inbreeding for the three generations is therefore 75 per cent.
REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS. 247

More generally, if ~ is the number of generations in the pedigree, # the
possible number, and g the actual number of ancestors in mth generation,
then Zn the coefficient of inbreeding for generations is given by the
formula Z®= 100 (fn41—¢n+1).

Pa+i

Dr. Pearl points out that in repeated brother-sister mating Za soon
approaches 100 per cent., so that if no effects are produced in a few
generations, any subsequent changes are probably not due to inbreeding
as such. Practical methods are given for working out the coefficient in
long and complicated pedigrees. The latter part of the paper discusses
the relation of inbreeding with continued self-fertilisation, but contains a
mistake which vitiates a considerable part of the argument; this mistake
is corrected by the author himself in Amer. Nat. XLVIII., p. 57.

The second paper is the presidential address to the Animal Section
of the American Breeders’ Association, 1913; it points out the importance
of the knowledge of the recently discovered principles of heredity in
checking the empirical methods commonly used by breeders of animals.

In the third paper the authors have collected records from breeders
of 480 births in cattle, in which it was known whether service by the bull
took place “early,” “in the middle,” or “late” in the heat period of the
cow. The “early” class contained 248 births, with 125¢, 1232; the
“middle ” class contained 125 births, 67 ¢, 58 ?;the “ late” class contained
107 births, 65¢, 42%. The ratio of males to females thus rose from
98'4¢,100¢% in the “early” class to 115°5¢ 100¢ in the “middle,” and
1548¢,100¢ in the “late” class. It is concluded that these changes in
the sex-ratio cannot be ascribed to any known cause except the difference
of time of fertilisation, and that possibly “staleness” of the ovum may
tend to destroy the activity of a female-determining chromosome, and
allow the ovum to develop into a male. L. DONCASTER.

Laughlin, H. H. Report of the Committee to Study and to Report on
the best practical means of cutting off the Defective Germ Plasm
in the American Population. 1. The Scope of the Committee’s
Work. II. The Legal, Legislative and Administrative Aspects
of Sterilization. Eugenics Record Office. Bulletins 1oA and
10B. Cold Spring Harbour, Long Island, New York; 1914;
Prices 20 cents. and 60 cents; pp. 64 and 150.

BULLETIN No. 10A appears to cover the whole scope of negative eugenics.
First the numbers of “ Socially inadequate in the American population ”
are estimated, and then “ Cacogenic varieties of the human race,” that is
to say those who are socially unfit on account of defective inheritance, are
classified with great minuteness. The ten main classes to which they
are referred are the feeble-minded, paupers, inebriates, criminals,
epileptics, insane, the asthenic class, the diathetic class (i.e., those who
have a tendency to some specific ailment). The deformed and the
cacaesthetic (those suffering from hereditary defects of the sense organs).
The remedies which have been proposed “for purging the blood of the
race” from the defects enumerated then receive consideration. They are
catalogued as follows. 1. Life segregation. 2. Sterilization. 3. Restrictive marriage laws and customs. 4. Eugenical education of the public
and of prospective marriage mates. 5. Systems of matings purporting to
remove defective traits. 6. General environmental betterment. 7.
Polygamy. 8. Euthanasia. 9. Neo-Malthusianism. 10. Laissez-faire. We
rather suspect that numbers 7, 8 and 10 were put in owing to the committee’s affection for the decimal system. In any case they are dummies
easily knocked down. Neo-malthusianism also receives rather scant
courtesy, and the efficacy of any “systems of matings purporting to
remove defective traits” is questioned. “General environmental betterment” is briefly conceded its place as a necessary part of social reform,
