POPULATION CONTROL IN INDIA
By CEDRIC DOVER

HE need for population control in

India has been often emphasized.

Within the country itself, large sections of the public, both professional and lay,
favour the widespread use of contraceptive
measures, but pronounced personal views
against birth-control are also prevalent. The
opponents belong to the so-called educated
classes, and base their attitude on religious
prejudices so familiar to birth-control workers
that they need not be considered here.

OPPOSITION TO BIRTH-CONTROL
Apart from religious and private objections,
certain economists feel that birth-control is
neither necessary nor feasible in India. Thus,
G. S. Ghurye and S. R. Deshpande, who
made an economic survey* of 2,053 immigrant labourers from Konkan to Bombay a
few years ago, felt that their inquiry did not
support the need for restricting the birth-rate
in India. They found that female reproductivity ceased at twenty-eight years, the
average age of mothers at the first birth
being 18-5 years. The interval between
births averaged 2-8 years, and the number
of children per marriage was 4:4. These
figures may be accepted as more or less representative for the labouring classes throughout the country, and provide an apparent
case against the practice of contraception.
But it does not stand close analysis. For one
thing, the incidence of abortions was not
considered ; nor was adequate importance
given to the relief which contraception gives
to the family. And Ghurye and Deshpande’s
survey itself shows how urgent is the need for
such amelioration. The sample studied lived
almost entirely in one-room tenements under
conditions which can be readily imagined.
Among the women, 23-8 per cent. belonged
to the age-group 21-25 years, the proportion
falling to 11-3 per cent. after 30 years, owing

* Indian Journal Economics, 1931.

to the fact that the older women returned to
their homes permanently incapacitated by
illness. That this condition could not be
wholly ascribed to environmental factors is
partly shown from the information that
mothers belonging to the age-groups 9-13 and
14-18 years contributed 4-9 and 51-3 respectively of the births. Even on the basis of
this inquiry it must be concluded, therefore,
that restriction of the birth-rate is necessary
in India. Wider studies emphasize this need
further.*

According to Dr. C. V. Natarajan (im litt.)
of the Mysore Health Department, and other
workers, the masses, to whom primitive
methods are already known, take readily to
suggestions for restricting parenthood. The
average labourer is certainly capable of
assimilating and using simple instruction in
the vernacular, and in this connection it is
interesting to note that the members of the
Statutory Commission (1930) commented on
“the shrewdness which often resides in the
illiterate peasantry.’”’ There is no basis,
therefore, for the popular belief that the
Indian masses are too ignorant to understand
simple contraceptive technique, nor is there
any reason to suppose that unsurmountable
difficulties prevent wide distribution of this
knowledge. It is said that almost every
village has its health visitor, and the cost of
effective methods can be so greatly reduced as
to place them within universal reach, particularly if modest State aid is given. This
has been partly proved in Mysore.

THE OFFICIAL ATTITUDE

Neither the Indian Government nor welfare and other ameliorative agencies have
given serious consideration to the problem of
population control. Apathetic officialdom in

* See, e.g. Wattal, P. K.: The Population Problem
of India. Bennett Coleman, Bombay, 1934. Das, R. K.:
The Industrial Efficiency of India. P. S. King, London,
1930. Hutton, J. H.: Census of India, 1931. Government of India, Delhi, 1933.

283
284

India has yet to learn that “it is incompatible with sound public health administration that any Government worthy of the
name should allow itself to be deterred against
its better judgment from including in the
national health services clinics for advice on
birth-control.’’*

In some Provinces, however, evidence of
interest in the problem is not wanting among
those theoretically concerned with the administration. In the Madras Legislative
Council, Mr. Shetty’s effortst during the last
five years have resulted in the inclusion,
against a storm of opposition in which
Roman Catholics played a dominant part, of
birth-control in the maternal welfare activities of the Presidency. It may also be stated
that a few years ago the Government of
Bombay made a noteworthy decision in
repealing the ban imposed by the Board of
Censors on a film, issued by the National
Baby and Health Week Committee of Bombay, entitled If She Only Knew, which was a
propaganda film for birth-control, inasmuch
as it illustrated the relationship between
frequent pregnancies and tuberculosis. {

In certain Indian States the position is
more advanced than it is in British India.
The Government of Mysore State was, I
believe, the first in the world to open (in
1930) official birth-control clinics at its principal hospitals, but between the recognition
of the principle and the fruition of its objects
there has unfortunately been a wide gap.
Visiting one of these clinics in 1932, I was
informed by the doctor in charge that she had
only had about ten cases, and that conditions
were not much better at the other clinics in
the State. This was not surprising, since she
was opposed to the widespread practice of
contraception, relating with pride her discouragement of ‘“‘ women with only three or
four children ’” who had approached her for
advice. In other Indian States such as
Baroda, Travancore, Cooch Behar, Rajkote,

* Macassey, Sir Lynden: Journal State Medicine,

XL, 399-405, 1932.
t+ See Madras Birth Control Bulletin, I, 2-7, 1931;
II, 13-14, 1932; and later issues. Also the Madras
Mail and Hindu in the third quarter of 1933.
{ Phadke, N. S.: Birth Control Review, XII, 174-5,

1927.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Pittapur and Jaipur, the rulers are also
interested in the birth-control movement, but
little has been done, except in Travancore,
outside the sphere of avowed sympathy.

UNOFFICIAL ENDEAVOUR

Private activity has resulted in the formation of a few propagandist societies and birthcontrol centres. The former, however, live on
the verge of extinction, and the latter are
largely associated with the sale of literature
and proprietary goods of very doubtful
value. The only organization deserving
notice is the Madras Neo-Malthusian League,
of which Sir Vepa Ramesam, a judge of the
Presidency High Court, is the moving spirit,
with the Maharajahs of Pittapur and Jaipur
as patrons. It has done valuable propagandic
work, and publishes authoritative pamphlets
in addition to a useful journal.

To such activities the medical profession
has made practically no contribution, though
recognizing their need.* The Indian Medical
Association, however, showed some interest
in the subject by requesting a survey of
contraceptive technique,f and Dr. A. P.
Pillay, who has frequently emphasized the
bearing of contraceptive knowledge on welfare work,¢ conducts “‘ The Eugenic Clinic ”’
at Bombay, where advice is given without
restrictive conditions. This clinic is largely
confined to the more prosperous classes, but
Dr. Pillay hopes to expand his services if he
has sufficient support.

Propaganda alone, based on Western
experience and a few economic generalizations, will not establish the birth-control
movement in a country where contraceptive
practice requires a specialapproach. Methods
for the masses require particular attention,
the investigation of indigenous products
offering a rich field for the combined efforts
of laboratory and social workers. One of the
main problems of population control in
India is of finding a really cheap contraceptive which will ensure a high degree of safety,

* See editorials in Indian Medical Gazette, 1929,
1931-2.

¢ Dover, C.: Indian Medical World, I, 1930.

t See, e.g. Welfare Problems in Rural India. Taraporevala and Sons, Bombay, 1931.
POPULATION CONTROL IN INDIA

even if it does not furnish the complete
security which combined methods offer to
more fortunate persons.

INDIAN LITERATURE ON
CONTRACEPTION

Like most countries, India produces a
large volume of contraceptive literature of
poor quality. I know of no work published in
India that attains the standard of a thorough
modern study, but several “ popular ’’ works
are at least earnest in purpose. In this category are those by N. S. Phadke* and Mercia
Heynes-Wood,f and the publications of the
Madras Neo-Malthusian League.{ Vernacular pamphlets are also numerous, but there is
much scope for brief and reliable information
in the vernaculars, such as that supplied in
Prof. R. D. Karve’s Marathi monthly,
Samajaswathya.§ Meanwhile, there are
moderately useful works in Hindi, Bengali,
Gujarati, Marathi, Tamil, Telegu and Urdu.

ORGANIZATION

Research. and propaganda need to be
supplemented by adequate organization, if
the birth-control movement in India is to be
productive. Broadly speaking, the existing
machinery of medical administration should
be utilized by (1) making contraceptive information available, without restrictive considerations, at all general and maternity
hospitals and welfare centres ; (2) including

* The Sex Problem in India. Taraporevala and Sons,
Bombay, 1927.

¢ Eugentcs and Buirth-Conirol: A Contribution to
Social Reconstruction in the East. Times Publishing Co.
Lahore, 1931.

¢ Including a book on Population and Birth-Control
in Indta (People’s Publishing House, Madras, 1930), by
its Secretary, Dr. M. S. Krishnamurti Ayyar.

§ Prof. Karve’s labours in the cause of Indian
eugenics were recently rewarded by a fine for the expression of opinions which are a common feature of
Western life. See Reason, Bombay, Nos. 5 and 8, 1932.

285

birth-control on the programme of all departments and associations concerned with
public health ; (3) instituting short courses
on contraception in medical and health
schools, and (4) enforcing legislation against
quackery and profiteering in connection with
the sale of contraceptive literature and
products.* The formation of an All-India
Birth-Control League, which is being stimulated by the efforts of the Birth-Control
International Information Centret in cooperation with local groups, supported by
provincial branches, would help to secure
official action which it would support and
extend. With co-operative organization of
this nature, information on _ birth-control
could be made available to the most rural
populations, since it is said that every village
has its health visitor, whose services can be
utilized for this purpose.

Finally, it must be emphasized that contraception alone will not suffice for productive
population control in India. The need for
sterilization and legalized abortion} is imperative in a country where the increasing
incidence of such diseases as leprosy and
insanity has not proved susceptible to treatment and research, and where abortion is
already prevalent and the failures of contraceptive technique are likely to be relatively higher than they are in the West.
The sponsors of the birth-control movement
must realize that the success of their efforts
is charged with danger if concession to
illiberal sentiment excludes sterilization,
segregation and abortion from the public
health programme.

* Dover, C.: Eugenic Legislation in India. Quarterly
Review, January, 1935.

¢ Particulars may be obtained on application to the
Honorary Director, Parliament Mansions, London,
S.W.1.

t Dover, C. Op. cit.

pee”

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVI, No. 4.
