C. P. BLACKER

World Congress on The Family

June 1sth to 23rd, 1958.

Society by Dr. Hilda Lewis and myself,
will be memorable to us for two reasons. The
first was the initiative of Professor David Mace;
the second was the tolerance and goodwill shown
by the secretariat of the International Union of
Family Organizations (the I.U.F.O.) and by its
president, M. Xavier Ryckmans of Belgium.

HE ABOVE CONGRESS, which was
attended on behalf of the Eugenics

The International Union of Family Organizations
The World Congress celebrated the tenth
anniversary of the foundation of the Union
which began to exist semi-officially in Brussels
during 1947 and officially in Paris during 1948.
During the inter-war years the Eugenics Society
had taken an interest in organizations concerned
with family welfare, having recognized that, in a
democracy, eugenic values were recognizable in
terms of the performance-test of raising a
healthy and happy family. There had been
discussions before the war of the need for an
umbrella organization to comprise and coordinate the miscellaneous voluntary bodies
which in Britain were concerned with the many
aspects of family welfare; indeed a movement
to establish such a co-ordinating organization
in Britain was interrupted by the war.

The matter was energetically taken up in
France after 1945. In that country special
anxieties about the danger of depopulation
were combined with a general concern (shared
by most western countries) about the increase
in juvenile delinquency; the origin of both
troubles was seen to lie in the waning influence
of the family; and the above-named Union was
convened. The first of a series of international
conferences was held in Geneva, on the theme of
juvenile delinquency, in the summer of 1948. I
was present at this conference as a representative
of the Eugenics Society, and I attended later
conferences held in Rome (1949), Brussels (1951)
and Oxford (1952).

Paris

From the beginning, Catholic organizations
in France and other countries took a keen interest in the Union. This interest was noticeable
during the conference in Rome (1949): in
welcoming the delegates on the opening day
Mme Pia Colini-Lombardi, a popular and
influential figure in the Union and a perfect
hostess in the capital city, reminded us of how
the inspiration provided by the holy family in
the world’s finest art reflected the central
character of the family in Christianity. Throughout the world, Catholic welfare organizations are
deeply concerned with the protection of family;
and this concern is demonstrated by the large
proportion of Catholic member-organizations of
the Union.

From the earliest days of the Union, an effort
was made to co-ordinate in each country the
activities of member-organizations by forming
a representative national committee. The secretariat of the British Committee has changed
three times. The first honorary secretary was
Mr. Cyril Bibby, a past member of the Society’s
Council to whom the Society owes several debts
of gratitude. The second was Mrs. Eleanor
French, the Secretary ofthe British Social Biology
Council, upon whom devolved the labours of
organizing the conference held in Oxford
(September 8th to 14th, 1952). Mrs. French
was for a short time followed by Miss Rée who
served the same organization as herself. The fourth
person to hold the secretaryship of the British
Committee is Mr. E. E. Fletcher, housing manager of Heston and Isleworth Borough Council.

A debt is owed by the member-organizations
to the four above-named persons who have
served the Union’s British Committee. Our debt
is perhaps greatest to Mrs. French who has held
the secretariat for longest.

The Eugenics Society’s position in the Union
In the last few years doubts had occurred to
certain members of the Eugenics Society’s

179

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, October 1958, 50, 3.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Council as to whether the issues which especially
concern the Society were being taken sufficiently
into account by the Union. The Society is
primarily interested in factors which, through
the exercises of responsible parenthood, can
affect the future quality of the population. It is
concerned with demographic considerations, in
particular with differential fertility. It sees in
responsibly planned parenthood a means by
which, in certain rapidly growing populations,
the harmful effects of pressure of numbers on the
family can be mitigated, and by which, in numerically stable populations, valuable inborn qualities
can be spread. It was felt by some members of
the Society’s Council that eugenics and planned
parenthood had not received the attention they
deserved from the Union, and that important
Catholic influences at the Union’s centre and
periphery made it impossible for these issues to
be seriously raised.

The Union’s decennial conference in Paris
seemed to provide a favourable opportunity for
settling this matter. Among the eighteen British
member-organizations of the Union are five
Catholic organizations and three whose orientation is generally similar to the Society’s. These
three are the British Social Biology Council, the
Family Planning Association, and the National
Marriage Guidance Council. The British Family
Planning Association is the only family planning
association of any country in the world which is
a Member of the Union. It holds a unique
position. Likewise, ours is the only eugenics
society. The position of the British Social Biology
Council is likewise unique in the Union. But
there belong to the Union several memberorganizations from other countries which are
directly or indirectly concerned with marriage
guidance. Indeed, the important position of
marriage guidance in the Union’s programme is
attested by the following circumstance: the
Union has four permanent commissions with
the following titles: Commission for Family
Housing; Commission for the Standard of
Living of the Family; Commission on ParentTeacher Relations; and Marriage Guidance
Commission. The important status now accorded
to marriage guidance is the result of the powerful influence exerted in recent years by Dr.
David Mace.

180

A joint statement

It seemed to the Eugenics Society that its future
policy in respect of the Union could usefully be
discussed in consultation with representatives of
the three above-mentioned cognate organizations. Such a meeting was convened and held in
the Society’s library on March 12th, 1958. It was
agreed that the standpoint adopted towards
family problems by the mostly Protestant
countries of northern Europe differed somewhat
from that prevailing in the mostly Catholic
countries of the Continent’s centre and south;
and that if the Union desired to provide a truly
international forum “‘regardless of race or creed”’
(as stated in the Union’s declaration of Aims), it
should be prepared to give a sympathetic hearing
to people of all nationalities and religions who
were genuinely concerned with the interest of
the family. It was therefore agreed to present at
the Paris meeting a jointly prepared memorandum
on behalf of the four organizations which would
stress the importance of population pressure on
family well-being. A draft was prepared, circulated, amended, and finally approved. The
Union’s secretariat in Paris was informed, and
we were advised to submit the memorandum to
the fifth of five study groups (Sections d’ Etudes)
between which the essential agenda of the conference had been partitioned. This fifth group or
section would be concerned with “Equilibre
interieur et épanouissement de la famille et de
l’enfant’’. Prominent among the topics covered
by this section was marriage guidance; and the
president of the section would be Dr. David
Mace. We were asked to send to Paris, before
the Conference, seventy copies of our memorandum in both French and English. This was
done. It will be seen from the memorandum
(which follows on page 185) that the sixth section
was submitted on its own initiative by the
National Marriage Guidance Council; also that
the document’s modest object was to test
whether the Union would be willing to discuss
the principle of family planning by means of a
method which (conditionally at least) was
acceptable to all religious denominations.

Reception of joint statement

The Conference was held in a conveniently
placed and well-equipped building profusely
WORLD CONGRESS ON THE FAMILY

hung with flags, the Maison de la Chimie, near
the Invalides. The attendance was impressive.
Over forty countries (including Overseas France
and the U.S.S.R.) were represented and over 540
people had inscribed themselves as members of
the conference. The five sections or groups
above mentioned met concurrently during the
afternoons. Dr. Mace, the president of the
fifth section to which the joint statement was
presented, was confronted with a difficult task
which nobody could have discharged better.
His section was the most popular of the five and
large audiences assembled at all the sessions.
Our memorandum, moreover, was one of many
submitted to the section. Some nineteen written
communications had been sent in: it was impossible to present and discuss them all during the
limited time available. Dr. Mace put his predicament to the section on the afternoon of Monday,
June 16th. He explained that, in the time
available, a few only of the submitted communications could receive the consideration which
all deserved. Some people would unavoidably
be disappointed. How, he asked, did the meeting
suggest that the selection should be made? It
was proposed and unanimously approved that the
selection should be left to the sole discretion of
himself, his co-president of the section (Professor
Osterrieth of Belgium), and the section’s two
rapporteurs (Dr. Bovet of Switzerland and
Professor Rousselet of France). These four
decided that our memorandum should be included among those which should be discussed.

The discussion took place at a meeting on the
following afternoon (Tuesday, June 17th). It
was one of the hottest days of the year, and the
poorly ventilated hall was full to capacity. Many
Roman Catholic priests were present in clerical
attire, several of whom later expressed sympathy
with the tone of our memorandum and its main
recommendation. Two full papers by American
speakers, pre-arranged in the programme, were
delivered, translated verbally into French and
discussed.

Other papers, including one from a commanding Peruvian lady, were likewise dealt with at
length. Dr. Mace had forewarned the section
that he wanted to find time for a discussion of
our memorandum; but as commonly happens
at international conferences when verbal trans
lations are necessary, the programme lagged
behind the inexorable clock. By the time I was
called on there remained but twenty minutes of
the session and everyone was feeling hot, tired
and irritable. The main point of a speech, which
I made as short as possible, was that, in the ten
years that had elapsed since the Union had been
formed, many countries (India, Pakistan, Ceylon,
Israel) had acquired independence and that the
most populous of these countries had adopted
population policies. Spokesmen for the governments of these countries had declared in words
never used before that population pressure was
a main cause of the degradation of family life.
Spokesmen of other populous but independent
countries (China, Japan, Egypt) had said the
same. These under-developed but over-populated
countries contained about half the world’s
population and were feebly represented in the
Union. From a world standpoint (though not
from a European and still less from a French
standpoint) population pressure could almost be
regarded as the most important factor in family
welfare. But during the ten years of its life the
Union had almost completely ignored these
important developments. What, essentially, our
memorandum suggested was that the Union
should recognize and study the effects of population pressure on the standards of living of
families. We had suggested a policy which was
designed to be both conciliatory and constructive.
We had taken the liberty of quoting the words
of the Pope, whose standpoint we hoped we had
not misrepresented. I hoped that our memorandum had given offence to no one. My speech
was translated by Mr. C. A. J. Thiery (the best
English-French interpreter I have ever heard) as
I went along. It took about ten minutes.

Dr. Mace then invited discussion. Mr. Joseph
Brayshaw (Secretary of the National Marriage
Guidance Council) then formally moved that the
Section should recommend to the I.U.F.O.’s
General Council that the bearings of population
pressure on the standards of living of families
should be further studied. Mr. Brayshaw’s
motion was well worded and could scarcely have
been more moderate. But to our surprise a storm
broke.

A forest of hands went up in requests to speak,
and Dr. Mace was abruptly confronted with a

181
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

most difficult task of chairmanship. A series of
amendments (not all of which were compatible
with each other) were moved, seconded and
carried by what appeared to be majorities of
those present. Several priests spoke. One said
that, though the memorandum had quoted the
Pope’s words, there were reasons for thinking
that his position had since been somewhat modified. Someone suggested that the meeting be
prolonged after six o’clock, and in fact it did
not break up till nearly seven. Only one speaker
expressed sympathy with the contents of our
memorandum—Madame Geneviéve Texier who
represented the French organization Maternité
Heureuse. Finally someone proposed that, in
view of the lateness of the hour and the confusion in everyone’s minds, the original motion
and amendments be clarified at a later meeting
of the section. Dr. Mace gladly assented. The
course of events at this meeting did not encourage Dr. Lewis or myself to feel that the Eugenics
Society would wish to prolong its membership
of the Union.

But next day (Wednesday, June 18th), through
the initiative, resourcefulness and tact of Mr.
Joseph Brayshaw, things took a remarkable turn
for the better. Mr. Brayshaw sought out and
gathered round himself the half-dozen or so
movers of amendments (among whom were two
Catholic priests) and suggested that they should
try to combine their apparently differing standpoints in a single composite recommendation to
the General Council which was due to meet on
the following Saturday (June 21st). A cordial
spirit prevailed. Indeed there was genuine cooperativeness ; and after about an hour’s friendly
discussion agreement was reached on the following formula which, it turned out, was closely
similar to that first moved by Mr. Brayshaw the
evening before:

The Fifth Section fof the I.U.F.O.], having
heard the proposal of Dr. Blacker and without
prejudging in any way the fundamentals of the
problems, recommends to the General Council
of the I.U.F.O. that the different causes of
population pressure and all the possible solutions should be studied and that to this end the
task should be entrusted to the Marriage
Guidance Commission.

The same afternoon this recommendation was
submitted by Dr. Mace to another full meeting

182

of the fifth section which, because of its size, was
this time assembled in the capacious conference
hall of the Maison de la Chimie. The recommendation had been typed out and French and
English versions were circulated at the meeting.
Dr. Mace reminded his audience that, on request,
he had undertaken to report to the section on the
questions raised in our memorandum; that an
agreed formula had been reached that morning
by the main participants in the discussion held
the evening before; and that the text of the
agreed recommendation was before them. He
hoped that this recommendation would be
approved without further discussion. He put the
recommendation to the vote and it was unanimously approved without a further word from
anyone.

Dr. David Mace’s position

The final chapter of the story was enacted at the
meeting of the General Council which was held
at Versailles on the afternoon of Saturday, June
21st. The General Council is, in effect, the
Governing Body of the Union, and the meeting
was attended by between fifty and sixty people.
The proceedings were even more laborious than
the meetings of the sections because everything
had to be translated into German as well as into
English or French, and some further translations
were required of Spanish. Mr. Brayshaw and I
were present and Dr. Mace, in his capacity of
president of the Union’s fifth section, was
expected to report on the proceedings of his
section. Dr. Mace had forewarned the secretariat
that he proposed to raise questions affecting the
Union’s future and had received their approval.
In submitting the above-quoted recommendation
(which was later unanimously accepted) he made
a noteworthy speech, forthright yet conciliatory,
which went beyond his section’s recommendation.

Dr. Mace, in effect, said that if the Union
refused to accept the recommendation there
would be a risk of its splitting into two—a
Catholic and a non-Catholic moiety. He (Dr.
Mace) did not belong to any family planning
association and was not speaking on behalf of
any; but he had travelled much in Asian
countries which were confronted with acute
population problems. Family planning associaWORLD CONGRESS ON THE FAMILY

tions had been formed in several; but these
associations were not solely concerned with
family planning as might be supposed. Family
planning was, in fact, one of several activities
undertaken by these Asian associations whose
main objective was the well-being of the family.
In India, for example, where he had met the
leaders of welfare movements, it was believed
that family planning was an indispensable factor
in a realistic programme directed towards helping
the family. If the Union was to be genuinely
international and to embrace, regardless of race
or creed, all the nations of the world, its present
balance would have to be much changed. Dr.
Mace had discussed family problems with a
group of Buddhist priests. He hoped that it
would not be long before we were welcoming
Buddhist priests to our Conferences. Also
Hindus and Moslems. Hence the presentation of
his section’s recommendation marked an important moment in the Union’s life: its acceptance
could open up a wide future—a future wherein
the keynote would be tolerance. Representatives
of all faiths and standpoints should be welcomed
and heard provided that they were sincerely
concerned with the welfare of the family.

Dr. Mace’s speech was attentively listened to
by all, including three of the Union’s controlling
personalities who were sitting on the platform in
a row—M. Xavier Ryckmans (President), M.
Jean Delaporte (General Secretary) and M.
Robert Boudet (Director of Services). From the
expressions on their faces it was obvious that
this triumvirate approved of what was being
said. In a brief reply, M. Ryckmans expressed
gratitude to Dr. Mace for having so well stated
the case for tolerance. The recommendation of
Dr. Mace’s section had, he said, been accepted by
the Conseil Général. It would be loyally implemented. Agreement, continued M. Ryckmans,
on all background questions was impossible:
but each must accept the title of others to their
Opinions. Tolerance must be reciprocal. Diversities of opinion must not be allowed to cause

schisms within the Union which, he was convinced, would be equal to the tasks ahead.
These tasks would be dealt with in accordance
with the Union’s Statutes and would beapproached
in the spirit of tolerance commended by Dr.
Mace.

To Dr. Mace belongs the credit of evoking
from the Union’s Conseil Général this important
expression of tolerance over an issue on which
a split would have been unavoidable.

Our debt to the Union’s Presidents and Secretariat
In conclusion, a word of appreciation is due to
the secretariat of the Union. M. Delaporte and
M. Boudet dealt with an awkward problem with
conspicuous tact and fairness. The expansion of
the Union is largely due to the personal qualities
of these two able and amiable men. Much is also
owed to their assistants Mlle Heléne Gerardin
and Mlle Denise Jamois. The Union has also
been fortunate in its Presidents. M. Maurice
Veillard (a Swiss Protestant) was confronted by
difficult and delicate problems during his seven
years’ term of office. During this period he earned
the admiration of all who sat under him. He has
been especially appreciated by the British
members to whom he has consistently affirmed
that a strong British representation was essential
for the Union. The British, he believes, form an
essential bridge between the countries of central
and southern Europe and those of the Scandinavian countries and North America. M. Veillard
has always been receptive to what he calls the
Anglo-Saxon standpoint and has insisted on due
notice being taken of it at the Union’s meetings.
Before the Paris Conference British members
knew little of the Union’s current president, M.
Ryckmans, a Belgian Catholic. By the end of it
we saw in him a worthy successor to M. Veillard.
I am much indebted to Dr. Hilda Lewis and
to Mrs. Jean Medawar (who represented the
Family Planning Association) for valued help
throughout the conference. Our debt to Mr.
Brayshaw is obvious from the above account.

183
