INTELLIGENCE AND FAMILY SIZE
IN AN ADULT SAMPLE :

By EILEEN M. SCOTT, M.A.,.
and JOHN D. NISBET, M.A., B.Ed., Ph.D.

relationship between intelligence and

family size, which is commonly observed
in samples of children, is attributable to the
effect of family environment on the verbal
development of children. In a large family,
children are less stimulated to develop the
use of words, and this impairs their performance in intelligence tests, particularly
verbal tests. In an earlier paper? one of the
methods by which this hypothesis was
tested was the comparison of results obtained
from verbal and non-verbal tests of intelligence: the correlation between test score
and family size was significantly smaller
when a non-verbal test of intelligence was
used than when a verbal test was used.

As a recent editorial note* observed, it is
not yet possible to say whether such an effect
persists into adult life. It may be that as
persons grow out of the narrow limits of the
family their adult experiences tend to
reduce earlier inequalities. Vernon’s findings?
seem to indicate that the effect at least: does
not increase after childhood. Thus, while
Nisbet found a tendency for the negative
correlation, between test score and family
size to increase between the ages of seven and
eleven, Vernon reported that this negative
correlation among 9,183 National Service
recruits mostly aged eighteen was not substantially different from the correlation
found among eleven-year-old children.

The data collected by Baird and Scotts
provide some evidence on. this matter.f
The following results are derived from
the test scores of the 288 women in their
one-in-six sample who were given intelligence

|: has been suggested that a part of the

* EUGENICS REVIEW, 46, 6-8.

+ Acknowledgment is made to the Social Medicine
Research Unit of the Medical Research Council for
the use of the data in this investigation, though neither
Unit nor Council is in any way responsible for conclusions reached. |

tests. A description of this sample has been
given in their paper (p: 139).

Two measures of intelligence were obtained
from this sample: the non-verbal Progressive
Matrices (1938) test (20-minute version);
and a combination of four of the verbal
sub-tests of the Wechsler-Bellevue Intelligence Tests (General Comprehension, Digit
Span, Similarities and Vocabulary). Both
these tests were administered individually,
the latter without time-limit. The mean
score of the sample in Progressive Matrices
was 34:3 (standard deviation 9-0); the mean
score in the Wechsler sub-tests, converted to.
a quotient by the tables of norms, was 94°8

~.(standard deviation 11-7). Both these means

are below the population average. The
correlation between scores in Matrices and
Wechsler was +0:580.

Family Size

Family size was measured as the number
of the subject’s siblings plus any non-sib
brought up in the family for not less than
two years of the subject’s life—that is, the
“family of upbringing.”” The mean family
size was 4:6 (standard deviation 2-3). The
full number of known pregnancies of the
subject’s mother (mean 4-6 ; standard deviation 2:4) differed in only a. small number of
cases from the size of the family of upbringing, showing a correlation of +0-903 with it.

Table 1 gives the correlations between
family size and scores in, the two intelligence
tests, the verbal and the non-verbal.

TABLE 1

CORRELATION BETWEEN INTELLIGENCE TEST SCORE
AND FAMILY SIZE.

Test Correlation with
size of family of
upbringing
Progressive Matrices, non-verbal —0'222
Wechsler, 4 verbal sub-tests —0°250

233
234

The correlation involving the verbal test
in this sample is smaller than most of the
corresponding correlation coefficients reported in other investigations from samples
of school children (e.g. the Scottish Mental
Survey). This suggests that the effect of
family environment on test score does not
increase after childhood, though it must be
remembered that the present sample is not
directly comparable with age-groups of
children. The difference between the correlation involving the verbal test and the correlation involving the non-verbal test is not
significant, though the non-verbal test does
produce the smaller coefficient. If the
number of pregnancies of the subject’s
mother is taken as a measure of family size,
there is no difference at all between the
correlations, which are: Matrices, —0-241 ;
Wechsler, —o-240.

Influence of Age

These results, however, are complicated
by the influence of age. Age affects the correlations in two ways. It will be remembered
that this sample was composed of women
having first babies. Though the sample was
suited for the purpose for which it was
selected, difficulties arise when the data
are applied to the problem of the relation
between, intelligence and family size. There
is a tendency for those with higher intelligence to have a first baby at a later age:
from this one would expect a small positive
correlation between test score and age in
this sample. But age also directly affects
ability to score on an intelligence test.
To quote Wechsler,4

Every human capacity after attaining a
maximum begins an immediate decline... .
The age at which this maximum is attained
varies from ability to ability but seldom occurs
beyond 30 and in most cases somewhere in
the early 20’s ... (p. 55).

Certain abilities decline more slowly with age
than others. Thus the abilities called for by the
General Information and General Comprehension
Tests hold up much better than do the abilities
called for by the Substitution and the Memory
Span for Digits Tests (p. 63).

This influence would therefore show itself
as a negative correlation, between score and

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

age, of uncertain size but probably larger
with a non-verbal than with a verbal test.

The ages.of the 288 women, in the sample
ranged from seventeen, to forty, with a mean
of twenty-four. In the Matrices test, the
first of the influences mentioned above
seems to have been nearly cancelled by the
second, for the correlation between Matrices
score and age in this sample is +0-o14.
In the Wechsler verbal sub-tests, the decline
with age is eliminated by the use of quotients
with age allowances, so that the correlation
between, Wechsler score and age is +0-274.

If the influence of age is made equivalent
in, the two tests by holding age constant in a
partial correlation, the difference between
the correlations of family size and test
score with a verbal test and with a nonverbal test is now larger, as is seen from the
results in Table 2.

TABLE 2

PARTIAL CORRELATION BETWEEN INTELLIGENCE
TEST SCORE AND FAMILY SIZE, WITH AGE HELD

CONSTANT.
Test Correlation with
size of family of
upbringing
Progressive Matrices, non-verbal —0'222
Wechsler, 4 verbal sub-tests —0°265

The difference between, these coefficients,
however, is still not significant (on Cochran’s
test of the significance of a difference between
two correlation coefficients based on the
same sample, t=1-04). The partial correlations between the test scores and the number
of pregnancies of the subject’s mother show
a similar, though smaller, difference:
Matrices, —0-:241; Wechsler, —0-259.

The tendency for women with higher
intelligence test scores to marry and have
first babies at a later age is closely allied to
social class patterns. Analysis of our data
within social ‘classes (Registrar-General’s
scale) is precluded by small numbers; but
within the largest class (Social Class III,
numbering 122) the differences between the
correlations of family size and verbal and
non-verbal intelligence test scores are similar
to the differences in the total group. In the
other social classes correlations are smaller
—due, in part at least, to the smaller
Oe, INTELLIGENCE AND FAMILY SIZE IN AN ADULT SAMPLE

standard deviations of scores and con sequent
attenuation of correlation coefficients—but
all are still negative.

Conclusion

Among eleven-year-old children, the correlation between, non-verbal Matrices score
and family size was shown to be smaller than
the .correlation between a verbal test of
intelligence and family size. This difference
was attributed to the effect of family
environment. The results from an adult
sample of 288 women suggest that this
effect may persist but is probably less
marked at a later age. In this adult sample,
the negative correlation between family size

235,

and intelligence test score was smaller
(though not significantly smaller) when, the
test used was a non-verbal test than when it
was a verbal test. Such a result gives
support to the conclusion, that environmental
factors associated with family size exercise an influence on test performance even
among adults.
_ REFERENCES
1. Nisbet, J. D. (1953). Family environment and
intelligence. Eugen. Rev., 45, 31-40.
2. Vernon, P. E. (1951). Recent investigations of
intelligence and its measurement. Eugen. Rev.,
43, 125-137.
3. Baird, D., and Scott, E. M. (1953). Intelligence and
’ childbearing. Eugen. Rev., 45, 139-154.
4. Wechsler, D. (1944). The Measurement of Adult
Intelligence (3rd edition). Baltimore. Williams
and Wilkins.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLVI, No. 4
