UNSATISFACTORY PARENTS
AND PSYCHOLOGICAL DISORDER
IN THEIR CHILDREN"
By HILDA LEWIS, M.D., M.R.C.P.

Introductory Remarks

HAT good or harm parents can do
\ \ their children is a subject that has
VY been of constant interest for many
a long day. A wide variety of opinions has
been held in the past and it is only comparatively recently that objective studies have
been made to remove this important matter
from the realms of personal impression,
cultural prejudice and changing dogmas.
But the subject is complex, and the methods
of social and psychological investigation
appropriate to it are by no means satisfactory
for answering the fundamental questions
about causes and relationships. |
They are fundamental, not only to an
understanding of how children come to
behave as they do under varying conditions,
but also to any effort at preventing or
lessening the amount of maladjustment,
delinquency and ill health.

I shall concern myself almost entirely with. ’
the investigation I made at the Mersham'
Reception Centre from 1947 onwards. I
would certainly not claim for this investiga- .
tion that it provided clear and conclusive ©

answers to the problems set. It did, however,

afford an opportunity for examining without bias the features in children’s homes and up- |
~ worker.

bringing to which current theory, previous
investigations or clinical experience pointed
as significant factors in determining a
child’s behaviour and it enabled us to see
what relation there was between these

features of the child’s background and his ©

conduct both before he came to the Centre

* A paper read at a Members’ Meeting of the Eugenics
Society on March 23rd, 1955.

I should say at the outset that there was
one hiatus in our investigation which will
strike you immediately, namely, that we
could not study the influence of heredity in
these children. This important gap existed
not because of any lack of awareness on our
part that constitutional factors had a potent
influence on the children’s behaviour and
development, but because the data we could
collect did not satisfy the requirements of a
genetic investigation. In the statistical
treatment of the environmental data which I
shall put before you, the genetic factor could
not therefore be taken into account though
much of what we knew about the parents of
these children gave grounds for suspecting
that heredity played a far from negligible
part. /

There were 500 children. They stayed at
the Reception Centre for three to six weeks.
During this time they were carefully observed |
by experienced staff during free play, in the;
general daily routine and in the schoolroom. »
I examined each child and an educational
psychologist made psychometric observations. Full reports on the parents and the

family background were obtained from”

welfare agencies and were supplemented by
personal inquiry by the psychiatric social
The mass of information thus
accumulated about the five hundred children

was analysed after the items had been

transferred to punched cards, and an initial
comparison was made between various
groups, e.g. the children removed from dirty

» and neglectful homes—the “ social problem

and while he was under our observation there. ~ families”»—and those who had not come from

~ such homes, and between children who had

been steadily in their mother’s care and the

153
154

“63 per cent who had been previously
separated from their mothers.

The children were then classified into three
broad groups according to their behaviour:
11g children were normal, 155 slightly
disturbed and 326 definitely disturbed. A
correlation between these three groups and a
number of background influences generally
thought to be harmful to a child’s development pointed to some decidedly significant
associations but did not, of course, permit
any relationship to be distinguished between
particular adverse influences and particular
forms of disturbed behaviour. A method of
classification which had been used and
submitted to careful statistical analysis by
Jenkins! and his associates in Michigan was
found to be applicable with slight modifications. The adverse background situations
were divided into three main patterns:

(1) Parental rejection; (2) Parental neglect
and bad company, and (3) Constraint, and
similarly three main patterns of disturbed
behaviour were recognized. I shall call
them

(1) Unsocialized aggression,
(2) Socialized delinquency, and
(3) Over-inhibited neurotic behaviour.

_ The behaviour of all but thirty-seven of the
disturbed children fell into these three
groups; the thirty-seven seemed a mixture of
two or three of the patterns without any one
of them predominating.

The Children’s General Background

Before I go on to talk about particular
children, I should mention briefly something
about the general social background and
experiences of the 500 children. They came
from 363 families and with two or three
exceptions — psychotic or maladjusted
children referred by child guidance clinics—
their homes had broken down or had proved
unsatisfactory. The common characteristics
were over crowding, high fertility in the
mothers, medical disabilities in the parents,
low income, lack of harmony between the
parents or homes broken by death, separation
or desertion. Ninety-nine of the known
fathers and 180 mothers had some mental
disability—a defect of intellect or personality

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

or a definite mental illness. Many parents
had neglected or ill-treated their children and
half the children had ‘been removed from
their homes by the public authority on a
previous occasion. Of these 109 were still
in public care at the time of admission to the
centre. Of the 500 children, 63 per cent had
been previously separated from their mothers
for two months or more, 142 of them for
many years or permanently. The break had
occurred before two years in fifty-four of
these, and between two and five in another
fifty-four. These children early separated
from their mothers had sometimes been
moved time and again from the substitute
homes or institutions in which they had been
placed: from infant nurseries to wartime
toddler nurseries and then to foster homes or
children’s homes — with correspondingly
frequent changes of school as they grew
older. Some of the neurotic children had
experienced six or eight moves. The initial
maternal separation seemed of little
significance compared with the tribulations
and difficulties the children had gone through
in repeatedly having to adjust themselves to
temporary substitutes for their mothers.

Social Problem Families

(a) Family Background. There were 141
children who came from sixty-six “ social
problem ”’ families in which there had been
gross physical neglect and filthy conditions.
In these families the mental qualities of the
parents were poor on the whole—half
the mothers were below average in
intelligence, six being certified defectives, and
just over a quarter of them (the mothers)
were neurotic, psychopathic or psychotic. In
twenty-eight families both parents had some
disability, as a rule, mental dullness or
psychopathic personality. Their poor
personalities were reflected in the greater
incidence of unemployment, drunkenness,
quarrelsomeness, and brutality in the fathers
and greater sexual laxity and shiftlessness in
the mothers than in the other families in
which there had been no such dirt and
squalor. Nevertheless, a greater proportion
of the mothers in the social problem group
seemed fond of their children. The most
UNSATISFACTORY PARENTS

striking finding was the normality of the
children from these homes. There were

sixty-six of them who were considered ”
and indeed they supplied the’
majority of the 119 children in the whole |
sample who were found quite normal in
behaviour. Another forty-six children from _

normal,

the problem families were near normal, that
is to say they were somewhat shy or anxious
or had shown slightly delinquent behaviour
but were otherwise satisfactory.

homes were definitely disturbed. These had
mostly come to the reception centre because
they had been behaving badly and not
because their parents had been charged with
neglecting them.

It was impressive to watch how quickly
these sixty-six normal children accommodated themselves to the routine and
social life of the reception centre in spite of
having come from appalling conditions in
their homes—they were pleasant, responsive,
and affectionate to their siblings, and the
older children were sometimes socially more
mature than their years even though their
intelligence was on the whole not as high as
that of children coming from cleaner homes.

Of the rest of the normally behaved:

children—fifty-three in all—who did not‘
7 ; be effective while they are living at home,

come from dirty homes, eleven had been in’;
public care for a year or more, and came for

administrative reasons, while the remainder |
came because of the recent death or’

prolonged illness of a parent.

(2) Educational Backwardness. When I
speak of the “normal” children from
problem families—I do not wish to imply
that all was well with them. In common with
the majority of the deprived children they
were backward at school when compared
with other children of similar age and
intelligence. This backwardness and their
attachment to their homes made it seem
likely that unless ‘they were given some
special training away from home, they might,
when they grew up, repeat the same unsatisfactory pattern of life which they had

met with in their parents. If they returned to.

their bad homes we might have found them
less satisfactory individuals as the years

Only .
twenty-nine of the children from squalid

155

went on. This indeed was what happened in
the case of a large family whom we decided to
allow to go home with a recommendation for
rehabilitation and aid from welfare workers.
After a short period of improvement, the
home deteriorated, more children were born
and during three years, the children, satisfactory at their first admission, became shiftless
and apathetic; two younger boys, more
intelligent than the others felt so embarrassed
by their ragged clothes and backwardness
that tltey played truant from school persistently or put on tantrums if sent forcibly.
They had become insolent and defiant to
their mother, whose mental incapacity they
began to realize. Such was the picture when
they were readmitted to the reception centre
three years later.

(c) Need for Treatment. These children
from social problem families need a comprehensive programme of special education,
training, and general kindly support if they
are to be induced to accept and adopt a
better standard of life. It is true that if their

_ parents are fond of them, and they of their

parents, we do not want them to forfeit
this affection nor do we want by court
proceedings to arouse hostilities towards
our efforts to help them, but I doubt whether
measures to educate them satisfactorily can

especially where their mothers are very dull
or defective and, as in many cases, go on
having a baby every year. Effective birth
control would, of course, be highly desirable
but the practical obstacles are great. Where
there is a large and growing family, training
away from home with the parents’ co-operation will often be the best course for the older
children when accompanied by family welfare
work. If well educated, highly intelligent,
and socially responsible parents seek expert
training in boarding schools for their children,
how much more do these offspring of dullards
and psychopaths need special types of
boarding schools and hostels—particularly
when the children are of good intelligence.
I describe a family in Deprived Children?
where this was the case: A thirteen-year-old
boy of superior intelligence, acutely aware of
the disadvantage of his poor home and of his
156

mother’s mental deficiency, was placed in a
foster home; but this only served to
aggravate his feelings of inadequacy and
resentment since he did not feel one of the
new family. He begged to be allowed to
return home; he tried hard to help his
mother and improve the home; he kept
himself clean and tidy under great difficulties.
Had he been placed in a suitable boarding
school, returning home for holidays, he
might have minded the separation less and
had a better time. Two of his younger sisters
had been placed in foster homes and had
accepted them as permanent homes, with
happy results.

Educational Backwardness

You may regard any general discussion
of the educational achievement of the
children as going beyond the scope of my
address, but this is really not so. Educational
retardation may be associated with deprivation of intellectual stimuli, i.e. poor contact
in early childhood with neglectful parents,
lack of outlets for play and occupation, living
in a large impersonal institution. In children
from bad homes, however, it is more often
due to constant fear of failure or emotional
conflict upsetting the child’s powers of
concentrating on what is being taught, or
causing special inhibitions in learning which
may be a serious obstacle when remedial
teaching is undertaken. It is therefore not
surprising that a large percentage of the
Mersham children were educationally below
their mental capacity; when tested on
Burt’s reading and arithmetic tests, 76 per
cent gave a reading age that was lower (on
the average by 14 to 24 years) than their
mental age and 96 per cent in arithmetic.
Their lack of confidence combined with their
backwardness often gave a false impression
of mental dullness and it was disconcerting
to find in a follow up of a hundred of the
children two years after reception that,
although there had been some general school
progress, some of the children who at the
centre had been found to be of average
inteligence were still regarded by their
teachers as dull, yet in the permissive
atmosphere of the reception centre some of

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

them had become dramatically more responsive and mentally active, especially when
encouraged to talk and play in the company

of a single adult.

Some of the young children reared in wartime nurseries were noticeably poor in
vocabulary, having difficulty in naming
common objects and in forming sentences
which would be mastered easily by normal
children of their age. With individual
teaching and encouragement they seemed to
learn rapidly even during the short stay at
the centre. Many of the effects of separating
infants and young children from their
mothers and placing them with strangers in
nurseries or foster homes, are probably due,
not to any rupture of a mystic bond between
mother and child but to the sudden breaking
down of familiar vocal communication
between the infant and the adult and lack of
sufficient effort or time on the part of those
who later take on the child’s care to understand and stimulate his efforts to speak and
make himself understood. Anna _ Freud?
commented on this delay in vocalization in
her study of infants in War Time Nurseries;
Skeels* and his co-workers in Iowa found
that backward children taken from an understaffed and poorly equipped orphanage
developed amazingly fast when put in an
institution for defectives where they were
given much attention by the adult high grade
defectives and their attendants. They began

‘to play and speak and the majority were

shortly afterwards successfully placed in
foster homes as normal children. Experts in
training deaf children to speak emphasize
the importance of encouraging the deaf
infant even before a year old to make the
sounds which precede the use of recognizable
words. How easily in the busy life of a
public nursery this may be overlooked by
the nurses, and even more so by the parents,
when an infant is unwanted.

One boy was admitted at 5 years 9 months
to the care of a voluntary children’s society
from a public institution in which he had been
a delicate infant. (He was illegitimate and at
the time of his birth his mother had been
destitute ; she had had to leave him in the
infirmary ward and later had been unable to
provide for him.) When he was sent to school
UNSATISFACTORY PARENTS

he was undersized and dull in manner. He
appeared to learn nothing and the Educational
Psychologist reported that his I.Q. was sixty-two.
_ He was placed in a small residential school for
maladjusted and backward children, where I
was the psychiatrist. His appearance at first
seemed to confirm the reports sent about him
but within a day or two striking changes were
apparent ; he showed delight and enthusiasm
at naming and tracing big coloured letters in
the class room and beamed at anyone who
praised his efforts and he very rapidly entered
into all the social activities of the place, though
he was a little shy and rather more gentle than
the average child. He wet the bed at night véry
occasionally but this gradually cleared up and
his progress was generally swift and unbroken.
After one year a retest of his I.Q. on the StanfordBinet Scale was ninety-one, and in less than three
years it was possible for him tobe placed ina
good foster home and to attend an ordinary
primary school.
He had grown into a charming boy, vivacious,
enthusiastic and intellectually rather indepen
dent, ready to challenge adult opinion fearlessly “

and good humouredly. He has been more than
two years now in his foster home where he is
much loved, and he is regarded as a completely
normal child who is getting on well at school.

Disturbed Behaviour and Unsatisfactory
Home Conditions

Having made the classification referred to
earlier, it was necessary to see in the first
place whether any particular features of the
children’s backgrounds were significantly
often associated with disturbance of
behaviour. There were in fact such features:
viz. lack of parental affection, a long period
in public care, a mother who had died or
deserted the child or who had otherwise
been apart from the child in his early life,
an over-indulgent mother or father, and a
mentally unstable mother. On the other
hand, as I have already mentioned, the
background features of neglect, dirty home
and having a dull mother were significantly
associated with normal behaviour. This was
partly because the children of the social
problem families were admitted primarily
on account of their parents’ failings and
not because their behaviour was causing
concern as had been the case with most of
the other children received. The dull,
shiftless and negligent mothers had affection
for their children who in spite of physical

157

deprivation had not suffered psychological
harm; but in the disturbed children, the
mother’s mental illness, mental instability
or psychopathic personality was an associated
and probably a causal factor.

(a) Patterns of Disturbed Behaviour. The
disturbed children presented various types
of behaviour though there was, of course,
some overlapping of symptoms and some
degree of anxiety was common to the whole
group.

Some children were particularly anxious
and timid, lacking self confidence, retreating
from any task in which they feared they
would fail; many of them wet the bed, or
had done so before admission, they made few
friends, spoke little, slept badly, had night
terrors, bit their nails badly and often showed
other habit spasms or tics. Other children,
also anxious and prone to wet the bed, were
restless and constantly sought the attention
of adults, wanting to be caressed or noticed
in a.manner babyish for their years. Both
these types, which I labelled the “ overinhibited neurotic,’ wished to please adults
and do what they were told, either from fear
or with a desire to please. They sometimes
engaged in petty pilfering or hoarding of
trifles or stole to make gifts to curry friendship and affection.

The other children’s disturbed behaviour
lay in the opposite direction. Their offences
were against law, discipline or social codes.
Two usually distinct patterns could be
distinguished:

(1) Those who were aggressive towards
other children, attacking them without
provocation, hostile in their relationships
with adults, easily upset, defiant of authority,
and destructive to property. If they stole,
they stole secretly on their own, often with a
malicious intent and frequently showing
inadequate guilt. They made no lasting
friendships with other children.

(2) Children who were friendly with others
of their kind in whose company they
committed offences—the gang delinquents
who truanted from school, wandered from
home, staying away overnight, who stole,
destroyed property—or if girls misbehaved
158

themselves sexually. These children showed

insufficient regard for codes of conduct and /of parental affection).

for property rights of those outside their

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

(x) Parental rejectton (items indicating lack
(2) Parental neglect
and bad company (items including exposure

own group. Following Jenkins, I labelled the 7to other delinquents in the home or

first type of behaviour the “ unsocialized
‘aggressive’’ pattern, and_ the
‘ soctalized delinquency.”

The  over-inhibited,
included forty-seven who were shy and
seclusive and thirty-three of the anxious,
restless, attention-seeking children; among

the former inhibited, shy children were six ©

who seemed incapable of showing affection or
arousing it—two of them were manifesting
psychotic disorders. Fifty-two children
showed behaviour of the _ unsocialized
aggressive pattern though not with identical
strength or persistence and seldom without
some features indicating anxiety or emotional
insecurity. Ten of them were cold and lacking in guilt feelings. Fifty-seven children
showed the predominant features of the
socialised delinquent although twenty-seven
of these children had shown aggressive
traits such as defiance of authority and a
tendency to quarrel with other children, and
to have outbursts of temper and destructiveness at times. Some were also neurotic.
Their thefts in company with other children
were sometimes trifling, sometimes serious—
judged in terms of the value of the goods
stolen. The persistence of the delinquency
was a grave feature in some (one seven-yearold child had been in court for larceny twenty
times! )

There remained thirty-seven disturbed
children whose conduct seemed to contain
even mixtures of delinquency and neurosis
so that it was impossible to assign them
definitely to one of the three main patterns.

They resembled a pattern of “disturbed / aggressive traits than when it was absent.

delinquents ”’ isolated by Jenkins® in a study
of older children in a New York Approved
School.

(6) Background Patterns. Having classified
disturbed behaviour into these broad groupings or patterns, a search was made for background patterns in the history of the child.
Three main types of adverse influences were
definable by grouping together a number of
related items in the history of each child:

neurotic children

/ neighbourhood, and neglect, including lax or
second ; ill-timed discipline and lack of common

decencies in the home). (3) Constraint—
represented by a rigid routine or excessive

discipline ; dominating, over-protective or

»hypercritical parents ; lack of family warmth

+ or enforced isolation.

«A difficulty occurred where a child had
lived at home experiencing neglect and
exposure, or lack of affection and had been
removed to an institution. If this had
occurred fairly recently, the earlier background influences could hardly be said to
have ceased to affect the child’s mental
state. Similarly the background pattern of
neglect and bad company was sometimes
found in conjunction with that of parental
rejection. In such cases both patterns were
recorded: Table 38 from Deprived Children
is reproduced here to show the distribution
of the three background patterns in the three
main patterns of disturbed behaviour. |

 

Child’s Pattern of Disturbed Behaviour at
Reception

Background
pattern Unsocialized Socialized Inhibited,
aggression delinquency neurotic Total
(52 children) (57 children) (80 children)
Rejection .. “8 T 39 23 27 89
Neglect and bad company 5 43 5 53
Constraint a .. 28 21 50 99

» The pattern of parental rejection was

» significantly related to the unsocialized
‘(aggressive pattern of behaviour, and when

his background pattern was present in
hildren of the two other types of disturbed
‘behaviour, these children showed more

Thus among the fifty-seven socialized
delinquents, of twenty-three who were
“rejected” by their parents, nineteen
showed aggressive features, whereas only
eight of thirty-four not rejected by their
parents showed aggressive tendencies.
Similarly, among eighty inhibited, neurotic
children thirteen, out of twenty-seven who
had been rejected, were occasionally
aggressive, quarrelsome and defiant as
UNSATISFACTORY PARENTS

against seven out of fifty-three who had not
been rejected.

In a sample of children coming into public
care it is not surprising to find such a widespread pattern of parental rejection—and the
hostility of the children who have suffered
in this way may not surprise us either.

The pattern of neglect and exposure to bad
company waS common among the young
delinquents who came on remand: it was
found in forty-three out of fifty-seven in the
group diagnosed as socialized delinquents.

This background of socialized delinquency 
was essentially the opposite of that of the
superior children in the Kent Paediatric
Survey®, where parental discipline, though
not harsh, was well defined and consistent,
and the parents acted in harmony and managed their incomes and their homes carefully.
The parents of these Mersham delinquents,
though sometimes quite fond of their
children, lacked harmony between themselves, had less strict codes of conduct,
applied no discipline or only inconsistent
discipline,
sometimes disorderly.

The following is a brief account of a
socialized delinquent boy who showed some
aggressive features and anxiety. Although
not lacking in intelligence, he had not
learned to read:

William, aged 9 years 7 months was an
illegitimate boy who had lived with his old
maternal grandmother since birth ; she had been
having frequent heart attacks and could no
longer control him or care for him properly.
His admission (to a voluntary society) had been
brought about by the school welfare officer as
he seemed in danger of getting into the hands of
the police. The boy and his grandmother had
been living together in the basement of a tenement building in a very poor central London
district. William. had been going about with a
gang of boys which had been recently broken up
by the police and he had been playing truant.
At school he was regarded as a boy of rather low

intelligence who could be helpful but easily
became too self-assertive. His mother, a rather
flashy woman, unhappily married to a very bad
tempered man, used to call almost daily on her
mother to talk over her troubles but she did not
invite William to her own home (on account of
her husband’s attitude) and she did not have a
very close attachment to her son.

At the reception centre William was so upset

and were often casual, and —

159

at leaving his grandmother that it was impossible
to examine him for a few days. He was a wellgrown boy for his age though rather pale ; he
wore glasses for mild myopia, his teeth were in
poor condition, he had some chronic infection of
his tonsils and slight catarrh of the middle ear,
not at the moment causing deafness. When he
was calm enough to be examined, he still seemed
anxious in spite of having been given reassurance
that he would be kept in touch with his grandmother ; his face twitched, he plucked at his
fingers, the nails of which were badly bitten.
He seemed a thoughtful and quite intelligent
boy who was emotionally disturbed. He was
bitter about being taken away from his grandmother and said that it was against her will as
well as his. He regarded himself as having been
necessary to support her and protect her against
the hostile elements in their neighbourhood. He
boasted that he had the control of the out-ofschool activities of sixty-two small boys, and
that he organized relays of them at railway
stations and bus termini to earn money carrying
baggage. He said he gave them a good hiding
when they did not obey him, and he also attacked
anyone who was rude to his grandmother. At
times he had worried because he had injured one
of the boys and said that he had had nightmares
afterwards. During his stay at the centre he
continued to be very anxious and did not sleep
well. He was destructive, aggressive and quarrelsome with the other children, but he would talk
well and sensibly with adults. He showed
interest and competence in practical work, but
educationally he was extremely backward—his
reading level was that of a five-year-old child ;
in other words he only knew a few letters of the
alphabet. Tests, however, revealed that he was
of at least average intelligence. He was distractible during the testing and needed to have
questions repeated to him and to be reassured
frequently—signs which indicated that. his
reading backwardness was largely due to
emotional causes.

The relationship of constraint to the
causation of the over-inhibited, neurotic
type of behaviour was less clear, partly
because this group. contained a number of
children who had neurotic or mentally
unstable mothers, or who had had prolonged
physical illnesses in early childhood. The
incidence of the pattern was higher (as
Jenkins found) among the children who were
shy and withdrawing than in the anxious,
attention seeking children. The constraint
background was present in 75 per cent of
the former, and in 45 per cent of the latter ;
the relationship therefore to inhibited‘
(neurotic) behaviour is clearly not fortuitous.
160

In this group some of the children had earlier
suffered from parental rejection or had
previously been exposed to neglect and bad
company, and later had been taken into
large institutions or suffered from
unsatisfactory fostering.

Constraint associated with isolation, particularly after early maternal separation
and institutional upbringing has sometimes
been suggested as a cause of autistic
behaviour. There were only two such
children in the 500 and these two had not
been separated from their mothers, and their
parents were not socially unsatisfactory.
Jenkins,’ studying the background features
ig cases of schizophrenia among 5,000
children who had attended a child guidance
clinic, found that the homes of these children
were above the average in stability and
social class and that the only closely related
factor was a “‘ perfectionist ’’ mother.

Sibling Rivalry. The thirty-seven children
who seemed to suffer from an even mixture of
emotional disturbance and delinquent trends
did not show in their backgrounds a mixture
of the unfavourable background patterns
as one might have expected. Thirteen were
rejected children, nine had been exposed to
neglect and bad company, and eleven
subjected to constraint, but a considerable
proportion of them had been in a situation of
sibling rivalry—seven were members of large
poverty-stricken families and ten lived with
parents and step-parents who showed open
preference for another child in the family.
Although not rejected children in the full
sense, they felt their position in the family
to be highly insecure. This showed itself in
quarrelsomeness at home, and they were
constantly at war with other children at
school and elsewhere.

Maternal Separation

I should now like to consider briefly, but
with some emphasis, a belief that has gained
ground and indeed wide-spread acceptance
during the last four or five years—the belief
that any home is better than an institution.
A child—so this contention runs—cannot
be removed from his mother, especially in the
early years, without the risk of grave

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

consequences, no matter how cruel or
negligent she may be. This doctrine, like so
many simple formulae regarding children’s
upbringing and welfare, is a half-truth; and,
in the manner of half-truths, can do much
harm, as well as good, when literally applied.
The harm can be primarily to the children
themselves ; and secondarily to the society
of which they are members, and to the

children whom they, in turn, will bring into

the world.

If the doctrine were true, we should expect
to find, in any large group of children, that
those who had been separated from their
mothers in early life were more prone, other
things being equal, to exhibit distortions
of personality and conduct than children
fortunate enough to have always been in
their mothers’ care. But in the five hundred
children I studied this was not the
case.

Among the Mersham children there was no
greater association between separation from
the mother in early years and mental

_ abnormality than there was between such

separation and good mental health ; the only
exception to this which we found was in the
case of children who had suffered lengthy
separation from their mothers before the age
of two; this group tended more towards
mental disturbance than towards normality,
but even then the tendency was more
towards mild than towards _— severe
disturbance.

Separation can seldom be _ considered
properly without regard to the circumstances
that brought it about and the ensuing events.
The children admitted to Mersham who had
been separated from their mother in early
life were mostly orphans, or illegitimate or
rejected children ; many of them had been
moved from one institution or home to
another, often through no fault of their own.
Those who appeared normal had found a
woman who stood securely in their mother’s
place in their affections. But this was not
always so. One girl, for example, who had
been separated early from her mother and
had passed through a number of children’s
homes where she could form no stable or
lasting attachment was, nevertheless, a
UNSATISFACTORY PARENTS

capable, socially and psychologically welladjusted child ; it was only in her preference
for group life that she betrayed the effects of
her chequered upbringing.

It is constantly stressed—and rightly so—
that all possible help must be given to keep a
family together and improve the material
and psychological conditions under which
the parents bring up their children. But
more harm can be done in many cases by
leaving a child in the hands of a mother who
dislikes him or ill-treats him than by removing him to a suitable nursery, school or foster
home. If the point at issue is the future
personality and behaviour of the children,
there is not at present any convincing
evidence that they are harmed by removal
from a very adverse environment created by
a rejecting and grossly psychopathic or
neurotic mother, and there is much evidence
to suggest that it does them good if they can
be transferred to an emotionally and socially
favourable atmosphere. Such an atmosphere
may be provided by a foster home, a boarding
school, or a wisely staffed institution.

It occasionally happens, however, that a
child who is being ill-treated by his parents
still longs for their affection and clings so
tenaciously to them that he reacts with
hostility or emotional inhibition if he is
removed from them. It is possible to lessen
this distress by letting the child freely
express his fears and resentment about
leaving home, but the immediate emotional
disturbance which removal may thus provoke
puts upon the welfare worker and the health
visitor an obligation to make as careful an
appraisal as she can of the home situation
from the psychological point of view before
making any recommendation that the child
should be taken away. She must consider
whether the parents have so little concern
or affection for the child that it will be
damaging for him to be left any longer with
them, while efforts are made to improve the
parents’ attitude. The final decision may be
so difficult that it calls for psychiatric
investigation and advice.

Conclusions
It is clear that the developing personality

161

of a child may suffer if he is without parental
affection or reasonable training and guidance
in his home. The damage to him may later
make him a liability or a danger to society.
The lack of his parents’ affection may be no
more harmful than a feeling on the child’s
part that he has lost their affection, as
occurs if he is removed when very young
from affectionate but neglectful parents so
that he feels they have cast him off. There
is no sacred and peculiar distinction, from
this point of view, between a child’s natural
parents and substitute parents who have
cared for him with parental solicitude and
towards whom he has developed filial love.
If a child has become unwanted or orphaned,
he needs someone who will stand in the place
of his natural parents. The ill-effects of a
home which does not afford parental
affection, steady discipline, interest and.
healthy stimulation to a child, may take.
many forms—delinquency, apathy, neurotic
behaviour, and_ persistent educational
backwardness.

Ideally, parents would be wise and
affectionate, children would be healthy, and
psychiatrists and welfare workers would
have little to do. Such a Utopia is unattainable but that does not prevent us from
striving to mitigate and prevent the illeffects of bad upbringing and harmful
environment seen in each generation. So far
as anomalies are hereditary, their prevention
calls for much fuller knowledge. than we now
have and, probably, more self discipline and
foresight than we can count on to-day. So
far as it is the parents who fall short in their
relations with one another and with their
children, there is promise of improvement
from three directions—from actual guidance
or treatment of the parents, from the steady
amelioration of social conditions which have.
already effected such striking changes for
the better in general behaviour, and lastly’.
from interruption of the vicious circle ; that
is, by dealing with the disturbed children
so that they do not carry with them into
adult life a pattern of behaviour which will
have an adverse influence on_ their
offspring.
162

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

REFERENCES 4.

1. Hewitt, L. E. and Jenkins, R. L. (1946), Funda
mental Patterns of Maladjustment: The Dynamics 5.

of their Origin. State of Illinois.

2. Lewis, H. (1954), Deprived Childven: The Mersham 6.
Experiment.

Nuffield Foundation and Oxford

University Press.

Burlingham, D. and Freud, A. (1943), Infants 7.
without Families.

Allen & Unwin.

Skeels, H. M. and Dye, H. B. (1930), Proc. Amer.
Assoc. mental Defic. 44, 1, 114-36.

Jenkins, R. L. and Glickman, S. (1947), The
Nervous Child. 6, 3, 329-39.

Kent Paediatric Society (1954). A Study in the
Epidemiology of Health among 10-11 year old
Schoolchildren in the Borough of Bexley.

Jenkins, R. L. and Glickman, S. (1946), Amer. J.~
Orthopsychiat. 16, 2, 244-61.

 

THE ECONOMIC JOURNAL

The Quarterly Journal of the Royal Economic Soctety

No. 259 SEPTEMBER. 1955 © Vol. LXV
1. ARTICLES
ECONOMIC FOUNDATIONS OF WAGE POLICY J. R. Hicks

WHAT ALL IS UTILITY ?
A REJOINDER

THE ECONOMICS OF SOCIALISM RECONSIDERED

M. FRIEDMAN
Sir DENNis ROBERTSON
H. Suirn

CONVERTIBILITY AND TRIANGULAR TRADE AS SAFEGUARDS AGAINST ECONOMIC DEPRESSION

THE CONCEPT AND MEASUREMENT OF FOREIGN EXCHANGE RESERVES
*“ PRODUCT ELASTICITIES OF SUBSTITUTION ” IN INTERNATIONAL TRADE

A REJOINDER

TRADE IMBALANCE, GAINS FROM TRADE AND NATIONAL INCOME CHANGE

KEYNES AND SUPPLY FUNCTIONS
MATHEMATICAL APPENDIX
A SECOND REJOINDER

INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION AND PROFITS IN THE UNITED KINGDOM AND THE UNITED STATES

II. REVIEWS
II. NOTES AND MEMORANDA

IV. RECENT PERIODICALS AND NEW BOOKS

» WRIGHT

W. M. Brown

R, J. NicHoLson

Sir DonaLp MAcDOUGALL
V. K. RAMASWAMI

Str DeENNIs ROBERTSON
H. G. Joxunson

F. J. pe Jone

STERN

MACMILLAN & CO., LTD., LONDON, W.C.2

Application for Fellowship to

ROYAL ECONOMIC SOCIETY, 21 Bentinck Street, London, W.1

Annual Subscription £1 10s.

162

Single Copy Ten Shillings

 
