EUGENICS AND THE DECLINE IN
POPULATION

By D. CARADOG JONES

HERE is an acid test which the

eugenist can apply to discover whether

any measure concerned with population is to be judged good or bad. He asks
whether it is likely to ensure that the best
types of infants are born, whether it helps
these types to survive, and whether it encourages them later in life to become parents
themselves. At first sight we seem to have
here three separate ends in view, but in
reality they are so intimately related that, if
we succeed in taking measures to secure the
third, we shall be well on our way to gaining
the other two. By giving every possible
encouragement to the best types in the community to become parents, we shall be
tackling the problem where it ought to be
tackled, at its source. The best human
material is most likely to be produced from
the best stock and—if ‘“best’”’ be allembracing, applying to body as well as mind
and soul, to adopt an old-fashioned but
convenient division—the offspring from

healthy stock is most likely to have a high

survival rate.

Readers of The Struggle for Population* may
be surprised to find no clear reference in it
to eugenic principles, seeing that the book
has been prepared under the auspices of the
Eugenics Society. Presumably the explanation is that this aspect of the subject is
reserved for future discussion, and the author
has advisedly confined himself at present to
his terms of reference, as defined for him by
the Population Investigation Committee.
As the first-fruit of the Committee’s activities he has produced a most valuable piece of
work, and he is to be congratulated on having
summarised in small space and in so readable
a form the main facts relating to the population position in five of the chief countries of
Europe.

* Glass, D. V., The Struggle for Population. London,
1936. Oxford University Press. Pp. 148. Price 7s. 6d.

213

The concluding chapter in the book sums
up the position in the first sentence: “ Now
that people are beginning to realize the
danger of the present situation we may,
within the next few years, see most of the
governments of Europe attempting, in their
turn, to stimulate the birth-rate. The question that arises is, what kind of action is
likely to have such a result ? ’’ The danger to
which the author alludes, of course, is the
coming decline in population, progressive in
its rapidity, which threatens most European
countries. Analysis of the anticipated trend
of the age-distribution of the population of
England and Wales indicates that the
responsibility for the production of goods
and supply of services will rest on the
shoulders of a relatively much smaller
proportion of able-bodied persons; this in
turn will mean a higher rate of taxation per
head. Moreover, the writer goes on to
suggest that the effect of recurrent trade
cycles will be much more severe; the constructional industries in particular will suffer
badly. As the market shrinks, we may have
to return to small-scale methods of production and the whole costs structure of industry
may be radically altered; in that event a
serious rise in prices and fall in the standard
of life may result for everybody. It was high
time, therefore, that an examination should
be made of the steps being taken by countries
other than our own to avert the impending
disaster, if we are to profit by their experience. Unfortunately, however, the time has
been too short for the schemes adopted by
them to be fairly and fully tested. Much of
the legislation enacted only came into force
within the last year or two and it is obviously
too soon to base any certain conclusions
upon such slender evidence. This being
so, it would be well worth while for the
Committee to ask Mr. Glass to keep his
figures up to date and to report upon the
214

position again after the lapse of a reasonable
interval.

The present volume ought to be read in
conjunction with Professor Carr-Saunders’
study of World Population,* just published
by the Oxford University Press. The problem that confronts us can then be seen in a
larger setting and in its full complexity. Mr.
Glass has conducted a careful and detailed
enquiry into the effect of the efforts made in
Germany, Italy, France and Belgium to
stimulate the birth-rate, and one chapter in
Professor Carr-Saunders’ book is devoted
to a re-statement of the evidence and the
conclusions which one can venture to derive
from it. Cautious as both writers have been,
the present reviewer is disposed to be still
more hesitant in deciding whether or not
the results of most of these efforts are likely
to remain as negligible as they appear to be
up to the present.

It is unnecessary to cover the same ground
again, but particular attention may justifiably
be drawn here to two important considerations :

1. The remarkable variety, and yet at the
same time lack of originality, in the schemes
devised in different countries for the promotion of marriage and the increase of fertility ;

2. The no less surprising fact that attacks
upon the population problem have been
directed almost entirely to the quantitative
aspect alone.

In Italy there is a tax on bachelors, while
marriage and birth premiums are offered in
some of its northern cities with special
prizes for exceptionally large families. In

Germany loans free of interest are given to.

couples who contemplate marriage but cannot afford to furnish a home, and part of the
loan becomes a gift on the birth of each
child. Both countries discriminate in their
taxation against the childless and in favour
of the larger families. In certain areas
preference is given to the heads of large

families in the allocation of; employment >

and housing accommodation and in social

* Carr-Saunders, A. M., World Population. Oxford,
1936. The Clarendon Press. Pp. xv+ 336. Price
12s, 6d.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

services. The laws against the practice of
abortion have been tightened and the open
advocacy of birth-control has been made a
punishable offence in France, Belgium and
Italy, though not yet in Germany. Finally,
family allowances and maternity and child
welfare services each play a part in the
formation of the larger-family ideal.

This list does not exhaust the devices
adopted to increase the birth-rate, but how
familiar they sound and how conspicuously
absent is any attempt at eugenic selection!
With few exceptions it would appear that
all who belong to the working or middleclasses of the population receive equal
encouragement to beget children and all who
respond are equally applauded. A reservation must be made in the case of Germany,
where it is true that beneficiaries as a rule
have to satisfy certain medical as well as
racial requirements. Applicants for marriage
loans, for instance, must be of “ Aryan”
extraction and “ free from inheritable mental
or physical defects, infectious diseases, or
other illnesses threatening their life and
appearing to prevent their marriage from
being in the interest of the community.”
Also, these loans were designed to reduce
unemployment by taking women out of
industry ; accordingly they are granted only
if the women concerned have been in employment for at least nine months in the last two
years or if they are replaced by domestic
servants when they have been engaged in
housework. In so far as women in fairly
regular work and free of inheritable defect
are superior types we have here an example
of a strictly eugenic principle introduced
which deserves to be followed. When family
allowances are paid in respect of older
children who remain in school beyond the
normal leaving age, a similar principle is at
work in a small way, because parents who
can appreciate the advantages of further
education may as a general rule be judged
to belong to types which deserve to be
encouraged to bring more children into the
world. At the same time it must be added
that it is extremely doubtful whether in
practice family allowances have had any
substantial effect upon the birth-rate. This
EUGENICS AND THE DECLINE IN POPULATION

perhaps is not surprising in view of the fact
that the amount of the allowance is usually
quite inadequate to cover the extra expense
involved in bringing up a child. The conclusion to which Mr. Glass comes, after an
impartial examination of the evidence, is
that the most that can be said of them is
that they may have prevented a still sharper
decline in fertility.

If other countries fail, by such methods as
they are trying, to reverse the impending
trend of population, it will be either because
those methods are wrongly conceived or
because they are not sufficiently drastic.
The present writer is inclined to think that
there is truth in both these views. It may be
possible to persuade some people to marry
and become parents by offering financial
inducements on a large enough scale, but
the danger is that in the main the wrong
kind of people will be open to such persuasion.
That is not to say that the provision of
marriage loans and family allowances and
tax discrimination in favour of large families
are wrong in principle. It is right that the
income-tax burden should be eased, for
example, to the man with heavy family
responsibilities, but such assistance is unlikely to be the decisive factor in determining
whether parents of the best type elect to
have more or fewer children. To such parents
the appeal must be put on a higher plane.
There may indeed be something in Dr.
Burgdorfer’s claim, at the International
Population Conference in Berlin last year,
that the decisive factor in Germany has been
“the new outlook brought about by the
National Socialist revolution, the fundamental transformation of the political and
moral (gezstigen) atmosphere .
the return of confidence on the part of the

. In short, ©

215

people in the political and economic government of the nation.”’

We come back, therefore, to the point
where we started. It is not enough to aim at
the mass production of human beings, for,
assuming we succeed, we shall not be satisfied. The best results are never produced by
such methods. In a fine passage from a
chapter on “ The Small Family Problem ’’—
a chapter that deserves to be widely read
and pondered—Professor Carr-Saunders has
put his anger unerringly upon one of the root
causes of the present situation, and this brief
article may fittingly end with the following
quotation :* ‘“‘ Upon attitude to marriage
depends the end to which it is directed. No
institution has been so degraded and vulgarized as marriage ; it would almost seem as
though all the artifices known to a sensational
press and to a commercialized literature
have been employed to emphasize every
aspect of marriage except the duties which
it imposes and the opportunities of selfdiscipline which it offers. What sort of
guidance have young people to-day when
they approach the age of marriage? It is
as certain as anything can be that, where
families are voluntary, a community, in
which marriage is regarded as it is to-day in
western civilization, will die out. For it is
held up to be no more than a mode of selfgratification. Those who are concerned about
the small family problem should address
themselves earnestly to a reform of the
outlook upon marriage. If this outlook is
changed, the parental instinct may grow
stronger and the power of attraction,
exercised by superficial and short-run satisfactions, may grow less.”

 

* World Population, p. 256.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVIII, No. 3.
