NATURAL AND SOCIAL SELECTION /

2.—In America as well as in England
By FRANK W. WHITE, L.R.C.P. & S.E.

tional mortality and general health i

England and Wales, I arrived at certain
conclusions. Some of them were briefly as
follows :

1. That ‘* An occupation (and a social

de) selects its men according to their
Fnatural] endowment’; that “In a
general way, the higher and more desirable the occupation for grade] the better
are the natural endowments of those who
gain admission to it; and vice versa ’’;
that ‘“‘ Their rates of mortality correspond closely to their inheritance ’’; but
that ‘‘ Every occupation (and grade) embraces [to a certain extent] an assortment,’’ which accounts for some of the
anomalies in the statistics.

2. That ‘‘ As age increases mortality
rates tend towards equality for all. . .
clear evidence of the mixed character of
each grade and occupation from the point
of view of inheritance. In each, those of
good endowment struggle successfully
through the adversities of their respective
environments and tend to reach a very
similar old age. But the constitutional
weaklings . . . manifest their presence
[especially] in the wide differences which
are noticeable between grade mortalities
at the earlier ages.’’

3. That, following the decline in the
mortality rates of infants and young
children, the death rates from both can.
cer and influenza are increasing. I therefore asked, ‘‘ Are we snatching lives
from the ailments of infancy only to
reserve them for a worse fate in later life,
after they have transmitted the fatal
tendencies to their children ?”’

4. That ‘‘ Both environment and in
* Natural and Social Selection: A
Analysis, Frank

| N a former article* dealing with occupe
‘ Blue-Book ’
W. Mer EuGENICS
e 2 eo

a

heritance play their parts in determining
mortality, but that by far the more important of the two is inheritance.’’

THE ENGLISH-AMERICAN PARALLEL

Such being the findings derived from a
study of the ‘ Blue-books ’ relating to our
own country, it is of particular interest to
turn to a recent American work* of a fairly
similar nature, and to observe how the facts
presented in it afford, so far as they go, a
strong confirmation.

The bulletin now before us records the
occupational mortality experience of the
Metropolitan Life Insurance Company,
Industrial Department, 1922-24. It covers
some 3% million policy holders who constitute a “fairly homogeneous social and
economic group ”’ and are representative of
the wage-earning population. During the
three years under consideration there were
105,467 deaths in all, and these are analyzed
both as a whole and under thirty-three chief
occupations. Unfortunately “ the actual
occupations of living policy holders were
not available ’’; but since the occupational
classification of those who died was known,
the authors have been able to employ with
success the method of ‘“ proportionate
mortality ’’; that is, ‘‘ to find out for each
occupation the part that any cause of death
has played in the total mortality, taking
into account the factor of age.”’

A similar study having been conducted by
the authors for the period 1911-13, many
valuable comparisons have been made.
Moreover, as the Company has an “ Ordinary department ” for the insurance of others

_* Causes of Death by Occupation. The occupational mortality experience of the Metropolitan Life
Insurance Company, Industri Department, 1922-24.
By Louis I. Dublin, Ph.D., and Robert J. Vane, Jr.
BULLETIN f Bureau OF LABOR
Oise Washington, 1930. Govern
- Pp. iv+129+vi. Price 25

47
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Death Rate per 100,000 for Ages (years)

Insurance Class.

j20 and Ove!
400°6

than ‘‘ wage-earners,’? two broad social
groups or grades could usefully be compared.

The ordinary department, we are told, is
composed mainly of the professional and
commercial classes, clergymen, and the
better-paid mechanics. The industrial department, on the other hand, is made up of
the lower-paid workers of every description,
down to and including ‘‘ undefined ”’
labourers.

ADVANTAGES OF SOCIAL STATUS

The table above (reproduced from page 7
of the bulletin) shows the death rates
for all causes in the year 1923 for the two
main grades: ordinary department (total
white males) compared with industrial department (white males).

It is unfortunate that the second column
of the above table covers so short an age
period; for, had the death rates at ages
15 to 20 been included, a still more pronounced divergence might have appeared at
the earliest period. However, the wide
differences in the mortality rates between
the two social grades are clearly revealed at
all age periods, and a relative lessening in
the ditferences is certainly to be noted after
middle life.

My general conclusions for England and
Wales seem thus to apply here also with
equal force. Undoubtedly both heredity and
environment are responsible, but the former
seems to be primarily so. Broadly speaking,
the ordinary policy holders, belonging as
they do to the more highly selected group,
enjoy both a better natural inheritance and
a better environment than do the industrial ;
and these things are reflected in the differences in their respective death rates. (As
serving directly to explain a small part—

Industrial department, males..
Ordinary department, males..

Per cent., Industrial of Ordin

[ase | sw | erse | sot beens

550-1
268-4

et [ast
ai ° I,

207°2 135°2

but only a small part—of the cae it
may here be noted that the better environment of the one group carries with it a
lighter risk from accident at all ages. In
round figures, accident accounts for some
5 per cent. of all deaths in the ordinary
group, and for about ro per cent. in the
industrial.)

Our next table brings out the same
points from another angle. In it the expectation of life at various ages is shown for
the same two grades.

 

Expectation of life in years.

 

From the above we see that the ‘ industrials ’ again make a poorer showing than
the ‘ ordinaries ’ at each succeeding period.
At age 30, the difference in expectation is
6.6 years ; at age 50, it is 4.2 years; at age
70, it is 1.3 years. The differences again
become less marked as age advances.

RECENT CHANGES IN MORTALITY

Returning now to the industrial group
alone and comparing their 1911-13 experience of it as a whole with their 1922-24
experience, the authors claim that most of
the causes of death have shown a “ highly
gratifying ’’ downward trend of mortality.

The death rate from typhoid fever, for
instance, shows a fall of 72.2 per cent. since
1912—‘ a greater relative decline than was
registered for any other cause of death.”’
NATURAL AND SOCIAL SELECTION

And the general statement is made that
‘‘ to-day workers of 20 years of age may
to live, on the average, five years
longer than similar workers could in 1912.”
As causes of this improvement the
authors give : expansion of workmen’s comtion, preventive industrial medicine,
the safety movement, reduction in hours of
labour, elimination of the ‘ sweatshop,’
better plant sanitation, wider education of
workers regarding dangers inherent in certain occupations, and last, but in their
inion most important, the ‘‘ improved
standard of living which the increased prosperity of the American wage-earner has
provided.”’

CANCER AND INFLUENZA

Our authors admit, however, that “‘ several exceptions to the general downward trend
of mortality are found.’’

Thus, cancer mortality has increased in
frequency among white male wage-earners
of 15 years and older from 77.6 per 100,000
in 1912 to 94.9 in 1923. Indeed, in the age
period 55 to 64 the disease was in 1923 the
second largest cause of death. And for all
ages combined the death rate in 1923 from
cancer was 22 per cent. higher than in 1912.
The greatest increase, however, is recorded
in the age period 25 to 34, where the rate
was actually 47 per cent. higher than in the
earlier year.

The more accurate diagnosis of recent
times does not, in the authors’ opinion,
account for these increases. Nor do they
find any very apparent correlation between
the incidence of the disease and the kind of
occupation pursued.

All this, it may be remarked parenthetically, confirms in a general way my
findings for England and Wales. I would
call particular attention to the tendency
which cancer now exhibits to appear at an
earlier age than formerly. This baleful fact,
it seems to me, is of profound significance
when viewed in connection with the lowered
death rate of childhood which has been so
notable a feature of recent years.

One other outstanding exception must

49

now be briefly mentioned. Influenza,’ like
cancer, is also causing an increasing deathroll among the white male ‘ industrials ’ of
America. In fact ‘‘ the influenza death rate
in 1923 for all ages was 157.4 per cent.
greater than in 1912, the greatest increase
being recorded in the age period 25 to 34
where the rate in 1923 was almost four-andone-half times that of 1912.”’

The year 1923, we are told, was a bad
one for influenza. But the sinister fact
stands forth that during periods when the
disease is prevalent, as seems now to be of
frequent occurrence, the younger adult agegroups are found to suffer exceedingly high
mortality rates. And this same tendency I
emphasized in my former article, where I
stated that during the epidemic of 1918 in
England and Wales—which accounted for
no fewer than 112,329 deaths—‘‘ although
all ages were attacked, yet the disease
showed an especial ruthlessness to early
adult life, a very high peak in the mortality
occurring about age 30.’’

Thus the findings for our own country
correspond exactly with the American experience; and these corroborations, combined
with many other well-grounded considerations of a similar character,’ seem to point
to the conclusion that modern civilizations
are rearing up to adult life, at enormous

 

1 The increasing ravages of the disease in our
own country are Presented in the following table
which shows, in decennial periods since 1870, the
average number of deaths per year in each iod
from influenza for England and Wales :

1871-80 1881-90 1891-1900 IgoI-r0 IQII-20

263 534 11,051 7,318 21,641

2 As I write, a recent American instance has just
come to hand. Dean K. Brundage, of the United
States Health Service, in a study for the research
division of the Milbank Memorial Fund, has
analyzed a large volume of data showing the extent
of disabling sickness among wage-earning adults.
Fis report states :

‘* The sickness statistics of industry represent to
@ surprising extent the youn adult ages. In the
manufacturing industries of the country as a whole,
probably 80 per cent. of the men are below age
orty-five. A larger proportion of the female ingot pe workers, apparently from go to 95 per cent.

age 45.

It is further to be noted that, according to this
report, the industrial workers ‘‘ in the main ”’ are
healthier than the general tion. In fact
they are referred to as ‘‘ the flower of the general
population in physique and constitution.”
50

cost, a large and growing percentage of
defective and highly vulnerable individuals
with low general resisting powers, who are
ever liable to fall an easy prey to di and
to perish prematurely by thousands—only
too often, alas! after being permitted and
even encouraged to procreate children like in
nature to th ves. Here, obviously, is
social selection at its worst. Here is philanthropy run riot! Racial suicide—no less.

RESULTS OF OCCUPATIONAL SELECTION

The next table, which I have built up
from the author’s chapter on ‘‘ Mortality
according to Occupation,” appears to me to
indicate the superior importance of heredity
over environment. It shows in a most striking manner how the occupation selects the
type; how those who are hereditarily susceptible to a particular disease like tuberculosis are eliminated by death during the
earlier age periods; and how, after the
susceptibles have been removed, the percentages of those who die of the disease in
the later periods of life tend to a remarkable
equality for all, despite the character of
thetr occupation.

The figures represent the percentages of
the total deaths from all causes (at the different age periods in the specified occupations),
which were due to tuberculosis of the respiratory system. I have included at the foot
of the table the corresponding percentages
for “‘ all occupations.’? ‘These last give us
a useful average for comparison. (See top
of next column.)

With regard to the extremely high percentages of deaths among clerks from respiratory tuberculosis, as revealed in our table,
no one, I think, can seriously contend that
these are due, except in very slight degree,
to the general conditions of the occupation.
The environment of the ordinary modern
office is by no means a bad one, certainly not
as contrasted with that of coal mine or forge.
It cannot be doubted, therefore, that the
explanation lies in the fact that for the most
part men of poor physique and low resistance
are attracted to just this relatively light,
though meagrely remunerated, kind of
employment.

 

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Per cent. of deaths from tuber
MOST PHTHISIS IN THE COUNTRY

The case of farmers and farm labourers,
as above recorded, is at first sight amazing.
Here is the occupation, the environment, in
which, par excellence, one would have
expected to encounter the very lowest percentages from tuberculosis. Yet our table
shows that these are worse even than the
average for all occupations taken as a whole.

Dealing with this anomalous state of
affairs, our authors have written: ‘* It is
surprising to note that unlike previous mortality studies, the standardized relative index for farmers and farm labourers does not
fall below the average of all occupations.
In fact, the standardized relative index is
actually 7 per cent. above the average.”’
Later they tell us that ‘“‘ The percentage of
deaths from tuberculosis among farmers is
about 4 per cent. greater in 1922-24 than in
1911-13, while the proportion for all occupied males has declined about 34 per cent.
during the period.”” ‘‘ Apparently,’’ they
continue, ‘‘ farmers and farm labourers
have not participated in the general improvement in tuberculosis mortality brought
about by intensive public health activities
during the past decade.’? They do not,
however, tell us why.

It seems to me that there is only one
reasonable explanation—and that a biological one. We are confronted, in fact, by
yet another case of selection. ‘The towns,
NATURAL AND SOCIAL SELECTION

by their many attractions of higher wages
and greater facilities for pleasure, have
recently been drawing off from the rural
districts a continuous and increasing stream
of the more vigorous stocks. And the
cumulative effect of this, as year succeeds
year, has been seriously to devitalize the
agricultural population and to leave in the
country a growing proportion of individuals
whose general type is clearly reflected in our
table. Aided, beyond a doubt, by a good
deal of inbreeding, the downward tendency
is now becoming more and more manifest—
and this in spite of a most favourable natural environment, coupled with the unremitting efforts of preventive medicine and all
the advantages of modern American civilization.

In the above, I suggest, lies the only
explanation that fits the facts.

ON BEING STRENUOUS

Coming next in the table to the blacksmiths and forgemen—whose work is of a
particularly strenuous nature, demanding a
powerful and vigorous type of general
physique—we find that the percentages representing tuberculosis mortality are well
below the average. With these men, as the
bulletin informs us, the proportion of
deaths from tuberculosis for all ages (15
years and over) has declined from 14 per
cent. to 7.6 per cent. since 1911-13. This,
we must note, is in marked contrast to the
experience with farmers and farm labourers
as just recorded, and is clear evidence that
in the main the occupations of smith and
forgeman still attract a comparatively fine
type of man, a man of relatively good
natural endowment.

With regard to coal miners (underground),
one cannot fail to be impressed by the
exceedingly low percentages presented in
our table at all the age periods. Here, once
more, we find a hard job which offers a
fairly high rate of remuneration attracting,
and being successfully performed by, a hard
man.

“While the heavy mortality from accidents,” says the bulletin, ‘‘ makes the proportion of deaths from other causes low, it

51

should not be inferred that this is the whole
explanation for the low ratio for tuberculosis. If we relate the deaths from tuberculosis to deaths from all causes, excluding
accidents for both all occupied males and
coal miners, the ratios remain lower for
miners in every age period.’’

It is interesting to recall that in my
former article I pointed out that an analysis
of the mortality ratios of all colliery workers
for England and Wales showed that the
hewers had considerably lower ratios at all
ages than the above-ground workers, though
the work and conditions and accident mortality of the former were much stiffer than
those of the latter. Hewers, however, could
earn the highest pay... .

THE BIOLOGICAL SUMMARY

Finally, viewing our last table as a whole,
we may summarize the extraordinary picture
there presented by saying: (1x) That the
worst tuberculosis figures are shown associated with the most favourable environments, while the best are found under the
severest conditions; and (2) That after the
hereditary defectives have been weeded out
by death at the earlier and middle ages, the
survivors share an almost equal mortality
from tuberculosis in spite of their widely
different environments.

I submit, if it were not for the biological
explanation, the problem would be absolutely insoluble.

ADDENDUM

Since writing this article I have received
another recent American publication, Study
ITT of a series on diseases of adult life from
the Division of Research, Milbank Memorial
Fund, New York City. This is a reprint of
an article—Some Recent Changes in the
Mortality Among Adults, by Dorothy G.
Wiehl, which first appeared in the Journal
of Preventive Medicine, of May, 1930. It
deals with the whole period 1921-7, but the
years 1921 and 1927 have been chosen for
the comparison of the detailed mortality
rates of sex and age, mainly because the
crude death rates for these two years were
52

nearly the same and because no general
epidemic occurred in either.

The mortality data used in the paper refer
to the original death registration area composed of the New England States, Indiana,
Michigan, New Jersey, New York, and the
District of Columbia. Among the chief findings of the investigation are the following :

r. ** With the reduction in the mortality from the more serious infectious
diseases and in the mortality in the early
years of life, the constitutional and
degenerative diseases of adult life have
taken the leading position as causes of
death.”

2. The trend of general American mortality in adult life has not been favourable in recent years.

3. In the registration area ‘‘ for each
sex the mortality in early childhood in
1927 was very decidedly more favourable
than in 1921, the improvement was less
marked for the young adult ages, while
in middle age and old age the rates were
less favourable in 1927, with the increase
in middle age mortality starting at an
earlier age for males than for females.’’

4. “At every age the proportionate
change is more favourable for females
than for males—particularly for the ages
of middle life.” The differences, moreover, between sex mortality rates show a
strong tendency to become wider, except
in old age.

5. “‘ For each ten-year group above 25
years of age the New York City male
death rate increased between 1921 and
1927, especially in the younger adult
ages.’’ After the age of 35, we are told,
the trend of female mortality in New
York City was also upward.

6. A comparison with England and
Wales shows that women of England and
Wales live longer than those of America,
and that Englishmen and Welshmen,
while not as good risks as their countrywomen, also live longer than Americans.

In this experience again, then, we find a

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

falling mortality in the early years of life
associated with evidence highly suggestive
of commencing racial eat inteon-—alore
apparent as yet, seemingly, among males
then among females, and in America than
in England. Since, however, our author
seems a good deal puzzled by the sex and
national differences, some a at explanation appears to be justifiable.

The comparatively favourable mortality
statistics for women can at first sight be most
easily explained by the higher male death
rate from accidents and the more sheltered
life women usually lead. But there is
no reason to think that these factors have
been accentuated of late; and a much
wider, a biological, interpretation is needed
to explain why in almost all forms of life
the females have greater vitality and longer
lives than the males. The female, in fact,
is by nature longer-lived than the male, and
the declining infant mortality of recent
years must necessarily have led to the preservation of a relatively greater number of
weakly males than females. ‘This selection
factor has also been temporarily enhanced
by the War which, while leaving the female
population untouched, removed a great
many of the fittest young men.

In partial explanation of the national
differences recorded in (6) above, I would
point out that the American population is
compounded of a remarkable admixture of
peoples; that, though always a migrantreceiving country, America has only quite
recently enforced restrictive immigration
laws of a eugenic nature; that in England
and Wales, despite a phase of general depression, there is now being practised an
intensive system of ‘reliefs’ and social
service on a scale probably without precedent or parallel in the whole of human history; and that but for that vast and costly
system, and in the absence of the application of eugenics, our death rates at all ages
and for both sexes would undoubtedly be
very considerably higher than they are today. In fact, the urgent question now is:
How long can the increasing burden be
endured ?

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIII. No. 1.
