THE COST OF A CHILD
By W. S. BROMHEAD

The writer of this article is the author of a scheme for‘ capitalizing ’ citizens, and has

been naturally led to investigate the financial cost of rearing a child.

Since this cost

bears directly upon family endowment, income-tax rebates, and other eugenic proposals, we are very glad to print his interesting estimates, and hope that they will eltctt

similar work.—Ed.

HE cost of raising a child is of utmost

interest to those who believe that

there can be no wholesale improvement in human evolution or intelligent
eugenics until the parent receives practical
acknowledgment for the citizen he supplies
to the future ranks of the nation. ‘The work
of family-rearing is a business of the first
importance to the State, taking preference,
indeed, over agriculture itself, which it is
customary to name as the primary basic industry of every people. It is a business
demanding the highest and finest qualities
of mankind and yielding compensating rewards. But the latter are immaterial blessings which cannot sustain an enterprise that
calls incessantly for financial support.

Parenthood is the only occupation to
which it appears to be nobody’s business to
fix a reasonable reward in terms of cash.
Yet it is the one supreme form of production
upon which every other lesser form of livelihood depends. In the ideal State the leading
‘* key ’? Trade Union would be the Parents’
Union ; and every other economic combination would be subservient to the demands
and criticisms of the race-builders. To-day
this natural order of things is reversed.
The community allows a man to breed a
horse, a cow, or a Pekinese pedigree dog and
gives him full rights to recompense himself
for his trouble by sale or otherwise; and
yet cuts up the value of all human offspring
among its members, or uses them up prodigally in its wars. ‘There is never a thought
for those who through the best years of their
lives strained and struggled to rear them.
Not the finest domestic traditions can survive the burden of such handicaps.

It is a hackneyed axiom of economics that
the intrinsic value of an article—quality

and finish being equal—is regulated by the
cost of output from the most successful and
efficient manufacturers, the latter being in a
position to fix market prices. Applying
this law to family affairs, the first requirement is to discover where the young of our
race can best be maintained at the lowest
cost, in conditions of maximum health and
progress, during their period of growth into
useful economic units. Clearly this is in
rural surroundings, where fresh air, low
rents, and cheap natural foods are to be
found. Hence the fact that our cities, which

row more and more unsuitable for the rearing of children, have always existed largely
by virtue of the constant drift from country
to town. To support this view we have
knowledge from earliest antiquity of the
successes achieved both in national mass
race-production and in the supply of remarkable personalities by parents who have had
the assistance of natural surroundings.

The remarkable efficiency, racial, physical, and industrial, of our British peasantry
during the last hundred years or so in rearing big families on incredibly low incomes
is too well known to be disputed. The men
and women who bore the brunt of the great
industrial revolution of the nineteenth
century, as well as the soldiers who won
Waterloo and the sailors of Trafalgar, probably did not cost their parents, on an average, more than one shilling per week in
actual cost ; and after the age of twelve they
were self-supporting. This cost—31 in all
—cannot, of course, include the infinite
labours of the parents. These, probably,
can never be capitalized. The secret of the
big family lay naturally in organization. A
clever mother, who had learned the business
from older women, knew that once the first
two or three children were on their feet the
30 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

worst of her troubles were over. The elder
children helped the younger; and further
family increases only strengthened her
position.

Not only in the rank and file has sterling
work in citizen production at minimum cost
been done. Many of our finest men in the
realms of commercial, political, and military
achievement have come from homes where
the family budget, and especially that portion spent in their upbringing, was amazingly little. What, for example, is a fair
estimate of the expenses incurred in raising
Kitchener, who never went to a public
school, in his rural Irish home? How much
was the outlay on Lloyd George until such
time as he joined a lawyer’s office in a very
subordinate capacity? It is probable that
£15 per annum would more than cover the
costs of both these boys to their natural
guardians.

Before the War there were sevéral country
schools (by no means necessarily of the
Dotheboy’s Hall type) advertising for
boarders at an inclusive charge of £30 per
annum ; and J have been at pains to seek out
one or two who are known to have been
trained at such institutions in order to summarize their present condition, in comparison with men educated at far more expensive
establishments. In no case do they show
either physically or mentally any inferiority ; and there has been at least one
ex-pupil who, by sheer innate ability and
initiative, has risen to be nationally prominent and personally wealthy. The fact
is that common knowledge may be disseminated and a knack for inculcating
independence of character exercised at very
little cost provided the ruling personality
is of the right stuff. To my own personal
knowledge there were before the War many
married women in modest country homes
willing to take charge of a child for £1 per
month. Since then it is improbable that
such folk are to be found. ‘The inference
remains, however, that if strangers could
do this at a profit, the cost to parents living in their own home was not more.

The actual costs even now of child-rearing
are not high if gone about sensibly and care
fully. During the War I was intimately
acquainted with the circumstances of a
family belonging to an educated man who
was called away on service to a distant part
of the Empire. Being on the wrong side of
forty, he never rose above the rank of sergeant, and his wife had to manage a family
of four children on an average income under
#2 per week. She took a cottage in the
heart of the country; the children assisted
her in the intervals of local schooling ; and
at the end of the War she was strong and
healthy herself with an able, level-headed,
happy adolescent family of boys and girls.
They are to-day far above the average in
worldly success and in mental, physical,
and moral qualities.

The latest figures of the Barnardo Homes
give the inclusive costs per child iri their big
family. They amount to £35 per annum
for a normal healthy child; and presumably
cover the paid service of foster mothers,
overhead charges, etc. These children are
perfectly nourished, well looked after, and
given an excellent start in life. The only
other necessary costly items needed by a
child thus reared are facilities for securing
further technical and general knowledge.

In a recently published book The Builders
of America, figures are given (p. 304) of the
costs of child-rearing from birth (confinement charges are estimated at £50 minimum) until the age of 18 years is reached.
The total figure amounts to $7,328 (say
£1,470) for that period. This works out at
about £1,300 for the limit of 16 years which
the writer suggests as the natural age for
livelihood-earning to begin.

It must, of course, be realized that the
American quotation, while doubtless low for
middle or well-to-do classes there, does not
pretend to represent the national minimum
expenditure for parents in the U.S.A.
Doubtless the costs of rearing the individuals of a respectable, potentially useful
country family in the villages of Ohio, Virginia, or a thousand other districts are far
less than this, probably approximating to
the figure of £600 which I believe to be the
total minimum cost of rearing a British
child. It is certain that the costs incurred
THE COST OF A CHILD

in raising Abraham Lincoln, Jack London
or Edison were well below this figure.

In auditing family budgets it is not just
to charge to child-rearing costs the heavy
expenses, rents, etc., which really originate
from the preference or necessity of the
parents for living in areas where these are
artificially enhanced. |

In conclusion it is interesting to note that
the earning powers of the ordinary man in
the U.S.A. (see p. 327, Builders of America)
from the age of 21 onward, whose maximum
income between the age of 4o and 50 rises
only to $2,500 (£500), produce an average
amount of wealth during his life calculated
at about $31,000 (£6,200) over and above his
own living expenses. Who gets this surplus of the ordinary man’s industry? ‘The

as J
l

OI Ke
SS po LIC a

31

community of course—not those who bred
and raised him. No serious attempt has
ever been made under modern civilized
methods to assist parents to draw in their
old age, if only by way of an advance, any
cash interest or share in the returns from
these productive human wealth-makers with
which they have endowed their nation. Until such an attempt is made, the present
wide diffusion of contraceptive knowledge
will operate increasingly in the direction of
sterilizing all that is best and most vital
in our race. Not till a standard minimum
capital cost for child raising has been agreed
upon can the task of just and adequate
reward for parenthood be usefully considered.

 
