THE ELIMINATION OF MENTAL
DEFECT.

By R. A. FisHer.

It has been repeatedly brought to my notice in recent months
that some calculations published by Professor Punnett seven years ago
(Journal of Heredity VIII, 465) have led to a widespread misapprehension of the effectiveness of selection, either by segregation or
sterilization, in purging a population of its feebleminded strains.

‘The table in which Professor Punnett has inadvertently supplied
material for anti-eugenic propaganda is the following, showing the
number of generations required, by segregation or sterilization of recessives only, to decrease the proportion of defectives in the manner
shown :—

From 1 in 100 to 1 in 1,000 .. 22 generations
From 1 in 1,000 to 1 in 10,000 .. 68 as
From 1 in 10,000 to 1 in 100,000 .-- 216 i
From 1 in 100,000 to 1 in 1,000,000 ... 684 ”

The figures are really alarming; most readers, after a hasty glance,
would conclude that such elimination would be too hopelessly slow to
be worth attempting. This impression is heightened by the increasing
length of each step, and could be further emphasised in the same way
by carrying the table up to say 1,000,000,000—only at this point the
reader would perhaps see the catch, and recognise that it would not
matter much if it took 10,000 generations to rid the world of its last
lone feebleminded individual !

The assumptions on which the table is based may be criticised,
but let us first rectify the method of presentation, so as to show on the
same assumptions, what would be the effect of such selection in our
immediate posterity ; expressing the frequency of defectives as so
many per 10,000, we have :—

From 100 to 82.6 in 1 generation.
From 82.6 to 69.4 in 1 generation.
From 69.4 to 59.2 in 1 generation.

This is as far as we need go to express the effect which one individual
might live to experience. In a single generation the load of public
expenditure and personal misery caused by feeblemindedness, if this
is the particular defect considered, would be reduced by over 17 per
cent. If our starting point had been 80 instead of .100, still a single
generation of selection would lighten the burden by over 11 per cent.
Even on the assumptions underlying Professor Punnett’s figures, it is.
within our power to leave our children a substantial eugenic legacy.
This legacy would be permanent, even if our children decided not to
THE ELIMINATION OF MENTAL DEFECT. 115

diminish the proportion of feebleminded still further ; it would, however, be in their power, merely by continuing the same administrative
measures, nearly to double it in handing it on to the third generation ;
further if any advances were made in genetical knowledge, or administrative wisdom, they could add more substantially than is in our
power to the accumulated capital of social fitness.

Turning now to the assumptions upon which the above calculations are based, we find that they are two.

(1) That feeblemindedness may be equated to a mendelian recessive, (2) that the population chooses its mates at random. Both
assumptions, especially the second, are unfavourable to the effectiveness of selection. .

Let us consider the first assumption. There is a considerable body
of pedigree evidence indicating the existence of a single mendelian
factor which, in its recessive phase, is capable alone of producing
feebleness of mind. There is an even more substantial body of evidence that normal people, as well as the feeble in mind, differ very
greatly in degree in just the same mental characteristics as distinguish
the feebleminded from the normal. Consequently, while we may
‘speak of feeblemindedness as due to a mendelian recessive, no responsible authority would claim that all feebleminded cases are genetically
alike. There are doubtless many mendelian factors of sufficient importance to decide the fate of borderline cases ; possibly there are several factors each capable alone of producing feeblemindedness ; the
latter possibility is paralleled by the case of stationary night blindness,
which it is known may be caused by either an ordinary dominant factor, or by a sex linked recessive. It is possible to distinguish these
two factors owing to their marked difference in inheritance ; had they
been inherited in the same way, no one would have thought of regarding them as genetically distinct. Consequently, in the case of so variable a characteristic as feebleness of mind it would be extremely rash
to assume that only one main factor is present, and entirely contrary
to the evidence to ignore the contributions of less important factors.

The second assumption is open to even more obvious criticism.
Mating is very largely controlled by social class, and the feebleminded
undoubtedly gravitate to the lowest social stratum. Further, within
each class there is a decided tendency for like to mate with like. In
stature the resemblance of husband and wife is nearly as great as that
of uncle and niece ; it can scarcely be doubted that mental similarity
is equally, or more, effective ; those who find their “ affinity ”? among
the feebleminded, are surely not to be taken as average citizens.

It is difficult, for lack of data, to take accurate account of these
facts. If instead of regarding the feebleminded as 1 in 820 taken at
random in the general population, we were to regard them as constituting one sixteenth of an intermating group constituting 5 per cent.
of the general population, then the effect of segregation would be to
reduce the incidence of the defect by 86 per cent. in one generation.
This is perhaps about what might be expected from an effective policy
of segregation, and it is of a magnitude which no one with a care for
his country’s future can afford to ignore.

There is some direct evidence that the above is not an over-esti116 EUGENICS REVIEW.

mate. If the factor for feeblemindedness were really scattered at
random in the population as Punnett assumes, then among the parents
of the feebleminded only 5.5% would themselves be feebleminded. If
the factor were concentrated to the extent assumed above, 25% of
the parents would be feebleminded. I know of no satisfactory published
data on this point, but Major Darwin informs me that the parents of
825 feebleminded cases given by Goddard may be analysed as follows :

39% Normal including several cases stated to be

2% Normal (?) alcoholic, sexually immoral, tuberculous,

migrainous, or neurotic.

14.6% Not reputed normal nor diagnosed as feebleminded, but
stated to be either alcoholic, criminalistic, epileptic,
insane, migrainous, neurotic, paralytic, tuberculous,
or tramps.

14.9% Facts unknown.

29.5% Feebleminded.

100.0

The lowest possible estimate of the percentage of feebleminded deriveable from these figures is 29.5%, and indicates a distinctly higher
degree of concentration of the defect than I have assumed. Actually
the fairest estimate which we can make is probably that based on the
definitely feebleminded and the definitely normal only ; of these
43.1% are feebleminded. It is, however, sufficient for the immediate
question that the proportion of the parents of the feebleminded who
are themselves feebleminded is about 25—50% and far greater than
the 5.5% of Punnett’s suppositions ; and that the social benefit of
segregation, or sterilization, is correspondingly greater than he infers.

It is true that in the absence of further advances in general knowledge, the rate of racial purification must be expected to fall off.
However, in the question of mental defect, it is extremely improbable
that improved methods of detailed diagnosis will not be followed by a
further discrimination of the genetical types present. Indeed it was
the main point of Professor Punnett’s paper, although a point ignored
by those who use it only for anti-eugeniec propaganda, that further
study might make it possible to diagnose the normal carriers of the
factor for feeblemindedness, and in this way greatly to accelerate the
speed with which the defect could be eliminated.

We may therefore sum up in the following three conclusions :—

(1) Even on the most unfavourable assumptions the segregation
or sterilization of the feebleminded would lead to substantial immediate progress in the elimination of the defect.

(2) The concentration of the defect in a limited number of
strains, to the extent which appears to be the case, renders the
probable rate of progress as great as any to be expected in the field of
diseases capable of remedial control.

(8) There is no reason to anticipate that the rate of progress will
fall off in subsequent generations, provided that genetical research is
as successful in the future as it has been in the present generation.
