THE BOMBAY CONFERENCE AND ITS —
AFTERMATH: REACTIONS OF THE PRESS

By VERA HOUGHTON

‘ General Secretary, International Planned Parenthood Federation*

of India to the Third International

Conference on Planned Parenthood,
held in Bombay from Monday, November
24th to Saturday, November 2gth, 1952,
was something quite unprecedented in the
experience of most of the delegates from
other countries and indeed, I believe, in that
of India itself. Interest was first aroused
some days before the opening of the Conference by a Press conference, held by Lady
Rama Rau and other prominent members of
the Indian Family Planning Association,
which was attended by between thirty and
forty representatives of journals and newspapers. Interest ended on or about December 6th with the departure of the main body
of delegates.

During the six days of the Conference
much publicity was given to the communications presented by leading demographers,
sociologists and doctors from some fourteen
countries. And such colourful personalities
as Mrs. Margaret Sanger and Dr. Abraham
Stone of U.S.A., Mrs. Frida Laski of Great
Britain, Mrs. Ottesen-Jensen of Sweden,
Senator Mrs. Shidzue Kato of Japan and
Dr. S. Chandrasekhar of Baroda University
were often “‘ in the news.”’

The inaugural address by India’s VicePresident, Dr. S. Radhakrishnan, has already
been adjudged the most remarkable feature
of the Conference.t As was to be expected,
his orationt made headlines in the English
and vernacular Press of India the following
morning. While some papers, like Amrita
Bazar Patrika, in Calcutta and Allahabad,

"Toc: reception accorded by the Press

 

* Mrs. Houghton arrived in India some three weeks
before the beginning of the Conference and was much
concerned both with its organization and with the
final arrangements.

+See Notes of the Quarter, EuGENIcs REVIEw,
Vol. 44, 4, January, 1953.

¢ The full text, as revised and approved by Dr.
Radhakrishnan, is published elsewhere in this issue.

41

echoed Dr. Radhakrishnan’s plea ‘‘ To Give
Better Chance to Future Children,” others
went further by challengingly demanding
population control and family planning. In
Bihar, ‘‘ Frequent Childbirth is a Cruelty to
Women ” was the banner headline of a twocolumn report in the Indian Nation; The
Bombay Chronicle called for “ Family Planning to Ensure Health, Happiness”; and
the Times of India announced that ‘ Birth
Control is Not Ethically Banned for Social
Welfare.”’

A note of caution in the Prime Minister’s
message to the Conference against a tendency
to ascribe all ills of India to over-population
was regarded by some as a warning to
family planners ; but on the whole comment
was fair and balanced. Here are extracts
from two influential papers ; the first sounds
a cautionary note :

If the third International Conference on
Planned Parenthood now being held in Bombay
underlines anything it demonstrates that an

_increasing number of scientists and statesmen
seek in the popularisation of birth control an
escapist solution. The case for family planning
is not altogether irrational since the conditions
of utter destitution in which millions of children
are born and’ bred constitute an evil and a
challenge to the conscience of mankind. ... What
is dangerous is an over-emphasis which might
lead to a distortion of the entire perspective of
social and economic problems, particularly in
under-developed countries. .. . Family planning
has its place in a comprehensive programme of
agricultural and industrial development. But
divorced from such a programme it can only be
a stratagem to confuse the real issue and evade
its solution. It is to run away from, not face the
problem.—Editorial in Times of India, November 26th.

The problem of over-population is a delicate
one. Scientists hold that fecundity is high in a
backward country. Poor, hungry, undernourished, illiterate people produce more. Thus,
the automatic restraints on the growth of population can be forged by raising the standards of
living and by promoting social reform measures.
420 +". THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Mr. Nehru in a message to the conference urged
for a scientific approach which should not be
‘inhibited by preconceptions or convictions
already held. In Mr. Nehru’s view, the problem
is one of higher production per capita and proper
distribution. He told the conference that
‘the Government of India have an open mind
on this subject.”” The family planning is most
urgent in Asia because of pressing economic
problems. In Asian countries the rate of industrial and agricultural production is low, and the
population increases faster than the food supply.
Thus, people in Asia oscillate between scarcity
and famine. The family planning is a step
towards the economic recovery. Mrs. Shidzue

' Kato told the conference that Japan today had
an average family of two children. This is
helping Japan for economic rehabilitation in a
quicker way. Family planning is sure to lead
to improvement in standards of living which
India needs badly.—Indian Nation, Bihar,
November 2oth.

The reporting, which was both accurate
and comprehensive, of the Plenary Sessions

was no doubt helped by the fact that most

of the communications to the Conference
were available in print at the time of
presentation.

Full use was made by the Press of figures
given by Dr. S. Chandrasekhar of Baroda
University and by Dr. C. Chandrasekharan,
Director of United Nations Office for Population Studies, New Delhi, of surveys being
carried out in different parts of India to
ascertain the attitude of mothers towards
family planning. The initial results of a
survey being carried out in Baroda—

showed that 63 per cent of Gujeratis, 77 per

cent of Marathis and 70 per cent of mothers
belonging to other communities favoured birth
control. Eighteen per cent of Gujeratis, 5 per
cent of Marathis favoured moral restraint while
the percentage of mothers who were against all

kinds of birth control was 19 (Gujeratis), 18

(Marathis) and 30 other communities.—Times
of India, November 26th.

In Bangalore,

60 per cent of the urban and 40 per cent of the

rural couples (of a total of 2,000 interviewed)

favoured birth control.—Times of India, November 29th.

A criticism by Dr. S. Chandrasekhar of the
lack of co-ordination amongst Government
Departments in tackling the question of
population planning did not escape notice.
He was reported as having said :

While the Minister of Health appeared to be

/

against planned parenthood in~the modern
scientific sense of contraception, the Planning
Commission had favoured the dissemination of
knowledge of birth control.—Times of India,
November 26th.

Dr. Chandrasekhar said, ‘‘ A charitable view
may be that the Government is not quite sure
whether our people, particularly our wives and
mothers, both in the urban and rural areas, are
in favour of contraception.’’ He said that a
survey was now being carried out in Baroda
City in Bombay State to find the attitude of
mothers on the question of planned parenthood.
—The Hindu, November 27th.

It should perhaps be explained that the
Indian Government has supported pilot
experiments in the Rhythm, or Safe Period,
method which were set up by Dr. Abraham
Stone in the course of his important visit
to India in October 1951 as the World
Health Organisation’s Consultant on Family
Planning.

Dr. Stone’s definition of an ideal contraceptive as one which is harmless, reliable
and acceptable appealed to the Press, which
widely reported his suggestion that “‘ the
people of the world today were on the
threshold of the realization of long-soughtfor contraceptive techniques . . . acceptable
by peoples of all cultures.”

Resolutions were passed on the last day
of the Conference when the name of the
International Committee on Planned Parenthood was changed to the International
Planned Parenthood Federation with a
widened scope. These resolutions were
printed in full in the Sunday papers (November 30th). Also widely reported was the
decision to invite India, Japan, Hong Kong,
Singapore and Western Germany to join
the Federation forthwith. The announcement
of the election of Mrs. Margaret Sanger and
Lady Rama Rau as joint honorary presidents of the Federation.was accompanied in
most editions by photographs of the two
Presidents.

Dr. C. P. BLACKER adds:

The word “ historical ’’ is doubtless overworked. But future developments may well
confer upon this Conference, which was but
scantily noticed in the newspapers of countries outside India, what will later be disss

  

eraed-a as 5 historical importance: Indeed, the
Conference has been almost immediately
followed by a most noteworthy event,
though how far the Conference can be held
responsible for this event is as yet uncertain.

Before Dr. Radhakrishnan delivered on
the evening of Monday, November 24th,
his address to the Conference’s inaugural
meeting, a message from India’s Prime
Minister, Mr. Nehru, was read. In this
message, Mr. Nehru wished the Conference
well; but he carefully stated that, though
the Planning Commission responsible for
India’s five-year plan had made definite
recommendations on the topic of family
planning, these recommendations had not
yet been officially adopted by the Government, which, over this important issue, still
maintained an attitude of neutrality. The
fact that Dr. Radhakrishnan, in his ensuing
address (which can ‘be read elsewhere in this
issue), paid much respectful attention to the
views of Mr. Gandhi, suggests that the
Indian. Government’s hesitancy in - this
matter may have been connected with
what they held to be the unready state of
public opinion, which they knew had been
much influenced by the views of the Mahatma.
(Gandhi, whose outlook has much in common

with that of the Pope, had consistently |

"BOMBAY. CONFERENCE © 0S

CLOT A aa See
ge coh yee ‘
. Z ee yo

1 = vet
ws
ts

opposed the use of appliance . methods and
had sanctioned no alternative to abstinence
and continence.)

The event above mentioned as having
occurred after the Conference is that the
recommendation of India’s Planning Commission’s five-year plan, which provided for
a sum of 65 lakhs of rupees (£540,000) to be
allocated to the Ministry of Health for a
family planning programme, has been passed
by the Indian Parliament. The views expressed by the Commission should be noted..
The Commission holds that, if acceptable
and effective, the Rhythm method is best
suited to India : it avoids enormous expendi-ture, and the self-imposed restraint which

it exacts is held to be morally beneficial...

Nevertheless, the Commission declares,
“research and experiment need not .. . be
confined to a single method.” It adds that
“there are numerous voluntary agencies
which are currently propagating the spread
of information on family planning and the
use of chemical and mechanical contraceptives ’’; and it suggests that these agencies.
should be given support.

[The full report of the Proceedings of the
Bombay Conference will be available in April—
price, 10s. 6d. Copies can be ordered from the
International Planned Parenthood Federation,
69 Eccleston Square, London, S.W.1.] :

i

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLV, Ne. 1
