THE REVEREND D. SHERWIN BAILEY
Ph.D., Study Secretary, The Church of England Moral Welfare Council

The Lambeth Conference and the
Family’

T INTERVALS OF roughly ten years the
Ave of the world-wide Anglican Church
assemble in conference at Lambeth Palace
to discuss matters of common concern, both
domestic and general, and this year, for the
ninth such occasion, more than three hundred of
them met together under the presidency of the
Archbishop of Canterbury. Among the subjects
for their lordships’ consideration was one in
which interest had already been aroused
throughout this country by the Warren Report,
The Family in Contemporary Society. This
Report was prepared expressly for the Conference, and particularly for the Committee
(No. V) to which had been assigned the task of
dealing with (a) the effect upon the family of
industrialization and urbanization, and (b)
the problem of the relation between the world’s
population and resources. Now we have the
Report of the Conference itself before us,? and
I have been asked to review the work of Committee V, together with the relevant Resolutions
and portions of the bishops’ Encyclical Letter.

The Lambeth Conferences and their Authority

First, however (since there is often misunderstanding upon the point), it may be useful to
recall the purpose of the Lambeth Conferences,
and to explain what degree of authority attaches
to their pronouncements. In summoning the
first Conference in 1867, Archbishop Longley
expressly stated that its object was the discussion of matters of practical importance, and
that any resolutions which might be issued were
to serve simply as “‘safe guides to future action”’.
Inevitably this very restricted aim has been
modified in course of time, for behind all
practical questions there lie theological prin
* A paper read at a Members’ Meeting of the Eugenics
Society on November 12th, 1958.

ciples which demand from the Christian prior
consideration; none the less, the Conferences
have never set out to define matters of fundamental doctrine, though from time to time (and
notably in the case of the present Conference)
theological considerations have been carefully
stated and elucidated.

But the Conferences are clearly not “‘councils”
in the accepted ecclesiastical sense of that term,
and their resolutions are not legislative—they
are “resolutions”, not canons, and as such
command respect but not unconditional obedience. For the loyal Anglican, however, their
authority will not on that account be greatly
diminished. He will accept them as “safe
guides” laid down by men of wisdom and
experience, in the light of Christian teaching and
tradition, and after taking the best available
advice—and therefore not lightly to be set
aside. But he will not hold them so binding as to
preclude question, or to inhibit such freedom of
thought and experiment as the informed conscience may dictate—witness the mounting dissatisfaction during the last two decades with the
resolution (No. 15) on contraception passed by
the Conference of 1930. Likewise non-Anglican
Christians, and indeed men of good-will everywhere, will receive the reports and resolutions
of the Lambeth Fathers as weighty statements
of Christian faith and duty expressive of the
general mind of a Church which is at once
catholic and reformed, and (to quote from the
Encyclical Letter of the Conference of 1908)
the “Church of free men, educating them into a
knowledge of the liberty wherewith Christ
hath made them free.” Finally, it should be
noticed that only the resolutions have the
authority of the whole Conference; the reports,
including that now under review, have only the
authority of the Committees which prepared
them.

239

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, January 1959, 50, 4
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

A Break with the Past

This year’s Conference was not the first to
address itself to the problems of the family, but
the report of Committee V and the resolutions
based thereon represent in several important
respects a clear break, both with the line taken by
past Conferences, and (to some extent) with the
sexual tradition of the Christian Church in the
West. For this very reason they reflect also a
gratifying and encouraging awareness on the
bishops’ part of the significant theological
developments in the realm of sex and marriage
which have occurred during the last few decades.
Thus the institutional conception of wedlock
hitherto dominant in ecclesiastical thought is
rejected in favour of one which accords full
recognition to the personal value of the union of
husband and wife as an “essay in responsible
freedom” for which “Church and State can only
provide the setting and the protections of law
and doctrine’. To say this is not to minimize
its institutional importance, but only to assert
that marriage is before all else a special personal
relation, and must be treated as such if violence
is not to be done to its essential nature. The
whole section in which this idea of marriage is
expounded deserves the closest study, preferably
with one or two modern theological considerations of marriage for commentary; it provides
the clue to an understanding of the relation
between husband and wife which, if it could be
established as normative and could be inculcated
convincingly, might revolutionize our society.

The Purposes of Marriage

Any such theological revaluation of marriage
involves some review of its purposes and their
interrelation—and here, too, there is a welcome
departure from tradition. The Book of Common Prayer has familiarized us with three
“causes for which matrimony was ordained”:
procreation; remedy against sin (altered in the
1928 Book to the hallowing and directing aright
of our natural instincts and affections); and
mutual society, help, and comfort. For these,
the report implicitly substitutes a formula more
consistent with its theological principles.
Marriage, it says, has three functions: ‘“‘the
procreation of children, the fulfilment and

240

completion of husband and wife in each other,
and the establishment of a stable environment
within which the deepest truths about human
relationships can be expressed and communicated and children can grow up seeing and
learning what mature life is really like”. These
three functions at once include and go beyond
the three “‘causes” of the Prayer Book, and can
hardly be bettered as a comprehensive yet
succinct definition of marriage in language which
is non-technical yet sufficiently precise, and gives
adequate recognition to personal and relational
factors.

About the relative importance of each of these
three functions, however, the report speaks a
little obscurely. On the one hand, it declares
that procreation and the mutual completion and
fulfilment of husband and wife are not directly
related, and that each has its own independent
value; further, it expressly states that all other
duties and relationships in marriage must not
be subordinated to procreation. To this extent
it is rightly critical of the tradition which for so
long has taught that procreation is the sole or
the principal purpose of marriage—an idea
which it ascribes to “fear of the misuse of the
sexual relationship’’, or “‘a false sense that there
is, in any sexual relationship, an intrinsic evil’’.
On the other hand, the report allows that there
is a sense in which procreation can be described
as the “ruling purpose” of marriage, and in
several places it is termed a duty or command
which, if at all possible, the married ought to
fulfil. We may, perhaps, detect here a slight
hesitation to break too violently with the view
that generation is primary—particularly when
we bear in mind the approval accorded by the
Conference to responsible family planning.

Nevertheless, it is difficult to establish sound
authority for the idea that procreation, if possible, is obligatory upon the married. Certainly
(though this may be dismissed as subjective,
and therefore valueless, evidence) the married
themselves and those about to be married do
not usually think of parenthood as an obligation
—save in abnormal circumstances, such as when
the principal reason for a union is to obtain an
heir. Yet if they are normal persons of average
maturity, they will none the less expect and
desire children. It would have been theologically
THE LAMBETH CONFERENCE AND THE FAMILY

preferable, and also more consistent with the
realities of human experience, to treat procreation, not as a duty imposed by God, but as a
blessing promised by him to husband and wife,
and as such expected by them—a blessing,
however, pronounced upon marriage in general,
but not guaranteed in every particular instance.
This would accord better with the patristic
and medieval view of offspring as one of the
bona matrimonii—the blessings or good things
of matrimony, and would be a happier conception of parenthood than to regard it as a marital
obligation. I do not think that this is merely a
question of terminology, and it would be valuable if further theological consideration could
be given to the relation between marriage and
parenthood—especially since Christian opinion
in the past has sometimes shown itself uncertain,
whether vocation to marriage necessarily implies
vocation to parenthood.

The Value of Coition in Marriage

If the report speaks of the obligation of responsible procreation, it speaks also of “‘the duty to
express, in sexual intercourse, the love which
{husband and wife] bear and mean to bear to
each other’. Here again, the bishops might
have expressed themselves more felicitously;
would it not have been better to say that the
married have a duty to accept coition affirmatively and gladly as an integral part of life as
one-flesh, and an unique means of communicating sexual “‘knowledge’’? This, however, is only
criticism of a detail; in general, the report’s
treatment of physical sexuality merits the highest
commendation for its soundness and realism.
As already mentioned, the Committee rejects
decisively the Augustinian dualism which has
for so long dominated the Church’s attitude
to sexual matters. It affirms more strongly than
did the Conference of 1930 the fact that coition
has a positive value of its own as “‘the most
intimate and the most revealing’ language of
sexual love; and it condemns as “‘utterly wrong”
the ideas that coition should never take place
unless there is an intention to procreate, and
that in the absence of such an intention the
act has the nature of sin. At the same time,
however, the report refuses to concede anything
to secular hedonism, and insists that chastity

and self-control are also good, and can be “‘a
positive and creative element in Christian
living’; if biological and venereal impulses are
not restrained within their due limits, the
Christian life would “lose the dimension of
holiness and its power to challenge ‘the world’ ”’.
Between the three purposes of marriage, as
they are reformulated by the report, there is no
necessary or automatic unity, yet experience has
taught Man that for the attainment of the highest
good in human relationship, both personally and
socially, all three must be brought together and
held together ‘‘in one frame of moral reference’’
—an art, says the Committee, which “‘man has
had a long fight to learn, and must still steadily
fight to preserve”. To-day the unity and harmony
between the different functions or aspects of
sexuality can be broken more easily than ever;
contraception now permits separation of the
generative from the relational purpose of coition
with an ease and certainty never before possible,
and artificial insemination allows generation to
be abstracted completely from any kind of
personal relation. These are but two of the
moral problems raised by the duty of family
planning, which the report handles in an
admirably sane and constructive manner.

Family Planning and Contraception

While the Committee recognizes that there
are potential dangers in the use of the techniques
and devices which make planned parenthood
possible, it does not on that account condemn
the methods of contraception approved by
medical science, but seeks rather to lay down
the principles which should guide the married
in the decisions which their freedom requires
them to make. It is important to appreciate
the way in which the bishops approached this
question. From many press and other notices
of the Conference the impression might be
gained that contraception was the main item on
the agenda, and that the bishops, chiefly on
expediential grounds, had given what is unfortunately called ‘‘birth control’’ a belated but
enthusiastic blessing. Nothing could be further
from the truth. The report makes it clear that
they began with a re-examination of the theological principles relating to sex, marriage, and the
family, and that consideration of these principles

241
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

and their implications for human life and sexual
relation to-day led them to endorse contraception as a morally acceptable means of family
planning. Hence it does the report less than
justice to applaud its conclusions while ignoring
the arguments upon which those conclusions
were founded. Indeed, the two cannot be
separated; and the strength of Resolution 115,
which approves of family planning “in such
ways as are acceptable to husband and wife in
Christian conscience”’, lies in a sound theological
insight into the nature and purpose of sex and
marriage. It is quite improper, therefore, to
accuse the bishops (as some Roman Catholic
critics have done) of capitulating to the
spirit of the age, or to depreciate their
pronouncement as nothing but a “‘forced move”
—a tardy concession, upon which they have
tried to put as good a face as possible. It
cannot be stressed too much that we have here a
theological decision made _ on theological
grounds, and not merely an endorsement of
current practice.

The general assent of the Conference to
family planning does not immediately solve all
the problems which are likely to confront the
Christian husband and wife in the duty of
responsible choice which the report lays upon
them. It says, for example, that the means
employed must be “‘admissible to the Christian
conscience”—but by what criteria must the
Christian conscience exercise in this matter the
duty of moral judgement? In one case the
conscience may approve the rhythm method
and reject the contraceptive appliance, while in
another it may approve the contraceptive
appliance and reject the rhythm method; but
either way, the decision, if it is a good decision,
will be made in accordance with clear moral
principles, and will not be simply the result of
irresponsible impulse. Here, no definite guidance
is given, nor is there any refutation of the argument (implicitly rejected by the report) that on
theological grounds contraception is unnatural
and contrary to the divine law.

Yet these omissions are understandable. A
full discussion of moral theological considerations would have been out of place, and could
well have raised issues which, at this stage,
might have divided the Committee or even the

242

Conference. Moreover, such considerations
had been already reviewed in the Warren
Report—not, it is true, exhaustively, but on a
sufficient scale and in enough detail to aid the
thoughtful Anglican to reach a decision. Now,
by giving its approval to contraception, the
Lambeth Conference has encouraged theologians
to address themselves seriously to the study of a
subject which, until recently, has been regarded
as lying outside the field of respectable divinity—
particularly in the Anglican Church.

Methods of Family Planning not acceptable to the

Christian

On the other hand, the Committee makes it
perfectly clear that there are certain means of
family planning which are quite unacceptable to
the Christian conscience. Persistent refusal of
coition by one partner is condemned as
“‘a denial of one of the supreme conditions and
purposes of marriage as God has established
it”. Coitus interruptus and (presumably) coitus
reservatus are rejected, since they preclude,
either in husband or in wife, the full and proper
completion of the act. On the ground that, for
the Christian, the sacredness of life is absolute,
induced abortion and infanticide are denounced,
save when dictated by “‘strict and undeniable
medical necessity”—though at the same time the
Committee pleads for a compassionate understanding of the predicaments which have compelled families and governments in some parts
of the world to regard abortion as a more
merciful thing than starvation. A.I.H. is accepted
as a proper means, under reputable medical
control, of enabling conception to take place,
when it would otherwise be prevented by ‘“‘some
physical or emotional abnormality”’; but A.I.D.
is firmly repudiated on account of the gravity of
the problems which it raises for the Christian
—problems which would not be in any way
diminished by resolving the legal difficulties
which at present surround the practice.

Sterilization

Sterilization is discussed at greater length
than all the other rejected means put together,
and it is clear from the report that members of
the Committee were not unanimous in their
views. All were agreed that in terms of our
THE LAMBETH CONFERENCE AND THE FAMILY

present knowledge, voluntary sterilization is
*‘a major and irrevocable abdication of an
important area of responsible freedom”, a violation of the body which is God’s gift, and not
entirely ours to dispose of as we will, and a
step fraught with unknown physiological and
psychological consequences. Yet its value as a
family planning device suited to poor and
illiterate peoples was appreciated, though not
approved; and it is clear that what chiefly
exercised the Committee was the fact that it is
now, generally speaking, irreversible. Curiously
enough, no reference is made in the report to
the control of conception by means of drugs.
Doubtless this was because research and experiment have not yet proceeded far enough to
provide the assured results upon which alone
practical moral judgments can be based, but it
is important to recognize that such use of drugs
amounts in fact to the practice of temporary
sterilization, rather than of contraception as we
now think of it. It may have been because they
had in mind the possibility of temporary sterilization of this kind, requiring no surgical interference with the body, that some members felt
that the Committee ought not to judge finally
for the future.

Another minor division of opinion is revealed
upon the question of government policies of
compulsory sterilization—whether for eugenic
reasons, or as a means of family limitation, it is
not clear. Some members of the Committee felt
that “in our present state of knowledge and
understanding” such a method of population
control could not be countenanced, while
others considered that it could never be justified under any circumstances. All, however,
agreed that sterilization might be approved in
cases of “imperative medical necessity”; and
the Committee urged those who might be thinking of sterilization not to act without the
“‘deepest and most conscientious thought’,
prayerful consideration before God, and the best
obtainable counsel from pastor and physician
—and only with the full agreement of the other
spouse. The bishops expressed their concern at
the thoughtless manner in which the operation
was increasingly sought or recommended,
without any adequate appreciation of the grave
moral decision involved.

Responsible Freedom

Underlying the discussion of all these impor-.
tant questions are two governing theological
considerations: first, that the ultimate significance of human sexuality is to be sought, not in
mere biological function, but in the realm of
personal relationship, and derives from the will
of God as revealed through the Scriptures and
apprehended by the reason which is informed
with an understanding of divine truth; and
second, that Man’s response to God’s will must
be an expression of human freedom as it is
exercised in the continual decisions which
sexual relation, marriage, and family life require.
The bishops repeatedly emphasize this factor of
freedom: thus, “the whole enterprise of marriage
and the establishment of a family is perhaps the
most vivid expression we know of responsible
human freedom under God’’; “freedom is the
condition of every virtue and of every grace”—
and it is also “‘the way towards the attainment
of all that is excellent and true”. But they also
insist that the fruits of freedom can only be
attained and enjoyed at the cost of self-discipline;
and it is in this context that the report speaks of a
“‘new freedom of sexuality in marriage in our
time” which can be “‘a gate to a new depth and
joy in personal relationships between husband
and wife”, dependent upon self-control, courtesy, and “‘willingness to receive and give the
fullest communication of love, physically as
well as in every other way’’.

I have devoted so much attention to the first
part of the first section of Committee V’s report,
partly because it contains certain notable
departures from tradition, but chiefly because it
lays down general principles of the utmost
importance for an understanding of the manifold problems which confront mankind in the
field of sexual relation. The bishops rightly
stress the fact that at bottom all these problems
involve primary considerations of personal
responsibility, relational integrity, and spiritual
perception—and this gives their words a
realism and directness of appeal which is often
absent from more abstract and technical discussions of social questions, and particularly
those concerned with population. They see
men and women all the time, not as demographic
units, but as human persons and children of

243
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

God whose perplexities and distresses call forth
an imaginative compassion as well as the skills
of scientific research and the energies of government administration; thus they bring back the
“population problem’ to its source in “the
personal life of husbands and wives in their own
homes”.

Social and Personal Responsibility

In dealing with the many questions which
affect the family and its well-being, the Committee constantly returns to the idea of responsibility. Parents have a duty towards their children
which overrides any mere “right to happiness’,
and which may only be abandoned in cases
where competent counsellors agree that separation is the least harmful course. Because the
family is the basic social unit, society owes it
“a most solemn obligation”. Industry must
take a serious view of its responsibility to the
family life of its workers, and if it requires the
services of married women, must see that suitable arrangements are made for part-time
employment of a kind which does not conflict
with their domestic responsibilities. Countries
which receive refugee and other immigrants
must accept the family as a unit, even if this
involves admitting some who are aged or ill;
they ought not to accept simply those individuals
who have actual or potential productive value.
Nations and peoples, too, are responsible one to
another, and the Committee quotes with
approval a trenchant paragraph from the
Warren Report which declares the duty of
Christians in lands which enjoy a high and
increasing standard of living; they ought to
use every influence towards securing practical
help for those countries where resources are
unequal to need, under conditions which neither
diminish self-respect and the sense of independence, nor carry political obligations. These are
only some of the ways in which the bishops call
for a show of responsibility, both individual and
corporate—even if it should entail a real measure
of sacrifice.

There is hardly time to do more than enumerate
some of the other topics dealt with in the report.
A new understanding of the complex problems
involved can be detected in the short section on
polygamy, which is seen as a social and economic

244

rather than a sexual (and therefore, a moral)
question. Where plural unions are customary
it is the duty of the Church unfalteringly to
teach that true marriage is by its nature mono-:
gamous, and it is the duty of Christians in such
a situation to commit themselves to what is in:
principle right; yet there must also be a sympathetic approach to the many difficulties which.
arise, and great care must be exercised in order
to avoid the dislocations in native patterns of
living which have in the past followed a hasty
and irresponsible imposition of monogamous
standards upon peoples not educated to receive
them. Another section stresses the importance
of remote preparation for marriage, and urges
the clergy to devote special pastoral care to
the couples they marry, particularly during the
first few months of married life, when their help
may be of great value; it also commends the
work of marriage guidance councils, and
expresses the hope that ‘“‘happily-married,
convinced Christans” will consider the claim of
counselling as an urgently-needed service and
witness. Finally, mention may be made of the
concern shown by the report at the corrupting
influences to which people are nowadays
subject through journalism, radio, and television,
and at the “‘sheer silliness and the low standard of
social morality which are the content of much
that meets the eye and assails the ear today”.
Within the limits of such a review as this it is
obviously impossible to do full justice to so
important a document as the report of Committee V of the Lambeth Conference, but by
concentrating upon its statement and application of the theological principles governing
sexual relation, I think I have sufficiently
emphasized its most notable and valuable
feature. For myself, its greatest significance
lies in the fact that the bishops have officially
recognized the studies in this field which theologians have been pursuing for at least two
decades, and have directly or by implication
endorsed their conclusions. For those who have
specialized in such studies the report is a great
encouragement, and its impact upon the Church
is bound eventually to be considerable, both in
pastoral teaching and practice, and (one hopes)
in theological education. And there can be no
doubt that recognition of contraception as a
THE LAMBETH CONFERENCE AND THE FAMILY

method of family planning acceptable, among
others, to the Christian conscience will have
relieved many loyal Churchpeople of a burden
which has sometimes been grievous.

The Report’s Eugenic Significance

You will naturally expect me to say something
about the significance of the report for the
science of eugenics. Since, for eugenists, the
family is perhaps the main centre of interest, a
report such as this, which addresses itself
radically, constructively, and thoughtfully to
the betterment of marriage and family life must
be welcome. But I would go further. It has no
doubt been inevitable that eugenists should have
been concerned in the past more with the
scientific factors affecting the human race than
with others; but I would submit that study of
the moral factors bearing upon Man’s development are no less important and should, equally
with others, be given a recognized place in
eugenic science—and, of course, in the concerns
of this Society. The report of Committee V of
the Lambeth Conference fully substantiates
this claim, for it shows better than any other
comparable statement how relevant theological
and moral considerations are to the study of
eugenics and to the pursuit of eugenic policies;
in this connexion I would venture to commend

to the close and sympathetic study of members
of this Society the section of the report headed
‘Christian Family Ideals’, in which are set forth
the qualities which go to make the true family
and home and the considerations which should
influence discipline therein.

Here, then, we have a report which will
commend itself to eugenists because it is concerned with the betterment of marriage, parenthood, and family life: and if, as a Christian
document, it implicitly recognizes all through
that Man’s development is influenced, not only
by inborn qualities and dispositions and by
environment, but also by a spiritual factor lying
beyond both—namely, the grace of God, then
that, too, is something of which we ought
perhaps to take more account. In short, we
may be profoundly grateful to the bishops for
their labour on ““The Family in Contemporary
Society’, and we may confidently expect to see
it bear fruit before their lordships are again
invited to confer at Lambeth in ten years’ time.

REFERENCES

1. The Family in Contemporary Society (London,
1958, S.P.C.K.), which was reviewed in
EUGENICS REVIEW, (July 1958), 50, 2. 125-129.

2. The Lambeth Conference 1958. London, 1958,
S.P.C.K.: U.S.A., The Seabury Press.

 

| The First Birth Control Clinic in the World

THE MOTHERS’

CLINIC

Founded by Dr. MARIE STOPES, March 17th, 1921

Still the only birth control clinic giving
FREE help to everyone who comes
or writes: no intrusive enquiry as to

money earned by applicants: no case

refused help because she is healthy.
OPEN DAILY (not Sats.) 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. FREE

 

Dr. Stopes’ helpful books can be ordered by post.
Married Love 7/6
Change of Life in Men and Women 7/6
Birth Control Today 7/6
Contraception: its Theory, History and
Practice. Pp. 507 illustr. 42/Sleep |0/Postage 8d. each

108 Whitfield Street, London, W.1:

245
