172 EUGENICS REVIEW.

you are. Occasionally we are told something worth hearing, for instance,
that poverty is largely due to “the inordinate diversion of labour to
the production of comparatively useless and undesirable things” (p. 108):

but the book is not all equally valuable.
A. W. COCKBURN.

Green, C. E., F.R.S.E. Zhe Cancer Problem: A Statistical Study. 3rd
Edition. Edinburgh. Green; 1914; price 5s. net; pp. 98.

In the first chapter of this work Mr. Green describes certain diseases of
plants caused by mycetozoa, and argues that some analogy exists between
these conditions and cancer in man. In the next chapter he quotes evidence to the effect that the occurrence of one of the plant diseases referred
to is favoured by the use of manures which have been dissolved in sulphuric acid, and then examines the occupational incidence of cancer
suggesting that those occupations in which the use or formation of sulphur
compounds occur exhibit high cancer rates, but that on the other hand
trades, such as those of tanners and papermakers, in which lime is greatly
employed, are relatively immune from cancer. In the following chapter
the geographical distribution of cancer is considered, and in chapter IV.
arguments are adduced in favour of a belief that the combustion of coal
leads to the development of cancer, the principal evidence being derived
from contrasts between the proportion of deaths from cancer to deaths
from all causes in coal burning and peat burning districts. In the last
chapter, Mr. Green suggests that calcium salts may have some curative
value in the treatment of cancer. The book is only of interest to eugenists
in so far as, the real cause of cancer being unknown, the possibility of an
inherited constitutional predisposition cannot be ignored. It is therefore
unnecessary to review it at length, and we would merely remark that few
readers are likely to be convinced by the evidence presented. To take
only a single point, the proportion of cancer deaths to deaths from all
causes, cannot be compared in different districts unless the age constitutions of the populations are approximately the same, a fact which Mr.
Green does not appear to have realised. M. GREENWOOD.

Pyeraft, W. P. Zhe Courtship of Animals. London. Hutchinson; 1913;
price 6s.; pp. 318 and 40 plates.
THE title of this book does not suggest any close relation between its
subject and eugenics, but the author, in the preface and introductory
chapter, shows that he regards the two subjects as closely connected. He
writes: “Such facts [the sexual behaviour of animals] have a vitally
important bearing on the very problems of social well-being which now
loom so largely among us. ‘Reform’ is in the air. Its protagonists are
busy amongst us with schemes for our regeneration, among which ‘ sexproblems’ are made to occupy a very conspicuous place. But no good
can come of their cogitations so long as they fail to realise the springs of
behaviour in this regard. The facts herein set down will, it is hoped,
help much towards this end.” The facts given in the book are full of
interest; many of them are little known, and, especially when dealing with
vertebrate animals, the author is clearly a master of his subject. He is
strongly convinced that the realisation of the intensity of the sexual
instincts in animals is of importance to would-be reformers of human
affairs—“ it is idle to speak of an equality between the sexes in this
matter, in regard to the human race. Dogmatism, and the frequent repetition of pretty platitudes, will not alter what Nature has ordained.” As a
collection of facts of the greatest interest the book is admirable, and the
descriptions are generally clear and graphic. In his speculations the
author is less convincing, and when dealing with the facts of sex in
invertebrate animals, is occasionally inaccurate. His contention that
sexual selection acts, not by the conscious choice by the female of the
most brilliant male, but by the success of the male which most completely
