THE

EUGENICS REVIEW

STERILIZATION OF DEGENERATES AND
CRIMINALS CONSIDERED FROM THE
STANDPOINT OF GENETICS

By RAYMOND PEARL.

SOME years ago eugenists became very much interested in possvbilities of
eugenic improvement of the race through the method of preventing
reproduction of the unfit by the process of sterilization. At that time laws
were -passed in certain parts of the United States permitting, within
rather narrow limits, operations to this end upon the criminal or otherwise degenerate classes. Latterly, im the presence of more absorbing
interests engendered by war, little has been heard about this subject.
Inasmuch, however, as it is sure to be brought to the fore again, it seems
worth while to consider with some care the whole problem of what may
be expected from any sterilization programme, in the light of present-day
knowledge of genetics.

To the geneticist the compulsory sterilization of certain classes of
degenerates and criminals appeals at first thought as a scientifically
sound and desirable procedure. Whether or not, or within what limits,
such compulsory sterilization would be a wise social policy to inaugurate
at the present time, having regard to the existing degree of eniightenment of public opinion on such fundamental questions, is a problem
which falls outside the field of genetics and therefore will not be discussed here.

The investigations of Pearson and his co-workers in England, and of
Davenport and the staff of the Eugenics Record Office in the United
States, leave no room for doubt that a very considerable number of
criminals, paupers, feeble-minded, epileptic and insane persons who
come under institutional care owe their defective condition in greater or
less degree to heredity. The pedigrees of such persons usually show
plainly that they are defective in innate, hereditary constitution. They are
the bearers of a germ-plasm which carries definite determiners for abnormal
or defective somatic characters. If such persons produce offspring, even
though in so doing they are mated to persons of normal, sound hereditary
constitutions, it is to be expected from our present knowledge of the principles of inheritance (and experience bears out expectation) that a certain
definite proportion of the offspring will not only be defective somatically,

1 Papers from the Department of Biometry and Vital Statistics, School of
Hygiene and Public Health, John Hopkins University, No. 2.
2 EUGENICS REVIEW.

as were their parents, but will in turn pass on to their progeny, in some
proportion, the defective germ-plasm. Furthermore, the study of these
cases from the standpoint of genetics suggests the still more important
fact that the somatically normal offspring in such a degenerate or
defective line of descent, in spite of their superficial normality, may, and
undoubtedly in most cases will, bear unchanged the defective germ-plasm.
When such individuals are mated with normal persons the degeneracy,
which is innate im the strain, will again appear in a portion, at least, of
the descendants.

All that is known of the laws of inheritance, taken with the
experience of the world through all history with criminals and degenerates of the type under discussion, shows that there is only one sure
method by which a permanent reduction in the absolute and relative
numbers of such unfortunates may be brought about. This method is to
prevent, absolutely and umfailingly, the reproduction of all individuals
bearing germ-plasm tainted in these ways. Sterilization appeals to many
as the safest and most sure way to accomplish this end which has yet
been suggested. But the case is not as simple as it appears theoretically
to be. Looking at the matter in a practical way, there are difficulties
which make it seem, at least, rather doubtful whether anything like the
theoretically expected good can possibly result from any sterilization
programme. This will be evident as we proceed.

The question has been asked whether sterilization of criminals and
degenerates will “raise the average of the race.” Theoretically, of
course, it miust, but the logically correct answer to this question turns on
what is meant by “raising the average.” The point can be made clear
by an illustration. Suppose a farmer had a flock of sheep of which onefourth were black and three-fourths white. He wishes all his flock to be
white. Now if he prevents all black sheep from reproducing, he will
mm avery few generations, indeed in one generation, greatly reduce the
proportion of black sheep in the flock. If then he keeps individual
pedigrees (that is, takes steps to know exactly what offspring come from
each pair of parents) and then prevents from further reproducing any
white sheep that ever have thrown even a single black offspring, he will
in a few more generations get a flock in which black sheep will never
thereafter appear, so far as is now known. But in all this nothing will
have been done which will make the white sheep any more white than
they were at the beginning. The average degree of whiteness of the
whites, in other words, will not have been raised. But the proportion
of whites in the flock as a whole will have been materially raised.

So we have every reason to suppose it would be with human
degenerates. If by sterilization, or other meams, such persons can be
absolutely prevented from reproduction the ¢roportion of them in the
tace will surely be in time reduced. Concurrently, of course, the proportion of non-degenerates or normals will be increased. But the
“average of the normals” in respect to degree of intelligence will mot
have been raised in the process. .

As to the criteria by which it shall be determined whether, in a
given instance, degeneracy of whatever kind is hereditary (due to
STERILIZATION OF DEGENERATES, ETC. 3

defective innate constitution) or merely acquired (somatic in the technical
sense) it would appear that the surest test is that of progeny performance.
Next in probative value is the family history or pedigree.! Practically
in studies of human heredity we are restricted to the family history, for
obvious reasons. If such a history extends over three gemerations in the
direct line, and more than one other person defective in the same or
some other way besides the individual appears in it, the conclusion may
be drawn with a considerable degree of probability that the germ-plasm
in this line of descent is in some degree defective. Such a conclusion is
andicated not only by studies of human pedigrees, but by the extensive
studies which have been made in recent years on inheritance in animals.

There can be no doubt that the superlatively effective procedure in
freeing the race of defective hereditary characteristics would be to
sterilize (or otherwise keep from reproduction) all individuals in all
pedigree lines, direct and collateral, in which any degenerates have
appeared. Practically, however, it is scarcely to be expected that society
will ever sanction any such wholesale compulsory sterilization, as this
would demand, of somatically normal ‘persons, even though there is
some reason to suppose that they carry in their germ-cells the deterMinants of defective characteristics: As a matter of fact, the present
state of knowledge in the field of genetics furnishes no practical warrant
for a wholesale and indiscriminate sterilization of all individuals belonging to tainted strains or pedigree lines. While, as has been said, such
a process would no doubt be the most effective method which could be
devised to rid the race of defective hereditary characteristics, it would
be altogether too wasteful of perfectly good and desirable hereditary
material. It is certainly made very probable, if not demonstrated, by
the studies of Davenport, Rosanoff, Goddard, Nettleship, Bateson,
Hurst, Punnett, Baur, and others, that many of these defective characteristics are inherited in accordance with Mendelian principles. This means
that out of tainted stock individuals may be expected to segregate who
will be truly normal—that is, who will not bear in their germ-cells the
determinants of defective traits. To bar such individuals from mating
with other normal persons and reproducing themselves would be an
unnecessary and essentially anti-social procedure.

Practically anything now known regarding the laws of Inheritance
would appear to give sanction for the compulsory sterilization of but two
classes of persons, viz. :—

(2) Those, of both sexes, actually and obviously degenerate, using

this word in a broad sense to include criminality.

(6) Such persons, of both sexes, themselves not obviously degenerate
(2.€., somatically abnormal), as have one or more children
which are actually and obviously degenerate, since the production of such offspring may be taken as proof positive that the
producing individuals bear the hereditary determinants of
defective characteristics.

1 For a discussion of the relative merits of different plans for arriving at a
knowledge of the composition of germ-plasm, see the author’s “Modes of
Research in Genetics,’ New York, 1915.
4 EUGENICS REVIEW.

So moderate a programme as this, could it be put into general
operation, could not possibly be expected to bring about, in anything
short of 25 to 30 years, a statistically noticeable reduction in the pro
portion of degenerates and defectives in the race. It must be emphasised
in the strongest terms that no startling immediate result is to be expected
from the inauguration of a sterilization programme. Such a result would
be statistically impossible. It is quite safe to say that any eugenic result
which is real and permanent will only be attained after many years.
The reason, of course, is that in genetic matters the significant time unit
of measurement is the generation. Man is a slow-growing creature; one
generation means 20 to 30 or more years. And the length of a human
generation is, in the highest civilisation, all the time growing longer,
pwing to economic and social influences.

In view of these considerations the importance of including individuals of class (6) (above) in the operations of any sterilization programme becomes obvious. While there are as yet no comprehensive
and exact statistics to show what proportion of the socially unfit are
produced by class (a) individuals as compared with class (0) individuals,
it is fair to assume that the latter class produce quite as many as the
former, and probably a great many more. Granting that somatically
normal and nearly normal individuals produce a larger proportion of
the total degenerate population than do degenerates themselves, it would
be many years—certainly far beyond the lifetime of any person now
living—before the proportion of actual degenerates would be reduced to
even one-half what it mow is, supposing a nation-wide policy of sterilization to be put into execution at once, and assuming that no other agency
acted in the meantime to reduce the number of degenerates.

These considerations have, it seems to me, a pertinent bearing < on
the question of social policy involved in any sterilization propaganda.
Granting that sterilization laws can be put on the statute books, does
the past history of law-making and enforcement in most nations, certainly
in the United States, give any warrant for supposing that such laws will
be kept alive and actively enforced for a sufficiently long time, im the
necessary absence of immediate and striking results, to bring about any
permanent and marked result? Certainly this could only be expected
if a continued and active campaign of genera] eugenic education were
maintained, and even then the case is not so hopeful as one could wish.
All this is here emphasised, not to discourage the eugenist from
inaugurating sterilization programmes, but simply to try to bring home
to him a more adequate realization than I think he generally
has, of the stupendous magnitude of the task, both in time and space,
which is involved in any effective changing of the germ-plasm of a race
of human beings, as a result of legislative procedure. Looking at the
matter from detached and hard-headed viewpoint of the geneticist, it
would seem as though the only legal foundation which could possibly be
adequate would be an incorporation of a sterilization enactment into the
fundamental constitutional law of the land. Only in this way would
there be hope of the policy carrying along unchanged for a sufficient
number of generations to produce definite and tangible results.
STERILIZATION OF DEGENERATHES, ETC. 5

Another matter in this same connection is of grave importance from
the standpoint of genetics. Whatever plan of preventing the reproduction of degenerate stocks is adopted it must be absolutely and surely
permanent,.so far as concerns the individual, and must include both
sexes. Here lies the opening for criticism of the most widely approved
plan of sterilization—namely, that through vasectomy. It is admittedly
possible to repair, by surgical means, a transected vas deferens so as to
make it once more functionally perfect. It may be argued that this
possibility is not likely to be taken advantage of by vasectomized
criminals and degenerates. Possibly not, but so long as the possibility
remains there is a weak spot in the eugenic dam which is supposed to
hold back the flow of socially unfit. From the standpoint of genetics
the only justifiable sterilization procedure is am operation which cannot
by any practical possibility be surgically repaired. Such an operation
admittedly might be more serious and immediately painful than “ pinprick ” vasectomy.

Along this line also lies the genetic objection to such suggested
substitutes for sterilization as life segregation, control of marriage selection (this plan would appear to be practically inapplicable in social and
intellectual strata of the sort here under discussion). If it is desirable to
prevent the reproduction of the socially unfit at all, this prevention should
obviously be absolute and irrevocable.

The effective sterilization of the female presents still greater difficultzes than that of the male. Any sterilization by surgical means
demands in the female a much more severe type of operation than that
necessary to attain the equivalent result in the male. In fact, it may be
said that there is no entirely satisfactory surgical method of permanentily
sterilizing the female which does not involve castration. Bucura’s?
method of sterilization is on the whole probably the best, but it is not
permanent, that is, a further operation may restore fertility. Possibly,
as has been suggested in certain quarters, the X-ray may offer a feasible
method of sterilizing the female, but the experimental basis here is
largely wanting. Certainly there is not such a definite and organised
body of knowledge on the subject as would be necessary before one could
hope to get legal authorisation for sterilization by the X-ray.

Altogether, the difficulties which beset the organisation of any
thorough-going campaign of sterilization are very grave. First, we have
the general opposition of public opinion to the passage and enforcement
of laws which interfere with the most intimate item of personal physiology. But it is clear that unless a sterilization programme is thoroughly
comprehensive in its scope and carried out rigorously and unremittingly
for a period of probably at least a hundred years, no significant, eugenic
results will come from it. In the present state of social enlightenment of
the greater portion of the general population one cannot but feel that the

1 It should not be understood from this that castration is recommended.
Leaving aside the social repugnance to this operation which rules it out of court
at once, the biological consequence would be anything but desirable. A thoroughgoing vasotomy would seem to meet all the requirements of the case.

2 Bucura, C. J. ‘*Temporire Sterilisierung der Frau.’”? Wiener Klin,
Wehnschr. Bd. xxiii., No. 46. 1910.
6 EUGENICS REVIEW.

general outlook for the solution of our difficulties by this method is not
particularly bright. One is inclined to agree with the cautious statement
of Goddard! in discussing the problem of the feeble-minded': “At best,
sterthization is not likely to be a final solution of this problem. We may,
and indeed I believe must, use it as a help, as something that will contribute toward the solution, until we can get segregation thoroughly
established. But, in using it, we must realise that the first necessity is
the careful study of the whole subject, to the end that we may know
more both about the laws of inheritance and the ultimate effect of the
operation.”

By way of summary it may be said, from the standpoint of the
science of genetics, that, while compulsory sterilization is the only
adequate means yet suggested for the prevention of the reproduction of
the socially unfit, striking immediate results in the reduction of the
mumber of degenerates and defectives are not to be expected to follow
the inauguration of such a system. Many years must elapse before the
proportion of hereditary degeneracy in the race could be substantially
reduced. Known genetic principles demand that, ab initio, not only
actual defectives, but the parents of actual defectives, should be prevented from further reproduction. Further, the means of sterilization
employed should be such as to ensure a permanent result. The difficulties, both social and genetic, which beset sterilization as a remedial
eugenic measure are so considerable as to make one doubtful of its
accomplishing much.

1 Goddard, H. H. ‘“‘ The Kallikak Family,’? New York, 1912, pp. 115-116.
