FOOD, FAMINE AND THE FUTURE
By W. J. SHAW, M.A., LLB.

The Scientific Dilemma

ROFESSOR HILL, by his presidential address at Belfast to the
British Association, has given prominence to a problem whose implications
concern not scientists alone, but all who live
in this troubled and distracted scientific age.
The problem is the ethical dilemma of
science. “‘ If,’’ said Professor Hill, ‘‘ethical
principles deny our right to do evil in order
that good may come, are we justified in
doing good when the foreseeable consequence
is evil?’ As an illustration, he instanced
“ the gravest of world problems, the shortage
of natural resources, particularly food. This
had arisen from the vast increases of population, due to public health measures and the
conquest of disease. Thus science applied
for motives of decent humanity entirely
beyond reproach had led to a problem of
the utmost public gravity. ... Suppose it
were certain now that the pressure of
increasing population, uncontrolled by
disease, would lead not only to widespread
exhaustion of the soil and other capital
resources, but also to continuing and
increasing international tension and disorder,” what view ought humane and
reasonable people to take ? If men will breed
like rabbits would it not in the long run
bring less evil if they were allowed to die
like rabbits? Did human rights extend to
unlimited reproduction, with a consequent
obligation falling on the more careful ?
Another recently to emphasise this same
dilemma underlying scientific advance is Sir
Charles Darwin. In his somewhat unnerving
forecast The Next Million Years,* he seeks
for factors defining the limits of human
progress, much as the laws of thermodynamics define the limits of advance in
engineering. One such factor he finds in
the Malthusian law of population. This
postulates a condition of stability for the

* See p. 224.

increase of mankind, with a margin of the
human race existing always at starvation or
subsistence level. Any departure from this
condition is an unstable one tending to be
overthrown by the operation of inevitable
laws. ‘‘ There is no need for the procreative
instinct to become even remotely as strong
as the sexual for it to defeat any opposing
creed that favours limitation of populations.”
Those communities that limit population are
at a biological disadvantage in the millennial
struggle for existence. The very nature of
the trait ensures its own extinction. Similarly, within the community, those who limit
their fertility will, if only in the course of
ages, be outnumbered and overwhelmed by
those who do not. The present standard of
life in the Western world, says Darwin, is
phenomenal. The absence of a Malthusian
pressure of population on the means of
subsistence is purely transitory, due as it
were to the accidental opening up of the
Western hemisphere coupled with the enormous advance in technology and production.
Temporarily the increase in subsistence has
outstripped the growth of population.
Inevitably, however, by the pressure of
numbers from without the area if not from
within, the balance will be reversed. |
The situation has, on a lesser scale, a
parallel in the irrigation of the desert of
Sind in India. That vast undertaking was.
designed to relieve the surrounding populations from the threat of endemic famine.
The design succeeded—foratime. Ultimately,
however, the press of population has overtaken the new-won productivity, with a
result that there are now in aggregate more
starving human beings in India than ever
before ! Whatever unopened spaces the
world may yet hold for exploitation, whatever advances in technique and production
the future may have in stoke, the logical
outcome is the same. They can win for Man
only a respite from the state to which he

216
FOOD, FAMINE AND THE FUTURE

imevitably tends, the stable state of overpopulation.

‘Now all this has a depressingly plausible
logic about it. It does look to be true.

Perhaps we ought, awe-struck though we are 
by the brilliant achievements of contemporary science, td join its leaders in a
justified pessimism. But it is hard to be
bereft altogether of hope! There is, after
all, a certain formal quality about the
dilemma so clearly presented to us by Hill
and Darwin. Theoretically, says the latter,
there is no escape from this ‘ doubtful
doom of human kind.” It is just this
theoretical inevitability of the fate forecast
that I want to question here.

The Possible Path to Salvation

Logically, at any rate, there is a means of
resolving our dilemma. Take first the merely
technical aspect. The discovery and development of contraception has proceeded almost
unheralded among the advances of the

scientific age. No doubt this is due to taboo.

Even now the subject has scarcely achieved
sufficient respectability to be mentioned in
public. But I do not wish here to enter into
a discussion of morals. I must confine
myself to saying that it is wrong lightly to
pass over the claims of profound thinkers
that the science of contraception possesses
immense possibilities for human betterment
as great or greater than any other discovery
of the scientific age. It is strange that this
idea should find such hard acceptance and
that there should be so much opposition
from religious bodies, for ‘‘ Malthusian
restraint,’’ though theoretically possible, is
scarcely a practicable doctrine to preach.
Except for contraception, it must be
increasingly apparent to all, limitations on
the growth of population will come by famine
and disease in conditions fraught with the
causes of war. Only the most heartless
dogmatist could continue to set his face
against the more humane alternative. In
the under-developed areas of the globe
particularly, a conscious and open policy
of encouraging and teaching birth control is
the almost indispensable complement to
material aid. To attempt to raise the

217

standard of life by the one without the other
is to empty resources into a bottomless pit.
It is not unlikely that the consensus of
opinion among thinking people already
supports the more factual outlook, but it
needs direction and a voice to be given effect.
Of clamant opposition there would be plenty;
already the World Health Organization has
been divided on this very point. But a
conscious policy aimed at the control of
population by the spread of contraceptive
methods cannot be ruled out as a future
possibility. .

The cost is another matter. In areas such
as Egypt the agricultural labourer can get
work for only part of the year at wages
which barely keep body and soul together.
The Rockefeller Foundation, after five years’
research in Egyptian villages, has reported
that the conditions of the people measured
by income, housing, nutrition, sanitation,
health and education are worse than in any
of the other countries—including China and
India—in which the Foundation has made
comparable studies. The standard of living,
estimated on the consumption of such basic
essentials as food and cotton cloth, is
falling. But the population has doubled in
fifty years. Obviously here a protracted
expensive campaign of education in, and the
provision of free clinics for, the spread of
contraceptive -methods can alone hope to
stem the tide. But how much less expensive
this would be and ultimately how much more
effective than economic aid in other forms
we can only guess.

But even if the spread of contraceptive
methods becomesan openly recognised policy,
our dilemma is by no means resolved. It
is just where the standard of life is lowest
and the policy is most needed that it is least
likely to be effective. The prolific, Darwin
might argue, must inevitably inherit the
globe. Those who restrict their increase
make space only for those who do not. And
population will always therefore be tending
to a state of stability with a Malthusian
pressure upon the means of subsistence. The
only possible check in the last resort is the
natural one.
218

Needed—A Change of Ideology

Well now, is this true? Granted, it may
transpire to be true so long as the governments of mankind are so foolish as to do
nothing about it. But something can be done.
For just as it is possible artificially to control
conception, so it is possible to create an
artificial subsistence level. Already in the
Welfare State we stipulate the minimum
standards of life for all. If one follows the
course of the Industrial Revolution in Britain
one cannot but endorse the measures that
have raised the mass of the working population from disease, ignorance and squalor
step by painful step to this latest achievement of social security. But social security
is no end in itself. By itself it may have no
greater ultimate effect than irrigating the
desert of Sind. My prophetic eye discerns
as the next stage, the next turn of the wheel
of welfare, a shift of responsibility back from
the all-providing State to the parent and
individual. The great social services perhaps
will remain compulsory but no longer free.
Accurately costed, they could be charged
proportionally to those who benefit. And the
State’s imperative, ‘For every child that is
born shall be provided...’ may in the
course of time become ‘‘ For every child you
bear you shall provide....” The whole
mechanism of administration is already in
existence—school inspectors, inspectors of
housing, of sanitation, of child welfare, even
the sanctions of the law. There remains
only the shift in cost back from State to
parent for the system to provide in effect the
artificial level of subsistence mentioned
earlier. Such a system implies that parenthood should be voluntary. The necessary
knowledge for family planning would have
to be available to all. Also implied is a far
greater equality of economic opportunity
than ordinarily exists at present. The very
powerful argument against a system such as
is here envisaged is that in the end it might
resolve into nothing but a means of oppression by one class of another. Manifestly one
cannot prohibit people from having children
they cannot support, or punish parents for
failure to support those children they have,
when one denies them at the same time full

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

scope to earn the means. A man must have
his due.

What is required, and may eventually
come, is not an increase in the State’s dictation, or an arbitrary interference with the
most sacred of functions. It is an impartial
rule, as impartial, for instance, as the rule of
the road. It would say in effect to all prospective parents, in or out of wedlock, wise or
feckless, “‘ Children must be cared for. But
if you have children you must pay for them.
They shall not be a charge on others more
careful than yourself.” If this is injustice it
would be surely less unjust than the present
burdening of one man with the care of
another’s children, albeit indirectly through
the medium of taxation. Nor would the
limited interference with the right of parenthood be exactly an innovation. The State
already prescribes the size of a man’s family,
if he is of a calculating mind, by every
measure which touches the pocket.

A system such as I have described above
would need to be supported by all the
sanctions of law and public opinion. It
would require a new interpretation of
morality. But once established it would
have the effect, within the State at least,
of creating this artificial level of subsistence.
In the long run population would tend
towards stability with a margin at the predetermined level, just as Darwin stipulates
a condition of stability at subsistence level.
Over-population would lead to fewer births
at the margin ; infertility above the margin
might lead to its own extinction. But the
standard of living, other things being equal,
could be held. It might be raised progressively as machines replace human
drudges.

International Implications

So much for our dilemma within the State.
What of the future for communities limiting
their populations in this way? Would they
be at a biological disadvantage in the
millennial struggle for existence? I strongly
question it. Rather it would seem the future
belongs to them and that they would be able
to impose their will and their way on those
who do not follow suit. For in the last resort
FOOD, FAMINE AND THE FUTURE

the principle can be applied on the international plane, perhaps regulating immigration and access to raw materials upon just
principles ; ending perhaps the tensions that
spring from the fear and threat of overspilling populations. But that is another
story.

Not Less Science, But More

I have tried thus far to show, if only
theoretically, how man can yet escape from
the horns of Sir Charles Darwin’s awful
dilemma. Whether in fact he will escape is a
different matter. But there is at least one
avenue of hope. Its exploration continues.
There is a growing acceptance among
influential groups of the attitude I have been
endeavouring, as best I can, to describe.
The cure for our troubles is not less science
but more. But there is indeed much to be
discovered—by the economists, how to
measure a man’s due, by the psychologists
(to use their own colourless phrase), how to
change a man’s social norms. But let us
have no more evangelizing. If science dic
219

tates a change of beliefs, let them be changed
in a scientific way. The metamorphosis,
however, is of no small order. For the system
I have envisaged means a revolution in the
climate of thought of catholic, communist
and socialist alike. Perhaps it is too late,
or perhaps the change is too tremendous.
Perhaps we and our descendants will see
another convulsion of civilization comparable
to the decline and fall of Rome, for often
falling back a step seems a condition of the
world’s advance. We live in a time of vast
uncertainties and perplexities with little
guiding light. But by what light we have
the aim of eugenic reform seems not a
hopeless or unworthy aim to follow. I
cannot do better in conclusion than to quote
the words of Galton: ‘‘ Man is gifted with
pity and other kindly feelings ; he has also
the power of preventing many kinds of
suffering. I conceive it to fall well within
his province to replace Natural Selection
by other processes that are more merciful
and not less effective. This is precisely the
aim of eugenics.”

GENETICS AND DISEASE

by

TAGE KEMP, M.D.

Professor of Human Genetics, University of Copenhagen
Director of the Institute for Human Genetics, Copenhagen

Professor Kemp has produced a book on Genetics and Disease that is thoroughly scientific, and
that at the same time will be completely comprehended by both the doctor and the biologist. After
a lucid summary of the Mechanism of Heredity, he deals adequately, but non-mathematically,
with the peculiar difficulties of studies on human pedigree data. Then follows an account of Normal
Hereditary Factors in man, including a notable chapter on the Blood Groups. Hereditary Diseases

next come under review, and are considered from both the clinical and the genetic aspects. This
section is enriched by a large number of excellent photographs. Finally comes a section on Genetic
Hygiene, which discusses practical applications for the individual about to marry (as well as for his
medical adviser) and as matters of public policy. The book embodies the results of many large-scale
investigations carried out in the Institute of which Professor Kemp is Director, and of the author’s
own reflections, based on his unrivalled knowledge and experience of human genetic problems.

otin. X 6hin. 330 pages

100 illustrations

27 tables Price 60/- net

OLIVER AND BOYD LTD.
EDINBURGH : TweEEepDALE CourRT
LONDON : 98 Great RuSSELL STREET, W.C.1

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLIV, No. 4
