THE GRAZ STERILIZATION TRIAL
By FELIX TIETZE, Lup., M.D.(VIENNA)

URING the latter months of 1932

the police of Graz in Steiermark,

Austria, discovered that a relatively
large number of men of this town and of Vienna
had been sterilized by physicians and medical
students who had either carried out on them
a double vasectomy or had ligated both their
vasa deferentia. In view of the fact that
similar operations have been proposed as a
means of securing sterilization in men, and
are indeed adapted for this purpose in certain
of the United States and elsewhere, the case
has some interest for the readers of this
REVIEW.

In actual fact eugenic aims had no part in
the Graz sterilizations. The operating physicians took not the least interest in the
genetical constitution ret their patients—
they were interested in hardly anything but
the operation fee; nor were the patients
themselves interested in eugenics. Some of
these were married men with small incomes
who already had one or two children and
were desperate at the prospect of having to
bring up more; some had no children, and
wanted none; and some were unmarried.
The idea that they might be carriers of
transmissible defects did not even occur to
them. It may be recalled that Lenz, discussing a similar case, expressed the view
that men who asked to be sterilized were
hardly worthy to continue their race, and
that it was quite proper to sterilize them.

The sentiment of an important part of the
Austrian population and Government, however, determined by their adherence to the
doctrines of the Roman Catholic Church, is
strongly against eugenic or (except for very
strictly therapeutic purposes) any other
sterilization ; and it was for this reason that
action was taken against one physician and
two medical students who had carried out on
a number of men (at least 100) operations
that had the effect of making them sterile.
Besides these, certain other individuals were

prosecuted for having helped in or had some
other connection with the operations—
especially an author who by lectures and
printed material had advocated this method
of sterilization and even helped his listeners
and readers to get into touch with the
operating surgeons and ‘“ half-surgeons.”’
"According to the Austrian Criminal Law
(dating from 1852, but really only a revised
edition of a former criminal law of 1803),
an individual is guilty of causing severe
bodily damage (schwere kérperliche Beschddigung) who, not with the intention of
killing but with other hostile (feindselig)
intention, has acted against a person in such
a way as to produce a disturbance of health
or incapacity for work lasting at least twenty
days, or a mental disorder, or severe injury
to that person (§ 152). The punishment is

imprisonment for a period of six months to

one year, or under aggravating circumstances
up to five years (§ 154). If the crime has
brought about loss of procreative faculty in
the injured individual the punishment is
hard labour for five to ten years (§ 156).

The law does not state what a severe injury
is, but in the case under survey the court
took it for granted that the sterilizing operations, while being severe injuries in the legal
sense, had not the special character specified
in section 156, in which the reference was
to permanent loss of procreative capacity.
This was not mentioned specifically, for
when the law was created sterilization by
vasectomy or vaso-ligation, was not yet
known and the only operation thought of in
this connection was castration, in other words
complete destruction or removal of the
genital glands and thereby of procreative
capacity. After the modern operation sterility is not permanent; a reverse operation
is possible and as a matter of fact was
successfully carried out in one of the Graz
cases.

Moreover, the judges concluded that

259
260

hostile intention, which would have to be
proved to make the operations punishable
under the above-mentioned law, was lacking.
The prosecutor had expressed the view that
a hostile intention was present in the mere
intention to attack the bodily integrity of an
individual; but the court found that the
law undoubtedly meant the intention of
damaging the body, this interpretation being
borne out by the wording of the analogous
section (§ 136) of the older criminal law of
1803 which runs: Who with the intention of
damaging an individual injures him severely
commits a crime. A hostile intention is thus
an intention to injure physically; a dolus
divectus is necessary, at least an mtended
assault. But in the present case the defendants had carried out surgical operations
with the intention of producing an effect
desired by the subjects themselves, who
presumably were entitled to dispose of their
bodies and had indeed themselves solicited
the operation ; and it was therefore impossible to argue that the surgeons had acted
with intent to assault, let alone with a still
severer hostile intention. The question as to
what were the defendants’ real motives (i.e.
whether their purpose was to help their
patients, or the human race, or just their
bank balances) is entirely irrelevant. Even
the fact that two of them had not graduated
and were therefore not entitled to operate
makes no difference, for only the treatment
of sick persons is forbidden by the criminal

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

law (§ 343) to unqualified persons, whereas
those operated on in the present case were
not sick.

The court was thus obliged to acquit the
defendants, basing its verdict on the fact
that the Austrian Criminal Law contains no
section forlidding the operation of sterilization.
In other countries such legal prescriptions do
exist, for instance in Germany, where the
Criminal Law was augmented by a section—
266a of May 26th, 1933—stating that an
individual who injures anyone with his own
consent acts against the law only if the
action, in spite of the consent of the injured
individual, violates custom. In the new
German Sterilization Law which came into
force on January Ist, 1934, section 14 reads
thus: Sterilization, not carried out according
to the terms of this law, as well as removal of
the genital glands, are only permissible if |
performed by a physician according to the
tules of medical science, to avoid serious
danger to the life or the health of the person
on whom the operation is undertaken, and
with his consent.

The judgment of the Graz court is not
final. An appeal against it has been lodged
in the Supreme Court, but it is very unlikely
that it will be changed in any fundamental
sense. There exist in Austria people who
want a Sterilization Bill more for the purpose
of forbidding sterilization for other than
eugenic reasons than for facilitating sterilization having this purpose.

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXV, No. 4.
