130 EUGENICS REVIEW.

THE FRENCH COMMISSION ON
DEPOPULATION.

By Hon. H. ONsSLow.

THE decline of the birth-rate among western civilised nations has
received attention in nearly every sociological work of the last
twenty years. No matter what country be considered, England,
Germany, Italy, or any other, it will be seen that both in urban
and rural districts, the number of children born to each family
is undergoing a continual decrease. In France, however, the
conditions differ from those of other European countries, as may
be seen from the accompanying diagram, which represents the
relative increase in their populations.

The stationary population of France is chiefly due to the
smallness of the number of births—a number which has sometimes been actually less than that of the deaths recorded. The
state of affairs was so disquieting that it led to the appointment
of a Special Commission to consider the birth-rate and the
death-rate, to enquire into the causes of such an abnormal
condition and to report upon the measures which might be
taken to improve the situation.

The fundamental questions raised by an enquiry on this
subject are ‘‘:\What is the ultimate fate of a nation with a
stagnant birth-rate?’’ and ‘‘ Why should such a condition
cause alarm?’’ In the case of England, where, though the
birth-rate is declining, yet there is a net annual increase in the
population, questions arise which are, perhaps, harder to
answer, and no satisfactory solution will be found until an
estimation is made as to whether any classes are supplying too
many children, while others contribute too few; that is to say,
until a qualitative survey of the birth-rate has been carried out.

In France, however, the evil is far more patent, for the
birth-rate is not only decreasing, but has for some time been so
low, that the total number of the population has remained
unchanged. Brit even in this case, before it is possible to
131

THE FRENCH COMMISSION ON DEPOPULATION.

ntries during

the second half of the nineteenth century

Increase of the population in several European cou

(a

3 — (V3

— A XE
—, KW

FRANCE GERMANY

W«wo

KW 2

AUSTRO-HUNGARY

KW
KW:
KW:
WV

WF

ITALY 
\W: :

Kw 
BRITISH ISLES

= 2 million

proportional to the population (F mm.

nce

angle is
1

ectangle

r
inhabitants by which each coun

inhabitants. )

The height of each rect
ch

inhabitants. )

The area of ea
132 EUGENICS REVIEW.

assert that it is an evil, it is necessary to postulate that the
progress of a nation should be towards the production and
maintenance of the greatest number of the finest lives. For this
purpose every country must first ensure the production of
human beings in numbers sufficient to allow the complete
representation of all possible varieties, so that, by natural or
artificial selection, a higher type of man may be produced than
has hitherto been possible. Anything that makes the selection
more effective, will raise the type of man; but for such selection
to be possible, it is of primary importance that it should have
sufficient material upon which to work. Hence it follows that a
birth-rate in excess of the death-rate is essential to a country’s
progress, and that it is disastrous to France that the number of
her native-born inhabitants should be. actually on the point of
decreasing. Other governments, not only in Europe but also
in the British Colonies, have taken steps to enquire into similar
conditions, but France, because of its more serious plight, has
been most active, not only in investigation, but also in devising
remedies. This is partly due to the initiative of MM. Piot and
Bernard, at whose request the government appointed the Commission, the reports of which are dealt with in the following
pages. They were conscious that France, by failing to replenish
her cradles, was in danger of committing political suicide, and
of becoming a nation of the second order; that her army! was
losing strength; that she was growing less rich than her
neighbours ; and that, even if she were not actually undergoing
a pacific invasion of her own territory she was at least unable
to send abroad her sons to colonise.

The causes which influence the numbers of a population are
exceedingly numerous and of the most complex character.
Among others are the age of marriage, the conditions of wealth,
the influence of legal institutions, religious conceptions, the
power of tradition and many other subtle and conflicting
factors.

Like many other sociological questions, the birth-rate is
explicitly determined by the mental attitude of every individual

1**Ta Dépopulation de la France,”” by Dr, Jacques Bertillon (page 15).
THE FRENCH COMMISSION ON DEPOPULATION. 133

concerned, and this conscious attitude is in its turn determined
by influences at work in the whole social complex underlying
everyday life. It seems, therefore, that the question of the
birth-rate may be considered psychologically as well as
sociologically, a point which is not infrequently forgotten by
some authors, who too often assume that a man restricts his
family from this or that economic or other cause, whereas in
fact these causes merely underlie his mental attitude, and in
reality ‘‘ La fécondité est réglée par la volonté.”’

In order to consider all the points more carefully, the work
of the Commission was arbitrarily divided into two portions,
the one to consider the birth-rate, the other the death-rate. All
the reports have not been received,! but those that have may be
roughly divided under the following headings.

A. Commission on the Death-rate.

1. Relations between the birth-rate and the death-rate.
2. The effect of criminal abortion on the birth-rate.
3. Measures to reduce infant and adult mortality.
4. The state of health in the army.
B. Commission on the Birth-rate.
1. Economic causes of depopulation.
2. Compensations that might be granted to large
families.
3. Effects of civil legislation on depopulation.

4. The influence of professions on depopulation.

tProofs have been received of the following reports from the Commission on
the Death-rate: ‘‘ Relations entre la Mortalité et la Natalité,”? by Dr. Jacques
Bertillon (1908). ‘‘ Relations entre la Mortalité et la Natalité,’? by Dr. Loéwenthal (1908), ‘Sur Influence des Avortements Criminels sur la Dépopulation,”’
by M. Drouineau (1908). ‘‘ Conclusions adoptées les 23 Décembre, 1908,
et 24 Juin, 1910, par la Sous-commission de la Mortalité,”’ by MM.
Drouineau and Atthalin (1910). ‘*La Mortalité de Armée de Terre, de l’Armée
de Mer et de VPArmée Coloniale,” by M. Lowenthal (1908). ‘LV’ Etat
Sanitaire de l’Armée de Terre,” by Dr. C. Février (1911). “ Rapport Général sur les causes de la Mortalité,” by M. Paul Strauss
(1911). — And from the Commission on the Birth-rate: ‘‘ Les Causes Economiques
de la Dépopulation,” by Alfred Neymarck (1905). ‘‘ Les Causes Professionelles
de Dépopulation,”? by M. Lucien March (1905). ‘‘ L’Importance des Dégrévements qu’il est possible d’accorder aux Familles Nombreuses,’’ by M. Jacques
Bertillon (1908). ‘‘ Les Dégrévements et les Compensations 4 allouer aux Chefs
de Familles Nombreuses,”? by M. Emil Rey (1908). ‘‘ Les Migrations Intérieures
et la Dépopulation des Campagnes,’”? by Dr. Drouineau (1908). ‘‘ Les Causes
de la Dépopulation se rattachant 4 la Législation Civile,” by MM. Atthalin and
Lyon-Caen (1908). The reports of MM. Pinard Budin, Variot, and others mentioned in the General Report have not been received.
134 EUGENICS REVIEW.
A. COMMISSION ON THE DEATH-RATE.
1. The Relations between the Birth-rate and the Death-rate.

The so-called law of parallelism between the death-rate
and the birth-rate, which assumes that they are proportional
to each other, and which is summed up in the quaintly crude
formula, ‘‘ La mort mesure la vie et la vie mesure la mort,’’ is
advocated too naively by M. Bertillon.

He does not seem to be troubled by the fact that there
exists no evidence of cause and effect between the figures
invoked, nor by the fact that the figures themselves are given
crudely, without correction for longevity, pre-nuptial conception, the relative numbers of men and women, the cause of
death and many other important factors, so frequently intervening to cause variations from the normal conditions, such as
wars, pestilences, and famines. Moreover, as is so often the
case with other statistics, a sufficiently full account of the circumstances under which the data were collected, is not given. In
addition to these objections, it does not seem to signify to the
author that statistics are but symbols, of themselves telling
nothing of the factors that underlie them; for he unhesitatingly
connects them causally, without seeking the real circumstances
that condition them. This law of parallelism asserts, as is
indicated by the following table, that in countries where there is
a feeble birth-rate, there will be a correspondingly low death-rate,
and vice-versa.

I. Countries where the Death-rate is low (1891-1900).

Marriages. Births. Deaths.
England vee . 78 ... 29°9 ... 18'2
Scotland we ww 72 2. 306 ... 18°7
Ireland wee .. 48 ... 2370... 182
Denmark wes we TR ee BOQ ws T'S
Norway vee .. OF 1... 303... 163
Sweden wee we 5'Q wee 27E we 164

Finland _ we TO. 63272) «19°F
THE FRENCH COMMISSION ON DEPOPULATION. 135

Marriages. Births. Deaths.
Switzerland wee . 76... 281... 19'0
Netherlands _.... we D3 «ee 32°75). = 184
Belgium bee .. JQ ... 29'0 ... 19°2

II. Countries where the Death-rate is high.

Marriages. Births. Deaths.
Austria sats .. 80 ... 37°1 ... 26°6
Hungary wee .. 88 ... 406 ... 29°9
Germany wee .. 82 1... 361 ... 22°2
Prussia wee .. 82 ... 367 =... 219
Bavaria ve we 77 4. 365 ww. 25°4
Saxony wes we QI... 395... 24'0
Wurtemberg _... we TQ we B42. = -23°4
Baden Lee wee 77 ee 3352 ws. 22°
Spain Le w. 7Q .. 348 ... 29°5
Italy ies we TQ... 34'Q w= 2G°2
Russia in Europe
50 governments... Q°O ... 4Q'2.... 34°!
Servia vee .. 10°; ... 47... 27°0
Bulgaria vee .. 83. ... 394... 26'0

But in spite of this and similar tables the Commission could
not agree with the author in concluding that any attempt to
increase the population of France by diminishing the death-rate
would be rendered unavailing by a parallel reduction in the
birth-rate, which paradoxical view M. Bertillon supported
by the following psychological considerations. All deaths tend
to produce births, because if a child dies its parents feel the
need of another child to replace it. If the deceased be old, his
death relieves his children of duties which have hitherto prevented their marriage, and if he be rich, their inheritance will
enable them to marry forthwith. Now, if this were true, it
would seem that since families are so small in France, the need
136 EUGENICS REVIEW.

of replacing a child at its death would be more felt there than
elsewhere, and that France, therefore, more than any other
country, would conform to this law of parallelism; whereas, on
the contrary, not only have her birth-rate and her death-rate

The Death-rate and the Birth-rate in France between

1805 and 1905.

NHABITANTS

3$ Lt
SESE

1300 1310 1320 1330 1340 13FO 1360 1370 1330 1390 s900 940

ER fooo

      
 

   

39

 

25

  

20

    

IS

been converging for the last century, but on several occasions
have actually crossed, as is shown by the accompanying diagram.

To strengthen his point, M. Bertillon then resorts to the following dilemma: a death must always be followed by a birth,
for if not, either there would exist loaves with no one to eat
them, “‘ ce quit n’arrive pas,’’ or else men would live without
loaves to eat, “‘ ce qui serait trop angélique,’’ to which indeed
the only possible reply has already been made, ‘‘ On se sent
presque désarmé devant tant de candeur.”’

Further, contrary to M. Bertillon, the Commission were
agreed that, far from being moderate, the death-rate was actually
very high. As may be seen from the following table which
THE FRENCH COMMISSION ON DEPOPULATION. 137

gives the calculated difference between the death-rate and the
birth-rate on the supposition that the birth-rate is roo, the
chances of death in France are exceedingly high.

Difference between Death-rate and Birth-rate when Birth
rate ts 100.
Norway _... .. 478 Baden bes .. §637°0
Holland _... w. 465 Switzerland .. 36°3
~ Denmark ... ws 45°0 Bavaria... ... 34°0
Prussia... . 42°8 Roumania . 319
Hesse ae we 423 Austria... w+ 31°3
Saxony... .. 42°O Italy a .. 29°9
Finland _... we 47 Portugal ... 1. 29°4
Germany ... ... 40°8 Hungary ... ... 29'0
Sweden __.... ... 40°! Russia... .. 268
Scotland ... ~ ... 40’0 Ireland ___.... .. 20°0
England ... ... 39°6 Spain bes «16°!
Servia Lee we 37°9 France ... we «59
Belgium ... . 37°4

Here, not only is France seen to be at the bottom of the
list, but the difference between her birth-rate and her death-rate
is out of all proportion to that of Spain, which comes next in
order. Infant mortality is so great, being, in France, between
1894 and 1898, for children under one year, 202 per 1,000
(whereas the average death-rate is 20°9 per 1,000); that, considering the scarcity of children, it is computed the death-rate
should not be higher than 14 or 15 per 1,000.

That there is a certain relation between the birth-rate and
the death-rate must be admitted, but it is neither constant,
mathematical, nor in any way reciprocal. It is mainly accounted for by the fact that a country with a growing birthrate has a growing death-rate, only because the elements that
compose it comprise a large proportion of children under the
age of one, among whom the death-rate is highest. Therefore in
two countries with equal chances of death, the country with the
higher birth-rate would have also a higher death-rate, owing to
138 EUGENICS REVIEW.

the excess of vulnerable lives, and the prevalence of a more
rapid natural selection.

That the birth-rate (21 per 1,000) is abnormal, as well as
the death-rate, need hardly be pointed out. Their combined
effect is to cause a Stationary population, whereas in most
European countries there is an excess of births over deaths,
amounting annually to about 12 per 1,000. Now, in 1905 there
were about 338,000 premature deaths in France, of which
110,000 were children under the age of one year; but even
could this mortality be reduced to nothing, there would still be
a shortage of lives, so that it is as necessary to increase the
birth-rate as it is to decrease the death-rate. It must be remembered, however, that, provided the saving of premature deaths
does not interfere with healthy selection, it is better to save a
young life than to procure a birth, because not only have halfgrown individuals already gained economic value, but they
have also run the gauntlet of the high mortality of infancy.
There is urgent need, therefore, that both these measures
should be adopted, because in France ‘‘ Ce n’est pas le menace
de la dépopulation, mais la dépopulation avec toutes ses
menaces.”’

2. The Effect of Criminal Abortion on the Birth-rate.

Among the many causes that have their effect upon the
birth-rate, one of the most important is criminal abortion, and
it has tended lately to increase. In 1903, 607 cases were reported, but this, no doubt, is only a very small fraction of the
total number procured, which, it has been suggested, approaches
the exaggerated figure of 12,000 annually. Dr. Maygrier
states that out of 742 miscarriages, 5°91 per cent. were
procured, and of these women 56°81 per cent. died, whereas
of the others only °57 per cent. This shows that abortion
affects the rate of natural increase, not only by suppressing
births, but also by increasing the death-rate due to child-birth.
Seeing that there has been so great an increase in the number
of cases observed—according to M. Doloris from 7°7 to 17°7—
and since there is no evidence of a higher percentage of cases
THE FRENCH COMMISSION ON DEPOPULATION. 139

being reported, it is to be presumed that there has also been an
increase among the far more numerous cases that have been
concealed.

Abortion is easily obtained, because it is largely practised
by mid-wives who do not hesitate to advertise in the daily
papers under the pretext of taking gynzcological cases. The
practice also is encouraged by the theoretical and practical
propaganda of certain societies,’ which distribute a considerable
amount of literature for the purpose of encouraging sterility,
and, in the case of one society at least,” abortion, and even
infanticide.

The Commission recommends that steps should be taken
to prevent the illegal conduct of such mid-wives, by forbidding
them to attend any but genuine confinements; and that the law
of abortion should be so strengthened that not only should
there be a heavy penalty for anyone advertising for such a
purpose, but also that the publishers should be liable to the
same penalty. If, in addition to these remedies, lying-in
homes were as strictly inspected, as was recommended by M.M
Atthalin and Drouineau, this evil would certainly be much
mitigated.

3. Measures to reduce Infant and Adult Mortality.

The unsatisfactory conditions of many women during
pregnancy largely increases the number of miscarriages and
still-births. In France the latter already amount to about
25,000, but they do not seem to have increased during the last
50 years. In existing circumstances, miscarriages and stillbirths due to inherent degeneracy of stock are inevitable, but
many of the others attributed to poor nutrition, lack of rest, and
ignorance of proper hygiene could probably be prevented.

Neglect at this period is most common among unmarried
women, partly from their ignorance with regard to pregnancy,

1Such as ‘‘ The Malthusian League,’ founded in 1887; ‘‘ Ligue de la Régénération Humaine,” founded 1896; and ‘‘ Das Sozial Harmonische Verein,” founded
1889.

2°* Régénération,”? September, 1907.
140 EUGENICS REVIEW.

and partly from their attempts to conceal their condition. To
reduce this mortality, it is advised that every encouragement
should be given to the existing societies and other institutions
which provide secret refuges, clothing, advice, and the attendance of doctors and midwives; and that similar societies should
be formed, until all mothers could receive the necessary assistance and advice for themselves during the last three months of
pregnancy, and for their children after birth.

In most European countries laws exist which attempt to
ensure four weeks’ rest to a mother before and after confinement, but these apply chiefly to industrial workers, and are
moreover mostly rendered inoperative by the lack of a suitable
indemnity; in all cases full salary should be granted, and
where necessary, attendance and drugs also.

The infant mortality, as has been seen, is very large, for
one-third of the total deaths occur to children under one year.
The causes of death may be seen from the following table :—

38°47 per cent. deaths are caused by infantile diarrhoea.

14°7 ” yy 9 affections of the respiratory
organs.
17°O y 9 ” congenital debility.
2°47 ” y = tuberculosis.
4°96 9 y yy infectious diseases.
22°4 5, die from causes not included in the above.

Improvement in the hygiene at this age will, therefore, be
of the utmost importance. For example, many of the sources
of contamination to milk, which cause most of the deaths from
infantile diarrhoea, might be avoided by encouraging mothers
to suckle their children, but as this is not always possible, every
care should be taken with regard to the milk supply, such as
sterilisation, inspection of dairies, and the elimination of tuberculous cows. Already feeding bottles with long tubes have
been prohibited in France.1 These measures are of the greatest
importance, for those already taken seem to have reduced the

1By the law of April 16th, 1910.
THE FRENCH COMMISSION ON DEPOPULATION. I4I

death-rate for children under one year by 26 per 1,000 between
the years 1889 and 1906.

In France the number of children put out to nurse in. 1906
was 90,146. The mortality for these children is 52 per 1,000
higher than the general infant mortality, no doubt partly because 31°4 per cent. of them are illegitimate, but also because
of their inferior sanitary conditions, which call for more inspection and special supervision.

In 1891 Théophile Roussel recommended to the French
Academy of Medicine the construction of a public bureau, for
the object of bringing up, incognito, all children presented to it
under the age of seven months. This is an example of one of the
schemes devised by France in her sore need to increase the
number of her people. The fact that these children are for
ever lost to their parents, and grow up indistinguishable from
each other, as has been described by M. Brieux,! is a sufficient
deterrent to prevent the abuse of this system.

Since the death-rate between the ages of 10 and 14 is higher
in France than in Prussia, England, or Sweden, the Commissioners are of opinion that it might be reduced, though it may
be the case that some inherent factor is involved, such as the
adaptability of the French to their environment, or the degeneracy of the stock due to suspended selection. Tuberculosis accounts for one-third of these deaths, and pneumonia
for one-fifth. It is evident that the intervention of the hereditary factor? make the former and possibly the latter disease
more difficult to combat, but it has been suggested that, in
addition to the building of sanatoria and dispensaries, hygienic
instruction (and, it is to be hoped, Eugenic also) should be
given in every school.

The Commission shows that, in order to reduce the mortality amongst adults, it is necessary that there should be an
improvement in public hygiene, and an increase of prophylactic
measures and specific remedies, especially with reference to infectious diseases. Though the death-rate from typhoid has
fallen, yet there is much to be desired in the purity of water

1°6 Maternité,” by M. Brieux.
3Cf., ‘Tuberculosis, Heredity, and Environment,” by Karl Pearson.
142 EUGENICS REVIEW.

supplies. On the other hand, the reduction in the death-rate
for tuberculosis is insignificant, though it is interesting to note
that the ravages of the disease are least in those departments where
cider and wine are drunk in preference to spirits. In the
country the hygiene is worse than in the towns, both as regards
housing and water supply, and these conditions affect not only
the lives of the labourers, but also the quality and condition of
the meat and milk. That sufficient encouragement for research
work and hygienic instruction does not seem to be given is
clear from the fact that Germany in one year granted fifteen
times as much as France for education and laboratory expenses.

4. The State of Health in the Army.

The following table is used by MM. Labbé and Lowenthal
to show that the French Army has a higher death-rate than
any other army in Europe :—

Death-rate in the French Army (Algeria and Tunis

included) ss ves vee ww §=—5°73
Death-rate in the French Army (of the Interior) ... 4°85
’ », Austrian Army vee we 4°84
9 », Russian Army -_ vee . = 4°84
i », English Army a wee .. 4°64
99 5, Italian Army i we we 4°35
9 », German Army ve sve 2°40

The authors partly attribute the declining birth-rate to
this unsatisfactory condition, but their view is not shared by M.
Février, because, as he points out, the number of deaths for
young men between the ages of 20 and 24 has steadily diminished in France since 1806. He believes the state of the army
to be due to the bad hygiene of the whole country, of which
the army represents a limited yet intensified case. That the
amount of sickness in the army is increasing he cannot deny,
and since 1906 the death-rate, but he accounts for it by the fact
that the time of service, and thereby the mean age of the soldiers
has been reduced, and since young men are the most subject to
disease, every reduction in the time of service increases the
THE FRENCH COMMISSION ON DEPOPULATION. 143

amount of sickness. Also, since 1872 the number of men
accepted has steadily increased, whereas the total number of
conscripts has not increased proportionately, nor have the barracks been enlarged sufficiently to meet these demands, and
consequently an over-crowding has taken place which tends to
aggravate the dissemination of infectious diseases. One circumstance which makes a comparison between armies unreliable is the varying size of the populations from which they are
recruited. For instance, the French army is drawn from a
population of 39,000,000, and the German Army from
60,000,000. This enables Germany to reject 50 per cent. of her
conscripts, whereas France can only afford to reject 12 per
cent., the result being that the German Army has a higher
resistance to disease.

In view of these considerations the Commission have
advised that no men of doubtful physique should be enrolled’ ;
that every advantage should be taken of the existing regulations
which provide for the care of those men who are at first incapable of undergoing all the rigours of military life; that the
rations and barracks should be improved; that the number of
army doctors and army hospitals should be increased; that
it should be made compulsory to notify any infectious disease ;
and especially that municipalities should be made to provide a
pure water supply with a view to preventing soldiers from
contracting typhoid in the garrison towns.

B. REPORT OF THE COMMISSION ON THE BIRTH-RATE.
1. Economic causes of Depopulation.

Of all causes that influence the birth-rate, those that affect
the wealth of families are probably the most potent. As the
civilisation of a country advances its wealth increases, but does
not keep pace with the increased desire for comfort. Every
man wishes to leave his children at least as well off as he was,
but that which was luxury for the father is too often considered

1To increase the strength of the army, a law was passed on January 31st,
1902, enabling men with certain physical defects to be accepted.
144 EUGENICS REVIEW.

customary for the son and a necessity for the grandson; or,
in other words, the cost of children becomes greater, and since
the purse cannot be lengthened it is the number of children
that must be restricted.

M. Neymarck is anxious to establish a connection between |
the decrease of interest on capital and the decline of the birthrate, and declares that since certain French securities yield
only half the interest they did 40 years ago, Frenchmen can
only afford to have half the number of children. This statement is exceedingly naive, for the author does not seem to
realise that the interest has fallen owing to the great increase
of national wealth and of the country’s security, nor does he make
any attempt to show who holds the stock of which he speaks.
It might equally well be argued that since the mean price of
this stock in 1871 was 54, and rose in 1902 to over 100, any
man by selling out then would be twice as rich as he was, and
therefore able to afford twice as many children. It is surely
absurd to make the increase in a country’s security the cause of
the decrease in its population. A much more probable factor,
which is also mentioned, is the increase in the National Budget,
which has necessitated an increase of 50°7 per cent. in direct
taxation since 1869, and 128°2 per cent. in indirect taxation,
though even this may be more than balanced by the increase of
national wealth.

2. Compensations that might be Granted to Large Families.

The fact that taxation is increasing so rapidly has led to
the suggestion that large families might be encouraged by reducing the taxes which fall upon them, in proportion to the
size of the family. Until 1908 such compensations as were
offered were so small as to be negligible. It is believed that all
“ familles nombreuses ”’ which are modestly defined as families
containing three or more children, could be entirely relieved
from direct taxation, without reducing the Treasury returns, if
the less numerous families had their taxation increased by onefifth. This is possible, because, as is shown by the following
table, families containing more than three children formed in
1896 only one-sixth part of all the families in France :—
THE FRENCH COMMISSION ON DEPOPULATION. 145

Absolute For 100
Figures. Families.
Number of bachelors of more than 30
years ane sue wes .» 1,341,740 ... III
Number of families without children ... 1,808,839 ... 14°9
Number of families having one child ... 2,638,752... 21°7
Number of families having two children 2,379,259 ... 19°5
Number of familieshavingthreechildren 1,593,387 ... 13°0
Number of families having more than
three children vee ve ... 2,190,155... 17°9
Number of families having an unknown
number of children ... a 234,855... = «19

12,186,987 100°0
It has been computed that this estimate might even be
reduced to an increase in direct taxation of only 14°4 per cent.,
since it is the richer families that have the fewest children, as
will be seen from the following table :—
Inheritances left by the heads of families having the number
of children indicated.

 

1 child 1,073 millions.

2 children 1,060 i

3 9? 618 99

4 9 and more 719 9
31470

However, since the poorest families pay so very little by
direct taxation, and so much more by indirect taxation, the Commissioners thought it necessary, in order that any substantial
advantages should accrue, that compensation should be extended to
indirect taxation as well. In addition to this, they thought encouragement should be given to fathers of large families by an
increase of voting powers, since fathers represent more to the
nation than bachelors; by giving a grant for every child after
the third; and by favouring all government officials with large
families. They also thought the death duties might be altered
and the tax made payable, not on the total heritage, but on the
portions inherited, so that the more numerous the heirs the
smaller would be the charges.
146 EUGENICS REVIEW.

3. The Effects of Civil Legislation on Depopulation.

Not only are there the opportunities that have already been
indicated for new legislation to encourage large families, but
the report of MM. Atthalin and Lyon-Caen shows that there
are also in existence certain laws which should be amended or
abolished because they hamper the birth-rate. Among these
are the numerous legal formalities such as the necessity of
parental consent by legal certificate, and the advanced age (21 for
women, 25 for men) before which marriage cannot take place
without this consent,' which hinder marriage so much that the
parties are often tempted to dispense with the ceremony altogether.
These restrictions are unfavourable to the birth-rate, because
legitimate unions are ten times more fertile than illegitimate
ones.

It is pointed out also that some of the laws of succession
in the Code Napoléon were not framed with due consideration
for the birth-rate. It is clear that a man who has toiled to
cultivate a piece of waste land, or a man who has laboriously
built up a small business, is so unwilling to see the fruit of
his industry divided amongst three or four children, that he is
often driven to restrict his family to one; so that ‘‘ Sz ancien
régime faisait les fils ainés, le régime actuel faisait les fils
uniques.”

Moreover, the laws of succession are so constructed that the
division of goods is supposed to be not only in accordance with
the value but also with the nature of the goods divided; and
anomalously enough for Republican France, the larger a man’s
family, the less is his testamentary liberty; and therefore, not
only are his expenses greater, but his parental authority is less.

These laws result in the dismemberment of family fortunes,
the infinitesimal division of lands, and the dislocation of commercial enterprises.

With regard to the equal division of property, the Commission assumes a sentimental attitude,? but it advises that the

1Some of these laws have already been amended: June 2oth, 1896, and June
21st, 1907.

2“*Ce régime d’égalité, la Révolution nous 1’2 mis dans le sang; il est
Vhonneur de la France; il est intangible.”” Report of MM. Atthalin and LyonCaen (page 12).
THE FRENCH COMMISSION ON DEPOPULATION. 147

other laws should be amended; that soldiers should have their
time of service reduced for each child born; that the expenses
of marriage and any other artificial obstacles should be as far
as possible removed; and finally it is of the opinion that were
affiliation orders to be granted there would be less chance of a
man avoiding the cost of his natural children, and therefore
less inducement to contract unions out of wedlock.

4. The Influence of Professions on Depopulation.

It is clear that the nature of a man’s profession, by affecting his health, morals, income and place of residence must have
a marked influence upon the size of his family. Also, that the
changes brought about by machinery in the means of production, and the occasional periods of unemployment have a
decided effect upon the birth-rate.

Emigration from France and immigration into France is
very small, chiefly owing to the stationary condition of the
population, and has probably little or no effect upon the birthrate. If, however, the movements of the population within
France, due to the change of industrial conditions, be considered, it will be found that the urban population has increased
by 165 per 1,000 between 1846 and 1901, and that the rural
population has decreased by 140 per 1,000 in the same time;
that is to say, the urban population gained 931,000, whereas the
rural population lost 486,000. Statistics are almost completely
absent, but it does not appear that these movements of the
population have any very decisive influence on the birth-rate,
though in one or two cases it has been shown that urban immigration and the breaking-up of agricultural properties have
partly caused the fall in the rural birth-rate, since emigration
affects principally young marriageable individuals.

It is obviously unfavourable to the birth-rate that many
women should work for their living. In France, however, the
number of women who are employed in remunerative work has
not increased during the last 60 years. They number at present 6,400,000, or 42 per cent. of the female population over 13
years of age, and 35°5 per cent. of the total number of persons of
either sex engaged in any profession. Miss Collett also has
148 EUGENICS REVIEW.

concluded that in England the number has not increased,’
whereas in the U.S.A. since 1890 there has actually been a
decrease, which seems to indicate that female employment is
not so largely to blame for the rapid decline of the birth-rate.
Without doubt the number of women engaged in industrial
work is greater in France than elsewhere, since France employs one woman to every two men, whereas Belgium employs
one woman to every three men, and Germany one woman to
every four. This is probably due to the fact that France produces so large a quantity of textile fabric and clothing.

Though it has been suggested that the excessive proportion
of women workers in France is a cause of the declining birthrate, yet it seems more probable that these both arise from a
common cause, namely, a desire to better themselves and their
children.

There is a higher proportion of married persons in France
than in Germany or Austria, yet in all these’countries the number
of celibates varies according to the profession. This is due
rather to the average age of those engaged in the profession
than to the nature of the profession itself. For instance, there
are more unmarried clerks than merchants, because many clerks
have become merchants before they are in a position to marry.
In Germany, and in the town of Copenhagen, however, it has been
shown that the number of celibates is higher among the liberal
professions than among artisans and labourers. Further, the
number of married women in the different professions varies
enormously. Some professions, especially those of teachers,
nurses, and the religious orders are chiefly supplied by celibate
women, who form 7'5 per cent. of the total women able to bear
children, for the reason that, in France, women are 400,000 in
excess of men. The Roman Catholic religion encourages
celibacy, which in the case of women, seeing that they are
already in excess, is not so harmful as in the case of men,
of whom the celibate priesthood numbers 4 per cent., and
thus renders childless a portion of the abler classes, a loss
which it is doubtful whether any other moral consideration compensates.

1 Labour Department: ‘‘Report on the Condition of Women,” by Miss Collett.
THE FRENCH COMMISSION ON DEPOPULATION. 149

There are other professions, such as those of waiters and
domestic servants, which encourage individuals to have neither
wife nor family, since their employers do not give them facilities
for establishing homes. Though, in France, statistics are not
procurable, those of other countries show that labourers marry
earlier than clerks, and clerks earlier than employers, and the
earlier the marriage, of course, the more fecund the union.
Military service also has an effect upon the age of marriage,
for whenever the time of service has been reduced, the number
of early marriages has increased. As in England,ethe mining
district of the Pas de Calais are among the few without
a declining birth-rate. The high birth-rate here is probably a
consequence of the non-employment of women in mining
families, and the continued multiplication of this class would
only go on, if all their descendants remained miners, which is
economically impossible. The liberal professions have an
average of 3°3 children per family, whereas the total professional
population produces only an average of 31. This should lead
to a preponderancy of the former class, but since the marriagerate in the former is only two-thirds of what it is among all the
professions, the total advantage gained by the larger families is
lost by members of those families failing to contract a sufficient
number of marriages.

The application of steam to manufactures has increased the
power of machinery in France from 67,000 h.p. in 1850 to
1,791,000 h.p. in 1900. Now, if each horse-power corresponds
to the work of ten men, it will be seen that this power represents the work of 18,000,000 hands. This has brought about
considerable changes, both by destroying many old industries
and by creating many new ones. It has led to the formation of
large factories and has favoured industrial concentration, while
on the other hand there has been a continual breaking-up of
agricultural enterprises. This industrial concentration appears,
from what statistics there are, to be to the advantage of the birthrate, but, on the other hand, in the biggest centres, disease is
rampant, and the number of deaths generally exceeds the
number of births.
150 EUGENICS REVIEW.

With regard to unemployment, French statistics are again
conspicuous by their absence, and it is unfortunate that M.
March has had so continually to rely upon those of other countries. In England it seems that in the same year unemployment affects most professions alike; that each period of unemployment is followed by a drop in the marriage-rate; and that
this drop is again followed in two or three years’ time by a
corresponding drop in the birth-rate. These considerations indicate that it would be advisable to persuade women to work at
home, and to discourage their work in factories; to ensure that
all shops and employers should encourage their clerks and
workmen to live with their families ; and to make every endeavour
to avoid long periods of unemployment.

% * * *

Even the many facts that have been mentioned in the reports
in question can hardly be said to exhaust the most important
causes which directly affect the birth-rate and the death-rate.
The question as to the influence of religion is not touched upon,
though the fact that Roman Catholicism forbids the restriction
of families, except by continence, and the decline of religious
sentiment in France, have often been considered determining
factors in the reduction of the birth-rate. In proof of this it
has been urged that the Roman Catholics of Australia show a
higher fertility than persons professing other religions, but this
can be entirely accounted for by the fact that they comprise so
large a proportion of Irish women who are more fecund than
any other nationality in Australia; and it is the opinion of Mr.
Coghlan that, speaking generally, ‘‘ the effect of religion as a
deterrent to the practice of prevention is not particularly
obvious.’’? There are, no doubt, other influences at work than
religion, such as the power of imitation, tradition, and habit, a
knowledge of which can only be procured from an intimate
acquaintance with the psychology of the nation itself.

Such is the estimate of the condition of affairs in the past,
and some suggestions for its amelioration in the future. But
latterly a new spirit has been afoot in France, and so strange

1’ Decline in the Birth-rate of New South Wales; and other Phenomena of
Child-birth ’ (an essay in Statistics), by Coghlan.
THE FRENCH COMMISSION ON DEPOPULATION. ISI

are the phenomena observed, that to M. Bergson they appear ‘‘a
kind of miracle.’? They are so striking that no one is unaware
of them; yet they are not tangible enough to submit themselves either to analysis or even to a very clear definition. Now
it is a new book, a play, or an article in one of the papers.
Young France takes a new joy in sport and games. She has
developed a new type of hero—the airman—and a new field of
endeavour—the sky. This Zeitgeist, as it may be called, is
stalking abroad, invoking, now here, now there, a revulsion
against anti-militarism, which has culminated in France’s
enthusiastic reply to the announcement of the three years’ service
bill. The moral weight of Germany, so oppressive during the
Algeciras Conference, so insupportable when it enforced the
resignation of M. Delcassé, was being thrown off half unconsciously, and after the Agadir affair, the high-spirited people of
France were no longer able to support the humiliations that
their military weakness had brought upon them. The very
enthusiasm and dash of the French troops tells of a self-reliant
military regeneracy, while in civilian circles there is a broadening
of the public mind, a desire for travel, an industrial revival, and
even ‘“‘ a change in the moral climate of Paris,’’ which is heralded
by such movements as the Students’ Medical Law and Life
League, called ‘‘ L’Action Nouvelle,’’ which meets to discuss
the realisation of an ideal morality. And, indeed, it has even
been said that there is a marked tendency towards earlier marriages
and that a generation is growing up that will face life with
*“more courage and a keener sense of responsibility.”’
Whether or not this mood is ephemeral, whether it is the
fleeting expression of a country’s momentary fancy, or on the
other hand the presage of a movement which is destined to influence profoundly the future of France, is a question not only of
the utmost practical but also of the utmost theoretical importance. The degeneracy that has hitherto been observed in
France, and indeed in any other civilised nation, has been successively attributed to a variety of causes such as trade-winds,
zymotic diseases or slavery, but it is more generally supposed
to be caused by a death-rate which is declining, and at the
152 EUGENICS REVIEW.

same time favouring the worst stocks. The truth of this theory
may be to some extent tested during the next few years, for it
will be possible to determine whether a new spirit, such as that
which is now abroad in France, can function as the psychological antecedent to a revival of the birth-rate, to a renascence
of vitality, and to the growth of an aristocracy of ability.

NOTE.—As this is going to press, the French Vital Statistics for 1912 have just
been published (June 17th).
Speaking roughly, the figures are as follows :—

Births 1912. Rate per 1000. Difference from 1911.

France... wae 750,000 19°0 + 0°22
England ... oes 873.000 23°8 — 06
Deaths 1912. Rate per 1000. Difference from 1911.

France... ese 692,000 17°7 — I°9 ‘
England ... Lee 487,000 13°3 — 3

Excess of Births over Deaths 1912. Rate of Natural Increase.
France... sons 58,000 1°5
England ... eee 336,000 10°6

From these figures it can be seen that already, not only has the birth-rate in France
improved slightly, whereas in England it has fallen, but also the death-rate has fallen
slightly more in France than it has in England.
