A. C. STEVENSON
B.Sc., M.D., F.R.C.P. Director, Population Genetics Research Unit, Medical Research

Council,

Oxford

Modern Trends in the Population

Genetics

| HERE HAVE BEEN many factors which

have influenced our thinking on popula
tion genetics over the past ten or fifteen
years. The term “Population Genetics” still
connotes a largely theoretical subject. Chapters
with such a heading in textbooks tend to deal
with the hypothetical distribution of genes and
traits in populations as determined primarily by
Mendelian segregation and modified by factors
such as fresh mutations at varying rates,
selection in various degrees against different
genotypes and different intensities of inbreeding in populations of finite size. The enormous
complexities introduced by even these variables
limit most of the theory developed to situations
at single loci being considered in isolation from
the whole genome.

The brilliant theories developed by Fisher,
Haldane and Hogben in this country and Sewell
Wright in the United States have been of the
greatest value in advancing genetical thought
and in stimulating further work. Over the years
they have been vindicated by work on the
population genetics of blood group gene
systems. Indeed, they continue to mould the
form of all planned observation in human
genetics.

_ However, these theories, although valid when
the strict conditions for their application are
present, have severe limitations and can easily be
misused even when considering what are probably single gene determined harmful traits in
man. When we come to consider traits which,
although not inherited by a simple mechanism,
have some genetical component in aetiology
and which are both more numerous and of
greater social importance in man; then often
only vague, complex and ill-defined hypotheses

* A paper read at a Members’ Meeting of the Eugenics
Society on December 14th, 1960.

of Man’

are available to be put to the test by planned
observation in populations. It has to be remembered that such complexly inherited traits
are more numerous and, on the whole, more
severe in total effects on individuals and populations than those simply inherited. Therefore,
from a medical point of view, it is important that their aetiology should be understood.
The large range of ill-understood developmental
anomalies and of premature degenerative processes with genetical components in aetiology
form an impressive proportion of all wastage of
human life at the present time.

Advantages and Disadvantages of Man as a
Subject for Genetical Study

Before considering current preoccupations in
human population genetics it seems well to
recall some of the advantages and disadvantages
of man as an organism for genetical study, for it
is still sometimes assumed that the limitations of
study of man are such that human genetics is a
kind of poor cousin of experimental genetics,
and perhaps even a rather dilettante occupation.

Some Advantages of Man

It is interesting to remember that following the
pioneer papers of Haldane® and Penrose’ there
was a period of over ten years before a spontaneous mutation rate estimate was available for any
vertebrate except man. At the present time
estimates are available for some twenty autosomal dominant and a number of sex linked
recessive genes in man. Further, these estimates
are based, not only on the findings in free living
populations in a manner quite impossible in
experimental genetics, but the sizes of the populations in whom these mutations have occurred are
very much larger than those available in experimental work, even with fruit flies. Men have

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, April 1961, 53, 1.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

names and other identifiable characteristics
which enable them to be traced. They know their
close relatives—even if it is said to be only the
wise who know their own fathers! Men can
detect subtle differences in each other because
they are studying their own species. Everyone
can recognize hundreds of individuals only seen
once before and subtle changes of expression
such as fatigue are recognized in a way impossible
if another species was being studied. There is
only one species of man and all races can interbreed. Men live in a greater variety of environments than any other creatures. Perhaps as
important, practically and potentially, is the
very high degree of sophistication of techniques
of investigation of disease which have been
developed in modern medicine, permitting a
unique range and precision of variation in man
to be displayed. When new discoveries of medical
importance are made, the intensity and high
standards of work which follows make for
accumulation of knowledge at remarkable speed.

The first concept of specific enzymic products
of genes arose in man some fifty years ago with
Garrod’s concept of inborn errors of metabolism
and it was only after thirty years that work on
neurospora and subsequently in other fungi,
moulds and bacteria gave practical demonstration of the importance of this theory and again
revolutionized genetical thought. The discovery
of blood group incompatibilities in man gave
rise to the sophistications of modern blood
group serology. More recently, haemoglobin
and serum protein differences, and the situations
at loci uncovered by drug sensitivities are not
only opening up new vistas in human genetics
but are stimulating an immense amount of
experimental work. Surgical problems of grafting
uncovered histo-incompatibility problems which
have also stimulated brilliant experimental
research. In turn, these experimental researches
feed back to man and offer further opportunities in medicine and human genetics.

Now that advances in techniques have
enabled us to study mammalian chromosomes,
practical needs, sophistications of clinical diagnosis far higher in man than in any other
organisms and previous knowledge of histopathological changes, have made for very rapid
advances in understanding of chromosomal

190

morphology in man and above all in facility of
relating developmental anomalies to chromosomal aberrations. Far more is already known of
these relationships in man than in any other
mammal.

A criticism of human genetics has been its
apparent preoccupation with the abnormal and
perhaps particularly with the harmful traits
which are, in sum, socially unimportant. This is
a valid criticism but it is important to realize that
the rare is usually simply inherited and available
for study with our blunt tools, and that these are
just the kinds of characters still used by experimental geneticists for most of their work. Most
animals used in experimental genetics are killed
long before they have time to develop the
premature degenerative processes with hereditary
associations which we are urged to study in man.
Few counterparts to these complex processes
have been recognized or adequately studied in
animals. Human medicine enables us to identify
the abnormal with so much greater precision than
in animals. It is not surprising that a large
amount of experimental genetics, now as in the
past, concerns itself with abnormal traits quite

parallel to those studied in man. The great

majority of such clear-cut harmful traits are
extremely rare in free-living populations. Only
their introduction into laboratory and use for
example as markers in experimental work makes
them familiar, but how often do they occur in
free-living populations?

It so happens that two classes of genes useful
in animal studies appear to have few counterparts in man. The first is the relatively mild
effect “recessive gene’. Human single recessive
genes are, with the exception of albinism and a
number of eye traits, nearly lethal. Almost
certainly a majority of what the experimentalists
regard as recessives would be recognized in the
heterozygote in man and so would be classed as
dominants. The second is that we have no
common easily recognized differences in man
determined by single genes such as_ those
determining coat colour in animals.

Some Disadvantages of Man

Enough has been said, I think, to show that
human genetics has for many years repaid with
interest its original debt to experimental genetics
MODERN TRENDS IN THE POPULATION GENETICS

and it is interesting to see, in papers in experimental genetics journals, how much in the way
of inspiration and technique has derived from
modern medicine and human genetics. It is
‘foolish, however, to make such comparisons for
any other purpose than to show that, as in the
wider field, all biology and medicine are complementary to each other and are the strongly
cross-fertilizing component parts of a larger
discipline.

It is proper, therefore, to point, in turn, to the
limitations of human genetics. The greatest of
all is obviously the impossibility of planned
breeding experiments affording the classical and
basic tool of genetical analysis. This is not so
serious in respect of balanced polymorphic loci
where by definition the least common allele is
not likely to be maintained at its observed or
calculated frequency by any substantial contribution from mutation. In those balanced
systems the least frequently occurring allele
would perhaps occur in about 1 per cent of
individuals in a given population. At this frequency, however, with patience, sufficient
matings of appropriate kinds turn up in time to
produce most, if not quite all, of the information
needed for adequate formal analysis.

The impossibility of test matings is serious,
however, in respect of the harmful effect mutant
gene traits where fresh mutation frequency,
although very low, has theoretically a simple
relationship to the gene and trait frequencies
in populations. Matings between persons
both affected by the same trait are uncommon
events but where they occur rarely, by chance
or by social selection as in the case of deaf
mutism, they tend to reveal what we know
from experimental animals and suspect to be
very Common in man on other grounds, namely,
that mutations at different gene loci or of different alleles can determine indistinguishable traits.
Further we cannot adequately separate the two
mechanisms as would be possible by genetical
analysis in well studied experimental animals.

So we must qualify our optimism about the
validity of mutation rates as estimated for man
and realize that some—I am tempted to think
practically all—are the expressions of fresh
mutations occurring at different loci or to
different alleles at one locus. The former is more

OF MAN

devastating than the latter, particularly in the
context of quantitative radiation estimates.

It is extremely important in view of these
difficulties that, unless the human geneticist is
dealing with characteristics assessed in the
laboratory (and often even then), every possible
effort be made to keep to the highest clinical
standards. This does not involve relying entirely
on the diagnosis of a clinician—for he will tend
to equate heterogeneous traits for other reasons,
€.g. response to treatment. Rather, it implies the
need for the closest co-operation with clinicians
and for them to be so genetically orientated as
to be on the look-out for both clinical and
genetical heterogeneity.

Single Gene Trait Studies in Man

Perhaps the simplest and most obvious opportunity in human population genetics is to study
the pattern of distribution of traits which are the
expression of single autosomal dominant or
sex-linked genes in a defined population. This at
its best involves ‘‘complete ascertainment” of all
cases in a defined population, the word of
necessity being used in the rather specific sense
as identification of all characterized individuals,
either in a series of births in a geographical area
or in a population living in a defined area. The
sophistications of “ascertainment” and their
bearing on interpretation of findings are too
complex to be dealt with here and it must suffice
to say that we can never be sure that an ascertainment is complete, and that nearness to
complete ascertainment and the methods to be
employed will be different for every trait. Anything short of complete ascertainment introduces
serious sampling doubts. Further, the work
involved takes time and persistance; it is expensive, and it is dependent on achieving a high
degree of co-operation with many people. Much
work of this kind has been done, particularly in
Sweden, Denmark, the United States and the
United Kingdom, and as a result we have a
series of estimates of different trait frequencies
and mutation rates. It is at least reassuring to
find that the order of magnitude of mutation
rates for this class of gene estimated per gamete
per generation in man is similar to that in other
species and that for the same genes of this class
estimates made by different observers in all the

IE

ER—C
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

countries mentioned are in substantial agreement.

There remains doubt, however, as to whether
they really represent absolute rates for specific
gene mutations, the sum of similar mutations at
one locus or the sum of like-expression mutations at different loci. It must also be a matter of
surmise whether mutation rates for this narrow
class of genes, namely well known grossly harmful autosomal dominant and sex-linked genes, are
representative of rates of mutation at other loci.

Nevertheless, estimates of spontaneous mutations so made are an essential part of the logic
of the rather hazardous estimates which have
been made of the effects of radiation on human
heredity. Work of this kind must continue and
much of the methodology evolved in these
studies has other applications. In any event, so
far as total detriment to a population is concerned from dominant or sex linked genes whose
expression is marked enough and specific enough
to detect, we can make reasonable estimates of
the total harmful effects in terms of premature
death and of disability.

When we come to consider autosomal recessive
genes the position is very different. As I have
already mentioned those recognized in man are
all grossly harmful in their effects and most are,
in the genetic sense, lethal. The summated frequencies of the recessive genes are far greater
than the sum of the previous classes considered.
Individuals homozygous for such genes and
therefore showing the trait are fortunately very
uncommon. Further, it is likely that there are
many hundreds of such genes which are not
recognized at all but which are grossly deleterious and lethal, or near lethal, to homozygotes.
This is simply because the homozygotes arise so
infrequently and most commonly only in one
member of a sibship, that the aetiology is not
suspected. Even if two sibs are affected with a
new and strange syndrome it is impossible to be
more than suspicious, as common environmental factors or multifactorial genetical causes
can just as readily determine such a situation. It
is highly probable if two sibs are affected and the
parents are related, that a recessive gene is
involved but what proportion of such cases are
reported in the literature? Further, of those
reported how many are so fully described that

12

any subsequent examples of the condition arising
can be identified with reasonable confidence?

The Importance of Harmful Recessive Genes

Ascertainment of recessive traits is on the whole
even more difficult than for dominant autosomal
and sex linked recessive traits. This is mainly
because they are usually so lethal that few subjects are living at any one time. Even with complete ascertainment, and all evidence pointing to
a one-gene-one-trait relationship, mutation rate
estimates are at best hazardous. Any calculations
have to make so many assumptions not susceptible to check, and other known variables
such as the effects of relaxation of inbreeding
cannot be expressed in quantitative terms
because the relevant information just does not
exist.

Always there has to be assumed that the
heterozygote carrier is neither at an advantage
nor a disadvantage in selection, that there is no
gametal selection and that the gene is uniformly
distributed in the population studied. Such
assumptions can seldom be tested.

There is a large group of lethal recessive genes
in man which determine traits having a frequency of between 1/100,000 and 1/20,000 births.
As in the whole of these islands there are only
just over a million births a year, it is clear that a
high gene frequency in a geographical isolate, or
in a group such as Irish emigrants to England
who tend to intermarry, could account for many
cases. Unthinking estimates of gene frequency in
the whole population from the total trait frequency could be very misleading. Suppose in a
population of 50 million people there were ten
cases, then, if we assume that the trait frequency
represents the chance coming together of two
genes in the offspring of carrier parents in a
population where the gene is uniformly distributed, then we have to assume that the carrier
frequency in the population is just under
1/1,000, i.e. there were 50,000 carriers. However,
all these cases could have occurred in a subpopulation of about 100,000 in whom the great
majority of the genes in the population were
concentrated. In that case the carrier frequency
in the isolate would be about 1 in 50 and the
total carriers about 2,000 representing in the
whole population a frequency not of 1/1,000 but
MODERN TRENDS IN THE POPULATION GENETICS OF MAN

of about 1/25,000. Recent work by our Chairman
this evening, Dr. Cedric Carter, and Dr. Louis
Woolf on the preponderance of phenylketonuric
children attending Great Ormond Street Hospital
who have Irish origins provide an excellent
example of this type of phenomenon.

However, there can be little question that in
total harmful effects of single gene expressions,
recessive genes are of much greater importance
than dominant or sex-linked genes and may
approach those of more complex constellations
of genes determining developmental and degenerative conditions. Further, any increase of
mutation rates from radiation or otherwise
would in time raise the frequency of these
traits, in the same proportion as dominant or
sex linked.

Consanguinity Studies

As sO many individual recessive gene effects
cannot be recognized, extensive use has been
made in recent years of another approach,
namely, the ascertainment of cousin marriages
and the comparison with those of non-consanguineous marriages in respect of the number
of pregnancies, the occurrence of single recessive
gene traits, the losses in utero, the malformations
in foetuses and those born alive and the subsequent mortality experience in the offspring.

It is not, I feel, being merely a carping critic
to say that no investigation has been conducted
in such a way as to give data worth serious
quantitative consideration except that conducted
by Schull and Neel® in Japan and even this
inquiry could only consider such marriages
when at least one pregnancy ensued and one
mature child was born.

From all these inquiries there is no convincing evidence of a role of recessive genes in
abortions or non-specific cause still births. Of
course, there may be recessive gene determined
very early embryonic deaths but there is no
evidence on this point in man and a proportion
of recessive gene determined abortions and still
births could be present but not in numbers
statistically significant.

Experimental geneticists always assume that
some abortions, still births and some complete
infertility are determined by single lethal mutant
genes in man. Further, they tend to assume that

they must contribute appreciably to these intrauterine losses and to complete infertility. It is,
however, probably fair to say that at very most
a few per cent of such losses are so caused,
because not only studies of the offspring of
related parents but of consanguinity in the
parents of abortions and stillbirths fail to supply
any supporting evidence for such a contention.’
Indeed, in much animal work death in utero
seems to be equated to “‘lethals” whether
*“‘point” or gene mutations or gross chromosomal
aberrations. No doubt both mechanisms occur in
man but they cannot account for more than a
small fraction of losses. In regard to harmful
visible effect genes there is sufficient evidence,
however, to show that on average in some
Swedish, American, British and Japanese populations every individual is the heterozygous carrier
of, on average, between two and four genes,
each individually of low frequency in the
population, which would be grossly harmful in
the homozygous genotype. There is also evidence
for an excess of early mortality from all causes in
the offspring. The Japanese data has also raised
other extremely interesting questions about
recessive genes or at least about the effects of
inbreeding not related so specifically to genotype
at a single locus.

Some recent data which we have collected in
Oxford suggest rather strongly that recessive
genes play no part, or at least no important
role, in determining complete infertility in
otherwise normal persons: of some 700 spouses
to infertile marriages only five are the offspring
of related parents.

A whole theory has evolved using terms such
as a “load: of mutations”, and “lethal equivalents” meaning an effect determining in total the
same number of deaths as a specified number of
completely lethal recessive genes. The derivation
of such hypotheses is, however, rather tenuous
and may be regarded as part of the result of
trying to find ways of expressing genetical situations in numerical terms for the purpose of
trying, in turn, to get quantitative estimates of
radiation damage in man. Such conceptions are
immensely stimulating but there is some danger,
as always when numerical estimates are made,
that the very hazardous derivation may be lost
sight of in the subsequent mathematics.

13
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

The Basic Conception of Population Structure
Regarding Single Harmful Recessive Genes

The real crux of the matter revolves round
whether in most recessive genes the heterozygote
carrier is just a normal individual whose
viability and fertility are in no way affected by
reason of his carrying a harmful gene at one of a
pair of specified gene loci. If this is the situation,
then, providing we are reasonably sure that
the gene is more or less uniformly dispersed in a
population, we can estimate a gene frequency
and a mutation rate. If, however, the heterozygote
either has a greater or less total effective fertility
than that prevailing in the population, matters
are different. A very small variation—much too
small to be detectable—could have an immense
effect on gene frequency. We may say that
providing a gene lethal in the homozygote has
once become established in a population it can
be maintained at a constant level by rather less
than 2 per cent heterozygote advantage without
any further mutations ever occurring. Conversely any heterozygote disadvantage of that
order of size would determine very high mutation rates indeed for any of the well known lethal
recessive genes in man. It is virtually impossible,
in practice, to detect any increase or decrease of
fertility of heterozygotes greater than, perhaps,
10 per cent, so that we are very much in the dark
concerning the mechanisms which determine
recessive gene frequencies in man. Further
heterozygote advantage may operate in utero.

It must be remembered also that any preferential entry into zygotes of germ cells, with or
without a particular gene-gametal selection, is
known to occur in experimental animals and a
possible example has been advanced in man.
Such mechanisms would have an effect as large
as heterozygote selection value variation with
1 or 2 per cent departure from random, and
therefore equal contribution to zygotes of alternative alleles segregating from a heterozygote
parent.

Balanced Polymorphic Traits

Although considerable advances have been made
towards recognition of heterozygote carriers of
grossly harmful recessive genes none of these,
except in sickle cell disease and thalassaemia, can
be recognized with sufficient accuracy or facility

14

to make them practical propositions for population studies.

There is, therefore, increasing interest in the
mechanisms which determine balanced polymorphisms of traits such as the blood groups,
haemoglobins and haptoglobins and the increasing number of single loci variations increased by study of drug sensitivities. An understanding of some of these mechanisms would be
of the greatest value; the stimulation afforded
to population genetics by the sickle cell malaria
story has been very great indeed.

In others, a remarkable complexity of related
factors have been uncovered. The proven
associations of the ABO blood groups with
disease, and others which may well be shown to
be associated, are almost embarrassingly large,
sufficient in too facile a fashion to explain the
polymorphism.* When to these is added the
rather suggestive undue proportion of ABO
heterozygotes born which may be accounted for
by preferential survival in utero, or may be
explained by gametal selection, then the position regarding the ABO blood groups is indeed
complex. The undue proportion of MN individuals could similarly be explained by one of
these mechanisms.

We must therefore expect to see a great increase
in family studies of such polymorphic traits—
an even more laborious practical proposition
than mere population distribution of genotype
studies.

Study of Disorders with Ill-understood Hereditary
Associations

Finally, bearing in mind the unique opportunities for certain aspects of population genetic
research in man, particularly high diagnostic
standards of complex clinical syndromes and the
large populations which can be studied, there is
plenty of scope for rather empirical collection of
good data. Even if, in our present state of
ignorance, we can hardly see what information
we should collect because we have no adequate
hypothesis to test, we can note variables of
known biological significance such as parental
ages, consanguinity, pregnancy order, age of
onset, cause of disorder, patterns of familial
incidence and so on and make full ascertainments
in communities making proper family studies as
MODERN TRENDS IN THE POPULATION GENETICS OF MAN

we progress. In this way data becomes available
on which some kind of an hypothesis can be
advanced and then in turn a more narrowly
orientated investigation started.

There is such an immense amount of work to
be done by people with special skills at all levels
of genetical knowledge. For the practising
clinician perhaps the most important dictum is
Bateman’s “treasure your exceptions’. To
recognize an exception or a curiosity, however,
there must be some genetical knowledge and it
should be remembered that clinicians are the
first to see sick people. For the statistically
minded there is so much we would like to know
about the causes of death of people characterized
in various ways, about the total reproductive
performances of members of cohorts of both
sexes and so on. Knowledge of medical genetics
and techniques developed in epidemiology open
plenty of avenues for interesting work. Some of
the studies are entirely orientated by hypotheses

whose theory is far from the original observations on which they were based. Others are
orientated by hypotheses evolved from recent
work and finally, as I have mentioned, there are
areas in human genetics where neither experimental or theoretical genetics point very clearly
a way to investigate. However, the steady
accumulation of information proceeds apace.
Already population genetics theory has been
enormously influenced by phenomena defined in
human genetics and this is only the beginning.

REFERENCES

. Gunther, M. and Penrose, L. S. 1935. J. Genet. 31, 413.

. Haldane, J. B. S. 1935. J. Genet. 31, 317.

Klinger, H. P., Ludwig, K. S., Schwarzacher, H. G.
and Hauser, ’G. A. 1958. Gynaecologica 146, 1.

Re J. A. Fraser. 1957. Brit. J. Prev. Soc. Med.
1

‘ Schull, W. J. 1959. Pediatrics 23, 195.

‘ Stevenson, A. - 1960. Ann, hum. ne 24, 89.

x Stevenson, A. C. and Warnock, H. A. 1959. Ann.

hum. Genet. 23, 382.

 

 

15
