THE INFLUENCE OF A TROPICAL CLIMATE
ON EUROPEANS

By J. H. F. Konispruecece (Utrecht)

Translated by J. H. KOEPPERN from the *‘ Archiv fir Rassen-und
Gesellschafts-Biologie’”’, Vol. VII., No. 5, 1910.

PREOCCUPATION with the problems of one particular tropical
colony may engender the idea that, save for a few differences,
tropical colonies generally have the same features. This is by
no means the case. In point of fact the tropical colonies are
as dissimilar from one another as the different countries in
Europe.

It is a matter of course that countries which, like the Dutch
dependencies, have been under European influence for three
centuries are different from those colonised more recently. It
also makes a difference whether the colonisers come from a
bureaucratic state, such as France and Germany, or from ‘‘a
nation of shopkeepers,” such as England and Holland. Other
dissimilarities must arise between colonies that preserve their
home customs, like the British, and those that adapt themselves
to native customs, like the Dutch. The Dutch have this
advantage over the Germans, that they are not only able to turn
to account the results of scientific research, but also the practical
experience gained during three hundred years. In Germany
the results of brief explorations and the opinions of scientists
who have undertaken them and the official reports published are
apt to be overrated, no sufficient attention being paid to the
practical experience of other nations.

The present paper will take into account both practical
experience and the results of scientific work, especially the
research carried eut in the laboratory at Batavia.

All investigations regarding the influence of a tropical
climate on Europeans were formerly based on the supposition
26 J. H. F. Kohlbrugge :

that the metabolism of the body would adapt itself to tropical
conditions. Eijkman examined the pulse, the rate of breathing,
the temperature of the body, and found no deviations ; a negative
result was likewise obtained regarding the specific weight of, and
the percentage of water in, the blood. Others determined the
number of red blood corpuscles and the percentage of hemoglobin.
It is well known that Europeans are pale in the tropics, and
they were, in consequence, considered to be anemic. It was,
therefore, a surprise when it was shown that the number of red
blood corpuscles in the tropics as well as the percentage of
hemoglobin are the same as in Europe. It had also been
assumed that in consequence of the high temperature of the
environment the temperature of the body would be lessened, and
a “‘ chemical regulation of temperature”’ was supposed to exist.
Accurate experiments were carried out by Ejijkman, who
examined the relative quantities of nourishment ingested and
egested. Again, contrary to expectation, no appreciable differences could be discovered, the production of heat (oxidation)
being mostly greater in natives than in Europeans of equal
weight. Metabolism, therefore, is not less intense in the tropics,
and the existence of a chemical regulation of temperature has
not been proved. The increase in the amount of perspiration
and of water secretion is easily explained by the greater amount
of liquids consumed, and is observable at home in summer.
Although the inhabitants of the tropical zone perspire less
than Europeans, the number of sudorific glands on equal areas is
identical. Few investigators have been of opinion that physiological differences are correlated to differences in structure. For
the benefit of those who may still believe in a “ racial’ anatomy,
it may be mentioned in passing that after prolonged and highly
specialised research it has not been possible to demonstrate any
difference between the native and the European brain. Judging
from observations in the dissecting room and hospital wards
there are no maladies which are confined to one race only.
Natives and Europeans show the same symptoms in disease, and
react to drugs in the same manner. But the former are not
tolerant of larger doses to the same degree as the latter, probably
owing to their much simpler food and to their not being accusINFLUENCE OF A TROPICAL CLIMATE ON EUROPEANS 27

tomed to irritant chemicals in childhood. The different degree
of immunity from disease may perhaps be explained in the same
way. Inshort, the question whether the body undergoes essential
ehanges in a tropical environment must be answered in the
negative.

The apparent differences in colouring and “ elasticity ” have
mot as yet been examined in the laboratory. It is universally
known that the indigenous population of the tropics have a
darker skin than the population of the North, and that this
darker skin reacts photo-chemically in a different way. Although
the contrary has been frequently asserted, there is no reason for
assuming that a dark complexion is due to climate. At any
rate, it is certain that Europeans, even those who have lived in
a tropical country all their lives, as well as their children and
grandchildren, do not (provided there has been no race-blending)
acquire a dark skin.

The question why Europeans lose their healthy complexion
in the tropics may conveniently be dealt with at this point. It
may be mentioned at the outset that natives of the plains often
show a marked paleness which they lose on the mountains.
It would be absurd to attribute this paleness to ill-health, and,
as has been shown, it is not due to anemia. Ina hot climate
constant perspiration is accompanied by an increase of the bloodsupply to the skin, and yet the complexion remains pale. On
the other hand, red cheeks are due to the greater translucency of
the skin. |

The main reasons for paleness in hot climates are the
following :

The skin becomes saturated with perspiration and the
corneous layer of the epidermis softens and thickens. The same
phenomenon can be observed at home in summer, when owing
to swollen fingers rings often cause discomfort. The second
reason is that in the tropics the atmosphere is charged with
moisture, which prevents perspiration from evaporating, and so
the epidermis grows opaque. The fact that moisture encourages
the formation of adipose tissue may be another reason. People
living in a dry climate are generally lean and gaunt; the inhabitants of the desert and North Americans are an example.
28 J. H. F. Kohlbrugge:

The Javanese, on the other hand, owing to their very moist climate,
are not stout, but the beautifully rounded contours of their body
prove the presence of a well-developed, fatty layer under their
skin. Most Dutchmen become plump in their colonies. In the
dry air of the hills Europeans regain their healthy rosy appearance, the old corneous layer sloughing off. This holds good for
natives also, although the natural darkness of the skin hides the
pallor which originates in any climate which resembles a hothouse.

A hot climate causes another well-known phenomenon, an
increase in “‘elasticity.”” Muscles and connective tissues which
are hard and comparatively unelastic in cold climates grow soft
and elastic under the influence of moist heat. We cannot squat
like natives or cross. our legs like the statues of Buddha, and the
joints of our fingers and toes are less movable. Japanese can
write with their toes; every Javanese seamstress holds her cloth
with them when sewing, and all Javanese prefer to pick up with
their toes small objects that have fallen to the ground rather than
to stoop further. This is certainly not a sign of a primitive apelike state, for white children born and reared in the tropics
imitate the natives without any difficulty. If one gives a child
or a native a hearty handshake one has the feeling of superposing
the carpals and meta-carpals, so slack are the tendons.

This greater elasticity is of great advantage in child-birth,
women being mostly able to walk about again two hours after
delivery. Blood-vessels have greater power of contraction, which
stops any bleeding sooner than with us. In our climate a life of
bodily toil causes the body to become stiff and bent in old age.
This is not the case in the tropics, and is, perhaps, owing to a
less frequent abuse of alcohol. The part played by heat and
moisture also becomes apparent when one considers that
European children living in the hill-districts do not possess this
greater elasticity.

To what degree a tropical country can become a white man’s
land is a vexed question. Young colonies that have not been
sanitated, where the European has not yet learnt to clothe himself, eat, and live according to the climate, show a terrible deathrate. Ifthe mortality is compared with the present death-rate at
home, the colony is at once condemned bysome. This is wrong,
INFLUENCE OF A TROPICAL CLIMATE ON EUROPEANS 29

because the comparison ought to be made with the Europe, not
of to-day, but with the Europe of, say, the seventeenth century.
As regards an old-established colony like Java, the life assurance
companies have discovered that the expectation of life of the adult
European male is not much less favourable, and that of the adult
European female is even more favourable, than it is in Europe.
It may be added that the death-rate of European children in
Java is considerably less than at home, and that, besides, they
grow more rapidly and are stronger. The higher insurance
premium is due to the greater cost of administration overseas
and to the fact that the companies have agreed not to cut the rates.
A higher premium for insurance is, however, justified for
individuals living in districts that have not been sanitated.

Very favourable results have been obtained with the
thousands of Chinese labourers working on the tobacco plantations. With careful supervision it has been possible to reduce
the mortality toa European level, not by means of hyper-modern
serum injections, or quinine or any other artificial methods, but
simply by the ordinary sanitary precautions and the inspection of
food. A country must be sanitated for natives as well as for
Europeans. The results of this policy are that the population of
Java has increased in a hundred years from eight millions to
twenty-eight millions. The therapeutic value of even a short
sojourn in equatorial mountain districts has been recognised by
the English and Dutch for many years, though eminent German
scientists like Koch and Plehn have dissented. The white
emigrant who has heard much of unhealthy conditions in the
tropics may be reassured by the fact that though cholera,
malarial fever and dysentery occur more frequently, diphtheria,
scarlet fever and pneumonia are rare. In a well-administered
colony infectious disease may be avoided as easily as at home.

All these considerations seem to confirm the view of Stokvis,
who said that “if a white man be a wise man” he could
acclimatise himself to tropical conditions perfectly well. But
we have been taught another lesson by practical experience.
Until now no white race has been able to survive in the tropics
unless vace-mixture takes place. It is true that blond individuals
have persisted in Pitcairn for about a hundred years, but their
30 J. H. F. Kohlbrugge :

ancestresses were natives of Tahiti; a fair people have lived on
Kisser, one of the Molucca Islands, owing to their Javanese
ancestresses.

Other whites have been living on Saba Island (Dutch West
Indies) and have not mixed with the natives, but are degenerating in a remarkable manner. During the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries many French aristocratic families resided in
Guadeloupe and Martinique, but as soon as immigration stopped
they died out or degenerated. A number of Dutch farmers
settled in Surinam with their families about the middle of the
last century; of these, only a few have survived and are fertile
without race mixture. The same can be said of the German
families settled on the coast of Queensland. But the period has
been too short to form a definite opinion. Dark-haired Europeans have fared better. For the last two hundred years several
Portuguese Jewish families have been living in Surinam, and
Spaniards have successfully persisted in high-lying plains, not,
however, without race-mixture.

Wherever the experiment has been carried out over a
sufficient period of time, it is apparent that favourable results
are met with only where race-blending has taken place. Fair
Europeans have not been able to hold their own, although
fertility does not decrease, at least not in the first generation,
and their first children show good promise. Degeneration only
sets in later. In a similar way the fair Goths and Vandals
disappeared from Spain and North Africa. The Americans discovered in the Philippines that their fair soldiers showed the
highest death-rate, and in Queensland it seems that the Italians are
more successful racially than other immigrants. Queensland
seems, by the way, to be a most interesting field for experiment
because no race-mixture is to be feared, and also because the
colonists are obliged to do their own work. The results will
only be conclusive after another hundred years or so.

It is an obvious fallacy to believe that a dark complexion is
caused by the climate, else the darkest races would be found in
equatorial regions, the fair races near the poles and the brown
ones between the former. That this is not the case is a matter
of everyday knowledge. Research is necessary, especially by
INFLUENCE OF A TROPICAL CLIMATE ON EUROPEANS 31

physiologists, to elucidate the problem of the influence of light
and heat on skin-colour. Perhaps the remarkable correlation
between the skin and the nervous system, both being derived
from the ectoderm, may furnish a clue to explain why one race
can live in the tropics whilst another disappears, why, in short, the
white man cannot become acclimatised. Inthe meantime it may
perhaps be assumed that the dark or fair complexion (whichever
is considered to have been the primary state) originated asa
mutation and survived where the climate was favourable. However, the whole problem is so complex, and so much further
research is necessary, that it is desirable to avoid theorising about
it at present.

The influence of the tropics on the nervous system is of the
utmost importance. Gryns determined that the rate at which a
nervous impulse travels along a nerve decreases in Europeans
the longer they live in the tropics, and that the Javanese
have a higher rate of transmission. The experience that
the nervous system of Europeans suffers in the tropics has
thus been corroborated by science. The first symptoms are
chiefly insomnia and an increased irritability. It has been said
that this is due to overwork and restlessness observable in all
new colonies where individual effort is so much more essential
than at home, but this opinion is contradicted by the fact that
the nervous system of individuals who do not participate in the
accumulation of wealth and influence also suffers. Again,
‘‘nerves’’ are not manifested, as in America, by rapid movements, hasty meals, and a general “ hustle,’”’ but, on the contrary,
rather by extreme lassitude and an avoidance of anything
calculated to increase the heat. Letters, reports, etc., show the
highly strung state of the nerves; and the tears ready to appear
at any sad opportunity are but a symptom of the protean malady
of neurasthenia.

The nativein his natural state does not show this irritability,
but if he is “‘ educated’’ to the same degree as ourselves, and if
his intellectual life is as intense as our own, he suffers as much,
if not considerably more. The inference is that a tropical climate
induces a certain intellectual indolence, and that any work
carried out with European energy very soon causes neurasthenia.
32 J. H. F. Kohlbrugge :

This is why the best and most highly gifted intellectually are
the first to succumb. Scientists and officials are mostly worn
out at the age of 50. The colonies suffer, because the higher
posts are naturally held by the older individuals who already
require rest and are, therefore, opposed to innovations. Medical
men, in observing children, are struck by their inability to suffer
pain, and by their lack of control when subject to disagreeable
sensations. The natives who have not been under the influence
of our civilisation can suffer the greatest physical pain without a
murmur, but as soon as they are educated they dread trivial
surgical operations even more than white children. Half-castes
show the same nervousness.

It has been frequently held that mountain districts in the
tropics would be suitable for European settlements. If the
European only stays for a short time, say, for a change of
air, the results are beneficial. But if he remains permanently
and works energetically he succumbs to neurasthenia as surely as
if he were living in a low-lying district. At any rate, this holds
good for altitudes between 4,500 and 6,000 feet, at an average
temperature of 15-17° centigrade. When one considers the
exertion in mental work during a hot summer at home one can
see the extreme difficulty of completing an educational curriculum in the tropics without damage to the nervous system.
Not long ago Steinmetz published a paper on the family histories
of gifted individuals which showed that those who had a great
capacity for work descended from large families but had few offspring. A similar experience is the lot of the European who
works in the tropics with the same energy as at home. His
nervous system is ruined, and his offspring are adversely affected.
The sensitive, neurasthenic man, as a rule, marries a similarly
constituted woman, with disastrous results in the offspring.

Unfortunately, no statistics are available as to the occurrence
of lunacy in Indo-European children and a comparison with
European figures. Neither is it possible as yet to state for how
many generations a white family may persist in the tropics
before becoming extinct. The author only knows of one family
in the Dutch East Indies who had remained racially pure to the
fourth generation. The present generation of this family conINFLUENCE OF A TROPICAL CLIMATE ON EUROPEANS 33

sists of four brothers who are married, but childless. This may
be “‘ chance,” and racially pure families are so rare in tropical
countries, and race mixture is so universal that the data for
observation are very scanty indeed. Hybridisation occurs
chiefly in young colonies where white women are absent; the
half-castes are frequently beautiful, attractive to a European,
and many of these women are far more suitable as house-keepers
than white women who have just come out, and are, generally,
healthier. Our education, our methods of working are suitable
for our climate. Transferred to the tropics this education, these
methods, do not injure the individual, whether black, brown or
white (for the European mostly returns home), but they certainly
injure his descendants.

The author does not consider it to be an impossibility for a
European to settle permanently in a tropical country, but then
he must discard “ civilisation ’’ and live according to the local
customs. The fair inhabitants of Pitcairn, Kisser and Saba are,
in consequence, on a low intellectual level, almost on a same
level with the coloured population. It is certain that Dutch,
English and French politicians strive in vain toimpose European
civilisation on natives, who can only be disadvantageouly affected
thereby. Of course, that does not mean that it is not possible
to give the natives in the tropics a higher degree of culture than
they at present possess, but only by letting them receive it in
instalments which they adapt to local conditions. In order to
achieve this it is desirable not to give a few individuals a
European education, but to slowly imbue the entire people
with the elements of our civilisation. As we cannot become
acclimatised, we can netther take the place of the native, nor do
without him. Whether we can achieve satisfactory results by
race blending is doubtful; only in cases of extreme isolation has
hybridisation led to a constant, European type. On large islands
or on continents the freedom to move about from place to place
has always had the effect of merging the mixed race in the
coloured population as soon as intermarriage with the whites had
stopped. The Boer-Bushmen in German South West Africa
form an ostensible exception, but they do not live in a tropical

climate. In order to improve an inferior tropical people they
3
34 J. H. F. Kohlbrugge :

should be crossed with Chinese, Hindoos or Malays, especially
with the Chinese, whose racial character is strong enough to
dominate when crossed, and they also seem to have a greater
adaptability than the white races.

So far our examination has been confined to physical
characters; the remarks about tropical neurasthenia, however,
lead us to aconsideration of the influence on psychical characters.
Numerous circumstances co-operate to prevent a European child
reared in the tropics from remaining European, and thwart the
permanent establishment of our culture in tropical countries.
The whole problem is so complex that only one aspect will be
discussed here, namely, education.

The individual who has “ educated ’’ knows that the education of others means self-education and ceaseless observation of
the most trivial details in the children to be educated. Education
thus means constant attention, and nothing is more difficult
than this in the tropics. If fresh from home, one can with great
energy create something new, and train others to execute one’s
ideas; but then it becomes a matter of routine, and routine in
the tropics means comfort. This is the reason why progress 1s
so slow in the colonies, and only possible with continual relays
from Europe.

In education routine is never permissible, and that is why
it is so difficult, one might say impossible, for the European to
attend to children so assiduously as at home. It is the reason
why children do not learn self-control and are left far too much
to the influence of native servants. The latter only have the
idea of letting the children do as they please, so long as they do
not suffer bodily harm. Obedience is quite out of the question,
and if parents punish their children the natives call it lack of
parental love. As a European household in the tropics ts
unthinkable without native servants, a proper education of
children is practically impossible, except in districts where the
native has gained so much self-respect under the influence of
Christianity that he considers himself equal to a European, and
does not permit children to treat him with indignity.

If the children are sent to Europe, as is done in most cases,
it is either too late, or other dangers beset their path. They are
INFLUENCE OF A TROPICAL CLIMATE ON EUROPEANS 35

often taken care of by individuals who only accept them for the
sake of money, and they receive a loveless ‘‘education.”? The
children reared in the East Indies are rarely as capable as those
born and educated in Europe. The latter are preferred to fill
appointments, having a greater stability of the nervous system.
The former, especially when they are half-caste, imagine that they
are rejected because of their status of birth. This is by no means
the case, they are rejected because of their lesser capabilities.

It is only human to deny that one is less capable than others,
and an excuse has to be found. They are less capable as
regards character, love of work, power to work, and adaptability.
They avoid difficulties that beset their path, rather than face
them. So they become timid, and fear begets falsehood; this
may be observed in well-educated Malays who are appointed as
officials or medical officers. If we cannot educate a white child
in the East Indies to be a European, we can as little succeed in
training a Malay to be a champion of European culture. It is
true that Malays are able to learn everything, they show great
promise at school and at the universities, they become excellent
officials, doctors, etc., but they lack one thing, namely,
‘‘character.”” The same complaint is being made in British
colonies. The British founded universities for Egyptians and
Hindoos, and permitted them to study at the universities of the
mother country; the examination results were excellent, but
these students lack ‘‘ character.”

We must remember, however, that the parental education
of the young Malays and Egyptians has been even more deficient
than that of the white child in thecolonies. They especially lack
the care of a white mother, who cannot be replaced, so long as
the woman in the tropics maintains her low position, so
long, especially, as woman is suppressed under the Islam.
Only when the future mothers are educated towards individualism, perhaps after supplanting Mohammedanism, can more
favourable results be expected. Even then the question would
remain unanswered whether the relaxing climate would not prevent further progress, whether the European, Japanese and
Chinese races will have to be the providers of energy for the real
inhabitants of the tropics.
36 J. H. F. Kohlbrugge:

We must wait. Centuries will have to pass before we can
reply to these questions, and in the meantime we cannot do
better than study our own history, in order to learn how slow
our own progress has been, and how often our progress has been
suppressed.

We shall then learn not to under-estimate the value of the
native. The first maxim for any colonial policy ought to be:
We cannot do without the native, because we must acknowledge
that we cannot take his place.

This is a sound policy, sound in our own interest. We also
pay due regard to the future, if we always remember that
colonies are only then worth while having if we cultivate them in
order to educate the natives for independence in the course of
centuries. It is therefore the duty of the state on the one hand
to prevent any selfish exploitation of the natives, and, on the
other hand, to see that only the best types of humanity the
motherland can produce are sent out, to act as educators. It
is true, this élite of the nation will perish if their offspring seek
their field of work, as they often do, in the colonies. In that
case the possession of colonies acts like bleeding, and the
lack of energy which the Netherlands have shown during the
last few centuries must be attributed to such bleeding, the
mother-land being too small for colonies of such large dimensions.
