THE EUGENICS REVIEW
THE HEALTH OF IMMIGRANTS

To the Editor, The Eugenics Review

Sir,—Semen exports at 11,530 ampoules reached a record level last year, nearly double the
amount in 1965. And Mr. Eric Boston, chairman of British Semen Exports, told the
company’s annual meeting yesterday that a review of the present policy restricting
semen exports could result in Britain’s trade leaping to over 100,000 ampoules a year.

Some, reading the above extract from the Financial Times of Sth January 1967, might
jump to the conclusion that the British stock is not as decadent as hostile propagandists
make out. England’s footballers recently winning the World Cup might even suggest to
some that here indeed the finest genetic stock can be obtained to revitalize and uplift
their eugenically less well endowed peoples.

The record semen export has nothing to do with the World Cup, for this company
report refers to the semen of certain breeds of bulls—not of men.

Far from the people of Britain being recognized as of superior stock, they are subjugated to a most rigorous examination before they are accepted as immigrants by various
countries. Particular regard is paid to the risk of importing people who may pass on
undesirable hereditary traits to their offspring.

Britain, however, is extremely strict about importing any animals (e.g. Charolais bulls
from France rejected after several months’ quarantine for brucellosis) yet permits immigrants
into the UK without any adequate medical control. Even exotic infections freely enter the
United Kingdom along with other diseases. A minimum requirement appears to be
compulsory medical examination of immigrants in their country of origin and also at point
of entry into these islands in order to raise the standard of public health in Britain.

In time it might, perhaps, be that the export of human semen from the UK would be
as highly valued as that of the British bulls. JAMES CAMPBELL
17 Meadway,

London, N.W.11

HAVELOCK ELLIS SOCIETY

To The Editor, The Eugenics Review

Sir,—We, the undersigned, propose the formation of a Havelock Ellis Society, because we
feel that this great man, who did more than any other Englishman to clarify and rationalize
sexual behaviour, is becoming increasingly neglected. It would be a pity if this and future
generations fail to realize, and take advantage of, the debt they owe to this man, who
dedicated his life to studying the man-woman relationship. But Havelock’s contribution to
philosophical thought and literary criticism, in his many essays, works of sociology and
psychology and studies of religion and ethics, was equally important. Most of his books are
now out of print and difficult to obtain, and this should be remedied.

In this project we have the blessing of the friend and inspiration of his later years—
Francoise Delisle.

We will be pleased to hear from readers interested in forming this Society, and if
sufficient support is forthcoming we will arrange an inauguration meeting in London.

SYDNEY L. PEPPER
MARIE MAYOW
JESSIE MASON
JAMES STEWART
MARIE VAUGHAN

South Eastern Group,
93 Eversley Road,
London, S.E. 19

148
