THE BIRTH CONTROL MOVEMENT
Its Scientific and Ethical Bases
By C. V. DRYSDALE, O.B.E., D.Sc., F.R.S.E.

The Eugenics Society has never accepted birth control as desirable unconditionally,
but only as a possible remedy for poverty and dependence ansing from here
ditary weaknesses. Dr. Drysdale’s is
negative eugenics; though, of course, his
which has no corporate opinion im party

Quem vocet Divum populus ruentis imperi
rebus?—-Horace. Car. I. 2
F a questionnaire were instituted asking
what has been the greatest obvious service of science to humanity, it seems
probable that most thinking people would be
inclined to award the palm to preventive
medicine, notably as regards the prevention
of epidemic and tropical diseases.

The pioneer work of Jenner followed by
the scientific bacteriology of Pasteur have
resulted in the almost complete elimination
of the scourge of smallpox, and the prevention or cure of hydrophobia, diphtheria, enteric fever, and syphilis, etc; while the discovery of the malaria germ and its transmission by mosquitoes by Sir Ronald Ross has
led in the hands of the Americans to the conversion of the deadly Panama zone into a
healthy locality in which many thousands of
men, women, and children are able to live,
and has enabled the immense achievement
of the Panama Canal to be carried out.
Similar methods are now being employed in
Africa and other infested regions, and will
result in rendering vast areas habitable and
capable of cultivation ; while the conquest of
the silkworm disease, phylloxera, and other
parasitic diseases of animals and plants show
their value for increasing agricultural
production.

All these great achievements are the results of a single method: the discovery of
(a) the germ or cause of the disease, (b) the
manner of its entry into the body, and (c)
the means for preventing its entry or for preventing or mitigating its effect. They are
examples of the general principle enunciated

a powerful argument for ws use im
view of Socialism is not that of the Society,
politecs. —Ed.

by Huxley, that human progress depends
both on accepting and fighting the cosmic
process, by studying natural phenomena
and setting the useful or beneficent forces to
counteract the maleficent ones.

A century ago such efforts were regarded
as impious and as “‘ flying in the face of
Providence.’’ Plagues and epidemics were
considered as of Divine origin for the
punishment of our sins, and only to be
exorcised by humbling ourselves in prayer.
The success of the scientific method has,
however, been so great that the anathemas
have died away, and the majority of people
are now eagerly looking forward to the
mastery of the two remaining greatest
scourges of mankind—tuberculosis and cancer—on the same lines.

HUMANITY’S INTERNAL WEAKNESS

But the social diseases of humanity, arising from within, are far more terrible than
those arising from external agencies. Of
the eighteen or nineteen hundred millions of
inhabitants of the world, probably at least a
thousand millions of them are living in a
state of chronic insufficiency of the necessaries and simplest comforts of existence,
resulting in a death rate of something like
30 per thousand—compared with ro per
thousand in a well-nourished community
such as New Zealand or Australia. This
means that in each year at least twenty millions of human beings die prematurely as a
result of chronic undernutrition—a figure
far surpassing the toll of all the wars,
plagues, and epidemics of the worst of
years.

If it be legitimate for science in the hands

173
174

of the medical profession to employ the
means above indicated for the elimination of
these lesser evils, is it not legitimate, nay
incumbent, on the scientific sociologist to
employ it for the elimination of the greater
one? ‘This is precisely what was recognized
and attempted by the Malthusians and neoMalthusians from Malthus to George Drysdale, long before preventive medicine took
scientific form. Malthus scientifically demonstrated what had been more or less
clearly recognized by thinkers from the time
of Plato and Aristotle, that the germs of the
disease of poverty were the human reproductive germs themselves, which, although destined for the maintenance of the race, were
so excessive in numbers as to cause chronic
serious over-population or insufficiency of
subsistence, if their fertilization were unchecked. Malthus’s proposal was to prevent, by delaying marriage, the fertilization
of all but a small proportion of the germs,
but he was himself too conscious of the
potency of the sex instinct to be sanguine
of its success ; and hence Francis Place and
others advocated methods by which sex
union could be divorced from fertilizationmethods which were the precursors of the
contraceptive or birth control methods of the
present day. .

FOOD AND SEX HUNGERS

It was Dr. George Drysdale in his ‘‘ Elements of Social Science ’”? (1854), however,
who first put what has since been called the
neo-Malthusian doctrine into definite form
by demonstrating the potency of the sex instinct, the terrible evils which inevitably
arose from its attempted suppression, and
the fundamental disharmony of Nature—the
antagonism between the satisfaction of food
and sex hunger—to which the greater
part of human misery was due. The present writer has pointed out that as these two
impulses are the primary essentials for race
survival, all attempts at their suppression
must operate for their intensification, owing
to the inherently selective action of such repressions. Contraceptive methods, therefore, offered the only escape from this
dilemma, and to this day no other solution

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

has been or seems likely to be proposed.
That it is the only solution yet put forward
which is acceptable to humanity, is indicated
by the fact that although Malthus’s doctrine
was widely debated and accepted in the early
part of last century, families remained large
in all ranks of society in this and most other
countries, until the immense advertisement
of contraceptive methods inaugurated by the
Bradlaugh-Besant trial of 1877 took place,
and was immediately followed by a steady
fall in the birth rate in the principal countries of Europe, accompanied by a similar
fall of the death rate.

Contraception is therefore the scientific
sociologist’s analogue to the antitoxins of
preventive medicine. It was arrived at by
the same process of correct induction or
diagnosis, logical deduction of a remedy,
and verification of its expected consequences
in the fall of the death rate and prolongation
of life ; and neo-Malthusianism stands to-day
as the one and only sociological doctrine
which has both been formulated by the
scientific method and been verified by experience.

Neo-Malthusianism took its origin from

- the economists who wrote before Darwin had

demonstrated the importance of quality and
heredity, but as soon as the BradlaughBesant trial enabled an organized movement
to be established in England, the question
of quality or what is now termed eugenics
was discussed. The two principles enunciated in The Malthusian in 1880 were that
parents should only have as many children
as they.could support and bring up properly
without assistance, and that those who
suffered from hereditary disease or defect
should adopt the advice of Mantegazza in
his Igiene del Amore, ‘‘ Amate ma non
generate.’”? These two principles are now
recognized as ‘ negative eugenics.’ The
neo-Malthusians recognized from the outset
that poverty to the extent of dependence on
charitable or state aid constituted unfitness
in the Darwinian sense, and therefore that
those who could not survive unaided should
not propagate their type. They accordingly
directed their first efforts to a propaganda
among the poorest classes.
BIRTH CONTROL MOVEMENT

3

‘SOCIALISM AND MALTHUSIANISM

_ This propaganda was enthusiastically
.welcomed at its outset, but it utterly collapsed after a few years, owing to the
opposition of the Socialists with their attrac‘tive counter-promises of universal comfort
‘through the social revolution ; and as every
‘other class of the community conspired for
ithe suppression of birth control instruction,
the neo-Malthusians were forced to remain
passive spectators of a dysgenic adoption of
‘birth control they had done their best to
‘prevent. For fully thirty years, almost all
that could be done was to impress the imEportance of the doctrine on the educated
Eclasses through the various neo-Malthusian
periodicals and international conferences ;
with such success, however, that the importance of the population question is now
Falmost universally admitted ; the birth rates
fof many countries have been halved; and
tthe average duration of life in these coun‘tries has been increased by fifty per cent. or
fmore. It is the fashion and at first sight
steasonably to ascribe the decrease of mortaity and increase of longevity to the great
Ppropress of medical science and of public
fhealth and welfare measures; but people
fannot live without food, and it is equally
Hair to ask whether this great effort and
public and private expenditure would have
heen possible or effective, if the high birth
mates of fifty years ago had persisted ?

; What seems certain, however, is that it
is Socialism and not birth control which is
responsible for the dysgenic type of reproluction from which we are_ suffering.
focialism is not only responsible for turning
be masses away from birth control at the
mtset, but for the development of those
mblic health and welfare schemes and of
employment benefit which preserve the
bss fit and their progeny at the cost of the
—who are thereby forced to restrict their
smilies unduly. Neo-Malthusianism and
cialism are the two great schemes for imFoving social conditions, but while the
armer, as has been shown, has been formuHed on strictly scientific lines, Socialism
ks totally disregarded or denied the MalBusian and Darwinian principles and eco
 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
 
   
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
  
  
  

175

nomic science, as shown by its slogans
‘‘ Equality,’’ ‘‘ Justice’? and ‘‘ There
would be plenty for all if it were properly
distributed ’’ ; and its driving force has been
class-hatred.

Unfortunately, the educated classes have
allowed these sinister teachings to go
on during the last half century, rather
than oppose them by the scientific teaching
of neo-Malthusianism ; and their own adoption of birth control, which should have
shown them the great boon it would confer
upon the poor, has enabled them to sustain
the burden of socialistic legislation which
was the inevitable consequence of their neglect. There can be no doubt that this is the
chief cause of the alarming revelations of
British unfitness by which we were startled
during the war; and the very different history of Holland, in which wiser counsels
have prevailed, is sufficient disproof of the
constantly made assertion that unfettered
birth control is necessarily dysgenic in
effect.

CINDERELLA’S ETHICS

This brings us to a most important question. What is the aim to which all human
effort should be directed? It seems strange
to have to ask such a question in this supposedly scientific age, but although, to use
Huxley’s metaphor, Cinderella (science)
has at last been allowed to ascend from the
kitchen to the parlour, she is still too overawed by her sisters (theology and convention) to assert herself in the domain of
morality and to propound her own ideal.
Neo-Malthusianism openly took its origin
from the Utilitarian or hedonistic principle
of Socrates, Epicurus, Bentham, and the
Mills, that the true goal of morality is the
greatest happiness of the majority of human
beings on earth; and so far as I know it is
the only doctrine which has kept steadfastly
to the principle of this supposedly defunct
school. Its votaries have had a perfectly
definite ideal constantly before their minds ;
the breeding of a human race in which every
individual will be able by his unaided efforts
to secure a sufficiency of the necessaries and
simple comforts of life, and a moderate satis176

faction of all his bodily, mental, and psychological needs, with sufficient stimulus to induce him to make further progress, and
sufficient prescience to regulate his reproduction for a steady improvement of his race
in health, strength, vitality, benevolence
and intelligence.

How is this ideal to be achieved? Bya
process which the writer put before the
Eugenics Society a few years ago under the
title ‘‘ A Guiding Principle for Practical
Eugenic Reform.’’ It is simply to employ
the conscious selection made possible by
birth control to imitate as closely as possible the natural selection of Darwin; i.e.,
to induce every individual who would have
failed to survive either through economic
incapacity or disease without external assistance, to refrain from further propagation.
Whether or not this needs supplementing by
appeals to the successful to increase their
reproduction remains to be seen; but, assuming it to be practicable, it solves at one
stroke the problems of over-population and
race improvement, and of the antagonism
between the satisfaction of the food and sex
hungers. It also reconciles one of the
most painful of disharmonies—the antagonism between the great human spirit of
benevolence and the quality of the race. At
present individual and social benevolence
and medical and public aid are seriously dysgenic, by enabling unfavourable variations,
which would be eliminated in the unchecked
struggle for existence, to survive and hand
on their defects; and we can have little
doubt that this is the cause of the immense
amount of defectiveness and institutional
care from which we are suffering. The
really important function of natural selection is not the elimination of the defective
individual, but the elimination of his posterity. We could afford to indulge our
charitable impulses to the full, if those
accepting them would refrain from reproduction.

LONGEVITY THE CRITERION

How shall we know whether we are approaching or receding from this goal? There
seems to be a simple criterion which com
THE EUGENICS REVIEW _

  
  
    
   
  
 
   
   
  
  
 
   
   
  
   
    
   
 
   
   
  
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
 

bines in a single figure the physical, med
tal, and moral condition of the people—thett
average duration of life. ‘That it represent
their physical status will probably not
seriously dissented from, but few will see q
first sight its connection with their ment@
and moral status. In the light of the popy
lation doctrine, however, the connectioj
seems clear. Since in order to secure th
maximum longevity people must be ad@
quately fed, clothed, and housed, their prq
ductive efficiency must be high; and as ang
lapse from utilitarian morality either ig
jures the wrong doer or others, it must ad
versely affect longevity. For example, ¥
the birth rate were to fall to such an extent ag
to give a considerable margin, the peopl
might either use it in healthy comfort or iff
injurious luxury, and in the latter case long
gevity would fall. Until any better criteriog
can be suggested, I therefore urge that lon
gevity should be taken as the criterion of
national progress; and this greatly facili
tates the discussion of birth control and
other social problems.

If we accept this criterion, the advantaged
on every hand of the adoption of birth conf
trol up to the present are too manifest tq
require demonstration. Whether or not if
has any injurious physiological effects, as ig
so constantly asserted, it is impossible t
dispute that, on balance, the average lons
gevity has risen so rapidly and greatly sineg
the fall of the birth rate commenced, that it
net result has been enormously beneficial j
and as all life is a balance between good ang
evil, we must approve anything which proq
duces a net advantage. As this improves
ment has taken place to an even greateg
degree among women than among men, wf
must deny the contention of Mr. Ludovid
and others that a constantly repeated cyclq
of pregnancy, parturition, and lactation
beneficial to women ; and when we remembef
that maternal mortality still stands at thé
figure of 4 per cent. it is obvious that the
reduction of the birth rate from 36 to 1§
implies a reduction of deaths in childbi
of about 3,000 per year, apart from the re
duction of strain of after-care. Birth com
trol most certainly did not derive its im#
BIRTH CONTROL MOVEMENT

petus from feminism, as has been claimed
by modern writers unacquainted with its
early history, and women of all classes were
very slow to take it up; but now it is the
working class women (including even a proportion of Roman Catholics), who certainly
are not feminists, who are clamouring for it
most loudly.

In order to put the scientific basis of neoMalthusianism on a definite and concise
foundation, so far as I am entitled to speak
for'it, I repeat the definition of it which J laid
before the First National Birth Rate Commission in I9I3.

Neo-Malthusianism is an ethical doctrine, based on the principle of Malthus
that poverty, disease, and premature
death can only be eliminated by control
of reproduction, combined with a recognition of the evils inseparable from prolonged abstention from marriage. It
therefore advocates nearly universal early
marriage together with a selective limitation of offspring to those children to whom
the parents can give a satisfactory heredity and environment so that they may
become desirable members of the community. It further maintains that a universal knowledge of hygienic contraception devices among adult men and women
would, in all probability, automatically
lead to such a selection through enlightened self-interest, and thus to the
elimination of destitution and all the more
serious social evils and to the elevation of
the race.

In accordance with the above, the Malthusian League immediately after the war
initiated the policy of putting pressure on
the Ministry of Health to permit the giving
of birth control instruction at the Public
Health Centres, to which the poor and
diseased naturally congregate. This appears
to be by far the most important means for
rapidly reducing the proportion of seriously
dysgenic births, now available; and it has
many supporters in the Eugenics Society. I
earnestly hope that the Society will use its
most strenuous efforts to secure this permission, which has already been advocated
by a majority of our House of Lords.

177
WAR AND POPULATION

Lastly comes the enormously important
question of international relations and war.
Few now-a-days dispute that pressure of
population is one of the causes, if not the
most important cause, of war; and the repeated utterances of Mussolini in which he
claims that Italy is over-populated and that
the remedy lies either in birth control or in
intense economic expansion or war; his rejection of the former and his sabre-rattling,
provocative actions, certainly constitute the
greatest menace to European peace at this
time ; while the high birth rate of Japan has
given cause for alarm in the East.

The neo-Malthusians have, of course, always recognized this difficulty, and their
remedy is perfectly simple. No one but an
extreme Socialist would contend that if two
neighbours live side by side in their own
houses, and one has a large family while the
other has a small one, the former has any
right to demand a share of the accommodation of the latter, Nations are only families on
the large scale, with their territories as their
homes, and it is futile to suppose that any
nation will tamely submit to have a portion
of its territory transferred from it for the
needs of a rapidly increasing neighbour,
even at the behest of the League of Nations
or any central authority which may arise.
The natural retort is ‘‘ We have limited our
birth rate so as to maintain a decent standard of comfort in the country we hold, and
we refuse to allow ourselves to be congested
and brought down to your level. You
should have limited your birth rate to your
resources, as we have done.’’

Universal birth control is therefore the
only possible means for maintaining international peace and amity, and until this is
fully recognized by the League of Nations,
its deliberations and decisions will always
lack reality. The crude casual objection
has always been that self protection requires
large numbers, but an excessive birth rate
only results in a greater number of deaths,
and a diminution rather than expansion of
the rate of increase of population. Further,
any wars of the future will obviously depend
178

more and more on scientific skill, in which
quality is more important than quantity. It
is significant that since the last war, with its
revelations concerning the high proportion
of our C3 population, militaristic opposition
to birth control has entirely ceased in this
country. Eugenically applied birth control
gives the best guarantee of world peace, by
making each country strong for defence but
‘with no need for offence.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Such is a brief sketch of the scientific
basis of the birth control movement and the
results it has achieved. There is much
which has perforce been omitted, but it
should serve to show that it has been formulated in a strictly scientific as well as
humanitarian spirit, and it is permissible to
ask whether any other proposal has been or
can be formulated which offers anything like
such beneficial prospects.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XX, No. 3.
