CONGENITAL MALFORMATIONS
By C. O. CARTER, B.M., M.R.C.P.

NDER the title congenital mal| | formations I propose to include all

the physical deformities which children may have when born, or may develop
without obvious external cause soon after
birth. ‘The study of the interaction of genetic
and environmental factors resulting in the
development of these deformities and of the
methods by which they can be presented is
obviously a part of the science of Eugenics.
Very little is yet known about these malformations ; it is not easy to find out what is
happening to a foetus concealed in its
mother’s womb, but perhaps enough is
already known to indicate the ways in which
future generations may prevent these deformities occurring.

The Epidemiological Importance of Congenital
Malformations

Fraser Roberts (1950) in a recent lecture
drew attention to the ever-increasing relative
importance of congenita] malformations as a
cause of infant deaths. As the more accessible environmental causes of stillbirth and
infant deaths are prevented by the everimproving care given by doctor and midwife
so the proportion of these deaths due to
congenital malformations steadily increases.
Record and McKeown (1949) have quoted
the Registrar General’s figures for Scotland
showing that in recent years about one fifth
of all still births and one tenth of all infant
deaths are attributed to congenital malformations. In the same way congenital malformations are contributing an ever-increasing proportion of the deformities and illnesses
which cause ill-health or even death in

childhood and adolescence.
The Psychological Importance of Congenital
Malformations

I think, too, that with the coming of
planned parenthood these malformations
have assumed greater psychological importance. Victorian mothers who not uncommonly underwent twelve pregnancies

83

and were proud to have reared eight of the
resultant children were not greatly upset by
a stillbirth and accepted a deformed child as
an act of Providence; but where each
pregnancy is a deliberate act planned at
carefully spaced intervals, parents, and
mothers particularly, have a feeling of
personal responsibility for a malformed child,
which may cause them distress and deter
them from having further children. In some
cases where the chances of subsequent
children being affected is considerable this
attitude is reasonable, it is perhaps best that
they should have no more children, but in
other instances there is little chance of
further children being affected and the
parents are needlessly denying themselves
children.

The Frequency of the More Common
Malformations

The nature and frequency of the more
common congenital malformations are shown
in Table I. These are those which one might
expect to find in a sample of 10,000
maternities.

TABLE I
CONGENITAL MALFORMATIONS IN 10,000 MATERNITIES
Anencephaly sw 25
Spina bifida aperta ... 25
Hydrocephaly 15
Mongolism . 15
Pyloric stenosis . 25
Harelip (+ cleft palate) 10
Cleft palate alone... 5
Club feet vs 15
Polydactyly ‘a 5
Congenital dislocation of the hip was 5
Congenital heart disease , wwe 10
Hypospadias 10
Miscellaneous 40

Adding all the malformations 1 up it t will
be seen that about one child in fifty is born
with some type of congenital malformation.

In Anencephaly the right and left halves
of the brain and skull have failed to develop
properly and to join. Anencephalics are
mostly stillborn and the remainder will die
in the first few hours of life. There is no hope
84 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of surgical cure after birth. In Spina Bifida
Aperta there is a gap in the lower part of the
spinal column through which the membranes
of the spinal cord and part of the spinal cord
itself may protrude; most of the affected
children will die in the first few weeks of life
and only a small proportion survive beyond
ten years of age, though there is hope that
better methods of surgical treatment may be
found. In Hydrocephaly the brain and skull
are distended, due to a block in the circulation of cerebro-spinal fluid. Many of the
hydrocephalics will die during the process of
birth and only about half of them will
survive the first year of life. There are very
few survivors at the age of ten. Here, too,
improvements in surgery may come to make
the outlook much better in time. In Mongolism there is mental defect in association
with a number of physical peculiarities which
are characteristic. Many Mongols will die
in the first few months of life and only about
a quarter of them will survive to the tenth
year. In Pyloric Stenosis there is an obstruction at the lower end of the stomach. About
g out of ro children are cured surgically in
this country and in the best centres 99 out of
100 are cured. With modern surgery even
the more severe forms of Harelip and Cleft
Palate usually survive.

The common deformities of the skeleton,
club feet, supernumerary fingers and toes and
congenital dislocation of the hip are not, of
course, a danger to life and with good

treatment few of these children are left with

any disability ; with club feet and congenital
dislocation of the hip, however, treatment
must be skilled and prolonged. Many of the
children with congenital malformations of
the heart die young, but great strides are
being made in the surgery of these conditions.
Hypospadias, a malformation of the penis,
can usually be cured completely’ by plastic
surgery.

Cases of rhesus incompatibility are not
included in the table since these are not
actually cases of malformation and no true
physical deformities are known to be caused
in this way ; the main features of the danger
to the foetus from rhesus incompatibility are
destruction of the red blood cells and the

bone marrow and perhaps the liver in late
pregnancy or soon after birth together in a
proportion of cases with damage to parts of
the brain. In the more severe cases the child
is stillborn. There would be about 50
children with rhesus incompatibility in a
series of 10,000 maternities. Of these about
5 would be stillborn, another 5 die in infancy,
2 or 3 survive with some damage to the brain
and the remainder recover completely.

The Causation of Congenital Malformations

As with any other disease processes, there
is not likely to be much progress in the
prevention of these deformities until more
is known about the way they are caused. In
this society we are accustomed to thinking
of the development of human beings in terms
of the interaction of genetic factors and
environmental factors. For example, eye and
hair colour are largely determined genetically,
infection with German Measles largely
environmentally, the height and weight of
school-children appreciably by both genetic
and environmental factors. I propose to
consider what we know about causation of
congenital malformations in these terms.

Purely Genetic Determination

There are quite a number of individual
malformations which are, for all practical
purposes, entirely determined genetically.
For example, Achondroplasia, a type of
dwarfism characterised by very short arms
and legs, a depressed bridge of the nose with
somewhat bulging forehead and normal
intelligence. Those of you who have not seen

such individuals in your professional capacity

may well have seen them about in the streets
or during your visits to circuses. There are a
pair in the current circus at Olympia. This
condition has been shown with near certainty
by Mgrch (1941) to be due to a single
dominant genetic factor. Again, many of the
minor deformities of the skeleton such as the
condition in which the fingers are short, only
two phalanges instead of three, or that in
which there are only two digits on the hand,
giving the so-called lobster hand, are due to
single dominant genes.

To refresh your memories I have illustrated
CONGENITAL MALFORMATIONS 85

the essentials of dominant inheritance in a
diagram (Figure 1).
Inheritance of a dominant gene.

Parents. Ag x "t
|
Germ cells. Aora a
Children. Ad or ad
Fic. 1

The essentials of dominant inheritance are
shown in Figure 1. Big “‘ A’ represents the
gene for Achondroplasia, little ‘“‘a’’ the
alternative gene for normality which may
occupy that particular place on that particular chromosome. An individual possesses
two of each type of chromosome and so two
of the alternative genes that a chromosome
may carry. A normal individual has “a”
on both of the particular chromosomes concerned ; an Achondroplasiac has ‘“‘A”’ on
one and “a” on the other. It is not known
what an individual with two “A’”’ genes
would be like but it would be an exceedingly
rare event. Of the children of an Achondroplasiac on the average half will be normal and
half Achondroplasiacs, according to whether
the Achondroplasiac parent transmits “A”
or “a”; the normal parent can only
transmit “a.” An artificially typical pedigree
of a malformation due to a dominant gene is
shown in the next diagram (Figure 2).

Typical pedigree of a deformity due toa
dominant gene.

  
  

initial mutation ---=-
@ = affected individual. —
@=affected individual without issue.

Fic. 2
You will note that at some time the condi
tion starts in only one of the children of
normal parents. This is the initial ‘‘ muta
tion,’’ perhaps a chemical change in part of
the chromosome which has probably occurred
in the formation of the germ cell. Sooner or
later this new gene, if it is a harmful one, is
eliminated. The rate of elimination depends
on the extent to which the gene diminishes
its possessor’s likelihood of having children.
Obviously a gene which invariably causes
death in infancy will be eliminated straight
away and there will only be one affected
individual in the family tree; the disease
will not appear to be hereditary at all. On
the other hand, a gene which does not affect
fitness at all may persist for many generations
and one may get very long pedigrees showing
the deformity in each generation ; some are
known going back hundreds of years. In
Achondroplasia, most cases are new mutations, but where Achondroplasiacs do have
children, on the average half of these
children are Achondroplasiacs too. Achondroplasiac women can usually only have
children by Cesarean section.

Another type of dwarfism due essentially
to a deformity of the bones of the spine,
Morquio’s disease, is due in most. cases to a
recessive gene. I have illustrated the
essentials of recessive inheritance in the next
diagram (Figure 3).

Inheritance of o recessive gene.

Parents. Mm x Mm
Germ cells. t »r | » m
Children. MM 2Mm = fm

FIG. 3

Here, little ‘‘m’’ represents the gene
responsible for Morquio’s disease and big
‘““M ”’ the alternative gene, for normality. A
child will only have Morquio’s disease if he
has ‘‘m”’ on both the particular pair of
chromosomes concerned. This will come
about when two apparently normal parents,
each carrying ‘““m’”’ but also “M,” so that
they appear normal, marry. Each of these
parents can transmit ‘““M”’ or ““m” and
these children will be normal, carriers and
affected with Morquio’s disease in the

Cc
86 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

proportion of 1:2:1; that is on the average
1/4 of the children will have Morquio’s
disease.

The next illustration shows an artificially
typical pedigree of a malformation due to a
recessive gene (Figure 4).

Typical pedigree of a deformity due to a
recessive gene.

@= affected individual.
Fic. 4

The parents of the affected child are shown
as first cousins. A child with an affection
determined by a recessive gene has received
the gene from both his parents. With a gene
that is rare the chance that a married couple
share a gene is much greater when they are
nearly related. The chance that an individual
shares a particular gene that he possesses
with his first cousin is one in eight. The
chance that he shares this particular gene
with an unrelated woman is only the frequency of the gene in the general population,
perhaps something like one in five hundred
for Morquio’s disease. So with rare conditions determined by recessives it is not uncommon to find that the parents are affected.

The two examples quoted are too rare to
give on the list of common malformations.
There is good reason for this. Where the
gene is dominant and severely limits fitness
nearly all the affected persons will be due to
new mutations and the frequency of the
condition will approximate to twice the
mutation rate (twice because there are a pair
of chromosomes on which the genes may
mutate). Mutations are rare events, so such
conditions will be rare. With a recessively
determined deformity which is severe enough
to make it impossible for the affected person
to have children it can be shown that the
proportion of affected persons will tend to

equal the mutation rate of the gene concerned. So once again one would expect
them to be pretty rare.

It is perhaps fair to say that not many
more diseases due to single genes are likely
to be discovered unless they are very rare
or unless a not uncommon disease is newly
recognized and distinguished from other
diseases causing similar signs and symptoms.
An example of a newly recognized disease is a
condition known as Cystic Fibrosis of the
Pancreas. It was realised some fifteen years
ago that a number of apparently different
types of illness—one type of obstruction of
the bowels in the newborn, one type of
recurrent lung infection in children and one
type of failure to absorb fat in children—were
all due to a congenital anomaly affecting the
lungs, the pancreas and some other organs.
Recently, good evidence has come from
America (Lowe, May and Reed, 1949) and
independently from The Hospital for Sick
Children, London, that the basic disturbance
in this disease is due to a recessive genetic
factor.

It is possible that some instances of the
more common malformations which will be
considered later will in time be separately
distinguished and found to be due to single
genetic factors.

Purely Environmental Determination

From theoretical considerations there are
a number of groups of environmental factors
which might be expected to interfere with
the development of the embryo—inadequate
nutrition either because the mother herself
is ill-nourished or because there is an
inadequate transfer of nutrients to the
embryo through the wall of the uterus, or
the passage of poisonous substances or
infectious agents across the wall of the
uterus, or the exposure of the embryo to
harmful physical agents such as the radiations from radium.

In animals all these agents have been
shown to be capable of producing congenital
malformations. It has become apparent
that much the same malformation can be
produced by a variety of different noxious
agents and even that malformations which
CONGENITAL MALFORMATIONS 87

are known to be due usually to a genetic
factor can be closely simulated by malformations due to environmental factors.
For example, in rodents Spina Bifida
Aperta due to a recessive gene is known, but
this malformation can also be produced by
injecting a blue dye into the mother before
the start of or early in pregnancy. It has
been suggested that at certain stages in
development different parts of the embryo
that happen to be growing vigorously are
affected if any of the varied requirements of
growth are withheld. But it is just because
a malformation can be produced in numerous
different ways that one must be cautious in
assuming that a method shown to operate in
an experimental animal is also the way that
that particular malformation is produced in
humans. Thus Warkany in America has
shown that one can produce a great variety
of malformations by depriving the mother of
Vitamin A or of Riboflavin (part of Vitamin
B) for some little time before and during
pregnancy. This is most important fundamental work, but women in this country are
not subjected to a diet grossly deficient in
Vitamin A and there is no good evidence that
inadequate nutrition of the mother plays any
part in causing congenital malformations. If
inadequate nutrition did play a part one
might expect malformations to be more
common in social class 5 where, at any rate
before the war,many mothers had a diet well
below the optimum. In fact there appear to
be no class differences in the incidence of
malformations and for the more limited
group of central nervous system malformations Record and McKeown (1950) in
Birmingham found that the incidence was
essentially the same in the poor districts of
Birmingham as in the wealthy districts. In
Rotterdam during the winter of 1944-5 there
was severe malnutrition but this had no
effect on the incidence of malformations
(Smith, 1947). More recently in Palestine a
group of 120 mothers who had riboflavin
deficiency did not have a single malformed
child (Brzezinski, 1947). The lesson to be
learned from these experiments of Warkany’s
is perhaps that some malformations in man
may be due not to an inadequate supply of

Vitamin A from the mother to the foetus,
but to some disturbance in the utilization of
Vitamin A in the foetus. .

Until recently there was no evidence that
infections caused true congenital malformations, although it was quite common for
smallpox and syphilis to be transmitted from
mother to foetus. Quite suddenly, however,
Io years ago an entirely new light was
thrown on the causation of congenital malformations by the Australian eye specialist
Gregg. Following the epidemic of German
Measles in Australia in 1940, he noticed that
a number of mothers of children with congenital cataract had had German Measles in
the earlier months of the pregnancy of the
affected child. A number of other Australian
workers investigated this further and it was
found that when the German Measles had
been experienced in the first four months of
the pregnancy the subsequent child was
liable to suffer from one or more of a number
of congenital malformations, congenital cataract, deafness, heart disease and occasionally
mental deficiency. German Measles late in
pregnancy had no ill-effect. The Australian
impression was that a high proportion of the
mothers affected in the early months of the
pregnancy had such deformities, but no
adequate prospective survey which followed
the mothers from the time of their infection
to an examination of the subsequent children
was made so that one would know precisely
the proportion of children who were likely to
be affected. Experience here, in America and
in Scandinavia is small, but does not give
quite such a gloomy picture. Attempts are
now being made in this country to have
instances of mothers affected with German
Measles notified at the time so that the
children can later be examined and an
accurate estimate of the risks to the children
made. It is important to have such an
estimate as naturally enough the question of
desirability of abortion when the mother has
German Measles early in pregnancy has been
raised. In this country there would not
appear to be adequate evidence to justify this.

This discovery of Gregg’s was of great
theoretical interest, but German Measles by
itself contributes little to the total sum of
88 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

malformations in this country since only a
very small proportion of women in pregnancy
have German Measles, even if one makes
allowance for mild, unrecognized attacks.
Only a very small proportion of the mothers
of malformed children give a ‘history of
German Measles in pregnancy. For example,
of over a hundred mothers of malformed
children whom I have questioned carefully
a few days after the birth of their child not a
single one had had German Measles during
‘pregnancy. Even if one considers a specific
malformation such as congenital heart
disease, which may be caused by rubella, it
was found that only six out of over six
hundred cases of congenital heart disease
seen at the Congenital Heart Clinic at the
Hospital for Sick Children had had rubella in
the pregnancy of the malformed child. It is,
however, important to recognize examples of
deformity due to German Measles since the
mother can be assured that there is only the
ordinary chance of about I in 50 of any later
child being malformed.

Another maternal illness which can certainly cause congenital malformations is
Toxoplasmosis, a disease due not to a virus
like German Measles but to a small protozoon. It may cause Microcephaly (that is a
type of mental defect associated with a very
small. brain and skull), Hydrocephaly and
some eye defects. The disease is not uncommon in certain parts of the United States
of America and a few cases have been
described in this country. It is not possible
yet to estimate its importance accurately,
but it would be surprising if it accounts for
more than a very small fraction indeed of all
congenital malformations. Again, only one
child in the family is likely to be affected, so
that the prognosis for further children is good.

There is no good evidence that any other
types of maternal infection can cause con
birth of the child. The biggest series available is for Poliomyelitis (Aycock and
Ingalls, 1946). Ninety-eight mothers affected
in pregnancy with this illness had two malformed children. These malformed children
occurred to two of the twenty-four mothers
who experienced the infection in the first four
months of the pregnancy, but even so this is
well within the figure one might expect by
chance. Attempts are now being made in
this country to get reliable figures for the
number of specific virus diseases, though it
will be some years before these are available.
Influenza, unfortunately, has not been included, but it is to be hoped that some
medical officer of health in an area heavily
hit by the recent epidemic wil] take the
opportunity to record those mothers who were
affected in the early months of pregnancy
and have the subsequent children examined.

However, even if one takes all the common
specific virus diseases together they would
account for only a small proportion of all
congenital malformations; they are rare
events in pregnancy. The only infection
which occurs sufficiently often to make any
appreciable contribution to the total sum of
malformations are the non-specific group of
common colds. These are seasonal diseases
and if they do cause many congenital malformations it should be possible to show a
seasonal variation in the number of congenital malformations. An analysis I made
recently (Carter, 1950) of 190 malformations
by month of birth over a period of six years
in a big London maternity hospital showed
no significant variation from month to
month or season to season that could be
explained by the prevalence of colds from
October to March.

Some years ago in Philadelphia, Murphy
(1947) analysed a large number of malformations by month of birth and he, too, found no

TABLE II

NuMBER OF MALFORMED CHILDREN Born IN EACH MONTH 1943-1948 AT A LONDON
MaTERNITY HospPItTaL

Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May June July Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec. Total

Malformed 18 18 16 14 20

genital malformations, but no investigator
has yet been able to follow up any large
series from the maternal infection to the

15
Percent. 15 16 4 %&F2 7 153

II 7 19 17 23 I2 190
To O6 «6I'F) 6UIeS) | 6I'Q) COLO I°4
significant variation. More recently in
Boston a group of doctors found in a large
series of births from one hospital that though
CONGENITAL MALFORMATIONS 89

the incidence of all malformations did not
vary from month to month, there was an
excess of multiple malformations, that is,
children with several deformities at once in
the autumn, which might reasonably be
attributed to winter epidemics eight months
or so previously. This is a sensible idea
since German Measles does usually cause
multiple malformations ; in my own series I
was not able to confirm this, but it needs
checking further. I also found that there was
no individual three-monthly period during
the six years in which there was a significant
increase in the number of malformations,
suggesting that none of the various epidemics
that occurred in this period had any considerable effect on the rate of malformations.

Apart from infections there is no good
evidence that any other maternal conditions
such as chronic heart disease, chronic lung
disease, abnormal position of the uterus, or
disease of the ovary caused any increased
incidence of malformations, and further one
may say that at any rate for the more
common of these conditions it is unlikely that
they do cause any such increase (Carter, 1950).

Genetic and Environmental Determination

This may take two forms. A malformation
may be due sometimes to genetic factors and
in other instances to environmental factors.
Or both genetic and environmental factors
may be needed to cause the development of
the malformation in a single individual. All
the more common congenital malformations,
except for congenital heart disease probably,
fall into one or other of these two groups
—Anencephaly and Spina Bifida Aperta,
Hydrocephaly, Mongolism, club feet, congenital dislocation of the hip, Pyloric
Stenosis, Hypospadias.

Unfortunately not enough family studies
have yet been made with most of these to
know whether either type of factor may cause
the malformation or a combination of both is
required.

Warkany has cited Microcephaly as an
example of a malformation apparently
caused alternatively by genetic or environmental factors. Microcephalics are graphically described by some American authors as

Pinheads. In some families this malformation is distributed as if it were due to a
recessive factor. But it is also known that
both German Measles and irradiation of the
mother in pregnancy can cause Microcephaly.
The time will come when it will be possible
easily to separate the different forms of
examination and relate each to its mode of
causation ; then one will no longer talk about
Microcephaly as if it were one condition, but
have specific names for the types of known
causation and use the word Microcephaly
only for a residual group where causation is
still unknown. .

The best examples of combined hereditary
and environmental factors is the condition
hemolytic disease of the newborn due to
incompatibility of mother and child for the
rhesus blood group. Hzmolytic disease is
outside my definition of congenital malformations, but it is worth describing in somewhat
oversimplified form as an illustration that
the relations between genetic and environmental factors may be complex and unexpected. To get hemolytic disease the
child must be rhesus positive and
have a rhesus negative mother; this is
purely genetically determined, the rhesus
positive gene being dominant so that a rhesus
negative woman married to a rhesus positive
man may have a rhesus positive child.
Another factor, however, is also required ;
the mother must have been previously
sensitized to rhesus positive blood cells
either by a previous pregnancy of a rhesus
positive child, or by a transfusion of rhesus
positive blood cells. A transfusion will
sensitize the majority of women, but only a
small proportion of rhesus negative mothers
who carry a rhesus positive child are sensitized. It is not yet known why this should beso.

Among the true congenital deformities,
club foot and congenital dislocation of the
hip probably afford illustrations of the interaction of genetic and environmental factors
although we do not yet know the details of
this interaction. There is a definite concentration of club foot within certain families.
The general incidence in the population is
about 1 in 600 as indicated earlier, but the
probability of a brother or sister being
go THE EUGENICS REVIEW

affected is not r in 600 but about 1 in 30;

similarly we find the parents and children of ©

individuals with club foot affected are more
often than one wpuld expect by chance.
This might be due to non-genetic similarity
of environment within these families, but this
view is made unlikely by a study of the twin
brothers and sisters of children with club foot.

It was Sir Francis Galton who first drew
attention to the value of twin studies. In
brief, monozygous twins, often called identical though they are never quite identical,
have the same genetic endowment, both
being derived from an early division of a
single embryo derived from a single sperm
and egg cell. Dizygous twins are derived from
two pairs of egg and sperm cells. They are
ordinary brothers and sisters who happen to
have been conceived within a few days of
each other, they are often called for this
reason fraternal. Dizygous twins, like ordinary
brothers and sisters, have on the average
only half of their genes in common. Now the
environment of identical twins before birth
is, with one exception, no more alike than
that of fraternal twins, and so it is reasonable
to attribute a greater similarity of identical
twin pairs to their greater genetic similarity.
The exception is that most identical twins
have an inter-communicating circulation
—however, this is probably not important.

Isigkeit (1938) in Germany studied over
200 of the twins of children with club foot
and found that whereas 30 per cent. of the
identical twins of affected children also had
club foot, only 3 per cent of the fraternal
twins also had it.

This much greater resemblance of identical
twins indicates strongly that there is an
important genetic basis to the causation of
club foot, though it does not tell us in any
detail about the genetic factors concerned.
A second deduction from this twin study is
that the genetic factor is not all-important.
If it were, Isigkeit would have found that all
the monozygous twin brothers and sisters
would also have had club foot. In fact, only
30 per cent, three out of ten, had it. There
must be some other factor, presumably
environmental, required. Denis Browne has
suggested that the immediate causative

factor in club foot is pressure of the wall of
the uterus inverting the foot, and he is able
to demonstrate convincingly the way that he
thinks the foetal limbs are positioned in the
uterus so as to produce the deformity. One
may suppose that the genetic constitution of
the foetus causes its leg to grow out in such
a way that there is a tendency for the foot to
reach the wall of the uterus at an angle and
be inverted, but that something else decides,
perhaps the size and shape of the uterus,
perhaps the lie of the foetus in the uterus,
whether the foot does, in fact, get inverted.

With congenital dislocation of the hip it
would appear that what is inherited is a predisposition of the head of the thigh bone to
slip out of its socket in the pelvis, but that
something else is required, some environmental strain to actually pull the head out of
its socket. Faber (1928) in Germany, suggested that what was inherited was a maldevelopment of the socket of the hip so that
it was unusually shallow. He claimed that
he was able to recognise this shallow state of
the socket in some of the near relatives of
affected children, though these relatives had
never suffered from dislocation. Further, he
claimed that while the pedigrees of congenital
dislocation itself did not suggest any simple
form of inheritance, the distribution of
shallow sockets in the families did behave as
if it was due to a dominant gene. This work
needs confirmation, but it is obviously a
sensible way of looking at the problem.
Again, one environmental factor concerned
may be the position of the foetus in the
uterus since there is evidence that children
with congenital dislocation of the hip are
unusually often breech-born.

Among the other common congenital
deformities Spina Bifida Aperta and Anencephaly not uncommonly go together in
tamilies. Penrose (1946) and later Record
and McKeown (1951) have shown that the
probability of brother or sister of an affected
child being also affected with one or other of
these conditions is about I in 40 instead of
the random chance of about I in 200.
Another factor, in some way environmental,
perhaps, that affects the incidence of Spina
Bifida Aperta and Anencephaly is the
CONGENITAL MALFORMATIONS ‘QI

number of children that the mother has had
previously ; first-born children and children
born later than sixth in the family are more
often affected than are children in intermediate positions. Naturally enough, genetic
investigation is handicapped by the fact that
anencephalics never have children, and it is
very rare that individuals with Spina Bifida
Aperta survive to have children.

With Mongolism, the familial concentration is less obvious than with the other
conditions that have been discussed. Nevertheless it probably exists. Penrose has
estimated that the overall chance of brothers
and sisters being affected may be about 1 in
100; this must be compared with the
general incidence of about 1 in 600. The
striking feature of Mongolism, however,
which has been known for a generation is the
way that the incidence varies with the age
of the mother. Some figures from a number
of London maternity hospitals (Carter and
MacCarthy 1951) showing the number of
mongols born to women in different age
groups are illustrated in Diagram I.

Number of mongols born to 10,000 women in
five year age-groups.

 

AGE —1519 20-24 25-29 30-34 35-99 40-44 45-49
D1racramM I

There is no good explanation for this
astounding phenomenon. It is more likely
to represent an environmental than a
genetic process. On the other hand, all
recorded identical twins of mongols have also
been: mongols, while fraternal twins of
mongols, like non-twin brothers and sisters
are rarely mongols. This suggests that
genetic factors are important in determining
the incidence of Mongolism. It is most
unusual for mongols to have children, but
there are two examples on record and these

two cases are most remarkable. One mongol
woman in America had a girl who was not
only normal and still alive but had an
intelligence quotient of 120; the other
mongol woman in France had a child who
also was a mongol, the child died in infancy.

Among the other common malformations
Harelip with or without a lateral Cleft
Palate, midline cleft palate, Pyloric Stenosis,
are all found more commonly in the near
relatives of affected individuals than in the
general population ; but, in all, the incidence,
even in brothers and sisters, is considerably
less than the I in 4 required by a recessive
inheritance, and in all of them only a proportion of the identical twins of affected persons
are themselves affected. With congenital
heart disease on the other hand it is not
certain that there is any increased incidence
within certain families at all.

Prevention

It will be clear to you that our knowledge
of causation of, at any rate, the common
congenital malformations does not enable us
to more than speculate on the ways in which
we might reduce their incidence. Nevertheless it is worth speculating and considering
some of the general principles that must
underlie any attempt to reduce the incidence
of common malformations. Onecannot remain
content with one childin fifty born malformed.

The simplest problem is presented by the
malformations which are, for all practical
purposes, entirely caused by environmental
factors. For example, it should not be very
long before it is possible to inoculate or
vaccinate all women who have not already
had German Measles, when they marry or
even in childhood so that they will be immune
to the disease. In the meantime, we should
encourage parents to expose their girls to German Measles at home and at school rather than
try to protect them from this illness which is
a very minor one except to the foetus.

Where malformations are, for all practical purposes, entirely caused by single
genetic factors it will be difficult to reduce
the number of affected persons beyond a
limit set by the mutation rate of the gene
concerned, and I imagine it will be a very
g2 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

long time before methods of reducing the
mutation rate are discovered. Where the
genetic factor is fully dominant and where
the condition always causes death in childhood then all cases are due to mutations.
There are a pair of chromosomes on which
the mutation can occur, and so the incidence
of these diseases will be twice the mutation
rate. It is just conceivable that novel
environmental means will be found to prevent
such genes taking effect, but with new
mutations it will be difficult to know when
to apply environmental prophylaxis.
Where the disease does not interfere with
the ability of the affected person to reproduce,
the incidence of the deformity could be cut
down to that which was twice the mutation
rate if all affected individuals refrained from
having children. This decision on whether
to refrain from having children or not can
reasonably be left to the parents themselves
once they are informed of the facts; the
affected person is probably the best judge of
the disability caused by his deformity and
whether it is something which he or she would
like to transmit to children. I do not think
anyone would mind much about transmitting
short fingers to their children, but they might
well be deterred by Achondroplasia, even
though Achondroplasiacs, if they survive
infancy, can and do lead happy and useful
lives. Such individuals need not of course
deny themselves the pleasure of any family
at all provided that they plan their families
at well below replacement rate, say, two
children. The life of the new mutation will
then be restricted to only a few generations.
Where the genetic factor is recessive there
are much greater possibilities of reducing the
incidence of the defect. It can be shown
that the number of persons with a severe
defect due to recessive gene tends to equal
the mutation rate of the gene concerned. It
has been suggested that the incidence of
such deformities could be reduced for a time
if the amount of inbreeding is reduced, say, by
forbidding cousin marriages. But in the long
run this would be futile since the number of
‘harmful genes eliminated in each generation
is also reduced for a time, and in consequence
the number of harmful genes build up again

till the number of those affected again equals
the mutation rate. The position, however,
will be very different once it is possible to
recognize the presence of the recessive gene
in the normal carrier. If these carriers were all
recognized, and if they planned the number of
their children at well below replacement rate,
then the frequency of the normal carrier would
approximate to twice the mutation rate as
with a lethal dominant gene. With a recessive
gene, however, this would mean in practice
that the number of affected individuals who
have the abnormal gene on both that pair of
chromosomes would fall to quite negligible
proportions. The detection of carriers will
not be easy in human beings. The poultry
farmer can cross a cock with a score of that
cock’s daughters and so make sure that it is
not carrying any harmful recessive genes.
With humans we must use other methods,
but we already know of one blood disease,
Mediterranean anemia, where the carrier
state can be recognized with some certainty
by laboratory test on the red blood cells. All
carriers, however, of recessive genes cannot
be encouraged to have small families at the
same time or the population would fall
drastically. We are probably all carriers of
at least one such gene. It would be necessary
to take them one by one as part of some coordinated scheme; but nevertheless it is
clear that the possibilities of improvement
are much greater with deformities due to
recessives than with those due to dominants.

For the conditions where both genetical
and environmental factors are involved the
most profitable immediate line of attack
would probably be on the environmental
factors. For example, if women had their
families before they were thirty-five, which
physiologically they could easily do even if
they planned to have five or six, the number
of mongols would be reduced by nearly twothirds. Again if we could recognise the
environmental factors that play a part in
congenital dislocation of the hip we could
take care that they did not occur to those
children whom there was reason to suppose
were genetically predisposed to this condition. Such environmental prophylaxis, however, by itself would be unsatisfactory since
CONGENITAL MALFORMATIONS 93

it would tend to reduce the rate of elimination
of the harmful genes and so increase the
number of persons who would need special
treatment to prevent the gene taking effect,
but as it becomes possible to recognize the
genetic predisposition in individuals who are
apparently normal it will become possible to
reduce the frequency of the predisposing
genes by advising such predisposed persons
to have small families. This will reduce the
number of predisposed children for whom
special environmental prophylaxis has to be
supplied to reasonable numbers so that they
will not be missed and will get the necessary
special treatment.

An illustration of the technical and social
problems involved is given by hemolytic
disease of the new-born. It is probable that
before long means will be found of neutralizing the antibodies in the mother’s blood as
they are formed by repeated injections ; but
this would be a tedious procedure, and unless
some practical way of preventing the sensitization of the mother is found, communities
will have to consider seriously whether they
should not all try to become Rh positive.
Some peoples such as the South American
Indians and the Chinese are fortunate in that
they are already practically all Rh positive
so that hemolytic disease of the new-born is
practically unknown. The proportion of Rh
negative women in England is about 16 per
cent ; this would be reduced to a little over
12 per cent in one generation if all couples of
whom at least one was Rh negative planned
two-child families and failed to replace
themselves by about 30 per cent, while of
the remainder those couples who are both
Rh positive but carried a Rh negative gene
just replaced themselves, and those couples of
whom at least one carried no Rh negative
gene at all more than replaced themselves
by 20 per cent, planning families of, let us
say, five children. In practice, as with most
eugenic plans the difficulty will be to
encourage the last group to plan large
families, rather than to persuade the first
group to plan two-child families. In this way,
even with incomplete co-operation from the
parents, one would get a great reduction in

Rh negative genes in half a dozen generations,
a result that would only be achieved in many
thousands of years by natural selection.

With other conditions the detailed procedure necessary would be very different, but
the principle of getting the co-operation of
the public in planning family size to achieve
desirable changes in gene frequencies remains
the same. Where the causative factors of
congenital malformations have been fully
elucidated this knowledge must be made
available to parents through the medical
profession generally and through special
clinics. The final decision as to size of family
must, of course, rest with individual parents,
but they need guidance on the issues and
chances involved. Where it is desirable that
families should be small I am sure there will
be no difficulty in getting the co-operation of
the parents in limiting their aspirations to two
children. Iam also of the opinion that where
families should be large parents will respond
to guidance and moral encouragement.

I would like to end on the optimistic note
that human communities will be able in the
not-too-distant future, by taking reasonable
trouble, to bring down the incidence of
congenital malformations to the limits set
by the mutation rates of the genes concerned.

REFERENCES

Aycock, N. L. and Ingalls, T. H. (1946). Am. J.
Med. Sci., 212, 366.

Brzezinski, A., Branberg, K. and Braun, K. (1947).
J. Obst. Gyn. Brit. Emp., 54, 182.

Carter, C. (1950). J. Obst. Gyn. Brit. Emp., 57, 897.

Carter, C. and MacCarthy, D. (195). Brit. J. Soc. Med.
In press.

Faber, A. (1928). Untersuchungen thher die Aetiologie und
Pathogenese dev angeborene Hiifiverrenkung. Leipzig.

Goldstein, L. and Murphy, D. P. (1929). Am. J.
Roenigen, 22, 207.

Gregg, N. M. (1942). Tr. Ophth. Soc. Australia, 3, 35.

Isigkeit, E. (1928). Arch. Orthop. Mech. Ther., 26, 259.

Lowe, C. U., May, C. D. and Reed, S. C. (1949). Am. J.
Dis. Child., 78, 349.

Mollison, P. and Cutbush, M. (1949). B.M./J. (i), 123.

Merch, E. T. (1942). Chondrodystrophic dwarfs in
Denmark. Univ. Institute for Human Genetics,
Copenhagen. "

Murphy, D. P. (1947). Congenital Malformations. 2nd.
edn. Univ. Pennsylvania Press, Philadelphia.

Penrose, L. S. (1946). Ann. Eug., 13, 73.

Record, R. G. and McKeown, T. (1949). Brit. J. Soc.

Med., 3, 183.

(1951). Ibid. In press.

Roberts, J. A. F. (1950). Mother and Child, 21, 128.

Stevenson, S., Worcester, J. and Rice, R. (1950)

Pediatrics, 6, 37.
Eugenics Review, Vol. XLII, No. 2

 
