ACQUIRED CHARACTERS

Recent Experimental Evidence

By M. S. PEASE

one of no less practical importance to

the social reformer than it is of irresistible interest to the philosopher. The certain
establishment of Lamarckism would lay to
rest once and for all any doubts as to the
causes of evolution and any doubts as to the
wisdom in the long run of eleemosynary
legislation. To the eugenist the issue is vital.

Samuel Butler, still by far the ablest
dialectician in the Lamarckist camp, clearly
perceived the two weak spots in the defence.
One was the adaptations of neuter insects and
the other the absence of experimental proof.
Both remain with us to-day. Butler put
forward an ingenious (if somewhat fantastic)
suggestion for the bees and ants, while he
evaded the matter of experimental evidence
by pointing to the enormous lapse of time
required for any evolutionary change to
become perceptible. Later arrivals in this
field of controversy have, however, taken the
converse line by evading the neuter insects
and bringing forward successive champions
to bear witness to the experimental evidence.
As a result, it is true to say to-day that a
number of experiments have been described
which fit a Lamarckian interpretation,
though usually it has not been difficult to find
a selectionist interpretation as well. But it is
equally true that every one of these instances,
from the classic case of Brown-Séquard a
generation ago to Professor McDougall’s
rats of to-day, has failed to obtain any confirmation.

A few years ago, the experiments of
Harrison and Garrett on induced melanism
in Selenia bilunarra seemed to be a Striking
case of the inheritance of an acquired
character. Professor Harrison fed larve of
this moth on leaves which had absorbed lead
and manganese salts in solution, and thus
produced experimentally a number of melanic

, ‘HE question of acquired characters is

171

moths. This induced type was inherited as a
mendelian recessive. Here at any rate was
a strikingly clear-cut case of induced change
(though it is not quite soclear that this change
was a purposeful adaptation arising from the
enforced change of habit). Be that as it may,
the experiment was clearly capable of confirmation at the hands of a competent and
patient entomologist. This laborious undertaking was carried through by Mr. McKenny
Hughes of the John Innes Horticultural
Institute ; his results, on a large scale with
adequate controls, have proved completely
negative.* No single case of an induced
melanic turned up. It is true that Hughes’s
material came from the south-east of England and Harrison’s from the industrial
north; the two strains may have had
different potentialities in their reaction to the
metallic salts—but this would introduce a
special hypothesis to explain a particular
discrepancy. The simple fact remains that
an attempt to repeat Harrison and Garrett’s
experiment resulted in failure.

Professor Haldane has contributed an
analytical appendix to Hughes’s paper and
this has called forth an interesting rejoinder
from Professor R. A. Fisher (Proc. Royal
Soctety, B, Vol. CXII, 1933) on the evaluation
of negative evidence in a mendelian experiment. In Hughes’s case, Professor Fisher
points out, the figures by no means exclude
the possibility of the metallic salts being a
causative agent of a mutation rate up to 5
per cent. per generation. What, however,
Professor Fisher’s calculations do show is
that if lead and manganese are the causative
agents of Harrison and Garrett’s observed
mutations, then these metallic salts induce a
mutation rate of an altogether greater order
of magnitude than that produced by the

* Induced Melanism in Lepidoptera. Proc. Royal Soc.,
B, Vol. CX, 1932.
172

most effective known agency for inducing
mutations, namely, X rays. It would seem,
then, that Harrison and Garrett have proved
too much; it would be simpler to suppose
(as both Haldane and Fisher point out) that
the mutant gene was already present in
Harrison and Garrett’s material.

The whole matter of acquired characters
has recently been re-argued in the correspondence columns of Nature (June 4thAugust 7th, 1932) by Professors McBride and
J. B. S. Haldane. The new material for
argument consists of the experiments by
Metalnikoff, which seem to show the inheritance of induced immunity to disease in
the bee’s-wax caterpillar (Galleria). There is
some obscurity as to exactly what precautions Metalnikoff took to rule out an explanation along ordinary selectionist lines ; but at
best it would be a wise caution, in view of the
history of previous cases, to suspend judgment pending repetition of the experiment.

More recently the EUGENICS REVIEW has
done good service in publishing an article by
“‘ Student ’’* in which attention is drawn to the

* January 1933, p. 293.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

important but oddly quite unnoticed experiments by Winter (Journal of Agricultural
Research, July-December 1929) on selection
in maize. Here we have a demonstration of
the unexpectedly large range of potential
variability. Isolated cases of this have long
been known to -geneticists—for example,
Salaman’s case of segregation for resistance to
wart disease in potatoes from South America,
where wart disease does not exist. But
Winter’s experiments have emphasized the
general case for a measurable character ; and
in view of his results the position of selection
requiresrestatement; clearly the effect ofselection is not necessarily bounded by Johannsen’s
limits. The Lamarckist has always found it
difficult to credit selection with any large
share in moulding the course of evolution ;
it is possible that Winter’s results may to
some extent remove this difficulty, for it
offers a mendelian-selectionist explanation
for the unexpected rapidity with which a
species responds by apparently purposeful
adaptation to a change in external environment.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXV, No. 3.
