STERILIZATION IN DENMARK

A Eugenic as well as a Therapeutic Clause

By H. O. WILDENSKOV

(Physician-in-Chief to Den Kellerske Aandssvageanstalt, Brejning, Denmark)

October issue of this REVIEW, the sen
tence occurs: ‘‘ We do not understand
the object of the Danish sterilization law,
which is not, apparently, intended to prevent reproduction.’’ It is, I am sorry to
say, my usually very well-informed fellowcountryman, Dr. Sdéren Hansen, who has
occasioned this misunderstanding, as he
writes on page 233: “‘ Last year a sterilization law, the first in Europe, was passed
authorizing the directors of these institutions to have certain troublesome aments
sterilized—but mainly dangerous sexual
offenders.’”’

Being one of the directors mentioned, I
shall try to point out that this idea is not
correct, and I trust that I shall succeed in
giving a better understanding of the Danish
Act.

As far as I know, the Canton Vaud of
Switzerland—and not Denmark—was the
first European country to pass a Sterilization Act (January Ist, 1929). As to the
experience with this Act, I may refer to
the results of the first year, published by
Dr. Wanner in L’Hygiene mentale, No. 7,
1930, pp. 163-72.

The Danish Act is now of two years’
standing (being passed June rst, 1929). It
consists* of two main sections, aimed at
two kinds of widely different individuals :

| N Notes of the Quarter (page 200) in the

Section 1 is strictly limited to sexual
offenders, as it says: ‘‘ Persons who,
through the abnormal degree or character
of their sexual desire, are liable to commit crimes ...’? This paragraph does
not take into consideration the question
of offspring.

 

* Mental Welfare, Vol. 8, 1927, pp. 74-78.

3II

Section 2 is social—eugenic—the consideration of the offspring being here the
absolutely decisive factor, which is expressed as follows: ‘‘ Operations on the
genital organs may be permitted in
psychically abnormal persons, who, although they do not present any such
danger to the public security as dealt with
in Section 1, still render it important to
society and beneficial to themselves. that
they be rendered incapable of reproduction.”

Thus, it is emphasized in this Act that
section 1 deals with the public security,
and Section 2 with the question of reproduction. In practice, this means that Section 1
demands castration, whereas Section 2
demands vasectomy or salpingectomy.

Dr. Soren Hansen thinks that the Act is
aimed at ‘‘ certain troublesome aments.”’
That this is correct in the case of the sexual
offenders (Section 1) is obvious, of course;
but it does not apply to Section 2, which
does not say one word about ‘‘ the aments ”’
being ‘“‘ troublesome.’’ They may be so,
but only to the public purse—through their
offspring.

I may reply to the erroneous conception of
the Danish Act by giving an account of my
own recommendations, as prescribed by the
Act. I wish to point out that my authority of recommendation for sterilization is
limited to the two most troublesome departments of this institution: (1) the islanddepartment} for criminal, mentally defective
males (95 inmates), and (2) the islanddepartment for mentally defective women
(44 inmates), criminal, sexually loose, or
vagrant. It is easy to understand that this

 

t+ An account of these island-departments is given
in Mental Welfare, Vol. 8, 1927, No. x, pp. 1-7.
312

human material entails a relatively frequent
employment of Section 1, as one has to be
very cautious in recommending the application of Section 2 on women who are not only
erotic, but also criminals or vagabonds.
This is really the crucial test of the efficacy
of a sterilization Act.

EUGENIC PRACTICE UNDER THE ACT

According to Section 1, I have recommended five men for castration. Of
these four have been operated on and discharged, and at the time of writing they
have been living in society for one year;
one is still awaiting operation. In three of
these patients it was a question of recurrent
assaults, in one it was obscenity towards
children, and in one it was recurrent homosexuality. I am still in touch with these
individuals. They all declare that they are
satisfied with the operation. As far as my
experience goes, we have here at our disposal a truly curative operation that
changes these individuals from the most
dreaded criminals to persons that are
altogether harmless sexually. Up to the
present, I have recommended only persons
over 30 years, in whom puberty may unquestionably be regarded as completed.
With the favourable results from the operation, however, it is now my intention tentatively to lower the age limit to about 25
years. In none of these cases has the operation caused any injurious psychic or physical effects. JI have had an intimate
knowledge of these five individuals through
a number of years prior to the operation,
and I cannot now find any indication of any
change in their behaviour or appearance
except this one, that the sexual reaction is
altered. I consider this operation, which is
usually denounced as inhumane, to be by
far the most humane procedure against
these persons, who are otherwise sentenced
to indefinite internment for many years.

According to Section 2, I have recommended thirteen women and one man
for sterilization. Amongst the women,
one died from an acute disease before the
operation; one was not approved by the
Department of Justice; and one is not yet

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

operated on. There remain, then, ten
women on whom the operation has been
performed. Before their admission to this
institution, they had given birth to 23
children. After the operation, these girls
are discharged to private families; a small
annual compensation is paid these families ;
and the girls are under the supervision of
the institution. Of the aforementioned ten
girls, nine have been discharged in this
way, on an average eight months before the
writing of this paper. In none of these
cases has it been necessary for me to fetch
them back to the institution. Seven of them
have behaved creditably ; one girl had intercourse with a mentally defective man, a
comrade of her brother, who was also a
mental defective. This girl was transferred
to another family in another rural district,
away from the unfortunate association with
her brother. Another girl claimed that she
was pursued by an old man. ‘The subsequent trial gave no definite evidence that
coitus had been accomplished, but the girl
was transferred to another district.

—AND SOME NOT STERILIZED

For the sake of comparison, I may mention that three non-sterilized girls were
placed under similar conditions for about
the same period. One of these had to be
taken back to the institution, as she was
pregnant.

The only man recommended for this
operation has been discharged tentatively.
He has now become engaged to a mentally
defective girl, who has already two illegitimate children, whereas he has begotten only

one child. Both have consented to his
sterilization.
Before recommending the above-men
tioned women for sterilization, I made a
field study of the hereditary aspects of their
cases. All the recommendations were
explained on the grounds that in all probability these women would give birth to
defective children, and that their behaviour
and working capacity was good enough to
entitle them to a ‘try-out’ in society,
whereas the probability of defective offspring was so great that it did not seem
STERILIZATION

warrantable to discharge thefm from the
institution without being sterilized.

Thus, in a total number of 44 female
inmates, 13 (or 29.5 per cent.) have been
recommended for operation, 10 (or 22.7 per
cent.) have been operated on, and 9 (or 20.4
per cent.) have been discharged. They have
all been recommended for operation according to Section 2 of the Sterilization Act.
Experiences obtained in this particularly
dificult material do not lend any support
to the objections raised by the opponents of
sterilization, namely, that after the operation such girls will be given particularly to
licentiousness and the spreading of venereal
diseases. Economically, these operations
mean for the present a saving of about
8,000 Kroner (Danish crowns) a year; and
besides, the discharge of these inmates has
enabled me to meet the requirements of new

IN DENMARK 313
admissions without a costly extension of
the department.

CORRIGENDA

We much regret that, owing to linguistic
difficulties, two slips occurred in Professor
Hansen’s article in our last number :

1.—Page 231, column 1, the sentence,
““".. one may date the beginning of
eugenical work here from 1788, when the
country became a single province.’’? The
words here italicized should be, ‘‘ when
compulsory treatment of venereal diseases
was introduced in a single province.’’ The
whole country followed suit the next year.

2.—Page 232, column 2, the phrase,
‘* Deaf-mutism is generally spoken of as
always the final result . . .,’’ should have
been, ‘‘ Deaf-mutism is—generally speaking—always the final result . . .”’—Ep.

\ Oey”

JOURNAL OF COMPARATIVE LEGISLATION
AND INTERNATIONAL LAW

THIRD SERIES.

1. ARTICLES :—

Disraeli and the Constitution.

VoL. XIII. Part IV.

NOVEMBER 10931.

CONTENTS :

The Future of Prize Law and the Freedom of the Seas.
By W. I. Jennings, Esq.

By T. Baty, Esq., D.C.L., LL.D.

‘* Dominion ” Nationality. By E. F. W. Gey van Pittius, Esq., M.A., Ph.D.

A Comparison of the General Principles of Criminal Law in England with the “ Progetto Defini
tivo di un Nuovo Codice Penale”’ of Alfredo Rocco.

By W. T. S. Stallybrass, Esq., D.C.L.

Foreign Persons and Companies doing Business in Germany. By Dr. Fritz Oppenheimer.
John Selden and Jewish Law. By Dr. Isaac Herzog.
Notes on Imperial Constitutional Law. By Professor A. Berriedale Keith, D.C.L.

2. NOTES.

3. NOTICES OF BOOKS.

Annual Subscription, One Guinea.

SOCIETY OF COMPARATIVE LEGISLATION, 1 Elm Court, Temple, E.C.4.

All communications respecting Advertisements to be sent to
Mussrs. MacmMILLaAn & Co., Lrp., St. Martin’s Street, London, W.C.2.

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIII, No. 4.
