“THE INFERIOR QUALITY OF THE
FIRST-BORN CHILDREN.
By SOREN HANSEN.!

THE great decline in the birth-rate in most civilized countries
has brought into prominence the question of the inferior quality
of the earlier children and given it an interest, which extends
far beyond the family circle. At the present time about 75,000
children are born in Denmark each year and of these probably
a hundred or so are weak-minded. Whether among these
there are 16 or 25 first-born is naturally of no importance save
to the persons concerned and their relatives, but if tt 1s a general
rule that the earlier children are of essentially inferior quality
in comparison with their brothers and sisters, then the racial
quality of the nation as a whole may be reduced when the birthrate falls, simply because the first-born constitute an increasing
proportion of the nation. In Berlin, for example, the proportion of first-born has increased from 22 per cent. in 1885 to 33
per cent in 1906, and in France the proportion is almost 50 per
cent., while in Denmark they only amount as yet to one-fourth
of the total number of children.

That the earliest born children are of inferior quality to the
succeeding at birth is an indisputable and long-known fact of
experience. They weigh less, they are more frequently stillborn, and of those that come into the world alive a much larger
proportion die in the first year, but the belief has prevailed
hitherto that the difference gradually vanishes in the later years,
and certainly the first attempts to prove its persistence in the
more advanced year-groups were not convincing. It had not
been remarked that the problem is much more complicated than
seemed probable at first sight, and sufficient attention was not
paid to all the many collateral circumstances that affect investigations of this kind. Whilst much of the criticism advanced
has been quite superficial, some of the objections have led to a
deeper probing of the question and have brought the study of
this equally strange and important phenomenon on to more
rational lines.

* Translated from the Danish by H. M. Kyle.
INFERIOR QUALITY OF THE FIRST-BORN CHILDREN. 253

In the following pages a condensed summary will be given
of the evidence, that the earlier born children, not only at birth,
but even at a much later period in life, are inferior in quality to
the later children. Every one will be able to judge, whether the
evidence is satisfactory, as no special mathematical or other
scientific acquirements are necessary for its understanding.

For this purpose pulmonary tuberculosis has been chosen.
This disease is acquired in general at a very early age, whilst
the organism has still but feeble powers of resistance, but does
not usually reach its full development until the individual is
considerably older. It is further so common that no great
difficulty is experienced in obtaining a sufficiently large material
for statistical investigation.

On going through the journals of the consumptive section
of the Oresund Hospital in Copenhagen information has been
obtained regarding the serial position in the family of
3,522 tubercular patients. Arranging these in a table like
the accompanying we at once obtain a general picture of
the size of the families concerned and the serial position
of the patients in each. We see—in the column farthest
to the right—that there were 988 first-born, 713 secondborn, 568 third, and so on. As there were 178 marriages
with one child, 301 with two children, and on the whole a large
number of marriages with few children, it is not surprising that
there are many of the first-born, but if we wish to know whether
there are more or fewer than there should be if the birth
number has no influence, we must examine how many there
would be, if the patients were distributed over the birth numbers
(first-born, second-born, etc.) in the same proportions as the
total number of sound and diseased children.

If we assume that the 3,522 tubercular patients represent
just as many marriages, it is evident that there must have been
3,522 first-born in these marriages, and if we deduct the 178
marriages with only a single child from this number we obtain
the number of the second-born children or 3,344. Deducting
from this the number of marriages with only two children we
obtain the number‘of third-born, or 3,043 and so on. Lastly,
adding together all these numbers we ascertain the total number
EUGENICS REVIEW.

254

 

¢ |—}]—]—]~—| —
r {zz {—|—|]—j|—
— a f — — —
r |—|S jz |—{|—
z{—j2}S | or} —
I z I € |6 19
€ {zz |}f€ |1 Jz {eg
z{—|1 zi|/golv
—iI zj}z2f€ |g
—!1 |—|]—I19]§
—i—|1 |& |g jor
I z € | ¢ L | or
—1I r 1g |Z | 6
I z S 1 |v | 41
I |—j1 GS | 11 | 6
G§ ;—|]€ |9 | 6 | or

‘SGOVINUVNW AHL NI

61 | 161 | gze| vee! Ser | ofb | gsr

NdYaTWHO dO ATH#NON

— | Jj Oe

oe
~! TTP liridietl

 

 

we AA PINO ~™O OOH AMY ST
on

 

‘requinu
“Wag
INFERIOR QUALITY OF THE FIRST-BORN CHILDREN. 255

of children in all the marriages, thus 20,600, and of these 3,522,
as mentioned, or almost a sixth part were tubercular. Taking
now this proportion of one-sixth (more exactly 0°171) as the
normal relation of diseased to sound children, no matter what
the birth-number is, we find that there should be among the
diseased 602 first-born, 572 second-born, 520 third-born, and so
on, whereas there are in reality 988, 713, 568, and so on.

This simple calculation shows, that among the 3,522 tubercular patients there were 386, or about 64 per cent., more firstborn than there should be, if the birth-number is of no
consequence. Nevertheless, we cannot take this result as definitive until we have carefully determined, whether the method is
correct. It has to be noted, first of all, that we are only dealing
with children of the marriages which have produced consumptive patients. The possibility is not excluded, that for some
reason or another too many first-born have come under observation, and that the surplus noted does not agree with the actual
condition. Thus, there seems something wrong, when we
notice that all the children in the marriages with but one child,
and almost half the children of the marriages with two children,
were tubercular, since this is not the case among the population
in general. We can get rid of this objection in a very simple
manner by excluding entirely all the marriages with but one
child, or with few children, or even more simply by taking
account only of the marriages with a certain number of children
for example, five, and we then find that of the 430 tubercular
patients issuing from such marriages 107 were first-born,
whereas there should only be one-fifth or 86. Moreover, we
can also investigate whether the families represented in the
hospital contain more or fewer first-born than in the total
population of Copenhagen, and the result of this investigation
is quite decisive.

According to the census taken in Copenhagen on February
Ist, 1901, there were 17,819 marriages with children, and in
these there were altogether 69,940 children. Of these 17,819
or 255 per thousand were first-born, whereas in the families
represented in the Oresund Hospital there were 20,600 children,
and 3,522, or 171 per thousand, first-born.
256 | EUGENICS REVIEW.

This difference arises from the fact that the tubercular
patients were on the whole grown-up, thus born in marriages of
so old a date that child-bearing had ceased, which was not the
case with all the marriages of the census.

On closer examination it appears that in marriages of less
than five years’ duration there were 613 per thousand first-born,
in marriages of from 5 to 10 years’ duration 337 per thousand,
and so on.

If we exclude these marriages and only take account of those
of 25 years’ duration and more we find that in these there were
173 per thousand first-born, or almost precisely the same proportion as in the families represented in the hospital. Among
the latter, as already mentioned, there are 171 per thousand,
or almost a sixth part of all the children, whereas the number
of first-born tubercular patients amounted to almost a fourth of
the total number. A direct comparison of the number of firstborn in all marriages, without regard for their duration, with
that among the tubercular patients, with an average age of
about 30 years, is not permissible.

It might seem probable that the considerable surplus of
first-born tubercular patients arose from the fact that they were
older than those born later and thus had been longer exposed to
the risk of infection. To inquire into this condition information
regarding the age of the patients has been obtained in the case
of a somewhat smaller material from Boserup Sanatorium.
This embraces 2,113 tubercular patients, and shows that the
average age of all the men was 29'6, of all the women 27°4
years. This was quite independent of the birth-number. If
we divide this material into two groups for each sex, such that
the first group contains the first three birth-numbers, the second
all the later children, we find that the earlier born men are even
a little younger than thé later born, namely 29°5 against 29°8
years old, whilst there is no difference for the women. This
result is in good agreement with what has long been
known regarding the vitality of the first-born. After they
have overcome the difficulties of the first year or the first
two years their chances of life are not less but rather a little
better than those of the later born, not because they are in any
INFERIOR QUALITY OF THE FIRST-BORN CHILDREN. 257

way stronger, but because the mortality increases with the size
of the family and the increasing difficulties of obtaining sufficient
care and nourishment. This well-known condition leads to the
result that at an age of about 30 years there are almost as many
first-born in the world as later born. According to some
investigations there are even a little more, though the difference
is not so great, that it can explain the large number of first-born
tubercular patients. It is greatest in countries where the birthrate is low and where special care is taken of the few children
born, especially when the desire is to have not more than a few.
In France, for example, we may estimate that at the age of 30
years there are almost 790 out of 1,000 first-born children alive
against about 725 out of 1,000 fifth-born.

We have not any similar investigations for Denmark, but
if we start from the French data we may estimate that in the
above-mentioned 430 families with five children there would be
go tubercular patients, if the birth-number were of no importance, whereas there are 107. Thus, even under this very wide
presupposition there is an appreciable surplus; but, as a matter
of fact, there is no reason to believe that in Denmark there
really are more first-born than later children living at thirty
years of age; consequently, we should not expect go, but as
shown above 86 first-born among the 430 tubercular patients
born in the marriages with five children.

It has been necessary to refer to this point in some detail,
since it might, partly at least, have explained the greater
frequency of tuberculosis among the first-born, if the birth-rate
in Denmark were as low as that in France. In investigations of
this kind it is necessary to think of every conceivable source of
error, and under this heading we have just the great difference
in the composition of the population in the different countries.
To compare the frequency of the first-born in a Copenhagen
sanatorium with the conditions in a country district in
Denmark would be just as erroneous as to compare the
conditions in an English sanatorium with those in New
South Wales. Further, the material must emanate from
within such a short period of time, that no_ essential
changes have occurred during the interval in the birth258 EUGENICS REVIEW.

rate, and at every point we must always deal with the actual
conditions. Lastly, we have to make certain that the material
is as trustworthy and accurate as possible, and in this respect
the information from sanatoria is much superior to that of
insurance societies, where we have always to discount the fact
that the insured are not interested in remembering cases of
tuberculosis among their brothers and sisters. But when we
have duly considered all these difficulties we may safely conclude that the result is as correct as statistical investigations
can be.

From the investigations discussed here it may be taken as
certain that pulmonary tuberculosis is considerably more
frequent among the earlier children than among the later, and
it may be considered, from all we know about the initial causes
of this disease, that this is due to the feebler resisting power to
tubercular infection of the earlier by comparison with the later
children. This again probably arises from imperfect nutrition
during pregnancy, since the channels of circulation in the genital
organs of the mother are not yet so well developed as to be able
to provide the embryo with sufficient nourishment. Our
information on this point is certainly meagre, but in any case
it is a probable explanation, which is in good agreement
with the well-known fact, that abortions are very frequent
among newly-married women. The first child born at full
term, excluding those conceived before marriage, is born on an
average at least sixteen months after marriage in the case of
younger mothers and much later for older. That such a total
or partial undernourishment of the embryo is able to affect
disadvantageously the quality of the first-born child in many
ways seems evident, and there is thus nothing improbable in
the fact that it is frequently troubled by defects, which reduce
its vitality to such an extent that it dies before or shortly
after birth. In many cases, however, these defects are of such a
nature that the child can live with them and even attain to a
considerable age. The question is, therefore, whether the
difference is of such frequent occurrence that it can be detected
statistically, as in the case of pulmonary tuberculosis. The
available investigations indicate that this is really the case, but
INFERIOR QUALITY OF THE FIRST-BORN CHILDREN. 259

with regard to imbecility, epilepsy, and similar defects, the
evidence is not yet absolutely convincing.

If we ask, finally, whether the inferior quality of the earlier
children is actually so low that it may influence the racial
quality in general, when the number of the first-born increases
in proportion as the birth-rate decreases, we must certainly
answer in the positive, yet the danger has been greatly overestimated. The racial quality is dependent on so many other
conditions, that it is only to a certain extent influenced by the
greater or smaller number of the first-born children, and with
regard to infantile mortality especially there is sufficient
evidence that it is considerably less in families with few children
than in families with many. But even in this connection we
must guard against general conclusions. Whereas the conditions in France have reached a considerable amount of
stability, because the birth-rate there has been low for many
years already, it is not excluded that in England and the other
English-speaking countries the racial quality may really have
been reduced as a direct consequence of the falling birth-rate.
Since the fertility of marriages decreases much more rapidly
among the well-to-do than in the lower levels of the population,
it is quite possible that, hand in hand with the social displacement accompanying this, there will be a decline in the mental
and physical level, which may be fateful for the nation unless
attention is called to the danger. In other countries also the
declining birth-rate is a social phenomenon, which deserves
attention. The experience of France indicates that the movement can hardly be stopped, but the consequences may be
guarded against by special care of the children that come into
the world, and especially of the first-born, for the reason that
they are less well equipped by nature for the struggle for
existence.
