C. H. WADDINGTON
C.B.E., Sc.D., F.R.S.

The Woodhull Lecture

Evolutionary Systems—Animal and Human’

HE MAJOR ADVANCE in the theory of

biological evolution since Darwin’s day

has been the rise of Mendelian genetics. It
is hardly an exaggeration to say that, when
Darwin wrote, biology possessed no theory of
inheritance. Since then, the existence of more or
less discrete hereditary factors has been discovered, their position in the cell ascertained to
be on the chromosomes in the nucleus, and the
behaviour of these chromosomes analysed in
great detail both in normal and in various more
or less unusual conditions.

The “‘Genetic System”

The whole of this complex of phenomena which
are concerned with the manner in which hereditary determinants are passed on from one
generation to the next may be referred to as the
“genetic system”. From the point of view of
evolutionary theory three main points have
emerged concerning it. The first is that the
existence of discrete hereditary determinants
safeguards variation against being lost if dissimilar animals cross-breed, as Darwin feared
it might.1 Indeed, the fact that during the greater
part of the life cycle of most animals and plants
the hereditary factors are present in the diploid
condition implies that most organisms carry
within them much greater potentialities for
variation in their offspring than would appear
at first sight. The second point, which is one that
we owe primarily to the insight of Darlington,”
is that the genetic system itself can be regarded
not only as an agent but also as a subject of
evolutionary change, which is to say that the

* The Woodhull Lecture was given on February 27th,
1959, at the Weekly Evening Meeting of the Royal
Institution, L. B. W. Jolley, M.A., M.LE.E., VicePresident in the Chair. It is here reproduced by kind
permission of Professor Waddington and The Royal
Institution, having first been published in the Proceedings
off The Royal Institution, 1959, volume 37, Part 5, Number

23

genetic system itself evolves. This I shall return
to later.

The third point concerns the origin of new
variation. It is essential to any theory of evolution that there must be some mechanism by
which new variation is brought into being.
Darwin was driven to speculate as to what this
mechanism might be. In the absence of any
understanding of how hereditary qualities are
transmitted, he made no pretence that he had
found a solution fully satisfactory to himself,
although he was somewhat tempted by the
theory, usually associated with the name of
Lamarck, that characters acquired by organisms
in the course of their lifetime might be transmitted to their offspring. Later experimental
investigations have shown that in general this
is not so.

Our knowledge of the genetic system, which
is very extensive and detailed, forces us to the
conclusion that the origin of new hereditary
variation is to be found only in alterations and
rearrangements of the atomic groupings out of
which the hereditary factors of the chromosomes are composed. These alterations follow
rules of stability which are still entirely unknown
to us, but which must be properties of the
hereditary molecules themselves and have little
or no relation to the precipitating events by
which the alterations were stimulated. One of
the most firmly based doctrines of modern
genetics is that mutation is a random process.
I do not wish to challenge this, but I shall
suggest later that some care is necessary in
interpreting the word “random.”

In present day biology, evolution is envisaged
as resulting from the interaction between, on the
one hand, the genetic system characterized by
random mutation, and on the other, natural
selection. The evolutionary pressures exerted
by these two factors are exhibited as being quite
external to the nature of the organisms involved.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, April 1960, 52, 1.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

The essential evolutionary pressure exerted by
the genetic system is that of mutation, and
mutation, it is explained, is a random process.
Any explanation which might be offered for the
nature of the mutational changes would have to
be found, it is asserted, in the chemical composition of the genes and not in the nature of
the complete biological organism in which these
genes are carried. Mutation thus appears as
essentially an external force to which the organism passively submits. Again, natural selective
pressures are usually thought of as arising simply
from the external environment. When the
climate changes, a new predator appears, or
industrial fumes blacken the tree trunks on which
the animal lives, the populations of organisms
concerned cannot, it is usually implied, do anything but submit to these pressures and wait
until the equally uncontrollable process of
mutation throws up a new hereditary variant
which enables them to meet the environment’s
challenge more successfully.

The Evolutionary Mechanism

The time seems to have come when we need to
take into account two further aspects of the
evolutionary mechanism.® In the first place,
natural selective pressures impinge not on the
hereditary factors themselves, but on the
organisms as they develop from fertilized eggs
to reproductive adults. We need to bring into
the picture not only the genetic system by which
hereditary information is passed on from one
generation to the next, but the “epigenetic
system” by which the information contained in
the fertilized egg is translated into the functioning structure of the reproducing individual.
Each organism during its lifetime will respond in
some manner to the environmental stresses to
which it is submitted, and in a population there
is almost certain to be some genetic variation in
the intensity and character of these responses.
Natural selection will favour those individuals
in which the responses are of most adaptive
value.

Two consequences can be expected to follow,
and have in fact been demonstrated experimentally. In the first place, natural selection will build
up genotypes which set going developmental
mechanisms which easily respond to environ
24

The Enplettive System

 

Genotypes of generation n

certain potentialities

Genotypes of generation n+1

FIGURE 1

THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE BIOLOGICAL
EVOLUTIONARY SYSTEM

mental stresses by the production of a wellorganized modification which is of adaptive
value. It will, as it were, build into the genotype
a gun which is not only set on a hair trigger but
which is aimed to hit the target when it goes off.
In so far as such a developmental response
becomes precisely delimited and easily initiated,
it becomes the more likely to be produced by
unspecified changes in the chemical nature of
the hereditary substance. Mutations, which we
can think of as random when we are considering
the nucleo-proteins of the chromosomes, will
have effects on the phenotype of the organisms
which are not necessarily random, but which
will be modified by the types of instability
which have been built into the epigenetic
mechanisms by selection for response to
environmental stresses.

Since this is an unfamiliar point of view it may
be as well to illustrate it by actual example.‘ If
eggs of the fruit fly Drosophila are submitted to
ether vapour shortly after laying, a proportion
of them tend to have their development modified
THE WOODHULLL LECTURE

so that they produce a very peculiar phenotype,
known as bithorax, in which the third segment
of the thorax of the animal is transformed from
its normal small and obscure structure into a
duplicate of the large second thoracic segment.
We can treat the response as though it were
favoured by selection, and in each generation
breed from those individuals in the population
which respond to the stress in this way. When
this was done with a population taken from a
normal wild type stock, it became apparent
that there was some genetic variation of the
capacity to respond in this manner. If selection
favoured the response, the frequency with which
it occurred increased from generation to generation, until after some time it became practically
universal when the selected stock was submitted to the ether. After some time a new gene
mutation occurred; this was a sex-linked factor
which had not been present in the original stock.
Its effect is that females homozygous for it lay
eggs which tend to develop the bithorax phenotype. This is particularly striking when the factor
is present in the selected stock, in which, as it
were, the bithorax modification has been set on
a hair trigger. If, by various types of crossbreeding, the factor is removed from this stock
and transferred into an unselected wild-type
stock, the tendency to produce bithoraxes is
very much reduced, though it remains just large
enough to make it clear that the factor could not
have been present in the strain with which the
experiment started. We have here an example in
which selection has built up a genotype which
exhibits a particular type of developmental
instability. A gene mutation has occurred which
in the normal Drosophila would have only a
very slight tendency to produce this phenotype,
but which does so with considerably frequency
in the selected stock. Thus, if one merely refers
to such a gene mutation as “random”, one does
not say by any means everything of interest
which can be told about it.

The other main evolutionary effect of the
epigenetic system depends on the fact that the
development of organisms is usually to some
extent canalised, in the sense that even though
it may become somewhat modified in response
to an environmental stress, it also exhibits a

tendency to reach its normal end-result in spite
of disturbing circumstances. If a strain of
animals is selected over many generations for
its capacity to respond in a particular way to a
certain stress, a set of genotypes will be built up
in which this response is easily exhibited when
the environmental stress is applied, but the
developmental resistance to change may be
sufficient to ensure that some of it is still retained
even if the stress is removed. If that happens,
we should have a system which exactly mimics
the inheritance of an acquired character, but
one which depends not on the direct induction
of a hereditary variation, in the manner suggested
by Lamarck, but on selection operating on the
genetical structure of the population.

Again, there is a practical chapter and verse
for such a suggestion in the experiments with the
bithorax modification. After rather more than
twenty generations of selection for ease of
response to ether vapour, the strain had reached
a condition in which a high proportion of
bithorax individuals appeared even when the
ether treatment was not given.

In another experiment a population of wildtype Drosophila was grown on a normal medium
to which sufficient sodium chloride had been
added to cause the death of the majority of the
larvae. The osmotic regulation of the Drosophila
larva is known to involve a pair of papillae on
either side of the anus. After twenty-one generations, flies from four strains which had been
submitted to this selection were grown in various
concentrations of salt, and the size of their anal
papillae compared with that of the initial strains
on which no selection had been exerted.

The selection had increased the capacity of
the individuals to respond to the stress of the
salt; the curve relating the size of the anal organ

to the salt content of the medium is steeper in

the selected strains than in the unselected.
Secondly, at any particular concentration of
salt the size of the anal organ is larger in the
selected strain than in the corresponding unselected one. The modification provoked by the
salt has become, to some extent, genetically
fixed or “‘assimilated’’. This is the process which
I have spoken of as the genetic assimilation of an
acquired character. Although its mechanism is

25
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

quite different from the Lamarckian inheritance
of acquired characters, being entirely based on
the concepts of orthodox Mendelian genetics, it
can in fact play the same role in evolutionary
theory for which Lamarckian hypotheses have
often been invoked.

To obtain a complete picture of the evolutionary system, we need to take into account one
further set of factors. These may be spoken of
as the exploitive system. Animals—the following
considerations do not apply so directly to plants
—are usually surrounded by a much wider range
of environmental conditions than they are
willing to inhabit. They live in a highly heterogeneous “ambiance”, from which they themselves select the particular habitat in which their
life will be passed. Thus the animal by its
behaviour contributes in a most important way
to determining the nature and intensity of the
selective pressures which will be exerted on it.
Natural selection is very far from being as
external a force as the conventional picture might
lead one at first sight to believe.

The problems which arise in this field have as
yet been rather little studied, even in the biological field, where the relations are likely to be
relatively simple. This area of study is, however,
likely to be of particular importance for eugenics,
since human behaviour is incomparably more
elaborate than that of the majority of animals,
and in particular the behaviour associated with
choice and the seeking of particular goals is
much more fully developed. Darlington’ has
already expressed opinions about the importance of the exploitive system in human evolution,
in his suggestion that hereditary differences
between various human groupings have led them
to choose or to create appropriate types of
selective pressure amongst the diversified possibilities offered by human society. Before such
hypotheses can be accepted, however, it is
necessary to consider how, if at all, the human
evolutionary system differs from the biological.

A “‘Socio-Genetic” System

Biological evolution, then, is carried out by a
mechanism which involves four major factors:
a genetic system, an epigenetic system, an
exploitive system, and a system of natural
selective pressures (Figure 1). All these factors

26

undoubtedly persist in man, but, just as the
genetic system is itself subject to evolution, so in
broader terms we may say that this whole fourcomponent evolutionary system, of which the
genetic system is only a part, itself evolves. The
human situation is characterized by an enormously important step in the evolution of the
evolutionary mechanism. Indeed, it might be
not unreasonable to define humanity by this fact.
In man, the processes of teaching by the older
members of the population, and learning by the
younger ones, have been carried to an incomparably higher pitch than is found in any of the
prehuman forms of life, where they play only a
relatively minor role, for instance, in the determination of bird song, and a few other examples.
In man, they have developed not only to highly
effective person-to-person learning, as in apprenticeship, but, by the invention of writing and
other more recent devices, to an extremely
elaborate system by which the whole conceptual
understanding of the past is made available to
present recruits to human society. We have here
what in effect amounts to a new mode of hereditary transmission. It may be referred to as the
cultural or “socio-genetic” system.

Within the last few millennia, the human race
has acquired capacities which in the non-human
world could only have been obtained as the
results of evolution. To give a banal example,
one may mention the ability to fly. Man has
certainly not achieved this capacity by waiting
for genes to turn up which have transformed his
fore-limbs into wings. In fact there is no evidence
that changes in the pool of genes available to the
human race had any specific effect on the
development of the human conquest of the air.
This does not mean, of course, that the genes
were irrelevant. Human inventiveness and skill,
just like any character of any organism, are
produced by the interaction of genes with one
another and with the environment during
development. But so far as one can tell, all the
genes necessary to produce men capable of
inventing methods of flying had been present
in the human population for many generations.
What the development of flight was waiting for
was not some change in the genetic system, but
some change in the cultural system.

When one attempts to consider the problem
THE WOODHULL LECTURE

of human evolution, the type of phenomena
which should rise to one’s mind are all the most
crucial changes which have occurred between,
say, the late Stone Age and the present. It is not
in any important sense the slight changes in
bodily structure which differentiate us from
Cromagnon man which make the greatest
impression. Human evolution has been in the
first place a cultural evolution.

It is important not to overlook this first
impression of what human evolution is all about.
It is clear that for an understanding of how the
human race has come into the possession of
those characteristics which we now think most
valuable in human life, a theory is needed which
is primarily one of cultural evolution.

Cultural evolution

It seems probable that in the cultural evolutionary system there are parallels for many of the
factors operative in the biological system. For
instance, parallel to the process of gene mutation there is the arising of new ideas capable of
cultural transmission; and there are undoubtedly
processes, fulfilling a function similar to that of
natural selection, which determine whether newly
arisen ideas will in fact be perpetuated in future
generations or not. How far is the arising of
culturally novel ideas a process which can be
characterized as random, even in the restricted
sense in which we have seen this term should be
used in the biological sphere? What is it that
determines the intensity of the natural selective
pressure for or against the preservation of new
ideas? Again, items capable of cultural transmission such as ideas, techniques or skills do
not occur in isolation but are found in coordinated groups. Can we find here some parallel
to the genetic phenomena of linkage and recombination? The cultural exploitive system,
the system of choosing and modifying the
environment, is also obviously very highly
developed. Again, cultures reacting to external
stresses may become particularly liable to
modification in certain directions, exhibiting
phenomena similar to those we have attributed
to the epigenetic system. All these parallels,
however, remain as yet very incompletely
worked out. It would probably be profitable to
pursue them.®

Although it would seem prudent, when faced
by a phenomenon of human evolution, first to
consider by what cultural means it has been
brought about, it is also very necessary to
inquire into the biological or genetical phenomena associated with it. This is, however,
exceedingly difficult. Suppose a marked change
takes place in the gene pool of the human
population; under what circumstances should
we expect this to have an important influence
on the essential cultural achievements of the
group concerned? It is extraordinarily difficult
to find any factual evidence, since most examples
of marked changes in the gene pool of a population involve the immigration or emigration of
individuals who carry with them not only their
transmissible genes but also their transmissible
culture. For instance, one may postulate, as
Darlington® has done, that the emigrants from
Ireland in the middle of the last century carried
out of the population many genes for various
types of socially effective behaviour, leaving the
home population impoverished. But in practice
the existence of these genes is only hypothetical,
and even if they did exist the emigrants carried
with them, also and undoubtedly, culturally
transmitted tendencies to vigorous behaviour.

There are a few cases however,—for instance
when Jewish populations have migrated into
or out of a country, with whose population they
have not engaged in extensive cross-breeding,
but on whose life they have exerted a considerable influence—in which one may deduce that
this influence has been primarily a cultural
rather than a genetic one. Even if we were to
make the unsafe assumption that it is their genes
which endow the Jewish people or the Chinese
with great ability in trade, the effect which a
small number of Jews or Chinese may have on
the economic existence of the people surrounding
them can only be the result of cultural rather than
genetic transmission. Again, the rapidity in
terms of numbers of generations, with which
many steps of evolution take place (such as, say,
the formation of the characteristic United States
culture out of an extraordinarily mixed European
immigrant population) is hardly compatible
with the operations of the genetic evolutionary
mechanism and, it would seem, must in the
main be attributed to the actions of the

27
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

human cultural evolutionary system.

When we can discern cultural differences
between two human groups, does the main
responsibility for these lie with the system of
cultural transmission or with that of genetic
transmission? Again, from an a priori standpoint one must expect differences in both
systems to be involved, and it is exceedingly
difficult to assess the relative importance of the
two contributing factors. It is quite clear that
races such as the West Africans, the Maoris and
the Chinese, differ genetically from Europeans.
Some of these genetic differences are obviously
expressed in skin colour; there must surely be
others, more difficult to detect. But is there any
reason, for instance, to suppose that it is the
differences in the gene pool between the Chinese
and the European populations which have
caused the one to develop a social system based
on such relatively unindividualistic systems as
Confucianism and Buddhism and the other a
civilisation inspired by such a different system
of thought and feeling as Christianity? I see no
a priori reason to suppose anything of the kind;
nor is there sufficient factual evidence to establish such a conclusion.

Again, one can find examples, particularly in
quite recent times, in which human populations
have undergone important changes in periods of
time which seem much too short to allow of
noteworthy alterations in their genetic endowment. The change in West Africa from the
conditions described a century ago, to the
present highly sophisticated and technologically
competent modern societies, can only have been
accompanied by exceedingly small, if any,
changes in the general gene pool. One of the
most striking of such changes, and one of the
very few that has been carefully studied by a
highly trained specialist, is that of the Manus
people of the Admiralty Islands in the Pacific,
studied by Margaret Mead.’ This transformation
from a palaeolithic to at least the beginnings of
a modern society has taken place within a lifetime; that is to say, it has involved no genetic
alteration. It is a most remarkable example of
how powerful the cultural evolutionary system
may be.

These examples suggest, in my opinion, that
in producing the changes of the kind which we

28

consider of major importance in the evolution
of mankind, the cultural system of transmission
usually contributes incomparably more than the
genetical. Even when we can be certain that
genetical changes have occurred, as for instance
in the comparison between Africans and
Europeans, there are only one or two examples in
which these changes can be shown to have any
practical importance.

The genetic system of a population, as
Lerner,’ in particular, has pointed out, shows a
considerable power of resistance to factors such
as natural or artificial selection which attempt
to alter it. I have argued that the epigenetic
system shows similar characteristics of unresponsiveness.* One might expect, and I think the
evidence suggests, that cultural systems also
have some tendency to stability. This is probably
correlated to some extent with their size. The
fantastically rapid transformation of Manus
society occurred in a minute population of only
a few thousands; one could hardly expect the
fifty millions of Nigeria or the five hundred
millions of China to alter as rapidly. One cannot,
therefore, always expect the processes of change
mediated by the cultural evolutionary system to
occur in a shorter time than those which might
be carried out by the genetic system. It is only in
favourable cases that the critical evidence
emerges which shows that steps in human evolution can take place at a rate much faster than
the genetic mechanisms could bring about.
Cultural phenomena which involve stability
over long periods, need not necessarily, on a
priori grounds, be attributed to the genetical
system; there is no reason to doubt that cultural
transmission may operate over many generations.
Such questions will only be answerable when we
find further methods of gathering empirical data
which will enable us to distinguish the contributions of the two information-transmitting
systems in each particular case.

REFERENCES
1. Bateson, W. 1909. Mendel’s Principles of Heredity.
Cambridge University Press.
2. Darlington, C. D. 1939. The Evolution of Genetic
Systems. Cambridge University Press.

3. Waddington, C. H. 1957. The Strategy of the Genes.
London, Allen & Unwin.
THE WOODHULL LECTURE

4. Waddington, C. H. 1956. Genetic assimilation of the 6. Waddington, C. H. 1959. The human evolutionary
bithorax phenotype. Evolution, 10, 1-13; 1957. The system. Proc. Conference on Darwin & Sociology,
genetic basis of the “assimilated bithorax” stock. Edinburgh, April 1959 (in press).

J. Genet, 55, 241-245.

5. Darlington, C. D. 1958. The Control of Evolution in 7. Mead, Margaret. 1956. New Lives for Old. London,

Man. (Woodhull lecture.) Proc. Roy. Inst. 37, 77: Gollancz.

Nature, London, 182, 14: The Eugenics Review, 50,

169: See also The Facts of Life. 1953. London, 8. Lerner, I. M. 1954. Genetic Homeostasis. Edinburgh,
Allen & Unwin. Oliver & Boyd.

THE EUGENICS SOCIETY

DARWIN RESEARCH FELLOWSHIP

Applications are invited for a Darwin Research Fellowship from persons qualified in
science or in medicine wishing to pursue (preferably) Full-time Research Work in the field
of human population genetics with special reference to the range of human variability.

The Fellowship is offered in the salary range £800 to £2,000 plus superannuation. The

appointment will be for up to three years.

Application forms may be obtained, together with further information, from the General
Secretary, The Eugenics Society, 69 Eccleston Square, London, S.W.1. (Tel.: VICtoria
2091.)

 

29
