C. P. BLACKER,
M.A., M.D.

Voluntary Sterilization:

The Last Sixty Years

Introduction and Summary”

tion was performed in the United States

during the year 1897. The first sterilization Act ever to become law was passed by
the State of Indiana ten years later (1907).
These are recent dates.

Te FIRST RECORDED Sterilizing opera
The Last Sixty Years

In the course of the last sixty years, ideas about
the uses of sterilization have broadened. There
have been three main phases in this broadening
movement. The first covered the first of twenty
years of the century. Sterilization was then
widely thought of as a means of checking the
increase of mental defectives, insane persons and
criminals. Compulsory measures were envisaged
and in some places (not in the U.K.) enacted.
But during the ensuing twenty-five years the
merits of voluntary sterilization came to be increasingly appreciated by private individuals
who, for one reason or another, wished to have
no children or to have no more children. Many
of these were normal people who were concerned
with the risk of transmitting a hereditary
infirmity.

In the United Kingdom there have always been
doubts about the legality of voluntary sterilization. The risks (in fact never great) were readily
taken by surgeons when operating in a private
capacity. But the same men were understandably
reluctant to take the same risks with non-paying
hospital patients. Questions of hospital policy
and principle were here involved. Religious

* We hope to print Dr. Blacker’s full discussion of
this subject in a later issue of the REview.

issues might be raised if the matter were brought
before the Governors of the hospital ; and candidates for sterilization did not rank high on any
list of surgical priorities. The result was that the
rich who could pay surgeons’ fees could easily
get themselves sterilized while the poor could
not.

Hence the legalizing of sterilization came to
be advocated not only as a means of protecting
the community from burdens but also as an act
of social justice. In the words of the Departmental Committee on Sterilisation* (1934):

Any measure which limits sterilisation to mental
cases will carry with it a stigma, much as certification does now. It would give a quasi-penal
character to a measure which in our view is
properly to be regarded as an act of social
justice. [Para. 72]

This extension from a penal context, carrying
a stigma, to one of social justice, applicable

-mainly to people with problems of morbid in
heritance, marks the second phase in the broadening movement mentioned above. It was one
of the objects of the Eugenics Society in the years
1927-34 to encourage this transition.

The third and most remarkable phase in the
same broadening movement began after 1945
and has been a reaction to the population explosion. Until this date sterilization had been
almost exclusively practised in European countries and in English-speaking countries overseas.
Abruptly its possibilities were seen by nonEuropeans—mainly Asians—in the context of

* Commonly known as the Brock Committee after
its distinguished chairman, Sir Lawrence Brock.

145

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, October 1961, 53, 3.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

an entirely new sort of problem which they did
not share with Europe or the English-speaking
world. Facilities have been created in India,
Japan, Singapore and other Asian countries
and islands for people to be voluntarily sterilized
for reasons which need have nothing to do with
heredity. Among these reasons are that parents
have already had as many children as they want
or as many as they feel they can competently
rear. There are here two strata of considerations
which broadly concern the family and the nation.
Uppermost are familial and health reasons which
are humanitarian and (in so far as they concern
the well-being of children already born) paediatric. But these family reasons overlie national
and demographic reasons which are broadly
concerned with the difficulties, despite carefully.
laid plans, of raising living standards in countries
whose already numerous populations are exploding.

Sterilization in Asia

In the United Kingdom the demand for legal
clarification grew in volume till 1934 when the
report of the Brock Committee was published.
This committee recommended that voluntary
sterilization should be legalized, subject to
appropriate safeguards, and that the facilities
should be available for mentally normal people
with genuine anxieties about problems of heredity
no less than for other groups. But unforeseen
events abroad hindered the public acceptance of
these recommendations. In the same year (1934)
the German National Socialist Government
put through an act legalizing both voluntary
and compulsory sterilization. The decision as
to when compulsion was to be used was placed
in the hands of Eugenic Courts. ;

Fears in this country were thereby generated
that the recommendations of the Brock Committee might become the “thin end of the
wedge ”’; the final outcome might be something
on the German model—compulsion with an
apparatus of eugenic courts.

Despite the remarkable developments in Asia,
there has been no change, and little demand for
change, in the United Kingdom. Inertia has
prevailed despite much postwar interest in the
predicaments of submerged or “problem”
families, brought to light by the evacuation from

146

towns of women and children. It was clearly
perceived that the difficulties of these problem
families were increased by the unplanned births
of numerous unwanted children; and that for
these families voluntary sterilization could be a
veritable boon. This inertia is all the more
remarkable in view of the effervescence of
activity in Asian countries and in several subtropical and tropical islands. In India, for
example, the number of people sterilized has
increased yearly. It is now very large indeed
compared with the prewar figures of any
“western”? country.

Persisting Legal Uncertainties
In the United Kingdom the legal problem has
daunted the medical profession. Uncertainty
largely prompted the recommendations of the
Brock Committee. The same uncertainty prevails to-day.
We understand (said the Brock Committee)
that the medical defence organisations agree in

_ refusing to indemnify any practitioner undertaking
-eugenic sterilisation. [Para. 5]

The Committee also consulted the British
Medical Association whose spokesmen

were emphatically of opinion that many doctors
would refuse to give the necessary recommendations unless they could be given some protection
against vexatious legal proceedings. [Para. 86]

That was how the position was authoritatively
assessed twenty-six years ago. Since then misgivings have intensified rather than diminished.
It has even been suggested that vasectomy and
salpingectomy (the approved sterilizing operations on males and females respectively) might
be held to be “‘ maims”’ under the Offences against
the Person Act of 1861. This act, which is a
hundred years old this year, is much quoted in
the discussions. Yet sterilizing operations had
never been heard of a hundred years ago. The
first was not performed till a third of a century.
after the Act of 1861 became law.

A Change in the Wind

But last year (1960) a change in the wind of

legal opinion set in, and it is the new view which

now makes the issue topical.
Opinions were simultaneously sought in
VOLUNTARY STERILIZATION: THE LAST SIXTY YEARS

England and Scotland: in the autumn of 1960
by the Medical Defence Union of London on the
position in English law; and the Medical and
Dental Defence Union of Scotland obtained a
comparable opinion on Scottish law. |

These two opinions, which proved to be entirely compatible with each other, were reviewed in
the British Medical Journal of November 19th,
1960 and were reprinted in the April 1961
number of the EUGENICS REVIEW (53, 33). The
pith of the English counsel’s opinion is given as
follows:

An operation for sterilization is not unlawful

whether it is performed on therapeutic or eugenic -—

grounds or for other reasons, provided that there
is full and valid consent to the operation by the
patient concerned. This proposition, however, has
no direct judicial authority to support it, because
it has never been tested
case to come before the court would be. in the
nature of a test case and would establish a precedent of the utmost significance. Although con
fident that the courts would uphold the legality of 
a sterilizing operation on therapeutic or wellfounded eugenic grounds, counsel are of the

opinion that the risk of an adverse finding increases —

as the reasons for the operation are medically
less well-founded

in the courts. The first

The Scottish counsel say:

We have formed the opinion that, if a sterilization
operation were performed with the full consent of
the patient by a responsible surgeon and if the
reason for doing it was substantial and not obviously immoral by present-day standards, it is
exceedingly improbable that the Court would hold
the act to be criminal.

The British Medical Journal concludes its
review of these two recent opinions with the
following words:

Whatever may be the law on sterilization, it is

clearly most desirable that the courts or Parliament
should now declare it.

Such a declaration would have the same value

-now as in 1934 when the Brock Committee

submitted its recommendations. Sterilization is

.@ boon for people who fixedly desire not to

have children. It is especially valuable for two
groups: those who have experienced failures in
contraception and whose sex lives are being
upset by fears of further failures; and those who

-have had as many children as they want but

who are unfitted by limitation of intelligence and
defects of character to use any of the available

methods of birth control.

147
