POPULATION PROBLEMS IN THE LIGHT
OF DIFFERENTIAL FERTILITY*
By J. A. FRASER ROBERTS, M.D., D.Sc, MRCP. BRS.

“YE are greatly in the debt of the

} eminent investigators of popula
: tion trends, not only for their
studies and estimates, but for explaining
their findings in such a clear fashion, easily
understandable by the layman. The net
reproduction rate, so convenient scientifically, seems to be universally accepted as
an appropriate measure. The fact that for a
time total numbers may rise while a real
decline is taking place, to show itself inevitably later, seems to mislead no one. The
facts have been presented squarely to the
public and whatever differences of opinion

there may be as to their significance, and as.

to causes and remedies, seldom can public
discussion of a complex subject have started
with less confusion or a clearer appreciation
of the issues involved.

Interest has grown rapidly and is now widespread, as was shown, for example, by the
recent debates in Parliament, and the correspondence in The Times which followed a
particularly clear letter from Prof. A. V. Hill.

There are, of course, two views in regard to
a declining, a sharply declining, population.
The first view is that it is a thoroughly bad
thing ; the second, that it does not matter
much, or may even be beneficial. It seems
clear, as was demonstrated by the debate in
the House of Commons, that the first view is
that of the great majority. Doubtless both
views are represented in our Soceety, though
here, too, I imagine that the majority regard
the present trend with alarm.

I am going to select three reasons which
seem to indicate strongly that the present
trend is to be deplored. In the first place
there is the feeling that our people have a
contribution to make and that we cannot
regard with equanimity a decline in numbers

“* An address to the Eugenics Society on Decembet
14th, 1943. |

which will be big enough absolutely, but,
relative to those of other nations, may prove
to be very great indeed. Some might go
further and hold that there was something
almost decadent in the cheerful acceptance of
a declining population.

In the second place there is the disastrous
change in age-composition in a sharply declining population—the greatly increased
number of old people who will have to be
supported by the greatly diminished numbers of young people. Again we are indebted to the experts on population problenis
for the clarity with which this consequence
has been explained to the public.

There is, however, a third reason which
should appeal to this Soczety as one of particular importance. And while the first two
are constantly quoted and were stressed repeatedly in the House of Commons debate,
this third reason was not mentioned on that
occasion by any speaker. Itisthis: As things
are at present, and as they are likely to
remain in any future which can be foreseen,
a decline in total numbers is, quite inevitably I think, bound to be associated with a
disastrous fall in quality also. |

Intelligence and Fertility

If it were to prove possible to increase the
reproduction rate substantially, I do not
believe that that could be done without
automatically improving the trend of differential fertility at the same time. I would
almost go so far as to say that the effectiveness of measures taken to increase the reproductive rate as a whole will be found to be
not very far from proportional to their
effectiveness in reversing the present trends
in differential fertility. This will be particularly so if we consider not differentials as
between social classes, a useful indicator
because easily available, but the far more
10 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

important differential as between the intelligent and the unintelligent, quite apart from
social class. The measure of success in regard
to both aims, that is, increasing total numbers and lessening the differential trend, will
not be reflected so much in the demonstration that the reproductive rate of, say, the
professional classes has been brought nearer
to that of labourers, but, what is far more
important, that the reproductive rate of the
most intelligent labourers has been raised
towards that of the least intelligent labourers.

What are the facts of differential fertility
in regard to intelligence, the most important
differential we know anything about ? They
can be briefly summarized. The study which
I presented to you five years ago (1938)
indicated that the least intelligent have
perhaps three times as many children as the
most intelligent, fertility declining quite
evenly from one extreme to the other. The
figures indicated a fall of rather more than
1} points of Binet I.Q. in the average intelligence of the population in a single generation.
When, however, allowance is made for the
incompleteness of some of the families investigated, it is seen that the fall must, in
fact, be considerably greater. Other studies,
for example that of Cattell (1936, 1937), and
those mentioned by Osborn (1940) in his
recent book, yield similar estimates.

A continued decline at this rate could
only be described.as catastrophic. To consider
one particular consequence, the four most
intelligent people in every 100, those with
an I.Q. above 130, will (without allowing for
the total decline) be reduced to three in a
single generation. The least intelligent four,
with an I.Q. below 70, will be replaced by
five persons of similar intelligence. That is,
a ratio of equality between the very bright
and the very dull will be changed in the
course of only thirty years to a ratio of
5 to 3 in favour of the very dull.

Timeliness of Positive Eugenics

It seems certain that questions of population will occupy an important place in plans
for post-war reconstruction. Public interest
is aroused. What is to be the attitude of our
Society? Negative eugenics will no doubt

find its place as before. The unwisdom of
parenthood in particular instances, sterilization as an aid in coping with certain problems
—such things will have their importance.
But the total effect of all these individual
negative measures is small compared with
the possibilities of encouraging changes in
relative reproduction rates amongst large
sections of the population—this is the vital
problem and in regard to it we may take a
positive or a negative view. Which we take
depends upon whether we consider that the
present reproductive rate should if possible
be substantially increased or whether it is
better that it should remain where it is, or
even diminish. If we take the positive view
we shall lay very little, if any, stress upon the
large families characteristic of certain sections of the community or of types of individual. We shall direct our attention to the
possibilities of increasing fertility, knowing
that if this effort is successful it will tend to
raise particularly the fertility of the more
desirable stocks. And we shall be advocating
popular measures to a public very ready to
consider them. Ofcourse, we have no wish to
advocate measures because they will prove
popular, but how much greater the chance
of achieving our aims should they indeed
prove to be so. We have the opportunity of
marching in the ranks of the big battalions,
because, perhaps for the first time, circumstances dictate that we and the big battalions
should think alike. |

I feel sorry for those, whom I imagine to
be in the minority, who for weighty and
arguable, though I think insufficient reasons,
take the opposite view. They must equally
deplore the present trend of differential
fertility but are bound to hope for equalization owing to changes which must involve
lowering the fertility of large sections of the
community. But what chance is there of
securing the acceptance of any such measures,
unpopular in themselves, when the great
majority of the public are convinced that
more babies are urgently needed ?

If, on the other hand, our Soczety accepts
the positive view, it has every opportunity
of seeing some at least, and perhaps the most
important, of its aims and objects translated
POPULATION PROBLEMS IN LIGHT OF DIFFERENTIAL FERTILITY 11

into achievement. It will be able to guide
public opinion along lines likely to secure the
most effective action in achieving the linked
aims of a population improved both in
numbers and quality.

I should like to consider the contribution
which our Society can make under three
headings. The first is to stress the great
complexity of the problem. of population
trends, to emphasize how much remains to
be discovered, to point out that the total
trend can only be studied in the light of the
differences in reproductive rates revealed
when the population is divided in various
ways. The second follows ; this is to stress
the necessity for investigation. The third
cannot be evaded: to attempt to estimate
in the light of the knowledge available at
present what plans for immediate practical
action are likely to prove most successful.

Complexity of Population Problem

Many people if asked to sum up population trends would probably say that from
about 1870 the Western European birth-rate
started to decline seriously. They would say,
further, that this corresponded in all probability to a wide diffusion of knowledge of
contraception, at least among the better
educated. They would also say that the
decline affected different sections of the
population very differently, that the more
prosperous limited their families to a far
greater extent than did the less prosperous.
Or, alternatively, the more intelligent in all
social classes tended to use the new knowledge and their children therefore rapidly
decreased in number. Thus arose the marked
differences in fertility as between different
sections of the community, as between those
of different levels of intelligence, and similarly
in respect of other groupings.

It is to be noted that even if this simplified
view were true, the problem is still complex.
It is striking with what proper diffidence
almost everyone expresses an opinion, and
how readily it is admitted that the cause or
remedy suggested is advanced tentatively
only, or is thought likely to be only one of
many factors concerned. There are few today who confidently advance a single cause

or a single remedy. When such sentiments
are expressed they are obviously not axiomatic—the great majority of reasonable
minds would not immediately accept them
as self-evident. The suggestions are often
mutually contradictory and seem to be
generally recognized for what they are:
expressions of faith, unsupported by adequate evidence. Even on the simplified view,
therefore, it is far from clear what factors,
intellectual, emotional, economic, have induced many persons to limit their families,
and to a varying extent in different sections
of the community. Even if this simple view
is accepted, there still remains much to
discover and remedies can only be advanced

‘tentatively and in an experimental spirit.

Variations in Natural Fertility

It seems to me, however, that there are
many important indications pointing to the
conclusion that the simple view outlined of
decline and of differential fertility is inadequate. At best it explains some of the facts
only. The real situation is far more complex.
An important source of complication arises
from the great variations which exist in
natural human fertility. On such facts as
are known to us, on the distribution of
family sizes, particularly perhaps on the
analogy of the domesticated animals, we
have to conclude that man is a relatively
infertile animal, that differences in level of
fertility are very great, and that they must
be, in part, inherited. Professor R. A. Fisher’s
well-known hypothesis depends upon this,
and if so much is admitted his conclusions
become inevitable.

At all times, whether the population is
declining or increasing, for, of course, even
if human beings are relatively infertile they
are quite fertile enough to increasein numbers ©
given favourable circumstances, at all times
then, some individuals, some stocks, are not
reproducing themselves, while others are increasing. If fertility itself is not associated
with other qualities, good or bad, this
hardly matters. It will not affect the quality
of the population generally. Stocks exhibiting different characteristics will be equally
fertile on the average. When, however,
12° THE EUGENICS REVIEW

certain qualities are regarded as desirable
and their possessors are chosen for social
promotion, all these characters tend to become concentrated in the same individuals
owing to intermarriage among their possessors. Now, there is no doubt at all that
at the present time it is an economic advantage in every walk of life to belong to a small

family. Above all else this enables parents

to give their children opportunities superior
to those they themselves have enjoyed.
Thus good looks, physical strength, mental
ability particularly, and infertility, tend to
become concentrated in the same people.
After a time the more intelligent inevitably
become less fertile. In my opinion the reality
of the Fisher effect can hardly be denied.
What is in doubt is how important it is. Is
it an important effect or a relatively minor
one? It seems to me that it is likely to be
of considerable importance, to say the least.
One reason for this will be given in a moment.

It is quite possible that there is in addition a real biological association between
intelligence and infertility. It may be that
the higher the level of general intelligence,
the more numerous are the objects of interest
in life with a consequent weakening sometimes of sex and parental instincts. It may
be, also, that there are influences in the lives
of the more prosperous directly inimical to
fertility. All this is speculative but worthy of
investigation. |

Thus the simple view of the population
trend since 1870 must probably be modified
to this extent: that the small families
characteristic of certain sections of the community may be less a matter of voluntary
determination than has been so _ widely
assumed.

Differential Fertility before Decline in Birth
rate

But there is another doubt. Is it a fact
that differential fertility first became important when the birth-rate started to
decline? Is it after all so exclusively a
matter of voluntary choice and of a widespread knowledge of contraceptive methods ?
Kuczynski (1935) published a paper on
British demographers’ opinions on fertility

during the period 1660-1760. He makes it
clear that at that time inequality between
town and country, and between rich and
poor, was generally recognized. In an
editorial note, Fisher remarks : ‘‘ On another
point a perusal of the older writings may
correct a modern misapprehension. The
great part played by contraceptive devices
in increasing the inequality of births between
different social classes has led many writers
to assume, or assert, that this inequality is
of quite modern origin. That the same differences as are now most striking, between the
cities and the country, and between the rich
and the poor, were asserted by observers
early in the eighteenth century should make
one pause before accepting this assumption,
and may suggest that contraception is
merely a means whereby the effects of a
more deep-rooted tendency have become
accentuated.”

Jaffe (1940), in a notable paper, has
analyzed figures relating to the eastern part
of the United States during the years 1800-40.
Using a number of criteria, for example,
amount of personal property or, in the
southern States, number of slaves owned,
he is able to demonstrate that the differentials
with which we are so familiar to-day were
already well established at the beginning of
the nineteenth century.

Age at Marriage

I should like to.add another piece of
evidence pointing to the complexity of the
problem. On currently accepted views it is
often assumed that relatively late age at
marriage is a potent factor in decreasing the
fertility of certain stocks. In the paper
which I read to you five years ago I described
differences between the reproductive history
of the mothers of the most intelligent 4 per
cent and least intelligent 4 per cent of
children respectively in a sample of school
children. It was perfectly true that the
average age of the mother at the time of the
birth of the first child (a fair indication of
age at marriage) was 27:4 years in the former
group and 23:9 in the latter. This was, of
course, responsible for a loss of children born
to the mothers of the cleverest children, but
POPULATION PROBLEMS IN LIGHT OF DIFFERENTIAL FERTILITY 13

it was notable that even more children were
lost to the mothers of this group because
they ceased their reproductive life earlier
than the mothers of the dullest children.

Two months ago we heard a very interesting paper by Dr. Paterson.* He laid great
stress on age at marriage, but in view of the
results just described it seems doubtful
whether this factor is as important as is
sometimes claimed, or whether a lowering
would effect as great a change as he hopes.
Perhaps many people do marry late for
economic reasons; but perhaps even more
do so for inborn psychological reasons.

Infertility, Voluntary and Involuntary

Of course no one would deny that differences in the degree to which families are
voluntarily limited must be responsible for
an important part of the present observed
facts of differential fertility. But, as we have
seen, by no means all. Similarly, if we think
of the total reproductive rate in our population. It is perfectly true to say that if we
could go back to 1870 we should have all the
births we required. A lessening of family
limitation could undoubtedly restore an
expanding population. But the contribution
would still be very uneven. There would be
many large families, but there would still

be many small ones, and also many childless .

marriages. It has been shown (Kiser, 1939)
in a study in New York City that threequarters of childless marriages were involuntarily so. We should aim at something
better than a return to 1870: the discovery
of causes of infertility and low fertility, and
their correction when this proves possible.
It is obviously desirable to help those wh6d
would like to have children or ‘have more
children and it seems clear that this would
be a contribution to improved quality also.

Problems for Investigation

We must surely conclude that the whole
problem of population trends and of differential fertility is highly complicated. Investigation is called for along many lines, and by
experts in many specialisms. The first re
* EUGENICS REVIEW, 1943-44; 35, 57.

quirement has been thoroughly stressed by
Prof. Carr Saunders and the Population Investigation Committee. This is additional
census data. Only when this is available shall
we know the structure of the population in
terms of individual families. This is the first
and essential step in order to discover what
is happening and to trace the effect of changing economic circumstances and of measures
designed to affect the reproductive rate.
Much more detailed investigation on
samples is also required, however. It is
necessary to find out as much as we can
about the reasons why families are of the
size that they are. These researches, by the
way, should not be only physiological, pathological and sociological. The psychologist
should be added to the team. Doubtless from
a practical point of view it is a very difficult
field of research and doubtless psychology
has not yet advanced to the stage when all
the problems involved could be easily tackled.
Nevertheless, it is highly necessary to investigate direct, as far as is possible, the motives
underlying these aspects of human behaviour.
The psychologist could not perhaps solve
all his problems, and certainly not at once,
but any contribution would be very valuable.
Research on involuntary sterility and low
fertility should be encouraged. One suspécts,
however, that the problem is likely to prove
relatively intractable. Low fertility may
often be an inherited characteristic and
correspondingly elusive. There has been some
reference lately to the possibility that the
practice of contraception may lead to subsequent infertility. This is, of course, an important subject for research, but it does seem
that up to the present little convincing

‘evidence has been forthcoming in support of

this view.

Here I feel that I should say a word on
how desirable it is that in the post-war.
world people should be ready, through their
scientific representatives, to conduct observations on themselves. It is so easy to raise
the cry of bureaucratic interference, of prying
into the privacy of the home. It is to be
hoped that it will be increasingly realized
that many of the most important questions
affecting human well-being cannot be
14 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

answered by general discussion and that
progress will not be achieved unless facilities
are provided for scientific study. Let us
hope that the time may come when people
who happen to fall into a sample chosen for
investigation will feel that it is a privilege
to assist in a project which will tend to
human betterment and that they will readily
answer intimate questions put by persons—
their own scientific representatives—in whose
skill, discretion and integrity they have full
confidence.

I cannot help recalling what happened
when Mr. Herbert Tout was conducting his
admirable social survey of Bristol. I speak
from memory, as I have not got my files
available. His grant from a local authority
was withdrawn and angry speeches were
made about the inquiries. ‘‘ Let them come
to me and my friends,” said one speaker.
“We will tell them all they need to know
about poverty.’ I need hardly mention that
Mr. Tout’s survey was one of those principally
considered when the Beveridge report was
drawn up.

One has to envy the United States in this
matter. American investigators seem to
enjoy a freedom which we do not. And it
may be that the division into States will
bring them one special advantage. Even
without conscious planning the different
schemes put into operation in different States
will from time to time present the observer
with a ready-made experiment. We have
seen an instance of this in sterilization and
it may be destined to become a potent factor
in social experimentation.

Control of Contraception

While we may lay the first stress on what
we do not know and the need for experiment, we have also to consider what attitude
we should take to the proposals of the present
moment and the immediate future.

But before doing so I might perhaps
mention one thing that I am sure we shall
not advocate. One of the speakers in the
recent House of Commons debate stated :
“A distinguished health expert, when I told
him this Debate was approaching, said, ‘If
you want to solve this problem Parliament

has only to pass a Measure prohibiting the
sale of contraceptives, and it is settled at
once.’’’ It would be difficult to compress
more nonsense into a single sentence. The
knowledge exists, and apart from the
futility of trying to suppress it, it is surely
right that parents should be able to choose
freely. The poorest possible way of attempting to increase the birth-rate would be to try
to secure the birth of children the parents
did not want, to trick them into parenthood.
It is infinitely preferable, and likely to be far
more effective, to help, as far as is possible,
those of low natural fertility to have the
children they want and to discover and
remove economic and other obstacles to the
family of large or moderate size.

Economic and Social Incentives

It seems to me that if we adopt what I
have called the majority view, the view that
the total reproductive rate should, if possible, be substantially raised, there can be no
question as to what is of first and immediate
importance, a question, moreover, which is
due for Parliamentary decision in the near
future. This is family allowances. The name
is perhaps unfortunate, because it suggests a
gift—even the word bribe has been mentioned. In slight measure the principle was
accepted in income-tax allowances for dependent children. It is now in the forefront
of debate in connection with the Beveridge
plan. It seems to me that the Beveridge
proposal should be welcomed, though with
certain qualifications. It does at least bring
the principle into prominence and once in
operation the idea can be modified and
developed.

But it must be remembered that the
purpose of the family allowances recommended was to relieve want. It was no
part of Sir William Beveridge’s task to
consider the effect on population. Now
for two reasons the principle which should
be advocated by the Society is that matters should be so equalized that parents.
should not be penalized economically for
having children. The first reason is that only
in this way can the Fisher effect be eliminated.
It should cease to be an advantage to be
POPULATION PROBLEMS IN LIGHT OF DIFFERENTIAL FERTILITY 15

born into a small family. The second reason
is that in general, and to the extent that
family limitation is under voluntary control,
it seems likely that the motives for preferring
a small family: have, on the whole, been good
and have tended to appeal to the most valuable elements in the population, and this at
all social levels. To the extent that differ
ential fertility as we see it to-day is the result |

of deliberate choice, and to the extent that
that choice is based on economic factors, we
are bound to hold that equalization would
improve the quality of the population. And,
as it seems likely that even if there are big
differences in innate fertility, the greatest
reservoir of additional babies exists amongst
those who have limited their families in this
way, the effect should be reflected in an
increased total reproductive rate.

The Beveridge plan, however effectively it
deals with the large family as a cause of
poverty, is almost certain, I think, to be
relatively ineffective as regards population.
It may not be actually dysgenic, if we think
of intelligence and not of poverty. It may
perhaps raise the fertility of some of those
who are gifted though poorly paid; but
from the population point of view it is unlikely to bring in much return for a“large
expenditure unless it is made part of a
wider scheme. : |

Starting with the Beveridge allowances as
a beginning, the scheme could be extended
to the whole population, and redistribution

effected, either by compulsory insurance .

(voluntary schemes would surely be too
partial, too slow and maybe too uneven), or
through taxation. Taxation.seems to be the
simpler. Due allowance can be made for the
Beveridge payments and the experts could
readily devise a scheme which would secure
equalization at all income levels for numbers
of dependent children. The rebate of income
tax would be proportional to income, though
not necessarily of course directly proportional.

As part of a whole scheme it would then
be seen clearly that family allowances were
not a dole or a bribe but simply a method for
redistributing incomes in relation to number
of children. There would still be equal pay
for equal work, but by means of the Bever
idge payments together with tax rebates
parents would not be worse off than those
with fewer children or with no children at all.

As much as possible should be given in the
form of direct services to the child. Money
would then be applied most efficiently and
the subsequent adjustments to be made
would be less.

An extension of services to the mother
should not be overlooked. Dr..Summerskill
has made a plea for a scheme by which
helpers would be available to take charge of
children periodically, giving the mother the
chance of rest and leisure. This principle
might be amplified. There are many women
who find their true vocation in looking after
children, and an extension of the system
might be possible by which the mother could
be helped not only in regard to leisure, but
work also. Money alone will not bring
freedom or equalization for the mother, and
thought should be given as to how this, too,
could be achieved.

But I must end on the note of the necessity for continued investigation. There lies
the main hope. And with that spirit of
inquiry should go the experimental attitude
in regard to economic and social measures.
They should be devised as carefully as possible in the light of existing knowledge and
then applied in an open-minded and experimental spirit. If they fail they must be
reviewed. If they are effective further experiments should be tried to make them yet
more effective. It seems to me that in these
matters a great opportunity lies ahead of
our Soctety.

Summary

It is well understood that the reproductive
rate of the population has fallen to such a low
level that a serious decline in numbers is
inevitable. Some, who are undoubtedly in a
minority, do not consider this a bad thing
and even hold that it might be beneficial.
The general view, however, is that the decline
is greatly to be deplored, and that efforts
should be made to discover the underlying
causes and to search for measures that will
increase the number of children born. Two
reasons are often advanced in-support of this
16 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

view. In the first place our people have a
contribution to make and we should not be
satisfied to see our numbers declining
relatively to those of other nations. In the
second place, it is inevitable that a declining
population will mean a far larger proportion
of old people who will have to be maintained
by far fewer young ones.

There is a third important argument which
is probably far less generally appreciated.
The trend of population is not only towards
smaller numbers ; a rapid decline in quality
is taking place also. This may be masked for
a time by providing better opportunities so
that human abilities are used to fuller
advantage; nevertheless, native inborn
ability is being reduced. The four most
intelligent people in every 100 will be
replaced by three only in the next generation, while the four dullest will be replaced
by five. This is the inevitable result of a
state of affairs in which the most intelligent
members of the community have only onethird of the number of children born to the
least intelligent.

It seems highly probable that a total
decline at the present rate will perpetuate
this undesirable state of affairs, whereas a
substantial raising of the reproductive rate
would inevitably tend to improve quality
also. The margin for increase is greatest
amongst the most intelligent (quite apart
from social class). It is the more intelligent
who are primarily responsible for the

decline in total numbers and it is only they |

who can remedy it. Thus success in raising
the reproductive rate of the population as a
whole will mean a corresponding improvement in quality also.

Many indications point to the fact that
the causes underlying these population
trends are very complex. To select one
example, it is far from certain that voluntary
limitation of families is the only mechanism
at work. Prof. R. A. Fisher has brought
forward strong arguments in favour of the
view that much is to be attributed to natural
differences in fertility. In every walk of life
it is at present an advantage economically to
belong to a small family; the chances of
social promotion are greater. If people are

promoted socially both for intelligence and
for infertility these qualities tend to become
associated.

It is often assumed that differences in
fertility became marked when the birthrate commenced to decline, about 1870. Dr.
Jaffe has shown, however, that these differences were well established in the United
States by 1800. There has been plenty of
time for the Fisher effect to operate, and it is
likely that the more intelligent are on the
average less potentially fertile than the less
intelligent.

The first requirement is research along
varied lines. We need to know far more.
Ampler census information and special investigations are both required.

In the meantime steps are likely to be
taken which are certain to affect population
trends. The principle of family allowances
has been incorporated in the Beveridge
Report as part of the plan for dealing with
poverty. If, however, there is to be a substantial effect on population the Beveridge
scheme must be incorporated in something
wider. In the light of our present knowledge,
the most effective plan would probably be to
ensure that at all levels of income the
standard of life is equalized whatever the
number of dependent children. This could
probably be carried out most easily through
income-tax adjustment. Rebates for children
would, after allowing for the Beveridge
payments, be proportional to income.

A complete scheme of this kind would
abolish the Fisher effect, and to the extent
that fertility is under voluntary control and
dependent on economic factors should secure
an improvement both in quantity and quality
of population. We should regard any scheme
as experimental, however. We should simultaneously carry out research projects and be
ready to learn by experience.

References :

Cattell, R. B. (1936). Euae. Rev., 28, 181.

(1937). EuaG. REv., 29, 171.

A. J. (1940).. J. Hered., 31, 407.

V. (1939). Millbank Mem. Fund Quart.,

 

Jaffe,
Kiser, C.
17, 50.
Kuczynski, R. R. (1935). Ann. Eug., 6, 139.
Osborn, F. (1940). Preface to Eugentes.
Roberts, J. A. F. (1939). Euc. REv., 30, 237.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXXVI, No. 1
