PARENTAGE OF DEFECTIVES —
By C. P. BLACKER, M.A., MD., MRCP.

HAT would be the value of eugenic

sterilization if limited to mental

defectives, but applied to them in
the most thorough-going way? Authorities
differ on the subject. A view commonly held
by persons with first-hand experience is that,
whereas mental defectiveness can be attributed to genetic rather than to environmental causes in the majority of cases, only in
a small percentage—something in the neighbourhood of 5 per cent.—do these genetic
causes take the form of certifiable defectiveness in one or both parents. Hence, it is
argued, if a sterilization law, limited to
mental defectives, but applied to them in
the most thorough-going way, had been put
into effect a generation ago, so that all defectives then in the country had been prevented
from breeding, the incidence of mental
deficiency in this generation would have
been reduced by about 5 per cent. only.
Though the majority of the remaining 95 per
cent. of defectives would owe their defectiveness to hereditary causes, in general these
would not take the form of certifiable defectiveness in their parents.

Much attention was given to this subject
when the Society presented its evidence
before the Brock Committee. .In reviewing
the continental literature, as we had been
asked to do by Mr. Brock, we found that the
diversity of standards adopted by different
authors in estimating mental deficiency made
it difficult to interpret their findings in terms
of the criteria which are employed in this
country. This difficulty was particularly
marked in connection with the term “ oligophrenia,’” which, when used by German and
Scandinavian writers, has a wider meaning
than the terms amentia or mental defectiveness employed here. That is to say, there are
classified as oligophrenic in Germany and
Denmark many persons who, in this country,
would not be regarded as defectives, but as
“ retarded normals.”

Thus, it was easy to calculate from the
papers by continental experts how many of
their oligophrenic propositi would not have
been born if all the parents of the propositi
who were also oligophrenic had been sterilized a generation ago; but we had great
difficulty in ascertaining from the papers how
many of the oligophrenic propositi were
sufficiently low-grade to be classified in this
country as mental defectives (and not as
retarded normals), and how many of these
had parents of the same degree of mental
backwardness. In this connection the Brock
Report says: “‘ The fact that so many of the
parents are border-line cases explains, to a
great extent, the wide variation in the estimates given by various investigators of the
proportion of parents who are mentally
defective. A slight modification of the
standards might result in a large increase in
the number of persons regarded as mentally
defective among these border-line cases.
Clinically, there is no definite line separating
mental defect from dullness; the one condition merges into the other.”

Two recently published investigations
upon children throw some light on this problem. The first was conducted by Dr. Frederick
Grundy in an area in East Suffolk; the
second by Dr. H. O. Wildenskov in Denmark.
Dr. Grundy has very kindly allowed me to
see his original thesis, an abstract of which
was published in the British Medical Journal
of June 30th, 1934; the volume in which
Dr. Wildenskov’s investigation is described
was reviewed by Dr. J. A. Fraser Roberts in
the EuGENIcS REVIEW of July 1934 (p. 152).

From Dr. Grundy’s thesis the following
figures are quoted: The population investigated comprised some 45,500 persons. The
elementary schools contained 6,648 children,
14°6 of the total population. Of these, 750.
were recorded as dull or defective on the
teachers’ lists, 550 children being over the
age of 8. This figure includes 165 children

263
264

who were ‘mentally defective—i.e. 135
feeble-minded, 23 imbeciles and 7 idiots.
Dr. Grundy obtained family histories of
149 of these defectives, 15 of whom were
illegitimate. These 149 defective propositi
had 9 defective sibs, so that family histories
were available for all of 158 mental defectives.
How many of these would not have been
born if parenthood had been prevented in all
mentally defective persons of the preceding
generation ?

Dr. Grundy draws an interesting distinction between defectiveness in a social and
in an educational sense. ‘‘ Rather more than
half of the children,’’ he writes in his article
in the British Medical Journal, “‘ who are
certifiable as defectives for the purposes of
the Education Acts, will not be defective ina
social sense in adult life in a rural area. That
is to say that there exists a wide disparity
between the standards used in the educational
and social classifications of feeble-mindedness, and it is difficult to avoid the conclusion
that the use of the single term ‘ feebleminded’ in two distinct senses, both of
which are legal and not scientific, is highly
confusing in an enquiry of this sort.”’ In
examining his pedigrees, it became clear that,
of the 149 defective propositi and their 9
sibs, 10 had one or both parents defective in
a social sense, and 38 in an educational sense.
If, therefore, all persons defective in a social
and educational sense had been prevented
from breeding a generation ago, 48 out of
the 158 defectives, or almost exactly 30 per
cent., would not have been born.

Dr. H. O. Wildenskov, who conducted the
second investigation referred to above, is
the medical superintendent of the Keller
Institution for Mental Defectives, Brejning,
Denmark. Briefly, his chief aim was to
ascertain if the milder grades of defect were
more strongly hereditary than the severer
grades. Two groups of 50 children were
studied ; group A consisting of children in a
special school, who suffered from a mild
degree of defect, and group B of asylum
children, whose defect was more serious.
Though Dr. Wildenskov presented in his
paper a most thorough and detailed analysis
of the family histories and backgrounds of

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the 50 defectives in each of these two groups,
he did not furnish the information necessary
to correlate the degree of defectiveness existing between the defective propositi and their
parents. He has, however, very kindly sent
me this information in a private communication. He has ascertained how many of the
oligophrenes in groups A and B, whose
intelligence quotient fell below the figure of
475, (i.e. who could be counted as mentally
defective in the English sense), had one or
both parents with a similar limitation of
intelligence. He writes as follows :

“For the school material in group A,
I obtained the following results: in 20
school families, one or both parents were
mental defectives. They had a total of
120 children ; 3x were dead at the time of
the research, 23 were normal or unknown,
Ir were debile, 43 dullards,* and 51,
including the 20 propositi, were mental
defectives. Had all mentally defective persons
in Denmark been sterilized a generation ago,
20 (40 per cent.) of my school proposits
would not have been born ; and, in addition
to these, another 31 mentally defective
sibs of the propositi would not have been
born. For the asylum material in group
B, only one family had one or both
(actually both) parents mentally defective.
These had 7 children, of whom two were
dead, one was debile, one a dullard, and
three mental defectives. Thus in group B,
only one of the 50 propositi, i.e. 2 per
cent., would not have been born if all
persons mentally defective in our sense
had been sterilized in Denmark a generation ago.”

In the EUGENICS REVIEW of October 1933
(page 184), I wrote a short memorandum
upon an investigation conducted by Dr. L. S.
Penrose upon 100 sub-cultural families, containing defectives who were inmates of the
Royal Institution, Colchester. Of these 100
propositi who were defective in a “ subcultural ’’ sense, 28 (28 per cent.) had one or
both parents certifiable as mentally defec
* The terms “‘debile’’ and ‘‘ dullard’’ express mild
degrees of oligophrenia which do not amount to mental
defectiveness as appraised in this country.
PARENTAGE OF DEFECTIVES

tive, and Dr. Penrose estimates that approximately a quarter of the inmates of the Royal
Institution, Colchester, come from subcultural families. On the improbable assumption, therefore, that none of the remaining
defectives who fall outside the sub-cultural
group (three-quarters of the inmates of the
Royal Institution) had a mentally defective
parent, the minimum reduction attainable by
preventing the parenthood a generation ago of
all certifiable defectives in the community
would be a quarter of 28 per cent., ie. 7 per
cent. But it must be remembered that the proportion of sub-cultural and other types of defectives in the Royal Institution at Colchester
is much smaller than that which obtains on
an average in the general community—this for
the reason that lower grades of defectives
tend to find their way into institutions, and
are found there in larger numbers than in the
general community.

The conclusion which may tentatively be
drawn from the very careful investigations
above referred to is that, if the parents of
defectives are closely scrutinized, it will be
found that more than 5 per cent. are born of
parents one or both of whom are mental defectives ; and that the principle of sterilization, if limited to mental defectives, but
applied to them in the most thorough-going

265

way, would have more appreciable eugenic
results than has been suggested by some
authorities.

In conclusion, however, it must be clearly
recognized that the type of sterilization
recommended by the Brock Committee is
strictly voluntary and that, to begin with,
at any rate, only a small proportion of defectives for whom it might be regarded as
appropriate would apply to be sterilized. It
would, therefore, be idle to expect appreciable results from legalizing a measure of
voluntary sterilization limited to mental defectives. From the eugenic standpoint the
chief value of the recommendations of the
Brock Committee are that they advocate
voluntary sterilization for the probable
carriers of mental defectiveness, i.e., for the
types of person who, in this country, would
be regarded as retarded normals and who,
in Denmark, would be regarded as debile
persons or dullards. In this connection the
shocking family history quoted on page 87
of the Brock Report is interesting. In this
family 17 children had been born, of whom
12 were living. Of these 12 living children, 8
were defective. But neither the father nor the
mother of this family was defective. They were
carriers of defectiveness, that is retarded
normals.

 

New (3rd) edition completely revised and enlarged

PARENTHOOD:

DESIGN OR

ACCIDENT ?

A MANUAL OF BIRTH CONTROL

By MICHAEL FIELDING

BRITISH MEDICAL JOURNAL: Not only the most popular but the best presentation and exposition

of the subject,
One of the most impartial and balanced discussions of the practical and technical aspects of

LANCET:
birth control.

MEDICAL TIMES: The very best treatise on the subject. It has our unqualified approval.
INTERNATIONAL MEDICAL GROUP: The best practical handbook that has yet appeared.

Pp. 208 with 8 illustrations.

2s. paper 3s. Gd. cloth

WILLIAMS & NORGATE LTD., London, W.C.1

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVI, No. 4.
