DISCUSSION
EUGENICS AND POLITICS

Dr. HERBERT’S article on Eugenics and Socialism, in the
July number of the Eucenics REVIEW, seems to me to suggest
the dangerous doctrine that the future of Eugenics is bound up
with the progress of one particular political and social creed.
‘“‘ Whatever,’ says Dr. Herbert, ‘‘ Eugenics may achieve in the
future, it can achieve only with the help of Socialism or some
such proposal.”

Political prophecy is an uncertain amusement, and should
those who wish to identify eugenic principles with the triumph
of any one political party by some miscalculation be wrong, they
might find themselves and their followers in the unpleasant
position of those who have “ backed the wrong horse.”

We all have our own views as to the particular social and
political environment in which eugenic theories would have the
best chance of exerting an effective influence on the future of the
race. Dr. Herbert thinks that a socialist state would be favourable. My own belief is that eugenics would best be furthered by
an enlightened and aristocratic toryism. I do not expect to
convince Dr. Herbert of his mistake. Still less do I expect him
to persuade me of the obvious absurdity of my error. Let us
agree to differ about our ideals for the future, which after all do
not matter, and work together for eugenic measures under our
present form of government—democracy tempered by some
dwindling remains of aristocracy, which are still of value though
coarsened by that growing plutocracy which Dr. Herbert and I
can combine in abusing in our leisure hours.

This is the main object of my communication, a warning
against committing eugenics to any political or social party,
whatever that party may be. Such a connection could only
result in driving away from our cause those who, on other
grounds, feel strongly opposed to the party in question, and in
the indefinite postponement of all eugenic measures, should that
party not establish itself in the future.

This caution in our attitude towards social and political
questions I regard as essential, both to the immediate advance
and to the ultimate triumph of our point of view. It is quite
certain that we shall have to deal in the future with temporary
Governments of both parties and all shades of opinion. We
shall have to talk to them privately, interview them publicly
and, when these methods fail, bring political pressure to bear on
DISCUSSION 243

them through their friends in the constituencies. In the privacy
of these pages we can afford to confess our political prejudices.
To the world at large let us have no politics, and be ready to
work with Liberal or Conservative, Socialist or Individualist in
the same friendly and sympathetic spirit. Let us follow the
apostolic advice and be all things to all men.

Now I turn to the less important side of what I have to say,
and write down a few reasons why I dissent strongly from Dr.
Herbert’s view that a socialistic environment would be specially
favourable to the eugenic development of the race.

In the connection between the future of Eugenics and
Socialism which Dr. Herbert has formulated in the sentence I
have quoted in my first paragraph, it is necessary at the outset
to make clear to ourselves what we mean by the terms we use.

If by ‘‘ Eugenics” we mean complete control of human reproduction by the officials of the State, it is, of course, a truism
to say that, in order to secure that control, the State must endow
its officials with the entire management of, and responsibility
for, the economic and social welfare of the people. Here we
have full-grown socialism in its most bureaucratic form—the
logical outcome of that ‘‘ bourgeois and bureaucratic’ socialism
advocated by leading Fabians. To get eugenic results, too, it is
necessary to define “ Socialism ’”’ in this sense—the democratic
or revolutionary socialism of the opposing and more militant
school of the street corner and the Hyde Park tub would make
short work of all restrictions on parentage by the unfit.

But no reasonable eugenist holds the extreme definition of
Eugenics suggested above, though a belief that he does is responsible for much of the prejudice against our cause in otherwise intelligent circles. It is desirable to repudiate at every
opportunity such an unnatural theory, either as an immediate
policy or an ulterior aim.

But, if we define Eugenics in a more modest way, as the
study of selective agencies which may improve the average innate
qualities of the race, and confine our advocacy of legislative or
social action to those cases where our available evidence is conclusive, we shall find ourselves under much more healthy
restrictions, though we lose the large outlook and the engaging
simplicity of the truism considered above.

‘The love of simplicity,” said F. W. Maitland, ‘‘ has done
vast harm to English Political Philosophy,” and no profounder
truth was ever uttered even by that brilliant philosopher and
historian. - It is largely the love of simplicity, or an inability to
grasp the full complexity of economic and social phenomena,
that renders socialist ideas so attractive, especially to a certain
type of immature mind. A short way with abuses, inequalities,
injustices—what is simpler or more attractive? The functions
of government have been extended tentatively to various departments of life formerly left to individual effort, and no obvious
244 DISCUSSION

harm (or, at all events, no harm which a little goodwill cannot
explain away), and even some definite advantage has resulted.
What is clearer than that a universal extension of governmental
action over the whole field of economic production would be
proportionately effective ?

To an enthusiastic disciple of this form of the simple life it
seems sinning against the light to suggest that the problem is
not so straightforward. The difference between governmental
interference in a few carefully circumscribed directions, and
universal State responsibility for production and distribution, is
one of kind, not merely one of degree. Human nature will, on
the average of large numbers, tend to take the easiest road. If
everyone may rely on government for a comfortable and
‘‘honourable’’ subsistence after a minimum of exertion, some of
us at all events will relax the strenuous efforts we now make to
better ourselves and our families, and incidentally to increase
the economic wealth of the community. If no labours are of
any use in Increasing our property, and consequently our
comfort and consideration, beyond a certain point, if no amount
of ingenuity or industry make it possible for a man to found a
family and give his descendants the opportunity of social service
from a secure position, some of us may feel that labour and
industry are not worth while, nor the responsibility of parenthood
worth the undertaking.

We are not all Fabians: and not all would be satisfied to
work hard to occupy one of a row of comfortable suburban
villas in the dull, dead equalitarian atmosphere of a socialist
garden city. But relaxed efforts, even by some, and especially
by the ablest members of the community, mean a lowered
average of industrial efficiency, a loss of economic wealth. The
‘comfortable villas for all’’ might in practice sink into ruinous
and poverty-stricken hovels, worse than the slums from which
our individualist society, slowly it may be, but none the less
surely, is raising the mass of the population. We might have
secured equality, it is true, and satisfied that child-like desire to
make things “ fair,” which is so clearly contrary to the order ofa
universe which progresses by natural selection, and in which one
man is born a genius and one a fool. But we might find that we
had levelled all to the present state of the worst or below it.
Wealth does not consist of a hoard of gold which can be divided
without loss. We might find that we had destroyed instead of
sharing our superfluities.

But however this may be, in the gray uniformity of the
socialist state, the qualities which would succeed and have survival value would not be those that now lead to success.
Whatever individualist society does, it favours the self-reliant.
self-contained character that is the best type of our Anglo-Saxon
race. Till the voluntary restriction of the birth-rate began forty
years ago, it was that type of man that succeeded and begat the
DISCUSSION 245

larger number of children. And so it will be again, when we
have adjusted our ideas to the new circumstances of the world:
when we have segregated the feeble-minded, the habitual criminal,
and the hopeless and hereditary pauper, and lightened the
economic burdens on the parents of satisfactory families in all
ranks of life.

But who will say that we shall continue to breed an Imperial
self-reliant race when the present incentives are removed, and all
have learnt to depend on an omnipresent and omnipotent
government ?

Moreover, if present indications may be trusted, a socialist
democracy would use any resources they gained by the labour of
the competent to support, and incidentally make easy, the reproduction of an ever-growing number of the incompetent, till
economic ruin plunged the whole residuum of the nation into
barbarism, or gave them over, an easy prey, to a less ‘‘ advanced”’
people.

But let us turn to Dr. Herbert’s special case: that socialism
would favour eugenic breeding because it would give a “ revaluation of all values according to natural abilities, which is the first
essential and preliminary to any eugenic undertaking whatsoever.” Into the grotesque idea that Eugenics may fold its hands
till the state is socialistic we need not enter. Let us, in spite of
the plain meaning of his words, take Dr. Herbert merely to say
that Eugenics would have a better chance of effective action in
such circumstances. And first, would socialism value men
according to their natural abilities? Doubtless, the particular
type of man which is held in most esteem varies in each age
according to the social environment, and not all those who are
now held in honour or gain wealth would succeed in socialist
conditions. But is there any reason to suppose that the man
best fitted for a bureaucratic or for a democratic socialism is the
best and noblest type of humanity, or even better and nobler
than the man who succeeds at present? When one thinks on
the one hand of universal interference by government offices, of
the likeness, let us say, of the present ‘‘ Tape and Sealing Wax”
department, and on the other hand of the ignorance and prejudice and inefficiency of more direct mob rule, one may perhaps
be forgiven a doubt.

I do not wish to deny that material and economic considerations too often come into play in the making of present marriages.
Would a socialist state do more than change the form which
such motives would take? One can image a socialist romance,
in which the unsound and ill-bred, but clever and unscrupulous,
government official would be accepted by the fair Ellen instead of
a young Lochinvar who found his health, strength and good looks
hampered by a spirit too independent and wild to brook the rules
of life prescribed for him in that same official’s department.

Again, the more democratic type of socialism would yield
246 DISCUSSION

our lives to the ignorant tyranny of the blatant demagogue, who
might prove more dangerous with the mob behind him than
even the hide-bound government official of the alternative
scheme. We might thus provide an environment in which the
art of the demagogue was, more even than at present, an
advantage to its possessor, and might by natural selection tend
to breed such qualities into what would become the governing
class of the race.

A fallacy which underlies much modern thought on these
subjects in almost all schools of politics is latent in the idea that
it is necessary to secure complete social mobility in order to give
natural selection in civilised society full play ; that it is necesssary
to secure an environment in which a man can rise soon and easily
from the lowest beginnings to the highest offices, should his
talent and ability be sufficient to fill them.

Now, whatever its advantages in other ways, not only do I
hold that such extreme mobility is not necessary for efficient
natural selection, but I go farther and, in spite of the outcry
such a statement may occasion, say that the power of rising too
easily from one class to another is positively dangerous to the
eugenic ideal, at all events in present social conditions, or any we
are likely to see in the immediate future. ‘The man who,
from early days, has before his eyes a large change in his
social class as an object of ambition, does not hamper his
advance with a wife and family who may not be able to rise
with him. Either he does not marry at all, or, marrying
late in the class to which he attains, has few offspring to inherit
his qualities. To secure for ability its true survival value it is
far better to hold before each man’s eyes as his natural goal a
leading position in his own class, from which, equally naturally,
his sons may advance another step or two if worthy of it. As
Dr. Herbert himself points out, exceptional men who rise too
rapidly rarely found lasting families. It is the family which
rises slowly, adapting itself naturally, both by training and intermarriage, to each step in advance, that becomes a stable asset of
national value. I believe that it is better, eugenically speaking,
to give ability its due advantage within certain defined limits, but
not to make it too easy for those limits to be passed.

But to return to the thesis with which I began :—all this
represents my own thought alone. I do not wish to commit
other eugenists to such views. Any form of government and
almost any social environment can be made either more favourable or less favourable to the process of race-development. Let
us agree to combine to try to make any government and any
social environment in which we may live more eugenic and not
less, while each holds firm by his special views about the relative
advantages or disadvantages of different political and social

theories.
W. C. D. WHEtTHaAM, M.A., F.R.S.
DISCUSSION 247

CRETINISM IN AOSTA

In 1865 Mr. George Whymper, in his Scrambles Amongst the
Alps, gives an account of a most unpleasant experiment being
unconsciously tried in the city of Aosta in North Western Italy.
The valley of the Dora Baltea in which Aosta lies, has been long
noted for the large numbers of cretins or idiots to be found
there, and Whymper calls attention to the mistake being made
by the people in permitting these cretins to marry, and he
speaks most scornfully of the work of the Church in blessing the
union of a brace of idiots and sending them forth to multiply.
The same valley is also noted for the prevalence of goitre. In
developing the armies of this region all the men with goitre have
been exempt from military service, and consequently by the
destruction or removal of the strong and vigorous those subject
to this affection have been allowed to multiply, so that goitre is
the rule rather than the exception in many of these districts. As
the people with the goitre were socially less esteemed than the
others, there is a tendency for the cretin'and the goitrous to intermarry, so that nearly every cretin was also afflicted with the
goitre.

I visited Aosta in 1881, 1893 and 18go0, and in each of these
years saw large numbers of the cretin, and was very greatly
impressed with the fact that by allowing the worst to mate with
the worst and protecting them as paupers and mendicants, the
people of Aosta were breeding a special type of man utterly
incompetent to take care of himself and utterly useless for
all sorts of purposes. In the month of August of the present
year I visited Aosta again to get further material on the
matter of the cretins. To my great surprise I found none in the
streets or on the roads, and for some time was unable to hear of
any or find anybody who had ever seen one. In Aosta, in the
Refuge des Pauvres, erected about twenty years ago, I found
two aged paupers of the city, gathered under the direction
of Les Petites Sceurs des Pauvres. I found that the men and
women were segregated in this large almshouse, that there was
no longer any inter-marriage of the incompetent. I founda
single cretin, a little old woman about sixty years of age, and
not over four feet high, with the intelligence and apparently the
affection of a dog accustomed to being petted. There were
besides two women and one man who were sort of demi-cretin,
that is, descended on one side from a cretin, and about half idiotic.
Sceur Lucie, at the head of the work of the Little Sisters of the
Poor, summed up the position in these words: ‘Il n’y en a plus,”
‘¢ There are no more.’’ In other words, the segregation of the
idiots from other people and from each other had put an end
absolutely and suddenly to the development of cretinism, and a
similar treatment, together with medical aid, has almost
248 DISCUSSION

extinguished the goitre in the same valley. In other words, in
Aosta and other places, we know that feeble-minded children
have in almost every case, somewhere along the line, a feebleminded ancestry. To put a stop to pauperism there is but one
method, and that is to prevent the existence of children of
pauper parentage. It has been said by Alexander Johnson of
Chicago that were the great wave of charity to cease for a week
it would mean the extinguishing of pauperism. It has also been
said that among the poor in each region there are three classes—
the Lord’s poor, the Devil’s poor, andthe paupers. The paupers
are those who are incompetent because they are descended from
ancestors likewise incompetent, and the great class of feebleminded children will become practically extinct if feeble-minded
children are not allowed or encouraged to marry. Education
will of course help them, as it will help all classes of people, but
no form of education can make good in any degree the defects
arising from incompetent ancestry, this incompetence, of course,
being inborn and not the result of illness or misfortune.

DavID STARR JORDAN.
