BRITISH BIRTH CONTROL CLINICS

Some Results and Eugenic Aspects of their Work
By NORMAN E. HIMES, M.A.

having, in some respects, a eugenic

effect ; but in other respects their influence would seem to be dysgenic. In so
far as they encourage family limitation by
those possessing foresight and intelligence
—and it may be safely assumed (1) that
these qualities are more common in the
skilled and professional economic groups
than in the unskilled group, and (2) that intelligence (as measured by the current
tests) tends to be inherited—it is possible to
contend that their influence, from the
eugenic standpoint alone, is not for the best
interests of the race.

To the extent, however, that they are
succeeding in causing family limitation
among the dull normals and the definitely
unskilled I think we may say with reasonable certainty that the effect is good.’ It is
clear at any rate that the clinics have been
unable to reach the feeble-minded, the
insane and epileptic, the chronic paupers,
and persistent leaners upon the State.

Thus may be broadly summarized the
main conclusions of a study based on the
records of seven English and two Scottish
clinics made in the summer of 1927, when I
visited them. Roughly, one-third of the
clients of these clinics were the wives of
unskilled workers. Approximately 40 to 50
per cent. of the clinic patients (varying with

Biss control clinics in England are

1The assumption is that we have a plentiful
supply of dull normals already. There are those
who, overlooking the fact that these people must
function as citizens of a democracy, contend that
such individuals are needed in considerable numbers
by modern, mechanized industry. It is not yet clear
whether industry tends (zx) to create a demand for
such workers, or (2) whether, bv insisting upon a
capacity for discipline, the dull normal and still
duller workers tend to be crowded out by the competition of those possessing greater manual dexterity
and planfulness and having quicker reaction times.
If the former, industry may be creating a serious
civic, not to say eugenic, problem, if the latter,
the effect would seem to be beneficial to the race.
Herein lies a fruitful field for further research.

each clinic series) were the wives of unskilled or semi-skilled workers, the remainder of the cases falling into miscellaneous
groups. Ninety per cent. of the clinic
clientele came from the working classes.
The study shows that the average size of
family in 3,296 cases was 3.17, despite a
surprisingly heavy rate of pregnancy loss,
chiefly owing to miscarriages. The correlation coefficients for the relation between the
size of family and the number of years
married ranged in the various clinic groups
from .54 to .79.

TWELVE SHILLINGS PER PERSON

The Means of Support.—Two other
points are impressive. Firstly, in great
contrast to the incomes of American
birth control clinic patients, the average
family income seems to range about £3 per
week, on which it is necessary to support a
family of five. Secondly, the British clinics
serve almost exclusively the working class.
Very few professional people, students, and
individuals holding the more responsible
business positions come to the British
clinics. This situation is in contrast to
that at Chicago. Data will also be presented tending to show that the New York
patients come from a higher social and
economic class.

I propose to show by a study of the occupational distribution of the husbands of
patients attending the clinics, and by a
survey of wage incomes, that the clinics are
reaching, to a modest degree, the wives of
the unskilled and the semi-skilled workers.
To this will be added an analysis of the
size of family from which the patients and
their husbands come, as compared with the
size of family they are themselves
producing.

Table I furnishes vital and social data on
3,296 cases which visited the nine clinics
studied. It will be noted that only one, the

157
158

North Kensington clinic, is situated in
London. The others are in the industrial
towns of Manchester, Wolverhampton,
Liverpool, and Birmingham, in the university town of Cambridge, and in the two
Scottish cities of Aberdeen and Glasgow.
The clinic which served the Cannock miners
was open only a short time, in a worker’s
cottage, and has since been obliged to close
on account of shortage of funds. For one
series at Glasgow the data on the clinic
cards (the first cards) were inadequate, but
summaries have been made for whatever
they may be worth. The first Cannock
series relates to miners only, while the
second includes only patients whose husbands were not miners (strictly speaking)
but who, none the less, were industrially
associated with coal-mining.

Omitting the small series upon which no
particular reliance is placed, the sizes of the
series vary from 109 to 1000. Reading
across Table I we have the following information for pregnancies: the total in each
series, the simple arithmetical mean, and its
standard deviation. For the children now
living the same information is given. The
losses resulting from still-births, miscarriages, abortions, and deaths are summarized as a total. Columns 9g and 10 deal with
the percentage of losses to pregnancies and
column 11 with the percentage of miscarriages to losses. For the number of years
married we have the arithmetical mean in
each series with its standard deviation, as
well as the correlation coefficient for the
relationship between the number of years
married and the number of pregnancies, and
the correlation coefficient for the relationship between the number of years married
and the number of living children. In the
last two columns are recorded the means
for the ages of each group of patients and
husbands.

FOUR PREGNANCIES PER PATIENT

In a total of 3,296 cases the average
number of pregnancies was 4.00, while the
average number of living children was 3.17.
The means for pregnancies range from
approximately 3.5 (Cannock non-miners and

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Wolverhampton) to 5.67 (Aberdeen). The
figure for Aberdeen is probably higher
owing to the fact that until recently that
clinic has accepted as patients only those
women referred by physicians. Liverpool’s
average is also high because that series
contains a large proportion of dock
labourers. The means for the living
children range from 2.86 (Cannock nonminers) to 3.89 for Liverpool.

One finds, of course, wide ranges in the
size of the family (0-14). Space is not available here for presenting distribution graphs.
However, when one considers (1) the
economic circumstances of the patients, (2)
the average age of the mother (31.5 years
for the whole group), (3) the average age of
the father (34.3 years for all cases), (4) the
mean number of years married (9.1 years),
these parents do not seem to have shirked
the responsibilities of parenthood. On the
other hand, the clinic families are smaller
than one would suppose after reading the
propaganda issuing from some of the clinics
and from similar quarters. But I hasten to
add that the size of the family has very
little to do with the right of these patients to
contraceptive information.

The pregnancy losses from all causes—
still-births, miscarriages, abortions, deaths
—approximated one-fifth of all pregnancies.
In two cases it was nearer to one-quarter
(Liverpool, 24.2; and Glasgow, 25.8),
Cambridge had the lowest rate of loss (16.4)
and Glasgow the highest (25.8).

FIFTY PER CENT. MISCARRIAGES

Perhaps even more significant are the percentages of losses due to miscarriages. The
range is from 30.9 (Aberdeen) to 51.9 for
North Kensington. From a third to a half
of all pregnancy losses resulted from miscarriages, natural or self-induced. The
figures on abortions—not presented here—
are an understatement, for the clinics do not
press patients for this information. Quite
rightly, the staffs of practically all the
clinics wish to avoid embarrassing patients
by inquiring into such delicate matters. I
should like to point out, however, that the
159

BIRTH CONTROL CLINICS

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

I z | 9 | s}UoMa|dW] JO sy JUSDLyHI0GY
1 yews wee wes wee “ gouaunsqy
| STD Tir Tr somaupsay
z ose eee eee oes ace Surqonog
0-6£ z $ + ve eee eee oes eee sqj}eous
¢ I ¢ eos coe wee ove solressog gIqnjos
+.6€ | € eee eee eee **"SoITesseg OAISNIIVO
Cr OL oz fr eee eee -** sngdnzzeqyUy Snj107)
Pit 06 “bP aT bP “ ** Zundsyo yr 07 yduis33 Vy
€.6z 8 €.9z oI ze of si sdAtde0vi7007) pesn IaAdN
€.6z FI 0-62 II €€ ‘ peuonuem soandsoeuo, jo osn ON
9-89 33 $-9¢ | 12 oof oo Suudsyo zy] 0} ydue}32 ON
*PUSD Jo} TeIOL, |/'FA9D Jaq) TEJOL |/'}FU9D Is) TeJOL |/'FU9D Jo) TeOL,
SNOOURT[SOSTT PeTIFIS PETIFIS-fuss PoTFAST Ll)

‘SNIVIS TVWNOILVdN900
Ad AUVAWNS ‘SHAILGHOVULNOD AO ASN SNOIATAd—~IOOdNAAIT—IA ATAVI

“pfz% JO peajsul Sased gzz lO paseg ,
‘OSI JO pvajsuI SasBeo gvI UO paseg, ‘b£e Jo pvoysur saseo cfz uo paseg ,
"60€ Jo peajysut saseo 26% uO poseg , ‘dnoid siq}
“60£ Jo peaysul soseo golf uo paseg, Ul peyUNOdD oie Siam aSeq} aoUIS ‘salias uOJdmMeY

-IIAJOM, 9} Ul PapHyour jou are ynq ‘uojdmEYyIaAjOM

ye yday slam Sased aso} JO ZI JO SPp1ODSI IYI,
‘SQL JO pBoqSUI Sasvd IOI UO pase ,
‘967 JO pvajsul sasea 967 TO paseg ,

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

— | 469%) — 00-% | S8T°ST! 96's |°" a **BIBIOL, PUvIH
— — | Sz-z gF.€ | 26 gz sf “** « STOUIP-UON Hoouues
_ — | 96-1 go-b | Sov j,bxrr |° ‘se "** SOU, WOouUes)
g-1z | b€x | Sz.z Lg. | 619 | 601 |°°° vane na “* Toeprleqy
_— —_ — gt-b | LSo'r} 6€z |e ‘ [e70L
— — — GSr-4¥ | g9€ | 69 “**  sorras oyenbopeuy
g-Se | 62r | or-e 09-% | 169 | oSr |°** sates azyenbepy—mossely
1-S€ | .z€ |,9¢. £L.oz | of: | SS.z 99-€ | tog | Sor {°° vee se WeysuIMIig
g- bE | g.1€ | SZ. z-be | bgz | Lez GSo-S | gf1‘r] bEz [°° ve ae *** TOOdIOATT
,6-vE |,z-z& | zQ- b.or | g6r | gz-z 6g-€ | zoz‘zr} 60€ |°°: st ‘ espliqures)
— |,g-0f | of. 0-61 | g€€ | €g-1 oS -€ | SLLZ‘r| 96h |-°° ais "+ goydureyaAlOM
9 f-£E |,0-1€ | 99- ¢.€z | gbS | 62.1 6g-€ | r€E'z}| cog {°° .s ve IoysaqOUL]
6.€€ | €.1€ | og- o-£z | ogg | 9S-z 98-£ | SSg‘E| ooo‘r) °°: so UO0SUISUSST YION
uvopy | UPA) “O'T "s801gq | [2I0L o ues | TeJOL | 1e70L
“SnHT | SFTMA | TH ‘O'd ‘Gy “OTUTTD JO WOReoO'T
‘a
sosy porrreyy SIea x SOSSO’] wsIpfiqy Zurary soroueuselg SOLIOS

  

SOINITO IOMLNOD HLYIG HSILIMA—SHSVO 962 NO VLIVd IVI0O0S GNV IVLIA—'I FIdVL
160

clinics have a unique opportunity to gather
this information.

The correlation studies tell us nothing
new, but they confirm the common assumption of vital statisticians that there is a
high degree of relationship between the
number of years married and the size of
family. The lowest correlation coefficient is
.54 and the highest .79.

Table II shows the occupational status of
the husbands of women who visited the
clinics." Table III is a summary of the
occupational status of the husbands by
different clinic series, dividing each series
into four groups, viz., the unskilled, the
semi-skilled, the skilled, and all others. It
will be observed from Table II that 37.9 per
cent. of the husbands at North Kensington
were definitely unskilled, while 32.8 per
cent. were skilled or semi-skilled.” The
rather large number (90) of bus conductors
and drivers, motor mechanics, and
chauffeurs in this series is accounted for by
the fact that one of the London ’bus routes
terminates near the clinic. ‘The category
‘“‘ higher business and professional ’’ refers
to the more responsible business and professional occupations. Quite obviously the
clinic served the wives of no industrial
magnates.

Manchester presents very much the same
picture. 32.6 per cent. of the patients’
husbands were unskilled, while a much
lower proportion (11.1 per cent.) were semiskilled. Curiously enough, at Wolverhampton 77.9 per cent. of the husbands were
definitely skilled, while only 12.6 per cent.
were definitely unskilled. Owing to the
difficulty of determining the degree of skill
and training required for the execution of
industrial tasks highly mechanized, the

1 Those with statistical inclinations will observe
that the occupational classifications for the different
clinics vary somewhat. While this is unfortunate,
each community seemed to offer somewhat different
problems in the distribution of the occupational
groups served. The allocation of individuals to each
group is necessarily only approximate. There is
not, nor can there be, sharp dividing lines. I have
not thonght it necessary to define here each group.

2In view of the fact that it was particularly difficult to allocate certain of the husbands of patients
in this series to the skilled and semi-skilled groups,
it was decided to place them all in the one category.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

occupational classification of the clinic husbands in this community, as in some others,
offered many obstacles. In Cambridge 32
per cent. were unskilled, 17.2 semi-skilled,
and 25.2 definitely skilled artisans. ‘This
series contains also a small but interesting
professional group. At Liverpool 46.8 per
cent. were unskilled, 16.2 per cent. semiskilled, and 19.6 per cent. skilled. Birmingham ranged next to Wolverhampton in
serving a large proportion of skilled
workers. Glasgow, on the other hand,
served a substantially high proportion of
unskilled. At Aberdeen 38.5 per cent. were
definitely unskilled, 7.3 per cent. semiskilled, and 20.2 per cent. definitely skilled.
The four lowest occupational categories,
however, included 66 per cent. of all the
cases (Table II).

MOSTLY UNSKILLED AND SEMI-SKILLED

Turning to the summary table (Table
III) one finds that if one omits the extreme
exceptions of Wolverhampton (12.6) and of
Cannock (100.0), from one-third to onehalf of the clinic husbands were unskilled.
From 7.3 to 18 per cent. were semi-skilled.
The skilled group ranged from 20 to 30 per
cent. (in round numbers), with the exception again of Wolverhampton, which had
an extraordinarily high proportion of skilled
workers. I suppose that one would quite
rightly consider the Cannock mining group
as almost entirely unskilled. The general
trend in most of these series is for nearly
one-half of the patients’ husbands to fall
either in the unskilled or the semi-skilled
groups. The clinics aim to deal almost
exclusively with the working classes, and at
least 90 per cent. of their clientele come
from this group.

It may be of some interest to compare
Tables III and IV, the latter compiled from
the records of the first 492 cases to visit the
first of the Chicago clinics (there are now
several). While the proportion of the unskilled at the British clinics ranges from
one-third to one-half, the per cent. of unskilled at Chicago was 18.9 per cent. or
approximately one-fifth. The skilled group
BIRTH CONTROL CLINICS

comprised nearly one-half (45 per cent.) of
the whole series, while the ‘‘ professional,’’
** managerial,’’ and ‘‘ student ’’ categories
included together 16.2 per cent. of the total
number of cases. In 5.1 per cent. of the
cases there was unemployment—it is estimated as twice that for the English series—
and in 14.8 per cent. of the cases there was
an absence of data. The socially more responsible group at Chicago—i.e., those in
the professions, in managerial business positions, or students likely to achieve more
than an average success in life—represented
a much larger proportion of the total
number of cases than is to be found in any
British series. While this may result from
several causes, I think the most important
reason is to be found in the fact that the
American ‘‘ upper ’’ classes (socially and
economically) have not now, and have not
had in the past, the same facilities for securing contraceptive information as the English
‘* upper ”’ classes.

The figures available in regard to wage
incomes are very unreliable. Frequently
this figure on the original records represents
the sum turned over to the wife for defraying household expenses rather than the
husband’s weekly wage. Many of the
women of the working classes do not know
what their husbands earn. An estimate,
therefore, of incomes would probably be
more reliable than any attempt to summarize the data available. A careful study
of the records leads me to conclude that
roughly go per cent. of the clinic husbands
earn from two to three pounds per week.
The arithmetical mean for Glasgow, for
example, was £2 15s. 8d. At Cambridge
the highest weekly wage recorded (there
were some gaps in the records relating to
the incomes of certain professional men) was
five pounds. Taking the 3,296 cases as 4
whole, I believe that it is not far from the
truth to say that a family of five—there was
an average of three living children, it will
be recalled—is supported on from two
to three pounds per week. I am certain
that itis not much in excess of three
pounds.

161

AMERICAN WAGES

The wage incomes of the British clinic
patients are in striking contrast with a thousand cases visiting the New York clinic. It
will be observed from Table V that 77.5 per
cent. of the patients in this series have an
average income of $30.52 (approximately
£6 2s.) per week, while 17.7 per cent. of the
same series had an average weekly income
of $61.20 (£12 4s. 1od.). Although this
table has serious defects, it is obvious that
the weekly income of husbands of New York
patients is very much larger than the income
of patients visiting the British clinics.

It is clear that money incomes (and real
incomes, too) are higher in the United
States than in England. Moreover, money
incomes in New York are higher than in
most other American cities. | For these
reasons one would expect a considerable
difference between the incomes of the New
York clientele and that of the English clientele. But this discrepancy is so great as to
lead one to suspect that the New York clinic
is reaching a higher economic group. It is
also possible that it is reaching a more intelligent group than the English clinics;
but of these matters we cannot be certain
until a great deal more fact-collecting and
fact-analysis has been carried on. Dr.
James F. Cooper, the Medical Director of
the New York clinic, seems to regard these
1,000 cases as representative of those “‘ in
the lowest social brackets’? and those
‘‘ whose intelligence is not of the highest
order.’? * This conclusion does not impress
me as following from the data, this being
especially true of the deduction that the
foreign-born are necessarily of low
intelligence.

Even if it be granted, for the sake of
argument, that the American “‘ foreign
born ’? may be considered as belonging to
the lowest social classes, I doubt the wisdom
of implying that the foreign-born are necessarily of lower intelligence. In fact, if these
people came to the clinic prompted chiefly
by their own impulses—and only a small
proportion were sent by hospitals, and social
James F. Cooper, M.D., Technique of Contraception. P.195.
162

service organizations —I should, on the
contrary, be inclined to believe that they
possessed more than the ordinary gift of
initiative, foresight, and intelligence. The
oft-repeated statement, made by those connected with the clinic, that the great
majority of the women find no difficulty in
comprehending the instructions given them,
suggests that only exceptionally does the
clinic serve the really stupid. No clinic
gives intelligence tests. If data on the
intelligence of patients could somehow be
secured, we should have a better basis for
the discussion of some of these important
but mooted points. Perhaps it should be
stated that in New York one has a peculiar
selective factor operating—the fact that only
those patients may be accepted who need
contraceptive advice for medical reasons. It
must be shown that the information is
needed for the prevention of disease.

ENGLISH FERTILITY FALL

In the case of only one British clinic
(Birmingham) is it possible to compare the
size of family from which the patients came
with the size of family these patients are
themselves producing. Although the clinic
families are not completed, and although
most of the patients’ and their husbands’
families were probably completed when
these data were gathered by the clinic’s
officials, it is interesting to note that the
clinic patients and their husbands came
from families (meaning by families the
children only, i.e., brothers and sisters)
2.64 times as large as the families the
patients have produced to date. If the clinic
families were completed, this figure would
doubtless be reduced ; but even after allowance is made for this factor, the difference
is considerable. In only one case did the
present generation produce a family larger
than the past generation. The average

5.8 per cent. were referred by hospitals; 11.8 by
physicians; 13.3 by social service organizations—a
total of 30.9 per cent.—the rest presumably coming
independently, perhaps on the suggestion of friends
or relatives or as a result of the propaganda of the
American Birth Control League which operates the
clinic. [Cooper, p. 198.] It is interesting to observe
that 38.8 per cent. were Protestant, 32.6 per cent.

Jewish, and 26.2 per cent. Roman Catholic, 2.4 per
cent. representing ‘“‘ all others.”’ [Ibid.]

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

number of children in the wives’ families
was 8.3, while the average number of children in the husbands’ families was 7.0. The
average number of children in both the
husbands’ and wives’ families was 7.65.
Since it is not clear from the clinic records
whether or not these data include the
patient or her husband (as the case may be),
it is not certain but that the figures should
be 9.3, 7.0, and 8.65 respectively. If so, this
would bring up the difference between the
present and past generation to more than
2.64 times. One would expect that the
families from which the parents came would
be larger because (1) these families are
probably completed, (2) because more
parents are available from larger families,
and (3) on account of the falling birth-rate.

Table VI is a summary by occupational
status of the use of contraceptives by the
Liverpool patients previous to the wife’s
first visit to the clinic. It indicates that
there is very little difference in the use or
non-use of contraceptives among the occupational groups here represented. Note the
percentages. Among those who did not
attempt to limit their families there is a
slight—but only a slight—decline in the
percentages as one progresses from the unskilled to the semi-skilled and _ skilled
groups. Conversely, among those who declared that they had made attempts to limit
their families before coming to the clinic,
the percentages increase, as one progresses
in the same direction, by only small increments. Note that coitus interruptus was the
method most commonly employed, although
even the unskilled labourers showed some
knowledge of more up-to-date methods. The
use of abortifacient pills and implements is
known to be much more common than these
figures suggest. Thus we see that even
some casual and dock labourers, some
hawkers, window-washers, car-cleaners, and
other unskilled workers in England have, at
the present time, a rudimentary knowledge
of birth control. ‘The methods commonly
used are, however, so crude that they
frequently fail. Hence the clinical visits of
the wives in the hope of finding a more
efficacious method.
BIRTH CONTROL CLINICS

FIFTEEN MILLION BOOKS

It is so easy to secure contraceptive information in England that it would be strange
indeed if this knowledge had not, to a
measure at least, percolated down to the
lowest occupational groups. In this process
the clinics, owing to the recency of their
origin, have played, comparatively speaking, only a minor réle. Shortly I hope to
substantiate the estimate that not less than
fifteen million books, pamphlets, brochures,
leaflets, etc., giving actual contraceptive
advice of a medical nature have been sold or
given away in England since the declaration
of peace in 1918.

While it is difficult to weigh the eugenic
meaning of the data just presented, I think
one point is reasonably clear, namely, that
we may expect a further decline in the
fertility and perhaps in the effective fertility, of the unskilled, semi-skilled, and
skilled groups in the working class. We
know by the ‘‘ Report on the Fertility of
Marriage ’’ [Census of England and Wales,
1911, Vol. XIII] that the crude effective
fertility of Class III (skilled labourers in
the transport service, in the building, metal,
and paper trades) and of Class IV (labourers
of a lower grade of skill whose work
required some physical strength) remained
relatively constant throughout the period
1851-1911. For the end of this period the
figures have less significance owing to the
shorter duration of the marriages, but my
work on the diffusion of contraceptive information leads me to believe that a further
decline is probable. On the other hand, the
crude effective fertility of miners rose very
rapidly up to the period 1891-96, fell off
even more rapidly between the interval
1891-96 and the interval 1901-06, when
there was again a slight rise (between the
intervals 1901-06 and 1906-11). But while
the significance of this also is in doubt,
owing to the fact that these marriages were
of short duration when the data were
collected, my own small series of miners
showed a fertility that was not high. The
families, however, are not completed.

In so far as the clinics are spreading
reliable contraceptive information among

163

these classes, and in so far as they are using
the technique for the purpose of limiting
their families, we may reasonably expect a
lower fertility in the future. If this
happens, will the results be eugenic or
dysgenic? I do not believe the question can
be answered categorically. A résumé of my
opinion has been suggested in the opening
paragraphs of this paper. I plan to
amplify those observations at a later date in
a book on ‘‘ The British Birth Control
Clinics,’’ but I have preferred, for the present, to emphasize facts rather than interpretations of them, in the hope of assisting
in forming a basis for discussion. Facts,
rather than opinions, no matter how provisional, are needed. Racial forces, even
more than social forces, are necessarily
complex in their operation, their mechanism
and their effects. When more space is
available, it will be possible to consider in
greater detail those qualifications which are
undoubtedly requisite for an accurate statement of the eugenic significance of the work
of the clinics. The conclusions presented
here, therefore, should be viewed as tentative. Most assuredly I am not prepared to
dogmatize on the subject.

DEFECTIVES NOT REACHED

Yet it may be said emphatically that the
clinics have been powerless, so far at least,
to reach the obviously inadequate—mentally, socially, and economically. ‘Those
institutional cases already confined are, of
course, beyond the limits of the clinics’
work, while those not already under care
are, as a rule, problems in segregation or
sterilization. It is not the business of
private clinics, but of the State, to handle
this problem. Necessarily, therefore, little
work has been done with the insane and the
definitely feeble-minded. Hence, when it is
stated that the clinics have reached the limits
of their functions before serving this group,
I speak as a recorder of fact, not as a critic.

Some clinics have, however, succeeded in
reaching a few families carrying a rather
strong strain of epilepsy or feeble-mindedness.

At a later date I hope to be able to present
164

more specific information bearing on the
question of the extensiveness with which
the clinics are reaching those with racial, or
presumably racial, taints. As regards unemployment, it is not known at present
exactly what proportion of the patients’
husbands were unemployed at the times of
the wives’ first visits, but a provisional estimate—it varies, of course, with each
locality—would place the figure at from
1o to 15 per cent. The group which one
might describe as ‘‘ chronic paupers’”’ is

‘

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

hardly — the clinic
patients.

Briefly, one can say (1) that the clinics
are serving the unskilled; but that (2) they
have been aiding the skilled to a considerable extent also; (3) that they have been
powerless so far to limit the reproduction
of those fertile individuals in the community
who constitute a serious problem—the
feeble-minded, the insane, the chronic
paupers, and the persistent leaners on the

State.

represented among

TABLE II
OCCUPATIONAL STATUS OF HUSBANDS.

NORTH KENSINGTON

Status. Total Per cent.
Unskilled _... _ mt 379 37-9
Labourers ... wee we 143
Porters bes bee ws. 50
Carmen... wee .. = 26
Miscellaneous _... ..» 160
Skilled or semi-skilled ... 328 32.8
Miscellaneous ... 238
Bus conductors or
drivers, motor mechanics and chauffeurs 90
Naval and military service 14 1.4
(mostly soldiers)
Police . bee 33 3.3
Clerks “ bee . 57 5-7
Petty tradesmen and
assistants ... +05 ss 70 7.0
Higher business and professional ... wes wes 17 1.7
Unclassifiable or unknown 102 10.2
1,000 100.0
MANCHESTER
Unskilled __... vee vee 196 32.6
Labourers ... bes ... 106
Others wee vee .. go
Semi-skilled bans ae 67 II.
Skilled artisans... wee 186 31.0
Clerks and postmen wes 38 6.4
Business and trade ve 31 5.2
More responsible ... Les 12 2.0
Professional (teacher)... I “2
Unclassifiable or unknown 69 11.5
600 100.0
WOLVERHAMPTON
Maximum definitely unskilled wee bee bes 63 12.65
Degree of skill uncertain
(mostly intermediate) ... 28 5-65
Definitely skilled * a 388 77-9
Unknown .... sy wns 19 3.8
498 100.0

CAMBRIDGE
Unskilled _... bere ve 99 32.0
Labourers... ... 60
Others ’ + 39
Semi-skilled wes wes 53 17.2
Skilled artisans... vee 78 25.2
Tradesmen ... Le Les 16 5-2
Professional ? Le nad 17 5-5
Unclassifiable or unknown 46 14.
309 100.0
LIVERPOOL
Unskilled _... wes vee 10g 46.8
Labourers vee .. 69
Others vee we ws 40
Semi-skilled vee vee 38 16.2
Skilled St bi ves 46 19.6
Miscellaneous net vee 4I
Clerks and postmen II 4.7
Tradesmen wee 5 2.1
More responsible * “ 6 2.5
Unclassifiable or unknown ‘ nana ms 19 8.1
234 100.0

 

1 Includes a very few professional people such as
teachers and clergymen.

2 Note on the Professional Group: This group included an assistant professor, 1 tutor, 2 university
lecturers, 1 airman, 1 petty officer of the Royal
Navy, 3 scientific instrument makers, 1 microscopic
artist, x managing director, 1 dentist, 1 music
master, 1 music teacher, another teacher, 1 schoolmaster, and a Primitive Methodist minister. This
Cambridge series does not include one other professor because the required data on the case were
not recorded on the clinic’s card.

* Includes a master mariner, manager of an ironmongers, two shops assistants, a goods foreman, and
a wholesale news agent.

“Probably mostly unskilled or semi-skilled.
BIRTH CONTROL CLINICS

TABLE I—(Continued.)

BIRMINGHAM
Unskilled _... bee _ 40 24.2
Labourers ... bes an «=
Others bee wee .. 19
Semi-skilled ves wee 23 13.9
Skilled wee Lee wee 66 40.0
Ordinary skill... .. 62
Highly skilled... nee 4
Miscellaneous 36 21.9
Clerks, tradesmen, shop
assistants wee 17
Unclassifiable or unknown ... wat wee oS
Professional a bee 4
165 100.0
GLASGOW (Adequate Series)
Unskilled __... x bes 52 34.6
Labourers ... Lee we 24
Miners wee wee («12
Others wee vee = =16
Semi-skilled ves wee 27 18.0
Skilled Lee bes mn 37 24.6
Tradesmen bee ve 20 13.6
Professional 3 2.0
Unclassifiable or unknown II 7.3
150 100.0
ABERDEEN
Unskilled wes 42 38.5
Labourers ... be = 28
Others we ves we = «1G
66.0
Fishermen, Seamen, etc. ... 18 16.5
Clerks we ves 4 3.7
Semi-skilled . bee vee 8 7.3
Skilled wee wes bee 22 20.2
Trade ... I
Professional or more than 3-7
ordinarily responsible ... 3
Unclassifiable or unknown II 10.1
10g 100.0

1 This miscellaneous category should not be interpreted as referring to a social class above the working class. See the more detailed classifications for
each series in Table II.

* Compiled from figures in Dr. Rachelle S. Yarros’s
Birth Control and its Relation to Health and Welfare.
Chicago: Illincis Birth Control League, 1925. P.6.

165
TABLE III
SUMMARY OF OCCUPATIONAL STATUS OF
HUSBANDS
Location of Un- Sem All
Clinic. ‘Skilled. skilled. Skilled. Others!
North Kensington ... 37.9 32.8 29.3
Manchester 32-6 II.% 31.0 25.3
Wolverhampton 12.6 5-6 77.9 3.9
Cambridge 32.0 17.2 25.2 25-6
Liverpool 46.8 16.2 19.6 17.4
Birmingham ... 24.2 13-9 40.0 21.9
Glasgow 34.6 18.0 24.6 22.8
Aberdeen .. 38.5 7:3 20.2 34.0
Cannock . I00.0 — — —
TABLE IV?
CHICAGO
OCCUPATIONAL STATUS OF HUSBANDS
Status. Total. Per cent.
Unskilled . vee wee 93 18.9
Skilled bee 221 45-0
Professional ... bee wee 49 10.0
Managerial ... noe samt 23 4.6
Students bes we 8 1.6
Unemployed .. wee wes 25 5.1
Not recorded wee bes 73 14.8
492 100.0
TABLE V

Economic and Social Data on 1,000 Cases at the
New York Clinic of the American Birth Control

League.*

Nationality Per cent.
Foreign born ... .» 51.0
American born 49.0

Weekly Income
$8 to $50 (Average of $30.52) . 77.5
$50 to tron (AweRtee of mez. 20) 17.7
$100 or more . wes .. 48

Age
25 years : 19.5
25 to 30 x 41.6
30 to 35 15-7
fo 4° 14.3

6.3

Neémber! of Children Per Family
Living wee vee we 240
Dead wee Lee bee wee bee wee 33
Abortions . wee wes wee bee -73
Total pregnancies | no 3-47

* James F. Cooper, M.D., Technique of Contraception. P.195. These cases had an average of 3.47
pregnancies and 2.41 living children [Ibid, p. 197].

Eugenics Review, Vol. XX, No. 3.
