PROBLEM FAMILIES IN SOUTHAMPTON
By H. C. MAURICE WILLIAMS, O.B.E.. O.St.J.
M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P., D.P.H., F.A.P.HLA.

\ X YHEN I was invited to speak on
the recently published report on
Problem Families, by the Depart
ment of Economics of the University of

Southampton* I should perhaps have de
clined and instead suggested that either one

of the three authors responsible for its
compilation should be asked to undertake
this task. I can, however, justify myself by
the fact, as stated in the preface of the

Report, that the survey was a joint project

between the University and the Local Health

Authority. This experiment of collaboration

is in itself a matter of some importance for it

illustrates the usefulness of combined research
between an academic body with its trained
statisticians and equipment and an administrative department of a Local Health

Authority and its field workers.

There is an unlimited field of medical and
social conditions in our community life still
unsolved that might benefit by the same
pattern of research.

The Initiation of the Report

Let me now turn to the actual survey and
the steps that led to its initiation. As
Medical Officer of Health of a fairly large
urbanised area I am frequently confronted
with problems relating to the conduct and
living conditions of families within my
administrative area. I have sometimes felt
that the information that I gathered from my
own field workers about certain of these
families might be supplemented by essential
information only known to social workers
outside my administrative jurisdiction. For
this reason I suggested to my Council the
formation of a Co-ordinating Committee in

* Blackwell Scientific Publications, 1955. Price 4s.

See EUGENIcS REVIEW, 47, 3, pp. 143-6.

217

order to bring together representatives of all
the statutory and voluntary social welfare
agencies in the town. This Committee, was
set up just-one month before the circular on
Co-ordination was issued by the Home
Office and the Ministries of Health and
Education, so that when the recommendation contained in the circular of appointing
a “designated officer’’’ came before my
Council I was in the strong position of
already occupying that office.

Appointment of Special Officers

There is at present a great variation
throughout the country in these appointments
of designated co-ordinating officers. About
half the local authorities have appointed the
Medical Officer of Health, but the other half
have appointed either the Town Clerk, the
Chief Education Officer or the Children’s.
Officer to occupy this office.

In advocating the appointment of the
Medical Officer you may think that I have a
vested interest, but let me quote Dr. C. P.
Blacker, who is outside local government
employment, when he says “ The Medical
Officer of Health sees the problem family in
its broadest context. He is in touch with
both adults and children and is also concerned with the conditions of the home.”’
May I therefore detail some of the services
that are available to him in collecting in
_.formation and introducing remedial measures

to deal with these intractable families.

In the first place he has usually a large
staff of medico-social workers operating as
health visitors. These women have an
intimate knowledge of the living conditions
of the families in their district and are

-excellent as a means of ascertainment, but |

when it comes to follow-up and remedial
action I am sometimes doubtful whether

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, January 1956. 47, 4.
218

their nursing, midwifery and health visitors
training is the right kind of background for
dealing with families that are not usually
receptive to health education. Are we,
therefore, as local authorities, wasting the

services of these highly qualified officers,

except for ascertainment, in using them ona
small section of the community who seldom
benefit by their advice?

I am personally in favour of specially
trained officers to cope with these families.
Such officers should be able to mix intimately
with the people in their locality, perhaps
visit the public-houses and while there, in
conversation and gossip, ascertain the families
that are going downhill. They must be men
and women who have had a wide experience
of life which is seldom possible in_ the
sheltered precincts of our hospitals and
university departments.

The personality and the right form of
approach is, in my view, of far greater value
as a qualification for these rehabilitation
officers than any academic training. The
family service units, in the selection of their
personnel, favour a social service diploma,
but realize that in addition they require an
intensive practical experience before dealing
with these social parasites.

Apart from the health visitors, the Medical
Officer of Health has, in about one-third of
the local authority areas, control over the
welfare services responsible for providing
help and accommodation to the homeless.
He also has the services of the child guidance
clinic, the mental health workers and the
midwives, together with personnel who
conduct the ante- and post-natal clinics.
His close association with the family planning clinics also helps but unfortunately so
many of these families are of such low mental
intellect or so irresponsible that the advice

they receive about family planning is seldom.

carried out.

Classification of Problem Families

In our weekly meetings of the Social
Rehabilitation Committee we have, like
other authorities, found great difficulty in
classifying our cases and in ascertaining the
incidence of problem families. There is no

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

common yardstick of measurement. The
late Sir James Spence in his investigation
into A.Thousand Families in Newcastle-onTyne* attempted to place them into three
types, determined largely by attributes and
attitudes of the mother. His classification
was (a) the friendly type, (d) the sullen type,
(c) the vicious type.

In a paper I addressed to the American
Public Health Association last year at
Buffalo I also tried to classify our problem
families into three categories.

In the first group there are those who show
affection toward their children and supply
them with sufficient food and clothing,
although the food is usually unsuitable and
given at irregular times. This type of family
is usually characterised by complete inability
of the woman to undertake the average
routine work of domestic life—which should
be the knowledge possessed by any normal
housewife—with the result that the mother
is generally of poor intellect or that her
health has been so undermined by recurring
pregnancies that she is unable to fulfil her
responsibilities. The father is often lazy and
fails to give his wife any encouragement in
the home; he indulges in long periods of
unemployment. Some of these families are
able to obtain from the Labour Exchange,
the National Assistance Board and their
Family Allowances nearly as much as they
would receive while working. These monetary |
benefits naturally increase the incentive to
laziness in this type of individual. We have
found that a large majority of the families
come within this category. Seventy-seven of
the 104 received National Assistance during
the two years under review. Seldom is there
fundamental viciousness in this group, and
unless there is a marked mental defectiveness
these particular members of society are
generally capable of rehabilitation if caught
in the early stages.

In my second group the father and mother
are devoid of any sense of responsibility.
toward their children. Many of these people
are educated above the average of their
station, but they have a low moral sense and

* Oxford University Press, 1954. Price 1os. 6d:
PROBLEM FAMILIES IN SOUTHAMPTON

seem unconcerned about the welfare of the
children or their legitimacy. In our survey of
104 families, 137 out of 470 children were
illegitimate, nearly one-third compared with
one-fourteenth in the remainder of the
Southampton population.

In the third group you have those whose
living conditions are satisfactory, but who
subject their children to physical cruelty.
Fortunately, from our own experience, this
group is in the minority.

You will therefore appreciate the difficulties that we encountered in the selection
of our families for this investigation, and as
the authors of the report say “‘ There is no
one distinguishable characteristic which
makes.a family a ‘ problem ’ as distinct from
a normal one’”’ and in the absence of a
precise definition a particular social worker’s
definition of what constitutes such a family
will depend upon several factors, personal
and contingent. This is borne out by the
five pilot surveys undertaken by your Soczety
in 1952, when you found the average inci‘dence in the West Riding of Yorkshire to be
I-2. per 1,000, whereas in Luton it was 7-2.
In Southampton we believe that our incidence is about 3 per I,000.

Although the Wood Committee report of
1929 showed a higher incidence of mental
deficiency in the.rural areas, and we of
course recognize that mental sub-normality
plays a big part in the creation of problem
families, yet I believe that the incidence
of these families is higher in urban than in
country districts for two main reasons,
namely, that in the villages the critical
surveillance of their neighbours acts as a
deterrent against cruelty, filth and squalor,
and further there is a tendency for this type
of individual to gravitate to the towns.

The survey showed that in ten of the 104
families the man or woman had been mentally ill and admitted to hospital for treatment either as a voluntary or certified
patients. In thirty-two of the families one
or more of the members were considered to
be mentally sub-normal. This opinion was
based simply on the opinion of the social
worker, without a detailed assessment by
intelligence tests.

219

Another interesting observation in the
report is the fact that reproduction began
early in these families. Twenty-nine out of
sixty-eight women were under twenty at the
birth of their first child, a very much higher
ratio than in the rest of the population. A
fairly typical story in the case histories of
a large number is that the couple marry at an
early age before the man has established
himself in any regular trade or employment.
Owing to the housing shortage in the postwar
years most of these couples started their
married life in one or two rooms in the
parents’ houses. After the birth of the first
child family quarrels commenced until eventually they were forced to leave and find
their own accommodatien in furnished rooms
at a rent far higher than their weekly wage
permits. The husband then begins to visit
the public house to get away from the
discomforts of a confined space and the noise
of an increasing family. The wife becomes
suspicious of outside female associations and
so joins him in his nightly visits. Their debts
pile up, they resort to football pools and
gambling in the forlorn hope that by some
stroke of luck all their worries will disappear
as if by magic. If such a family is to be saved
from developing into social parasites this is
the time when our preventive work must be
concentrated on rehabilitation to break these
links which make up this chain of the vicious
circle.

One-third of the 104 families gave betting,
drink and gambling as the main reason for
their financial difficulties. There was a
natural reluctance to confess to these
extravagances so that a true picture would
probably indicate a much higher figure of
wasteful expenditure.

Rehabilitation

Let me now pass on to our efforts to
rehabilitate these families. In the first place
we try to select one officer to be responsible
for each case to avoid duplicating visits.
We don’t want a cavalcade of social workers
cascading into the homes of these families.
The more one has to deal with these submerged groups, the more one realizes the
220

almost insurmountable difficulties of applying remedial treatment. At first, from my
own experience, I was very despondent
about any hope of improving their state of
life, but after talking to many of these
people in their homes I began to feel that
there was quite a lot of good in some of them
and if we could alter their circumstances we
might succeed in bringing them back to some
degree of normality. The Committee therefore adopted my suggestion that we should
approach the Housing Committee of the
Council and get them to allocate a certain
number of houses for families selected by the
Rehabilitation Committee. The Housing
Committee was at first reluctant to accede to
our request because’ they rightly felt that
these problem families would be “* jumping
the queue ”’ in being given a Council house
before many worthy and deserving applicants. However, when we pointed out that
this was in the form of a social experiment
they agreed to provide a certain number.

Here I must emphasise that the greatest
care must be taken in the selection of
families, otherwise the public reaction to this
form of priority will be most critical. Help
must also be given either by loan or grant of
furniture and household equipment to give
them encouragement and avoid their starting
off with debts. It is important not to
segregate problem families in groups of
Council houses.

Case Histories

In Southampton we have been most
fortunate in this work in that we have
brought about some really spectacular results. A few examples will illustrate my case:

A man and wife who had been prosecuted
and sent to prison because of the filthy
conditions under which they were living have
made a remarkable recovery. At the time of
the conviction this man and wife were living
in a slum dwelling with eleven children.
They were sleeping on the floor of the
kitchen without any proper bed covering and
no mattresses. There was very little food in
the house as most of the money which was
earned by the man, who was a dock labourer,
was spent on drink or wasted in other ways.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

They had no cooking or feeding utensils and
the family used their hands for eating just
like young savages. The father and mother
were both sentenced to six months’ imprisonment, and during the mother’s term in prison
she gave birth to another child.

On their discharge we rehoused them in a
corporation flat in the poorer part of the
town. The children had, in the meantime,
been taken over in the care of the local
authority. We gradually returned the children from the care of the local authority,

- and by constant visitation we got the man and

woman to realize their responsibilities and
to make some saving from the man’s weekly
wage for the purchase of necessary household
equipment. When they satisfied us that they
were making a real endeavour to rehabilitate
themselves we rehoused them in a Council
house. Since then there has been a remarkable transformation in their standard of
living and they now compare favourably with
the rest of the tenants on the housing estate.
Some of the children are still in the care of
the local authority. When we are satisfied
that the parents are able to cope with the
complete family we shall return them to their
parents. : .

Another family—-man, wife and six children—who had been evicted for arrears of
rent, went to live in one room with the
husband’s mother. When visited we found
that their state of living was beyond description. Eventually we offered them accommodation in the Welfare Services hostel. The
woman had completely lost heart with her
circumstances and her recurring pregnancies.
The husband at this time was lazy and
seldom kept his employment for more than a
week or two and stayed away from work on
the most flimsy excuses. Here again by
constant visitation and advice they. were
told that if they made some real effort to
improve their conditions, rehousing would be
considered. This was eventually done with
very gratifying results in that the conduct of
the husband has completely changed ; he
takes a pride in his home and has kept
regular employment. The wife’s outlook on
life has greatly improved, and she attends
regularly at the birth control clinic and no
PROBLEM FAMILIES IN SOUTHAMPTON

further pregnancies have occurred. One
must sympathize with some of these families
who have to perform most functions of life
herded together in one or two small rooms,
often with the added difficulties of being
harassed by a domineering landlady or
criticised by a querulous mother-in-law.

A family consisting of husband, wife and

five children occupied the ground floor of a 
seven-room house which was in a filthy
condition, being damp and dirty, the wallpaper hanging off, and the walls crumbling:
The wife stated that the agent was not
collecting rent as the owner wanted them to
move so that he could sell the house. The
children were fairly clean and well fed. The
family was eventually evicted for rent
arrears and obtained two rooms in a different
house in the same street. After a few months
that landlord required the rooms for his
daughter. The family was told that we
would be prepared to consider them for
rehousing if they made an attempt to pay the
rent arrears owing from their previous
accommodation. The mother again became
pregnant. At this time the parents were
sleeping on a mattress on the floor, and as
they were not allowed to use the kitchen
downstairs, water had to be drawn off and
taken upstairs to their-room. The mother
was admitted to the’ maternity unit and
during her absence from home the children
were placed in the care of the local authority.
After visits and advice the husband arranged
to pay off some of the rent arrears: It was
felt by the Committee that with the provision of better accommodation and help
toward their furniture, together with the
curtailment of future pregnancies, there was
some hope that this family would improve.
Fortunately, this opinion has been amply
justified and they now take a pride in their
new home and their garden.

There are many other families that could
be mentioned who also show marked improvement, and I am convinced that. rehousing, with help toward furniture in
selected cases; is one of the best practical
means of bringing about rehabilitation.
Although the methods of dealing with
problem families appear at first sight to be

221

fairly costly, it is far cheaper than leaving
the problem untackled with the continuing
liability on national and local funds.

Institutional Homes

In the past, the children of problem
families have eventually had to be admitted
either to local authority or voluntary homes,
Although the parents were unsatisfactory, in
the majority of cases they were often dearly
loved by their children who greatly resented
being parted from them. Although most
extravagant arrangements were made for
these children in institutional homes, the
children suffered emotional starvation and,
as they were not emotionally satisfied, they
exhibited behaviour difficulties, and in a
large number of cases developed into psychological problems. We found seventeen cases
of juvenile delinquency drawn from twelve
of the 104 families.

In several recent cases where children havé
been admitted to local authority homes it
has been found that their mothers or fathers
were also brought up in these homes. In the
case of one girl who was brought up in the
homes and who is now only thirty-four years
of age, her four children, all illegitimate, are
now wards of the Local Authority. .In the
case of a man aged forty-two years who was
also brought up in the homes, his two
children have had to be taken into care by
the Local Authority. These people who
have known no love in their childhood have
frequently nothing to offer their children.
Where children have been taken from
unsatisfactory parents it has been found that
more children have then been produced and
thataftera few years thesame position prevails
as when the first children were removed. The
satisfactory method of dealing with so-called
problem families is as a family unit. In my
view, birth control is indicated when recurring pregnancies occur in poor housing
conditions because this is one of the main
factors conducive to deterioration in the
standard of living for people of this type.
Even voluntary sterilization may be advised
where it is obviously detrimental to the
mother’s health that further pregnancies
should occur.
222

Since the war Local Authorities have had
permissive powers to employ domestic helps
in relieving the overburdened mother with
her household duties. Unfortunately, the
scale of charges made to the recipient of this
service by most of the Local Authorities is so
high that these families are quite unable to
pay for the help.

Robert Owen, supported by many reformers of his day, believed that environment
was the only factor that influenced human
nature, he argued that all persons were
universally plastic and the infants of any one
class in the world could be readily formed as
men of any other class. He stated that if the
children of Quakers had been at birth
exchanged for a similar number from the
loose fraternities of St. Giles they would have
grown up to participate in every degree of
crime, while the exchanged St. Giles children
would have developed into good, temperate,
moral characters. If the judges of the realm
had been born and educated amongst the
poor and profligate their natural abilities
would have taken them to the head of the
criminal profession, and they would have
suffered imprisonment, transportation and
death.

To-day we know that such a dictum is not
correct for we recognize that the biological
inheritance is the most important factor, yet
it must be acknowledged that an improvement in environmental conditions can bring
about some surprising results. In Southampton we established a home for eleven
families, something on the lines of the
‘Mayflower Home at Plymouth. Since this
home was opened twelve months ago
eighteen families have been admitted to the
house. Ten of these families had previously
occupied Council houses and been evicted
because of arrears of rent. Eleven of the
families, after a period of six months in this
home under supervision and instruction, have
been rehoused in suitable Council houses and
have continued to be satisfactory.

Only two families have failed to cooperate. We were fortunate in obtaining the
services of two retired Salvation Army
officers who undertook the supervision. In
addition, one of the health visitors visits

_ THE EUGENICS REVIEW

three times a week and gives health advice
and organizes mothercraft classes.

My Council are considering the purchase
of a further house. We are also trying to give
the female children of problem families some
additional instruction in housewifery in our
secondary modern schools.

Slum Conditions in the Nineteenth Century

Many of the general public seem to think
that problem families are something new that
have developed like a canker on our postwar
social fabric, for the “‘ man in the street ”’
knows little of the horrors of slum life with
its conditions of filth and squalor under which
these derelict families exist. The official
evacuation scheme of the last war introduced
many of these families into districts whose
residents were previously unaware of the
existence of such people, and gave considerable publicity to the situation.

It is undoubtedly true that to-day the
public conscience is sensitive to any devia
tion from the normal standard of living,

therefore those who fail to attain these
standards are more apparent. Yet, those of
us who have studied social conditions in
bygone days know that there is nothing new
in the problem. In fact, in the last century,
after the Industrial Revolution, with its child
labour, cheap alcohol, poor wages, and bad
landlords, there must have been a much
higher proportion of our working-class families living under conditions far worse than
anything we see to-day. Charles Booth,
in his Life and Labour in London at the end of
the last century, spoke of the “ submerged
tenth.”

As social amenities became more readily
available to the people so the great majority
took advantage of the benefits and improved
their conditions of life. With better educa- .
tion, better housing, and higher wages most
of the working-class people are to-day living
at as high a standard as the middle classes
enjoyed during the nineteenth century. Yet
one finds a small minority, either through a
temperamental instability or mental defect,
who fail to keep pace with the advancing
times. In our Welfare State to-day there is
PROBLEM FAMILIES IN SOUTHAMPTON

seldom need for real poverty in the homes of
these submerged families. —

Southampton, like other provincial centres
in England, is determined to continue this
important work of rehabilitation. We undertake this work with the confidence that we
shall save at least a proportion of the
families from a continued life of degradation.
In this we are inspired and encouraged by
the words in the final paragraph of Booth’s
monumental work:

223

‘“‘ The dry bones that lie scattered o’er the
long valley recorded in my volume of Life and
Labour in London bring to light the terrible
conditions under which many of our fellow
beings exist. May some great soul, master of
a nobler and subtler alchemy than mine,
disentangle the confused issues, reconcile the
apparent contradiction in aim, melt and comingle the various influences for good into
one uniformity of effort, and make these dry
bones live so that the streets of our Jerusalem
may ring with joy.”
