GALTON ON EUGENICS AS SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE’
By C. P. BLACKER, M.D., F.R.C.P.

ALTON concerned himself with
ee during three phases of his
, long life. The first of these periods
has, as its most outstanding event, the publication of Hereditary Genius in 1869. But the
chain of thought which culminated in this
book was first forged ten years before, when
Galton began, as he puts it, “to interest
myself in the human side of Geography.”
It was then that began Galton’s transition,
well described by Karl Pearson, from
geography to anthropology. We can regard
the two papers published during 1865 in
Macmillan’s Magazine as_ preliminary
announcements of the theme of Hereditary
Genius. Indeed the articles and the book
have certain passages in common.

The second period during which Galton
sounded his theme was marked by the publication in 1883 of his Inquirtes into Human
Faculty. It was in this book that the word
eugenics was first used. A glance at the list
of his publications will show that, between
1883 and 1889 (when a later book Natural
Inheritance, dealing with a cognate theme,
appeared), Galton was much occupied with
anthropological and psychological questions.

The third and last period was the terminal
decade of Galton’s life between 1901 and
Ig11. Galton was then an old man and his
physical powers were failing.

It is remarkable how constant Galton’s
views on eugenics remained during the halfcentury that his mind played over the subject. Some interesting remarks are made
on this topic in the Memories (1908).
Galton says :

“In accordance with one principal purpose of these pages, which is to show the
fundamental coherence of most of my many

* From a new study of Galton’s life and work to
be published later in book form. The chapter on
Galton’s religious views was published in THE
Evucenics Review, July 1946.

inquiries, I will quote several passages from
the above-mentioned articles [the articles in
Macmillan’s Magazine] written in 1865.
They expressed then, as clearly as I can do
now, the leading principles of eugenics.
They will each be followed by a remark as
to how I should wish to modify-them.”’

Galton then proceeds to quote extracts
from these two early papers ; and he adds
short commentaries which are the fruits of
forty-five years’ subsequent experience. The
commentaries, which are more in the nature
of qualifications than of re-statements (there
is nowhere any trace of recantation*), bear
witness to the remarkable stability of
Galton’s essential ideas. Summing up the
quotations and the commentaries, he writes :

““ These views published by me forty-five
years ago are stilluptodate. :.. My fault
in other parts of these articles was a tendency
to overrate the speed with which a great
improvement of the race of mankind might,
theoretically, be effected. I had not then
made out the law of Regression. With this
qualification the above extracts express my
present views.”

The stability of Galton’s ideas throughout
his life facilitates our exposition: the
writings of 1869 and of 1883 will have the
same authenticity as those of 1908. |

Galton’s views on eugenics were mainly
shaped by his reactions to the evolution
theory. They were also fashioned by the
singularities of his character—his independence of spirit, his developed critical
powers, his love of measuring and assessing
things, his essential trustfulness and benevolence. In the present study, some further
comments will be made on Galton’s general
conception ofeugenics. In particular, atten
* Except in respect of the theory of pangenesis
which, in a preface written in 1892 of Hevredsttary
Genius, first published in 1869, Galton declares “‘ would
require revision.”

168
GALTON ON EUGENICS AS SCIENCE AND PRACTICE

tion will be drawn to the practical steps
which he thought might be taken at the
time he was alive, and also later, when the
principles of eugenics had been generally
accepted.

Galton thought of eugenics as containing
at one and the same time the elements of
science, religion and social practice. ‘‘ There
are,’’ he wrote,* “ three stages to be passed
through. Firstly it [eugenics] must be made
familiar as an academic question until its
exact importance has been understood and
accepted as a fact; secondly it must be
recognized as a subject whose practical
development deserves serious consideration ;
and thirdly it must be introduced into the
national consciousness as a new religion.”

If we change the order of the second and
third of these stages, so that we have science ;
religion ; social practice in that order, the
phases can be compared to those of the
elementary nervous reflex which consists of
sensory, central and motor processes. We
are here applying to a social phenomenon
the analogy which McDougall gave to an
instinctive reaction. (The sensory, central
and motor components of the reflex were

translated by McDougall into the cognitive,

affective and conative components of the
instinct.) Eugenics must first be established
on a firm basis of science ; the facts must be
collected and organized. . This process of
investigation or ‘‘ascertainment’”’ corresponds to the sensory phase of the reflex and
the cognitive phase of theinstinct. Theremust
be an internal response of the organism to
this stimulus—central in the reflex, emotional or affective in the instinct, and
affective also in the sphere of eugenics ;
eugenic principles must be incorporated into
social tradition and even in religion before
they can become operative. Lastly the
motor arc of the reflex and the conative
phase of the instinct correspond to that stage
of eugenics when it becomes social policy.

I have already tried to show what was in
Galton’s mind when he described eugenics
as a religion.f It now remains to outline

 

* Essays in Eugenics, 1909, p
t ‘'Galton’s Outlook on Religion” EvucGEnics REVIEw,
1946, 38, 69.

769

how he conceived it as science and as socialpolicy.

EUGENICS AS A SCIENCE

Galton’s statistical bent, his inventiveness, his love of measuring things, his passion
for reducing his observations to quantitative
terms admitting of direct comparisons, have
been mentioned above. The idea that living
things can be measured and that their
measurement can become a science is embodied in such words as biometry, psychometry and anthropometry. We are now
beginning to hear of sociometry. Galton’s
biographer, Karl Pearson, was professor of
biometry at University College when the
first number of a new periodical, Bsometrica,
was published in 1901 under Galton’s consulting editorship. Biometry. (which includes anthropometry and psychometry)
forms the scientific basis of eugenics. In
the year 1905 a Research Fellowship was
established in eugenics, first held by Edgar
Schuster ; and in 1907 was founded a Research Scholarship. A Eugenics Laboratory,
now called the Galton Laboratory, was
established at University College in 1909.
An abundance of valuable work has flowed
from this source before Galton’s death and
since.

In two popular expositions of eugenics
delivered in the last decade of his life (the
Huxley Lecture delivered in 1901 and the
Herbert Spencer Lecture given in 1907),
Galton lays much stress on the statistical
basis of the subject. The reader is introduced to the “‘ Normal Law of Frequency,”
which, under the title of “the law of
deviation from an average,” had been discussed at some length in an early chapter
of Hereditary Geneus. The principle cannot
here be described in detail. Suffice it that
the “‘ law ’’ expresses quantitatively the fact
that, in respect of any common measurable
performance, circumstance or feature, most
people will be. placed near the average on
one side or the other, and that the further
we proceed, to extremes the rarer do the
instances become. This is a matter of
common observation and is generally appreciated ; but few people grasp how precisely
170

the distributions of these numerical devia
tions from the mean can be computed. In
the Huxley Lecture (1901) Galton gives an
example of the application of this “law ”’
to the grading of human beings in terms of
what he calls “civic worth.” Charles
Booth’s classification of Londoners provides
the data. Booth’s table of findings, when
slightly rearranged, agrees sufficiently with
the statistical expectations to enable Galton
to say: “So far ...as these figures go,
civic worth is distributed in fair approximation to the normal law of frequency.”

Of the Herbert Spencer Lecture, delivered
in 1907, entitled “‘ Probability, the Foundation of Eugenics,’’* the essential part (the
part, at least, which corresponds to the title)
is sandwiched between opening and closing
sections dealing with general subjects. Galton here seeks to demonstrate by a series
of Object Lessons ‘‘those fundamental
principles of the laws of Probability that are
chiefly concerned in the newer methods of
biometry, and consequently of eugenics.”
He proposes five such ‘“ object lessons,”
wherein the student would learn the meaning
of such terms as Variability, Variate, Array,
Curve of Frequency, Standard Deviation,
Mean, Binomial Series, Correlation, etc.

Galton’s ideas as to what social measures
would be eugenically beneficial are much
influenced by his views on the distribution
throughout the population of desirable and
undesirable types—in other words by the
implications of his “law of deviation from
an average.” According to this law, some
half of the population clusters around the
mean or average of any character which is
determined by multiple causes and is at the
same time measurable, such as stature, the
circumference of the chest, etc.; and
the more pronounced the deviation from the
average or mean the rarer the incidence.
The principle is applied to those qualities
which are the expression of natural gifts.
His book Hereditary Gentus is concerned with
men highly endowed with various kinds of
natural ability (thirteen in all) ranging from
the Judges of England to wrestlers of the

North Country. The word “ genius ”’ is thus

* Essays tn Eugentcs, p. 73.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

liberally interpreted, and Galton acknowledges in a preface written in 1892 that the
title was apt to mislead and that “if it
could be altered now it would appear as
Hereditary Abthity.”

The first fifty pages of the book are concerned with an examination of two standards
according to which natural ability could be
classified—i.e. men’s reputations and their
natural gifts. The conclusion is that reputation (the opinion of contemporaries
revised by posterity ; the favourable result
of a critical analysis of each man’s character
by many biographers) is achieved through
the exercise of natural abilities. Of these,
three are especially needed to raise men
from mediocrity—namely intellect, zeal and
power of work. Youths, Galton argues, very
highly endowed with these qualities are
irrepressible and almost independent of
ordinary school education. Instances are
given such as d’Alembert, Watt and Julius
Cesar Scaliger, of whom the last was
entirely unlettered. For purposes of convenience Galton classifies as ‘‘ eminent ”’
men of the order of intelligence attained by
250 in a million or by one in each 4,000 ;
and as “ illustrious’? men of the order of
rarity of one in a million. These prodigies
are next to incomprehensible by ordinary
persons, among whom Galton modestly
counted himself.

“IT have been conscious,’ he writes,*
“of no slight misgiving that I was committing a kind of sacrilege whenever, in the
preparation of this book, I had occasion to
take the measurements of modern intellects
vastly superior to my own, or to criticize
the genius of the most magnificent historical
specimens of ourrace. It was a process that
constantly recalled to me a once familiar
sentiment in bygone days of African travel,
when I used to take altitudes of the huge
cliffs that domineered above me as I travelled along their bases, or to map the
mountainous landmarks of unvisited tribes,
that loomed in faint grandeur beyond my
actual horizon.”’

It was the main purpose of Hereditary
Genius to show that these exceptional

* Hereditary Genius, p. 21.

>?
GALTON ON EUGENICS AS.SCIENCE AND PRACTICE

abilities are, together with all natural
abilities, inherited ‘‘ under exactly the same
limitations as are the form and physical
features of the whole organic world.’’*
From these considerations there emerges a
practical conclusion which Galton clearly
states in the following words: ‘‘ We may
divide newly-married couples in three classes,

with respect to the probable civic worth of.

their offspring. There would be a small class
of ‘ desirables,’ a large class of ‘ passables ’
of whom nothing more will be said here,
and a small class of ‘undesirables.’ It
would clearly be advantageous to the
country if social and moral support as well

as timely material help were extended to
the desirables, and not monopolized as it is
now apt to be by the undesirables.”

- But the effects of encouraging the fertility
of the class of “desirables’’ would be
limited by the working of a process upon
which Galton laid much stress, namely that
of ‘‘ Regression to the Mean.”” The children
of exceptional’ parents are on average less
exceptional than their parents. The “ filial
centre ’ or average is always more mediocre
than the parental centre. There is a casting
back towards the average, a regression to
the mean.f But this regressive tendency
does not neutralize the beneficent effect of
breeding from the “ desirables.”” A community which encourages this kind of replacement will be most abundantly repaid
in the richest conceivable dividends.

Here are some short passages which
illustrate Galton’s ideas about the aims of
‘eugenics :

" The aim of eugenics is to represent each
class or sect by its best specimens; that
done, to leave them to work out their
common civilization in their own way.”

Variety, not uniformity of type, should
be the goal. ‘‘ Society would be very dull

* First sentence of Hereditary Genius.

¢ Karl Pearson sees some minor fallacies in Galton’s
assumptions as to how this process operates, and in
Volume IIIa of his Life (p. 230) he presents a modified
version of Galton’s standard scheme of descent as
shown in the Huxley Lecture, 1901. But the main
argument of the lecture—that it would pay a community to encourage the fertility of its “ desirable’
elasses—is not weakened. It is rather strengthened in
Pearson’s re-statement: 
_ counter to . expectations.

Ii

if every man resembled the highly estimable
Marcus Aurelius or Adam Bede.”

““A considerable list of qualities can be
easily compiled that nearly everyone except
‘cranks’ would take into account when
picking out the best specimens of his class.
It would include health, energy, ability,
manliness and courteous disposition... . .

Let us for a moment suppose that the
practice of eugenics should hereafter raise
the average quality of our nation to that
of its better moiety at the present day and
consider the gain. The general tone of
domestic, social and political life would be
higher. The race as a whole would be less
foolish, less frivolous, less excitable and
politically more provident than now. Its
demagogues who ‘played to the gallery’
would play to a more sensible gallery than
at present. We should be better fitted to
fulfil our vast imperial opportunities.
Lastly, men of an order of ability which
is now very rare, would become more
frequent, because the level out of. which
they rose would itself have risen.”’

“‘ Speaking for myself, if I had to classify
persons according to worth, I should consider each of them under the three heads

of physique, ability and character.... I

rank physique first, because it is not only
very valuable in itself and allied to many
other good qualities, but has the additional
merit of being easily rated. Ability I should
place second on similar grounds, and
character last, though in real importance tt
stands first of all. It is very difficult to rate
character justly ; the tenure of a position
of trust is only a partial test of it, though a
good one so far as it goes.’

The education of the public to think of
human affairs in statistical terms Galton
regarded as of the first importance. It is
a common human weakness, by no means
confined to persons of meagre intelligence,
to generalize from single events. However
enlightened eugenically the marriage customs
and however favourable eugenically the
differential fertility of a community, there
would be exceptional occurrences. running
Low-grade defectives would continue to be born here and
172

there; some marriages would founder ;
some children would disappoint their parents.
These events would attract notice and would
bring eugenics into disrepute. But a judgment which failed to balance the unfavourable results against the favourable would be
superficial and misleading. It is only by
the collection and proper analysis of numerically adequate data that a fair evaluation of
results is possible. In other words, our
ascertainment and assessment must be
statistical. Galton was never tired of
reiterating this fundamental principle.

We may perhaps epitomize Galton’s view
of eugenics as science by repeating the
familiar definition which was drawn up by
a committee, of which Galton was a consenting member, for embodiment in a scheme
_for the endowment of a Research Fellowship :
“The term National Eugenics is here
defined as the study of the agencies under
social control that may improve or impair
the racial qualities of future generations
either physically or mentally.”’

In some respects this is an unsatisfactory
definition. It needs to be closely scrutinized
before its full implications are understood.
Three of its features, however, are noteworthy. The first is that eugenics is defined
as a study. The definition is of eugenics as
a science and as nothing else. The second
feature is the strain which is placed on the
key-word racial. The term has the same
meaning as “‘inborn”’ or “ genetic.”” The
third feature is the mention of social control.
Taken as a whole, then, the definition would
require us to study such questions as these :

What human qualities, physical and
mental, are inborn or genetic in character ?
How are these qualities transmitted ? How
can they be detected and assessed ? Which
of these qualities are desirable and which
undesirable ? Whereabouts in the community are they found ; how are they distributed ? By what means of social control
can the desirable qualities be propagated
and the undesirable checked ?

These are all enormous questions and it
is with some of their aspects the Galton
Laboratory. has concerned itself since its
foundation.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

EUGENICS AS A SOCIAL PRACTICE

It is upon eugenics as a social practice
that the interest of the man in the street is
mainly focused. What do eugenists want
to do with us? It is upon the social or
political proposals that the limelight of an
unwelcome publicity is commonly thrown.
The average newspaper reader is little
interested in the law of deviation from the
average, in regression, in the correlation
coefficient, or even in the principles of
Mendelism, or the circumstances of differential fertility. But he pricks up his ears
when told that eugenists want to sterilize
the unfit, organize eugenic matings, practise

” artificial insemination, or treat human beings

like animals on a stud farm. Such themes
are sadly apt to be advertised in newspaper
headlines, with the result that eugenists come
to be thought of as eccentrics, and eugenics
is treated with ribaldry.

It was upon eugenics as a social practice
rather than as a science that Galton’s views
most changed during his lifetime. In the
early articles in Macmillan’s Magazine
(1865) and in Hereditary Genius (1860)
Galton announced his theme with the
enthusiasm which comes from what is felt
to be a momentous discovery. Darwin’s
writings had shown that a great power was
to hand wherewith man could transform
his nature and destiny. In Hereditary Genius
Galton developed this argument in inspired
passages. It is indeed possible that the
mental excitement caused by the disclosure
of these immense vistas had something to do
with the serious nervous breakdown from
which he suffered in the year 1866. But his.
message was unheard and Galton put the
subject aside for some twenty years. He
returned to it in his Human Faculty (1883),
and again put it aside. But in the last
decade of his life (1901-11) it became his
main and continuing preoccupation. It was
during this period that the Eugenics Soctety
(then called the Eugenics Education Soctety)
was founded ; and it was then that Galton
seems to have recognized fully how difficult
it was to translate the principles he had
formulated into social measures which would
yield the results he sought. The Eugemnstcs
GALTON ON EUGENICS AS SCIENCE AND PRACTICE

Educaiton Society was open to any interested person to join. And among these were
to be found, in the expected proportions,
various types of propagandists, misguided
enthusiasts, and cranks. A most unfortunate series of differences, fully recorded by
Karl Pearson in his Life of Galion, developed,
between the Galton Laboratory and the
Education Society. During these last years,
Galton was in very close touch with Pearson,
who has clearly shown how these schisms
pained Galton, and made him realize, as
he had not done before, how fraught with
difficulty was the conversion of scientific
theory into social practice.

Fight papers on eugenics written by

Galton during the last ten years of his life
have been assembled in a small booklet
entitled Essays on Eugenics, published in

1909. For this volume Galton wrote a_

preface which is among the last of his public
utterances. He there says that the essays
help to explain his own views,‘* which often
have been, and still sometimes are, absurdly
misrepresented.” He goes on to say: “It
is above all things needful for the successful
progress of eugenics that its advocates
should move discreetly and claim no more
efficacy on its behalf than the future will
confirm; otherwise a reaction will. be invited.”” One of Galton’s last pronouncements was therefore a note of caution.

But Galton not only recognized that the
transition from theory to practice would be
slower than he first thought; he also
changed his views on an important matter
of emphasis. I refer to the comparative
importance of positive and negative eugenic
measures. In 1gor he wrote:* ‘“ The
possibility of improving the race of a nation
depends on the power of increasing the productivity of the best stock. Ths ts far
more important than that of repressing the
productivity of the worst.” (My _ italics.)
But the opening paragraph of a paper given
in r908t reads as follows: ‘I propose to

*“ The Possible Improvement of the Human
Breed,”’ Essays in Eugenics, p. 24.

¢ ‘‘ Local Associations for Promoting Eugenics,”’
Essays in Eugenics, p. 100.

173

take the present opportunity of submitting
some views of my own relating to that large
province of eugenics which is concerned with
favouring the families of those who are
exceptionally fit for citizenship. Consequently, little or nothing will be said relating to what has been well termed by Dr.
Saleeby ‘negative’ eugenics, namely the
hindrance of the marriages and the production of offspring by the exceptionally
unfit. The latter 1s unquestionably the more
pressing subject of the two.” (My italics.)
The statement made in 1go1 says that positive eugenics is more important than negative; that made in 1908 declares that
negative eugenics is more pressing than
positive. The two statements are compatible, for it does not follow that the most
important things are the most pressing ;

- but the rest of the context of the later

statement suggests that Galton’s views had
been modified by the recently published
Report of the Royal Commission on the
Feebleminded.

Galton moreover gave priority to negative
eugenics in the last paragraph of his
memories (1908), where he writes that the
Jirst object of eugenics “' is to check the birthrate of the unfit, instead of allowing them
to come into being, though doomed in large
numbers to perish prematurely. The second
object is the improvement of the race by
furthering the productivity of the fit by
early marriages and healthful rearing of
their children.” |

Upon eugenics as social policy Galton
had short- and long-term views. With the
first, he concerned himself in his Huxley
Lecture delivered in October 1901 and
entitled ‘‘ The Possible Improvement of the
Human Breed under the Existing Conditions
of Law and Sentiment.” Short-term
measures are also discussed in other popular
lectures delivered in 1904, 1905, 1907 and
1908. But in 1910, the last year of his life,
he developed his long-term views in an
account of a eugenically organized Utopia,
which he called Kantsaywhere. This will be
further described below.
174

SHORT-TERM POLICIES

Of the short-term programme it can, I
think, be said that the more carefully Galton
thought over it the more hesitant and uncertain he became.
in an address in 1908, “‘ while explaining
what I have in view, to steer a course that
shall keep clear of the mudflats of platitude
on the one hand, and not come to grief
against the rocks of over-precision on the
other. There is no clear issue out of mere
platitudes, while there is great danger in
entering into details. A good scheme may
be entirely compromised merely on account
.of public opinion not being ripe to receive
it in the proposed form, or through a discovered flaw in some non-essential part of it.
Experience shows that the safest course in a
new undertaking is to proceed warily towards the desired end, rather than freely
and rashly along a predetermined route,
however carefully it may have been. elaborated on paper.’’*

But Galton believed that public opinion
was malleable; indeed, he ‘devoted a
lecturet to showing how diverse are the
mores relating to the institution of marriage,
though these are “hallowed by religion,
‘accepted by custom and enforced by law.”
In other words he believed that the ‘‘ existing
conditions of law and sentiment,” to which
all practical eugenic proposals should be
conformable, could themselves be gradually
changed. Once the importance of eugenics
was grasped, once its principles had ‘‘ been
accepted as a quasi-religion, the result will
be manifested in sundry and very effective
modes of action which are as yet untried,
and many of them unforeseen.”

Family Records

How far, then, did Galton think it was safe
to go during his lifetime ? On what lines
could progress be made? Throughout his
life a train of thought is detectable. He
believed that active steps should be taken
to discover families which were eugenically

* Essays in Eugenics, p. 101. |

t * Restrictions in Marriage,”
in Eugenics.

reproduced in Essays

“It is difficult,” he said —

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

well endowed and to give to them some
sort of hall-mark. In 1873 he wrote*
“My object is to build up, by the mere
process of extensive inquiry and publication
of results, a sentiment of caste among those
who are naturally gifted.” This guiding

‘ principle was developed in the two lectures

which he gave to the newly founded Sociological Society in 1904 and 1905.f He
wished, to see systematically collected facts
relating to large and thriving families. He
suggested that a Biographical Index should
be prepared of gifted families; also biographies of capable families, who do not
rank as gifted ; also biographies of families
who, as a whole, are distinctly below the
average in health, mind, or physique.
(“ These include the families of persons in
asylums of all kinds, hospitals and prisons.”’)
These two lectures to the Sociological
Society were very carefully organized. Upon
the first, delivered on May 16th, 1904,
written expressions of opinions were ob
_ tained from several persons highly dis
tinguished in the worlds of science and
literature. Henry Maudsley, H. G. Wells
and Bernard Shaw were among them.
Galton’s proposals had a mixed reception,
and it is, I think, clear that Galton himself
hoped that the Sociological Society might
itself be induced to undertake the “‘ ascertainment ”’ of exceptional families which he
advocated. The importance which Galton
attached to the discovery of gifted families
is shown by the fact that, in his second
lecture delivered on February 14th, 1905,
he announced that Mr. Edgar Schuster had
recently been appointed to a Francis Galton
Research Fellowship in Eugenics and that
Mr. Schuster “ will in particular carry out
investigations into the history of classes
and families.” This research had the
ambitious aim of producing a Register of
‘“* Able Families,” of which only the portion
dealing with Fellows of the Royal Society
was completed. The volume was written
jointly by Galton and Schuster and pub
_* Fraser's Magazine, 1873, p. 116.
t ‘‘ Eugenics: Its Definition, Scope and Aigas’”’
and ‘“ Studies in Material Eugenics.’’ Both are reproduced in Essays in Eugenics, 1909.
GALTON ON EUGENICS AS SCIENCE AND PRACTICE

lished. in 1906 under the title Noteworthy
Famtlées (Modern Science).

Galton pictured to himself the ultimate
outcome of these labours as a “ golden
book ” of thriving families.

He returned to this theme in an address
given in October 1908 to the Eugenics
Education Society on the subject of “‘ Local
Association for Promoting Eugenics.”

“The successful establishment,” he wrote,
"of any general system of constructive
eugenics will, in my view (which I put
forward with diffidence), depends largely
upon the efforts of local associations acting
in close harmony with a central society lhe
Our Own. . Such a central society would
tend to bring about a general uniformity of
administration the value of which is SO
obvious that I do not stop to insist on it
(My italics.) The “central society ”
which he referred was the Eugenics E duce.
tion Society, which he was addressing at the
time. The local associations, Galton went
on, should form themselves into provisional
executive committees, and elect honorary
officers. They should then provide “a few
sane and sensible lectures . . . on eugenics,
including the A B C of heredity,” and should
enlist the co-operation-of local medical men,
clergy, lawyers, public health authorities and
other officials who make contact with the
different grades of society. Meetings should
then be organized. The committee might
issue “invitations to guests at their social
gatherings, where differences of rank should
be studiously ignored.”’

“The inquiries made by the committee

when they were considering the names of

strangers to whom invitations ought to be.

sent, would put them in possession of a
large fund of information concerning the
qualities of many notable individuals in

their district, and their family histories:

These family histories should be utilized for
eugenic studies, and it should be the duty
of the local council to cause them to be
tabulated in an orderly way, and to communicate the more significant of them to
the central society.”” The notable qualities,

Galton goes on to say, consist in the posses
sion of “ worth” or “ civic worthiness ”’

175

“as it would probably be assessed by... .
fellow workers. . Thus, the worth of
soldiers would be such as it would be rated
by respected soldiers, students by students,
business men by business men, artists by
artists and so on.”’, These gatherings have
something in common with Rotary Clubs.
Galton proceeds to say that physique,
ability and character should in his view
enter into our assessment of ‘“‘ worth,” and
that in real importance character should
stand first of the three.

_ Through the activities of local associations,
Galton continues, “‘ family histories would
become familiar topics, the existence of
good stocks would be discovered, and many
persons of ‘ worth’ would be appreciated.
and made acquainted with each other who
were formerly known only to a very restricted circle.” By such means “ a strong
local eugenic opinion might easily be
formed,” and persons who became acquainted
through the local eugenic association could
help one another to obtain appointments.

Galton thus thought that local associations would be useful in the process of

“ ascertaining ’’ families of eugenic worth
and in fostering a local eugenic conscience ;
and that the "members of the associations
might assist each other in various ways,
among which he counted the ebEamiang of
public appointments.

The last-mentioned feature of Galton’s
programme for local eugenic associations—
the clubbing together of eugenically favoured
people for mutual assistance—provides the
main principle of the long-term programme
which Galton outlined in his eugenic Utopia,
which will be considered below.

But there were certain other features of
a short-term programme which Galton
propounded. These will be briefly considered under the headings of certificates,
adoptions, immigration and marriage laws.

Certs Cares

“In some future time,” wrote Galton in
1905,* “‘ dependent on circumstances, I look
forward to a suitable authority issuing

* Essays in Eupenics, p. 63.
176

eugenic certificates to candidates for them.
They would imply a more than average
share ef the several qualities of at least
goodness of constitution, of physique and of
mental capacity.” As to how far in the
future the time would be ripe for this
measure, nor what the “ circumstances ”’
were upon which the matter would depend,
we do not know; that Galton thought the
time might come in his lifetime is suggested
by the fact that he himself devised the draft
of such a certificate and circulated it for
comment to at least two people, one being
Mr. Havelock Ellis.* Professor Pearson
reproduces in his Life a copy of Galton’s
draft (Lefe, Vol. IIIa, pp. 292-6). There
is nothing remarkable about this pro forma.
It asks nine personal questions designed to
throw light on the applicant’s physical constitution, on his athletic and academic
distinctions, and on his character as reflected by the tenure of appointments or of
positions of trust; and it asks for particulars of the applicant’s fraternity and of
those of his father and mother.

It is not clear what standards were to be
applied by the authorities who were to issue
these documents. How stringently were
the recipients of certificates to be selected ?
In one passage Galton suggests that only
about one in twenty-seven persons should
be eligible. And it is not evident from the
pro forma what the authorities or examiners
were supposed to certify after having made
a favourable assessment.

Adoption or Befriendment

Galton declares that there is no satisfactory word in the language to denote the
relationship he here proposes. The word
“ befriendment ’’ partly conveyed his meaning; the term “patron’’ was odious.
Galton had in mind “that wholesome
practice during all ages of wealthy persons

interesting themselves in and befriending:

poor but promising lads. The number of
men who have owed their start in a successful
life to help of this kind must have struck
every reader of biographies. This relation
* See Havelock Ellis, The Task of Social Hygiene,
Constable, 1927, p. 203, footnote.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW
‘ship between befriender and befriended is

hardly to be expressed in English by a
single word that does not connote more
than is intended.’”’ This was “a kindly and
honourable relation between a wealthy man
who had made his position in the world and
a youth who is avowedly his equal in natural
gifts, but who still has to make it. Many
degrees may be imagined. between mere
befriendment and actual adoption, which
would be more or less effective in freeing
capable youths from the hindrances of
harrow circumstances, in enabling girls to
marry early and suitably, and in securing
favour for their subsequent offspring. Something in this direction is commonly but half
unconsciously done by many great landowners whose employments for man and
wife, together with good cottages, are. given
to exceptionally deserving couples. The
advantage of being connected with a great
and liberally managed estate being widely
appreciated, there are usually more applicants than vacancies, so selection can be
exercised. The consequence is that the
class of men found upon these properties is
markedly superior to those in similar positions elsewhere.”” The virtues of this scheme
are two. Firstly, it would help promising
young men and women to make the most of
their natural abilities, and from this fulfilment the nation would benefit. Secondly,
it might enable the young people to marry
earlier than they might otherwise do; and
this is the more relevant of the two effects.
Galton’s proposals for befriendment would
serve a eugenic purpose only if they resulted
in earlier marriage and more children than
would otherwise have occurred.

Immigration

Throughout his life Galton wrote about
the debt owed by Britain to immigrants.
But for some reason unexplained he does
not develop the argument that we should
encourage judicious immigration as part of
a practical eugenic programme. I will
quote two passages illustrating his views.
““ Whatever other countries may or may
not have lost,’ wrote Galton in 1869,*

* Hereditary Genius, p. xxiii.
GALTON ON EUGENICS AS SCIENCE AND PRACTICE

“ours has certainly gained on more than
one.occasion by the infusion of the breed of
selected sub-races, especially of that of the
Protestant refugees from religious persecution on the continent. It seems reasonable
to look upon the Huguenots as men who,
on the whole, had inborn qualities of a distinctive kind from the majority of their
countrymen, and who may, therefore, be
spoken of as a sub-type—that is to say
capable, when isolated, of continuing their
race without showing any strong tendency
to revert to the form of the earlier type
from which it was a well-defined departure.
It proved also that the cross-breed between
them and our ancestors was a singularly
successful mixture. ponsequently, England
has been largely indebted to the natural
refinement and to the solid worth of the
Huguenot breed, as wellas to the culture and
technical knowledge that the Huguenots
brought with them.”’

Fourteen years later Galton wrote :*
“The debt that most countries owe to the
race of men that they received from one
another as immigrants, whether leaving
their native country of their own free will,
or as exiles on political or religious grounds,
has been often pointed out, and may, I
think, be accounted for as follows: The
fact of a man leaving his compatriots, or so
irritating them that they compel him to
go, is fair evidence that either he, or they,
or both, feel that his character is alien to
theirs. Exiles are also on the whole men
of considerable force of character; a quiet
man would endure and succumb, he would
not have the energy to transplant himself
or to become so conspicuous as to become
an object of general attack. We may justly
claim for this, that exiles are on the whole
men of exceptional and energetic natures,
and it is especially from such men as these
that new strains of men are likely to
proceed.”’

Another passage could be quoted showing
that Galton’s estimate of the effects of
immigration depended on what was the
impulse that caused it. The immigration

* Inquiries, p. 200.

¥77

.of a gold rush, or that of carpet-baggers

into the Southern States of the U.S.A. after
the civil war, was enacted by different types
of people and prompted by different motives
than was a flight from religious persecution.

The example of the Huguenots was often
used by Galton to illustrate the advantages

. of selective immigration. He used it in a

presidential address to the Demographic
Congress in 1891 and in an article in the
Jewstsh Chronscle as late as July 1910.

Marriage Laws

Though to my knowledge Galton never
specified any definite feature of the existing
marriage laws of this country which he
regards as dysgenic and therefore desired
to’ see altered, he was much preoccupied
with the customs which, throughout the
world, regulate marriage. In 1905 he read
a paper* to the Sociological Society on
“Restrictions in Marriage,” the general
argument of which was that diverse traditions, limiting and directing the choice of
marriage partners, had at different times
and places become “ hallowed by religion,
accepted as custom and enforced by law.”
From such considerations, Galton argued,
eugenic principles should receive the sanction
of religion.

Of the conventions sanctioned or demanded by Christianity, one was especially
singled out by Galton for condemnation on
eugenic grounds, namely celibacy. “ During
the fifty or so generations,” he wrote in
1905, ‘‘ that have elapsed since the establishment of Christianity, the nunneries and
monasteries, and the celibate lives of Catholic
priests, have had vast social effects.” That
he regarded these effects as almost wholly
bad Galton had made clear in 1869.t
“‘ The long period of the dark ages,”’ Galton
then wrote, ‘‘ under which Europe has lain
is due, I believe, in very considerable
degree, to the celibacy enjoined by religious
orders on their votaries. Whenever a man
or woman was possessed by a gentle nature
that fitted him or her to deeds of charity,

* Essays in Eugenics, p. 44.
+t Hereditary Genius, p. 343,
178

to meditation, to literature, to art, the
social condition of the time was such that
they had no refuge elsewhere than in the
bosom of the Church. But the Church
chose to preach and exact celibacy. The
consequence was that these gentle natures
had no continuance, and thus, by a policy
so singularly unwise and suicidal that I
am hardly able to speak about it without
impatience, the Church brutalized the breed
of our forefathers. She acted precisely as
if she- had aimed at selecting the rudest
portion of the community to be, alone, the
parents of future generations. She practised
the arts which breeders would use, who
aimed at creating ferocious, currish and
stupid natures. No wonder that club law
prevailed for centuries over Europe; the
wonder rather is that enough good remained
in the veins of Europeans to enable their
race to rise-to its very moderate level of
natural morality.”’

But celibacy is not enjoined by the

Protestant Churches, and I do not know of

any evidence that Galton would have
altered any specific ordinance governing
marriage in these churches.

We may sum up Galton’s short-term
views : The social practice of eugenics must
be subject to the existing conditions of law
and sentiment, but these conditions are
more malleable than might be supposed.
We should collect information about large
and thriving families with a view to assessing how and in what degree they are gifted ;
also about families below the average.
Local associations should be formed to
promote these qualitative family studies ;
Galton thought that we were sufficiently
near the time when eugenic certificates might
be issued by a suitable authority, to prepare,
himself, a draft of such a certificate. He
fayoured a process of adoption or befriendment of eugenically favoured boys and girls
by persons of means. He believed in
encouraging the immigration of selected
groups, including political refugees. He
wished to see eugenic considerations applied
to marriage laws and customs so that the
early marriage of eupenically. favoured
couples was encouraged. Most important of

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

all was the education of the public in such
principles of eugenics as the laws governing
variability of human beings, the laws of
heredity, and the processes of differential
fertility. By such education, the “ conditions of law and sentiment’ would be
changed ; we would learn to see our way

.more clearly and to define more precisely

the immediate goals of policy.

A LONG-TERM POLICY

In the last year of his life Galton wrote
a Utopia. He gave to his fantasia the title
of ‘“ Kantsaywhere,’’ and the form of
“Extracts from the Journal of the late
Professor I. Donoghue,* revised and edited
in accordance with his request by Sir
Francis Galton, F.R.S.” Galton began
writing this work in May or June Ig1o
(he died on January 17th, I911), and submitted it to a publisher in December of
that year—a few weeks before he died.
The publisher refused it. Galton was sensitive to such criticism and decided to
destroy the MS. ‘“ Kantsaywhere,” he
wrote to his niece, ‘“‘ must be smothered or
be suspended. It has been an amusement
and it has cleared my thoughts to write it.
So now let it go to ‘ Won’t-say-where.’ ”’

But a fragment was most fortunately
preserved, and we owe a debt to Professor
Karl Pearson for having given us the most
important passages (Life, IIIs, pp. 41I25). With certain reservations, we can
treat this work as expressing Galton’s vision
of a long-term policy:

Kantsaywhere is a small state or country
with a seaboard. In 1810—a century before
Galton wrote—it had a population of only
200. About that time a wealthy benefactor
left all his property to a council which was
charged with improving the stock of the
place, especially its human stock. A
Eugenic College was established which
flourished to such an extent that its trustees
became “the sole proprietors of almost all
the territory of Kantsaywhere, and they
exercise a corresponding influence over the
whole population.” Kantsaywhere con
*T don’t know you.
GALTON ON EUGENICS AS SCIENCE AND PRACTICE

tained a town; but “the families of the
College and those of the town were connected
by numerous marriages and common interests, so that the relation between them is
more like that between the Fellows of a
collége and the undergraduates than between
the town and gown of an English University.” In the hundred years since its
foundation the population had increased
from 200 to 10,000. The original 200 inhabitants accounted for 1,000, and immigration had provided the rest.

The form of government of the country is
not described, but most of its functions
‘seem to be carried out by the Council of the
College.

Immigrants to the country, most of whom
seem to come by sea, have to be passed as
fit to enter by registered medical men at the

principal ports from which they embark. .

By the certificates of these practitioners
immigrants are exempted from a more
severe and tedious examination at the port
of entry. But they are required later to
pass the Poll examination which allows them
to become citizens of Kantsaywhere. In
this Poll examination, marks. are awarded
to husband and wife; the number of
children (if any) they are permitted to have
depends on their joint marks. Galton
devotes some space to the system of mark‘ing. If the marks exceed + 20, the restriction on child-bearing is nil and large
families are encouraged. If between + 10
and + 20 they are restricted by public
sentiment to about three children. If over
0 and under + Io they are restricted to two
children. If between o and — 10 they are
restricted by law as well as sentiment to
one child. If below —v1o offspring are
wholly prohibited to them.

But the Poll examination is not the only
one. There is in addition the Honours
examination, which is taken by about eighty
candidates a year. It consists of four parts
or divisions. The first is mainly anthropo‘metric, the second is esthetic and literary,
the third is medical and the fourth is
ancestral. Thirty marks was the highest
obtainable in each of the divisions, giving a

possible total maximum of 120 marks.

179

Candidates who obtained high marks might
obtain valuable advantages. If they later
married persons who had scored sufficient
marks to raise the joint total to 200, the
wedding was celebrated with special ceremony and was known as a “ College Marriage.” The children of such marriages were
regarded as foster-children of the College
during their childhood, and they and their
“College parents’”’ were helped in many
important ways. Those persons who gained
more than seventy marks had their names inscribed in the Calendar of Kantsaywhere,
where the record of their doings was detailed.
It corresponded in length to the paragraphs
of Debrett’s- or Burke’s Peerages, but
differed from them in containing anthropological facts and little else. It was a mine
of information for inquirers into heredity.

The College was richly endowed and had
four sources of income, of which one was a
eugenic rate of 15S. a year per head. There
was thus obtained from the 10,000 inhabitants of Kantsaywhere a total from the
annual eugenic rate of £7,500. About half
of the income from this rate and also from
gifts to the College went to the Examining,
Inspecting and Registering Departments of
the College. The other half went to Collegiates who needed help for the proper
nurture of their large families.

It would appear that the country was
governed, by the University, for there is no

-mention of universal or any other kind of

suffrage. The Senate (presumably of the
University and the country) consisted of all
resident collegiates ofeithersex whohad gained
at least seventy marks or were the parents
of children whose average marks exceeded
seventy. The Senate was the supreme
authority. But in quiet times three high
officials, together with a council annually
elected at a general meeting, managed
matters very much in their own way.

An important committee of this Council
was charged with the care of those who
failed to pass the Poll examination in
eugenics. Such are undesirable as individuals and dangerous to the community
because of the likelihood of their propagating. These persons were encouraged to
180

emigrate, but if they refused were subject
to surveillance. The small number of insane
and mentally defective were suitably segregated for life.

Accounts are given of the physical appearances, social mores and religious convictions
of the inhabitants of Kantsaywhere which
need not be mentioned.

It would be a mistake to treat this. fantasia too seriously, more especially as
Galton decided twenty-four days before his

death to commit it to oblivion. Nor do we 
know how seriously Galton himself took it.
We are told that most of the essay was
dictated to his secretary and not written ;
also that the plot became entangled and that
one of the characters who had earlier been
killed off had to be resuscitated. Nevertheless we are justified in thinking that the
institutions Galton described reflected the
general trend of his thought. Throughout
his life he seems to have played with the
idea that power should finally lie with a
eugenic corps d’élite or caste. He spoke of
a “golden book of thriving families ’’ in
1904; and thirty years earlier, in 1873, he
had the same idea in mind. He then wrote
of a “ golden book of natural nobility,”’ and
discussed the consequences which might
ensue from a eugenic caste becoming unpopular. They might even be forced to
‘emigrate. And in 1864 he was asking us to
“give rein to our fancy and imagine a
Utopia—or a Laputa if you will—in which
a system of competitive examination for
girls, as well as for youths, had been so
developed as to embrace every important
quality of mind and body, and where a considerable sum was yearly allotted to the
endowment of such marriages as promised
to yield children who would grow into
eminent servants of the State.”

The ideas set out in Kantsaywhere had
been germinating in Galton’s mind for nearly
half a century. They probably expressed
his speculation as to how a eugenically
organized state might be administered after
appropriate changes had been brought about
in “existing conditions of law and sentiment.”’

Reproductive functions were to be regu
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

lated by an oligarchy selected by tests.
Social status was decided by four tests which
together took only four hours. The Senate
consisted of people who had gained high
marks in these tests—seventy marks or
more. Supplementary marks might, under
exceptional conditions, be awarded for
“especially good service to the community
subsequent to the examination.”’ But such
services were not taken into account as a
routine. Galton had a bent for measuring
things. -He was a pioneer in anthropometry
and psychometry. It was natural for him
to believe that with future experience tests
would be evolved of high predictive value
and that general confidence would be placed
in their accuracy and reliability.

Galton’s Utopia was amiably paternalistic. He compared its working to that of
a university wherein a relation of affection
and confidence existed between undergraduates and dons; wherein the former
never doubted the good intentions, the
honesty, the competence or the capacity to
legislate of their preceptors ; and wherein
they willingly paid rates to support the
university’s institutions and to endow the
children of their teachers. Some to-day
might see in Galton’s fantasy something
more sinister than paternalism: they might
discern the rudiments of a system of dictatorship comparable to the travesty of
eugenics later evolved by the Nazis. But
they would be wrong. Galton’s other writings
disclose in the most explicit language his
dislike of tyrannies. But if any doubts linger
in the reader’s mind, let him consider the
following passage :

“‘ Our present ignorance of the conditions
by which the level of humanity may be
raised is so gross, that I believe that if we
had some dictator of the Spartan type, who
exercised absolute power over marriages,
assigning A to be the wife of B, and C to
be the wife of D, and who acted with the
best intentions, he might possibly do even

more harm than good to the race.’’*

If we were in search of an adjective to
describe Galton’s Utopia, we would not

* From Galton’s Record of Family Faculties, quoted
from Pearson’s Life, Vol. II, p. 365.
DANISH EXPERIENCES IN NEGATIVE EUGENICS

choose such words as authoritarian or dictatorial; we should select, rather, the
epithet ‘‘naive.’’ The desire for wealth, for
power, fot social status and honours—nearly
all the motives which, throughout history,
have contributed to political strife—have
apparently beccme extinct. In Kantsaywhere. there are no rival political parties,
no pressure groups, no caucuses, no intrigue. What had become of these disturbing yet formative movements ? Apparently
the citizens had become as oblivious of them
as Galton had been during the whole of his
life. They had shed them much as a snake
sheds its outgrown skin.

Galton’s “ Kantsaywhere”’ is projected
into a distant and visionary future when

181

scientific methods (expressed in anthropometric procedures) have not only been
statistically validated but publicly recognized and universally accepted. The Senate
of Kantsaywhere constitutes an oligarchy ;
but the powers with which it is invested and
which it freely exercises are no more regarded by the country’s imaginary inhabitants as dictatorial than are the powers today wielded by an examining board so
regarded by the candidates who sit for the
examination which it arbitrates. The man
who is ploughed may be disappointed ; he
may even feel bitterly aggrieved ; but he
does not, if he is sane, regard himself as a
victim of Fascism or as the slave of a
dictatorship.

DANISH EXPERIENCES IN NEGATIVE
EUGENICS, 1929-45°*
By TAGE KEMP

University Institute for Human Genetics, Copenhagen

lated the principles of eugenics, the

possibilities. of putting these principles
into practice were only slight, for but very
little was yet known about human heredity.
Long before a ‘scientific foundation for
eugenic theories had been provided, however,
they were taken up by others, often with
more enthusiasm than wisdom.

Eugenics soon spread to other countries,
often under new names and, in some degree,
with changes in content. In Denmark the
term ‘ hereditary hygiene ”’ is now usually
employed. In Germany, where eugenic ideas
were introduced in the early ‘nineties, the

* A paper read before the Eugenics Society on November 19th, 1946.

| N 1883, when Francis Galton first formu
designation adopted was “‘ race hygiene ’’—a
concept which later was to be so grossly
abused in the Third Reich. More recently
the term “ eugenics” has been attached to
any application of biology to social hygiene
in the widest sense of the term.

During the first epoch of eugenics towards
the end of the past century and in the
beginning of this century, however, the whole
subject was markedly speculative, for at that
time the study of heredity, which was to
form the scientific foundation of eugenics,
was still in its infancy. Indeed, this essential
basis of eugenics did not exist until the
second and third decades of this century.

A distinction has been made between
quantitative and qualitative eugenics, the
