ENERGY IN THE FUTURE
By SIR CHARLES DARWIN, K.B.E., E.RS.

R. P. C. PUTNAM, a consulting
Mics was charged by the American

Atomic Energy Commission to make a
study of the prospective demands there
would be for energy during the next fifty
or a hundred years. He was to consider
this primarily for the United States, but
also for the whole world. His findings
have recently been published in an important
book.* Although such a study necessarily
involves making estimates of future probabilities, Mr. Putnam does all he can to
avoid setting himself up as a _ prophet.
Instead he takes what seems a quite
admirably appropriate line for his purpose,
for he imagines himself in the position of
the trustee of some very large trust. Such a
trustee must take all necessary precautions
against unsuitable investments, but in planning his investments he is entitled to disregard remote possibilities such, for example,
as the simultaneous failure of all the great
banks. Acting on this principle the present
trustee takes it for granted that the world
will go on in the same general manner that
it has been doing in the recent past, and his
forecasts for the future are thus mainly
extrapolations from the present conditions
of the world.

In the light of this policy the trustee has
to decide what is the probable trend of
development for the world, and in deciding
this he, as an American, is very naturally
influenced by the view that the only world
really worth having is one running broadly
on the lines at present established in the
United States. He therefore assumes that
America and Western Europe will want to go
on and extend their present “ literate industrial-urban-farm ’’ pattern of life, while the
under-developed countries, whose lifeis based

* Putnam, P. C. Energy in the Futuyve. London,
1954. Macmillan. (Published by Contract with United
States Atomic Commission, 1953.) Pp. x + 556.
Price 9os.

for the most part on “illiterate subsistencefarming,’ will continue, as they are doing
now, to aspire towards turning over to the
industrial-urban-farm pattern. This seems a
not unreasonable line to take about the
present wishes of most of mankind, and the
supply of sufficient energy is an essential
thing to make it possible, but it must be
recognized that many other things besides
energy would be needed. However, these
other things fall outside the scope of the
present book, and certainly the provision
of energy is one of the most: important needs
that must be satisfied if the whole world is
to turn over to the industrial way of life.

The book falls into five main parts. First
there is consideration of the population
numbers to be expected during the next
century. Then there is consideration of the
demands for energy to be expected from
them. There follows an examination of the
quantities of ‘‘ fossil fuels,’ coal, oil, etc.,
available. Then there is consideration of
“income ’’ energy, from water-power, wind,

forests, etc., and finally there is atomic

energy. These matters are all discussed
in great detail, making use of all the knowledge at present available, and they are
explained with much use of charts and
diagrams and tables. Moreover, more than
half the book is given up to long explanatory
notes. With this vast amount of information
the book could claim almost to rank as an
encyclopedia of the subject of energy.
Anyone wanting information on some detail
can find it somewhere in the book, and can
get references to the documents on which
the information is based. It does not make

the book easy reading, but nevertheless it is

quite possible to get the gist of it by running
more lightly through the text, and the
reader will be much helped in this by
summaries and conclusions that are given
at the end of each chapter.

For the subject of population Putnam

237238

begins by reviewing the numbers of mankind
in the past. In 10000 B.c. the population
may have been about one million, though this
is very uncertain and may be wrong by a
factor of ten either way. Civilization was
invented some six or seven thousand years
later, and it is estimated that by the beginning of the Christian era the population of
the world had grown to something like 300
million. With fluctuations up and down it
stayed roughly constant for 1,600 years, and
then there began what can only be called
an explosion of population. In the three
hundred years from 1650 till now it has
jumped from less than 500 million to 2,400
million, and the increase is going on at an
ever faster pace—at present every day year
in and year out there are about 70,000 more
births than deaths, and soon it will be 100,000.

It is easy to explain why these increases’

have suddenly occurred among the Western
nations, for they can be attributed to the
rapid filling up of the nearly vacant New
World, and to the enormous improvements
in medical science and in transportation,
both of them consequences of the Scientific
Revolution, which have lengthened the
individual life and removed the danger of
local famines. But Putnam makes an
interesting point in this connection. At the
same time that the Europeans started
increasing there was a similar increase in
China, and this began long before there was
any serious contact between the two civilizations. This certainly calls for study, for
no one seems to know why it happened,
though it is hardly reasonable to suppose that
a population can explode in this way without
some good objective cause. Was it perhaps
because of the extension in the use of some
new crop in the same way that the introduction of the potato explosively increased the
numbers of the Irish in the early nineteenth
century? This unexplained Chinese increase
began in the early part of the present phase
of increases; of course the later world-wide
increases are directly due to the Scientific
Revolution invented by the West.

From reviewing the past Putnam passes
to the prospects for the future. He examines
the various methods that have been proposed

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

for forecasting future populations, but finds
that none of them can be accepted with
any confidence. So in his role of trustee he
assumes the world will go on in the way it has
been going in the recent past ; that is to say,
he does not consider the possibility of major
catastrophes, or of wholly unexpected strokes
of exceptional good fortune. The habits of
2,000 million people cannot be changed in
a day, or even in a generation, so it is fairly
safe to extrapolate from present trends for at
least fifty years, and rather less certainly
for a hundred. The results are quite
formidable. .

By A.D. 2000 the population will be a
little short of 4,000 million, and by A.D. 2050
something above 6,000 million. There is one
thing which makes these estimates even more
formidable than the mere numbers suggest.
An important characteristic of our present
way of life is that every year the amount
of energy used per head of population
steadily increases, and so the trustee will
have to satisfy much more exorbitant
demands for energy than are suggested
by the mere population numbers. Of course,
the question also arises of the prospects of
being able to feed these expanded populations, and this is examined in one of the
longer notes later in the book. The trustee
arrives at the conclusion that it should be
perfectly possible to do so, because the
peasantry of most of the world at present
have many very inferior agricultural practices, and these could easily be improved.
The reforms would not even call for any
elaborate modern agricultural machinery;
only comparatively simple and obvious.
changes would be needed, but there does
remain in the mind of the reader the question
whether it is possible to reform all the conservative habits of 2,000 million peasants in
a couple of generations.

In the next chapters he comes to his
principal subject, the energy that must be
supplied for these people. To handle the
large figures that arise he adopts a special
very large unit of energy, the Q. This is
defined as a million million million British
thermal units (10% B.T.U.), and is the
energy contained in not quite 40,000 million
ENERGY IN THE FUTURE

tons of coal. He estimates that in the first
eighteen and a half centuries after Christ
the whole of mankind used up about 6 Q.
This was chiefly from trees and farm-waste
such as straw and dung, and its chief use
was for cooking and house warming. Since
1850 the leading place has been taken by

coal, and in this century alone some 4 Q

t~

of coal has been burnt, and it is now being
consumed at a rate of 10 Q a century. One
of the most startling figures he gives is that,
of the total amount of coal burnt since the
beginning of the world up till now, about half
has been burnt in the United States in the
period since 1920!

_ He goes in detail into the expected reserves
of coal, and in particular of coal in seams
convenient enough to be mined, and he comes
to the conclusion that there will be little
such coal left in fifty years. In making his
estimate of what coal is worth winning he
takes as standard that the energy it produces
should not cost more than twice as much as
it does now. This is an arbitrary figure,
and perhaps it would have been better to
take a bigger factor, because there must be a
lot of coal at present produced in various
parts of the world which is in fact already
costing more than twice as much as the coal
obtained from the best American mines. Still,
it is reasonable to take some fairly small
factor like this, because if the cost of energy
were many times more than it is now, it would
certainly have a profound effect on the
shape of our civilization.

There is a great deal of information in the
book about reserves of coal and oil, and the
subject is judged conservatively, but without
too excessive caution. As a final summary
of the situation the trustee estimates that
the amount of fossil fuel still available has
energy 27 Q. There is thus no room for the
cheery optimism which claims that new oil
wells are being discovered every year and
that there need be no end to this. The
reader is left with the conviction that, no
matter how economically coal and oil are
used, there simply has got to be some new
source of energy within the next fifty years
or so if our way of life is to continue on
the present lines.

239

The next subject is “‘income’”’ energy,
and the results are also very discouraging.
Timber and peat do not look profitable.
Thus if forestry were systematically developed in all suitable parts of the earth, the
trustee reckons that by A.D. 2050 the total
trees of the world might have energy 1°4 Q.
This is the accumulation of a century and it
is really quite a lot, but it is not important
if measured on the scale at which coal is
being used even now. Peat and farm-wastes
give little help. Water-power is much the
most important source of income energy,
but even that is disappointing. At present
the energy derived each year from waterpower is less than 1 per cent of the total
energy developed from all sources, and in
fact its use is increasing at a slower rate than
the use of coal. If all imaginable sources of
water were suitably harnessed, there would
still only come from them about half a Qa
century. And there is one trouble even so
which has hardly yet had to be faced, for the
great reservoirs that store the water are all
silting up, so that many of them will be useless for storage before the end of a century.
Perhaps the silt might at intervals be dug
out, but the need of the energy to do the
digging again lowers the total value of the
water-power. The general conclusion is that
water-power should be developed wherever
possible, but that it can never be expected
to carry more than a small fraction of the
energy load demanded by our present
civilization.

Of other sources of energy neither wind
nor tides can ever give a really important
contribution, though they will no doubt be
developed in the appropriate places. The
only serious contributor from income is
the direct use of sunlight. Experiments have
been going on with this for some time, and
minor things such as cooking and the heating of water are easily accomplished. The
heating of houses is also feasible on a
limited scale, and the trustee estimates
that in the parts of the United States with the
appropriate climate something like 6 per cent
of the house heating could be done in this
manner at a cost not more than twice the
present cost. For the direct production of
240

mechanical power the difficulties are much
greater, but so of course are the rewards,
because the energy of sunlight is so enormous.
Roughly speaking a square yard facing the
sun receives energy at the rate of a horsepower, so that if even a fraction of this
energy could be won nothing else would be
needed. Thus Putnam calculates that a
plot of land seventy miles square in the
deserts of New Mexico would provide
enough energy to meet all the present energy
requirements of the whole United States.
The problem of turning this light-energy
into power-energy has not been solved,
and though it seems likely that some solution
will be found, it looks likely that a sunengine would always involve great capital
outlay, and so would not satisfy the
trustee’s demand for cheap energy.

There is also the possibility of using
nature’s own method, the vegetable, for
getting energy out of sunlight. This is not
thermo-dynamically a very efficient process,
but there is so much solar energy that
efficiency hardly matters. At present probably the cheapest way of getting such
energy is simply to plant a row of trees, let
them grow and then cut them down, but a
more effective industrial process than this is
being tried. The green alga, chlorella, can
grow at a prodigious rate in water containing
nutrient salts with carbon dioxide, and of
course sunlight. The daily yield is many
times that of any of the higher plants, but the
cost is estimated at more than a hundred
times the present cost of energy. When an
experimental process is at last developed into
full production the cost is often very greatly
reduced, but it is too much to hope that it
could be cut by a hundred. Furthermore, one
of the characters of the alge is that they
are very largely proteins, and so they might
contribute directly to human diet, and it
seems hardly likely that a world perpetually
asking for more food would allow such a
source of it to be used for the less essential
purpose of providing mechanical energy.

Since the central purpose of the book is
to consider energy,
touches on the other difficulties the world
will have to face in the near future. One of

the author hardly

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

these is the approaching exhaustion of the
supplies of many of the metals, such as zinc,
lead and copper, which play such an important part in our present life. It 1s sometimes
possible to use other metals instead, and
some, such as iron and aluminium, are never
likely to go short, but even so there would
be energy troubles. Thus there is nothing
impossible about making an electric generator with aluminium wires instead of copper,
but the efficiency would go down on account
of the inferior electric conductivity, so that
once again the energy would cost more.
There is another matter on which the author
only touches lightly, though it is really a very
important matter for the trustee, and this is
the storage of energy. Most income energy
can only be won during part of the time, and
to be really useful to us we need a more or
less continuous supply. Thus sunlight will
only yield energy during the day, so that
it would not light our houses at night.
Similar troubles would occur for the tides or
wind. So the use of income energy on any
reasonable scale demands the necessity of
storing it. This may be done mechanically as
in a water reservoir, but that calls for
building the reservoir; or electrically as in a
storage battery, but present storage batteries
require lead, and that is nearly exhausted;
or chemically as in a vegetable, and the
difficulties of that have been already
described. So it would seem that an important part of the problem of developing
income energy is to find a really cheap way
of storing it, but the book hardly touches on
the subject.

The remaining source of energy is of
course the nucleus of the atom. This looks
a most promising source, and it may well
replace the fossil fuels for quite a long time.
When atomic energy was first considered it
was thought that only uranium 235 could be
used, and this would have meant that the
total amount of energy in the world to be
derived from the nucleus would have been
roughly equal to the amount from coal; that
is to say, it would have been very useful, but
no final solution of the energy problem. But
it now looks extremely probable that an
efficient method of “ breeding’’ will be
ENERGY IN THE FUTURE

found, which will make the much more
abundant uranium 238 also fissile, and also
the element thorium; in this way a supply
of energy many times greater will be won.
Uranium is not a very rare element—tt is, for
example, commoner than silver—but for the
most part it is very widely distributed in
very small quantities. Nevertheless the
energy of the individual atoms is so great
that even these very small quantities could
give a lot of energy; there is, for example,
more atomic energy in a ton of granite than
chemical energy in a ton of coal. At present
only the richest concentrations of uranium
are being worked, but soon poorer ones will
have to be used, with all the attendant
difficulties. With the possibility of “‘ breeding ’’ it seems not unreasonable to expect
that energy could be supplied to the world
on the present scale for a couple of thousand
years at least.

There is no reference in the book to the
thermonuclear reactions of hydrogen as a
source of power, presumably because nothing
had been published on this subject at the
time the book was written. No one yet has
much idea how to make hydrogen—or more
probably it would be deuterlum—give up its
energy slowly instead of in a violent explosion, but it may be that in due course this
problem will be solved. If that is achieved,
a practically infinite amount of energy could
be obtained, perhaps by some rather elaborate
processing of sea water. It must be remembered, however, that any invention takes a

| 241

long time to move from first discovery to
final production, and it is not over-cautious
to say that even if the key discovery were
made today it might well be fifty to eighty
years before it bore full fruit.

In dealing with atomic energy Putnam
discusses how it would have to be used.
It would be produced in great powerstations, and so it would not be convenient
for all the purposes for which the present
small power-units are so suitable. The
railways could be electrified, and some house
heating could be done with it, but he
estimates that this would only satisfy about
Io per cent of the power demanded in
America. It is hardly too much to say that
the central feature of the American way of
life is the automobile, and however unlimited
the supply of nuclear power may be made, it
cannot help in the retention of this characteristic when once the fossil fuels are
exhausted. Perhaps it may one day be
possible to turn the energy liberated from

the nucleus into chemical energy in the

form of some liquid fuel, but here again the
time for the development of the process
might well be so long that the fossil fuels
would be exhausted before the substitute was
created.

These are the chief subjects treated in this
important work. There are quite a number
of others which have not been touched on
here, but anyone who wishes to be fully
informed must have recourse to the book
itself, and he will find it a rewarding study.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLVI, No. 4.
