THE NORDIC MYTH

A Critique of Current Racial Theories

By PROFESSOR H. J. FLEURE, D.Sc.

HEN the peoples of Europe ac
quired the idea of spending the

earth’s capital expressed in coal
and minerals in order to accumulate social
luxury and political power for successful
business men, they also learned to think of
themselves more highly than they ought.
This development of a good conceit of ourselves came to us in the days of the advance
of science into every field of thought, and a
supposedly scientific basis was found for thts
conceit. A white skin was obviously a mark
of superiority, even though our ancestors
had shown a then becoming deference in
their contacts with the Yellow Emperor.

Moreover, was there not a sanction in
folk-tradition, and folk-tradition was reviving everywhere with the decline of Christian
belief.
to realize that white-skinned, fair-complexioned people seem to have played a big
part in the disturbances of the days when
many of the surviving early traditions of
Europe were taking shape; they were apparently an aristocracy of that particular
time and so set the standards for bardic
flatterers to follow.

In Germany, Wagner’s strong imagination led a movement towards glorification of
native tradition, and found his great hope
in this respect in the possibility of a widespread expansion of egoism into racialism
under the guise of a glorification of the fairhaired, blue-eyed white man. And, after
Wagner, Houston Stewart Chamberlain
produced a work which was greeted with
amazement and laughter by _ serious
thinkers, though many a superficial writer
swallowed its follies whole.

But hair and eyes are known only for

117

It is well to pause for a moment |

modern men, and, since the growth of the
historic sense, we need to know the origins
of our groups and their history, if our pride
is to have its chance. Now it so happens
that a good many fair-haired, blue-eyed
people have long skulls; many have quite
broad ones it is true, but the long skull has
the additional virtue that it is the dominant
type in ancient Scandinavian burials, in the
region where tall men with light hair and
blue eyes are most widespread nowadays.
So the combination of blondness and a long
head and tall stature has a special charm
for certain minds. But this is not enough,
for even the most enthusiastic racialist is
not going to do his duty by organizing a
Nordic Association to which might be admitted all men of any people on earth or,
perhaps, in Europe and North America,
who could show, not the sixteen quarterings
as of old at Baume-les-Messieurs, but, let
us suggest, sixteen type-characters of the
blond race. No, were this organized there
might be too few subscribing-members to
pay the secretary’s salary. When Ammon,
the well-known German racialist, was asked
to select a typical Alpine complete in all his
characters he explained that this was impossible. It is as difficult to find the complete
and perfect Nord. ©

Race-type is an abstraction, to be used
with much reserve. But that caution does
not suit the temperament of the apostles
of the Nordic Race. They want to use
that race to glorify some group or other
about which every one knows, be it the descendants of the men of the Mayflower or
the landed aristocracy of England or the
masters of Germany. The Nordic cult is
less violent in the Scandinavian lands where,
118

now at least, men have less mania for
power. It is political ambition that is but
too often the deflector of science !

THE ‘SUPERIORITY COMPLEX’

The expansion of the English who first
developed modern industrialism, followed
by the miraculous development of German
scientific industry and the expression of its
ambitions in politics, made hasty writers
speak of Teutonic or Germanic superiority,
and this talk was not a little encouraged by
the feats of the German armies in 1870-71.
From this beginning it was easy to proceed
to the idealizing of the Anglo-SaxonTeutonic peoples which formed a part of the

ancestry of both English and Germans.

The next step was naturally to think of the
long-headed people of the north-west of
Europe, supposedly fair-haired and lighteyed, as the essential type and to dig back
into the past and make them the founders
of a pre-historic Baltic civilization, characterized by battle axes, though the Danish
specialists, with customary wisdom, declined to be drawn into the theory. So far,
let us admit, there was a spice of truth; for,
though the battle axe and other things
probably came to the Baltic from South
Russia, these features may well have been
worked out, in their Baltic forms, by the
people concerned. But we may suspect that
those forms were but barbarous efforts to
copy superior objects, in metal, made by
mere Asiatics from Mesopotamia or elsewhere. |
The trouble begins when having con
structed, not without a good deal of emotional subjectivity, the historical scheme,
our enthusiasts proceed to interpret all that
the peoples of north-west Europe have done
as the work of this particular stock. ‘This
leads to little difficulties when, for example,
we laud the work of the broad-headed Bismarck, Gladstone, or Salisbury, or Darwin,
or Luther, or some other public figure, as
the work of the race. Insensibly we lose
our hold on actual physical race characters,
for it is childish to say that a man is mainly
Nordic when his head form is quite other,

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

even if hair and eye are light. Moreover,
will those who have seen a certain number
of people from the lands east of the Baltic
be quite happy about the hypothesis that
light hair and eyes are always a sign of
intermixture with the tall long-heads of the
West Baltic,;lands? A few years ago Professor Parsons took measurements of Germans and showed that the average cephalic
index for a region was nearly always above
80, a rather high figure for the purpose of
the Nordic enthusiast who is so often anxious to belittle the broad-headed Slav.

In the same way it is uncomfortable for
this enthusiast that the British population
is to such an extent too dark to be accounted
truly Nordic. The English-German basis
of the proud superstructure weakens at
every stage of the examination, unless it
can be shown that the great achievements
of the peoples in question are due to the
Nordic element among them. So we get
the idea of looking for Nordic traits: long
heads (that may be of quite other origins),
prominent profiles (that may come from
quite another source), light hair and eyes
(that are shared with other East European
types), and many another feature may serve
its turn at need, and the game goes on until
all sorts of admirable people in all sorts of
circumstances are hailed as Nords. Perhaps
the highest flight of imagination was reached
when Jesus was almost claimed as a Nord,
though all representations of him are made
without knowledge of what he looked like.

Thus both in identification of examples,
and in definition of type, the apostles of the
Nordic idea leave the ground of fact and
soar into a very thin layer of the atmosphere where they may beat their wings for
ever, without fear of beating them against
the awkward data to which groundlings are
forced to give attention.

THE HOMEZOF, CIVILIZATION

Unless the school of Kossinna, the
archeologist, is right about the Baltic origin
of the battle axe (and the Danish specialists
are against this view, as are nearly all
others), the Baltic has not been an original
THE NORDIC MYTH

home of civilizations, however vigorously it
may have developed imported ideas during
periods of favouring climate. Situated on
the border-zone of temperate and arctic conditions, even little oscillations of climate
affect it very seriously, and, according to
several students, these have much interfered
with the continuity of history in that region,
an important fact so far as strength to develop new ideas is concerned.

Civilization began, apparently without the
help of the Nord, in the riverine lands of
Sumer and Egypt, to which pair may some
day be added one or two not unrelated areas
that have not yet been fully examined.
After a long period of 1,000-1,500 years,
it seems to have spread to India and to the
Aggean and probably to China as well.
From the Eastern Mediterranean it spread
to the Western; and the time this took is
suggested by the fact that, whereas the
second Hissarlik was founded about
2600 B.c., the date given for the foundation
of Rome is 753 B.c. ‘Taking the city as a
useful index of civilization, we note its
spread to Gaul under the Roman Empire,
and the extension of the idea into Central
and North-western Europe, beyond the erstwhile confines of the Pax Romana, only as
the Dark Ages were giving place to the
Middle Ages some time after A.D. 1000. In
other words, in city development the North
lagged more than 3,500 years behind the
South-east.

If, instead, we study the arts, we find
again that the North has learned most of
its ideas from farther south, even the art of
war being a doubtful exception in this case.
The northern peoples may have been vigorous barbarians at one stage and apt pupils
at another; their record is not a great one
in the field of creative work in early times.

THE MODES OF INHERITANCE

Enough has now been said to show how
chimerical are the ideas of a pure Nordic
race born to lead the world. Let us now
try to review the present position of scientific observation on the subject of the blond
peoples.

119g

In the first place, both Mendelian studies
and those of practical plant and animal
breeders have gone far to show that particular characters, or groups of characters, have
their own modes of transmission : the whole
constitution rarely acts as a unit in inheritance. ‘Thus we are all packets of inherited
characters, and the contents of the packets
get re-sorted generation after generation.
We have to try to use as the centre of our definition of a race a packet of characters which
is usually handed on fairly completely ; and
fairness of hair together with greyness or
blueness of eye and some other features make
up such a packet, associated at different times
with narrowness or broadness of head, with
tallness or shortness of stature, and so on.
In North-west Europe it seems, though it is
not yet proved, that when fair and dark mix
the fair colouring may affect the majority
of the descendants ; though, on the contrary,
it must be said that Hurst found blue eyes
recessive to brown eyes in England. It
also seems that when some broad heads and
some long heads mix, the majority of the
descendants tend towards broad-headedness.
There is at any rate a considerable distribution of fair colouring associated with
broad-headedness in Europe north of the
Alps, and one may be allowed to say that
the idea of a tall, fair, long-headed stock as
the main feature of North-west Europe from
a far-off time is quite unproven. ‘There
seems further a good deal of reason for supposing that tendencies towards depigmentation have been strong in North-west Europe,
and that therefore blondness is not exclusively a feature of one type of man any.
more than are long-headedness or tallness
of stature. At the same time, it is fully
admitted that these three characters, or
packets of characters, often do occur together, especially in Sweden, though we
cannot say that the ancient long-heads of
Sweden’s early graves were blond—indeed,
there are remnants of darker folk here and
there in the remoter corners even in that
country.

In Germany the observations of Ammon
were made on school children, and one cannot be sure that by any means all had
IZO

reached their final early adult colouring; it
is probable that his figures made the population seem too blond. Parsons’ studies of
head form of German soldiers could not
deal with as large numbers as he would have
wished to use, but they at least suggest the
abundance of broad-headed men in most
parts of Germany, and make one think that
the long-headed are a minority even in the
North-west.

Observations in Britain all show how
mixed we are and how dangerous it is to
argue from averages; moreover, we are certainly not more blond than brunet.

SOCIAL VALUE OF A TYPE

Nor can we say very much, at any rate
as yet, about the capacities and social values
of types. Ammon found that in South Germany the people of towns were less broadheaded than those of the country villages,
but this seems to mean merely that there
are more non-local elements in the towns
in a country when the long-established type
is broad-headed. It seems likely that in a
region of long heads the town populations
would be less long-headed. ‘There is little
in this to encourage speculations about social
values of types, as Hankins has well argued.

What may we then say in the presence
of all these mixtures of difficulties? First
of all, certainly, we must affirm that the
day for conclusions has not yet arrived, and
that Professor Karl Pearson was right in
referring to a good deal of modern writing
as unscientific dogma, that is in danger of
making the subject a happy hunting ground,
instead of a field to be cultivated carefully.
With this preliminary reserve we may perhaps suggest a few points that admittedly
still need further examination and verification.

There is some ground at least for thinking that the extremes of blond and dark
colouring are specializations related in certain ways not as yet fully understood to
intertropical sunglare in the case of dark
colouring, and to cool temperate moist conditions in the case of the blond. We must
nevertheless remember that these climatic

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

features are not always correlated with the
pigmentation types mentioned, which may
be the results of regional evolution and
which are certainly not confined to one type
in either case.

There are many indications that the
period of growth is rather longer in cool
temperate regions than in warm ones, and
thus it is natural that among the blonds of
North-west Europe there should be a good
proportion of tall people.

Moreover, under cool temperate conditions the body can easily get rid of the
heat produced by muscular exercise, and,
at the same time, it is rarely in danger of
losing too much heat if reasonable clothing
be used. ‘The climate therefore favours
muscular activity, while life near the sea
gives scope for fishing and maritime adventure. On the whole, therefore, we may
say that the regions in which blondness and
tallness are common are also regions in
which many men have a lot of muscular
energy, and in which activity and adventure seem natural. Might one suggest to
psychologists that this may go with the
extrovert type of mental action, and a certain lack of subtlety in argument and criticism ?

No doubt all these characters are sometimes found together in one and the same
person, the ideal whom Belloc teonically
bids us worship :

Behold my child the Nordic man,
And be as like himas youcan. ...

The advice, if followed, would lead to a
fair social success, no doubt, for approaches
to the idealized type are commonest among
the rank and file of the upper social grades
—among officers in the army save in the
higher ranks, among hunting squires and
their entourage, among school pupils who
are good without being distinguished. But
we are only at the beginning of studies of
correlation between the physical and the
psychical ; and the uppermost in society, or
in the army, or in the school, are but too
often tainted with other characteristics,
THE NORDIC MYTH

either breadth of head, or darkness of hair,
or some other trait of the non-Nordic man.

These tentative statements are set out
here less for their own sake than to suggest
an affinity of the tall blond, when healthy,
for outdoor life; and indeed it appears
from some medical observations that he finds
the cramped conditions of the poorer quarters of our industrial towns specially trying. Probably the rather high level of
metabolism keeps going healthily only with
difficulty under these conditions.

It seems probable, further, that as a consequence of this it is other types that tend
to multiply in big cities, while the energy
of the tall blond often lures him out to
pioneering work in far lands where there is
a chance for every muscle and the level of
thought is a simple one.

On the other hand, we do not know how
far a tall blond is likely to be of real value
under hot inter-tropical sunshine. Several
observers think these conditions are speci
I21I

ally difficult for him, which seems natural
enough.

SCIENCE—AND PROPAGANDA

To sum up, we may hold with some likelihood of correctness that tall stature and
blond colouring do occur, not seldom together, in parts of North-west Europe, and
that their possessors may have the long
heads which are so characteristic of parts
of that region; but that the idea of a tall,
fair, Nordic type existing in purity in the
far past as the indigenous stock of the region is as yet quite unproven. Nor is it by
any means certain that the type which combines these characters is normally a highly
superior one : the observations tend in quite
another direction, and there is need for a
great deal more work and quiet examination, rather than rhapsodies wherein the
language of science is used to veil, however
thinly, political propaganda of the simplist
even when not the most sinister intent.

 

Eugenics Review, -Vol. XXII, No. 2.
