REPORTS.

RECONSTRUCTION PROBLEMS. NO. 33, CHILD WELFARE. Munistry of Reconstruction; 1919; price 2d.

THE infant mortality rate for 1899 was 163 a thousand births. In 1918 it

was 97.

The Medical Report of the Board of Education for 1916 showed that
out of the six million children who are under medical inspection 10 per
cent. are unclean and 10 per cent. ill-nourished. About three million have
decaying teeth, more than half a million have poor eyesight, about a
quarter of a million are suffering from diseases of the ear, throat and
lymphatic glands; and a good many are afflicted with skin diseases, disorders of the heart, tuberculosis and infectious maladies of different kinds.
Quite a million are unable, by reason of their health, to profit by their
schooling.

The welfare movement dates from 1892 in France and about 1904 in
England. Just before the war the State guaranteed to pay at least half of
the expenses of the centres. The latest advances have been secured by
the Education Act and the Maternity and Child Welfare Act of 1918. The
former gave the Board of Education power to subsidise nursery schools,
compelled local authorities to extend medical inspection to secondary and
continuation schools, forbade the employment of children under twelve
years of age, imposed on the education authorities the duty of educating
all the defective children in their district, empowered the committees to
maintain holiday and school camps, gymnasia, swimming baths, playing
fields, and day and evening centres for recreative physical training; and
made many other provisions for health, Among the advances made by
the latter were the payment of grants to municipal nurseries, and the
permission given to the Local Government Board to aid schemes for
improving the midwifery service, accommodating delicate mothers and
children in hospitals and convalescent homes, keeping up the health of
expectant mothers and securing satisfactory conditions of home or institution life. These and all other health functions were transferred, in 1919,
to the Ministry of Health.

At the present time there are many open-air schools, 15 of them residential, at which baths, good meals, special clothing and other means of
promoting health are provided; 62 schools for cripples; 50 schools for
deaf and so for blind children; 191 schools for mentally defective and six
for epileptic children; six day sanatoria and 13 residential schools for
tuberculous children; and 17 residentia] schools for tuberculous children
who need surgical treatment.

The spirit in which the welfare work is done is that which was expressed by Mr. John Burns, in 1906, in the words: “ First concentrate on
the mother. Wiat the mother is the children are. Let us glorify, dignify,
purify motherhood by every means in our power.”

REPORTS OF THE INDUSTRIAL FATIGUE RESEARCH BoaRD. No. 2. THE OvurTPUT OF WOMEN WORKERS IN RELATION TO HouRS OF WORK IN
SHELL-MAKING. His Majesty’s Stationery Office; 1919; 6d. net.

THE noteworthy facts revealed by this enquiry are, that by a change from

twelve-hours to eight-hours periods of daily work (1) the output of shells

per hour was raised by 6.5 per cent., (2) the full efficiency of the worker
was maintained throughout the daily period. Night employment did not
prove to be harmful to the workers.
REPORTS. 157

THE TRAINING OF HEALTH VISITORS, ESPECIALLY FOR MATERNITY AND CHILD
WELFARE WorK. Circular 4. Local Authorities. M. and C. W.
10. His Majesty’s Stationery Office; 1919; 1d.
BOARD OF EDUCATION. DRAFT REGULATIONS FOR THE TRAINING OF HEALTH
VisiToRS. His Majesty’s Stationery Office; 1919; 1d.
THE appointment of health visitors was begun in 1908. Their chief duty
consists in home visiting for the purpose of giving advice with regard to
the murture of young children. Their sphere is different from that of
sanitary inspectors, district nurses, midwives, inspectors of midwives,
tuberculosis visitors and school nurses, although they have worked in all
these capacities in the past, and will probably be employed in the two
last-mentioned ones more and more in the future. They will have to
undergo a two years’ training, which need not include a full course in
midwifery, but must embrace elementary physiology, artisan cookery and
household management, hygiene, the treatment of communicable diseases,
maternity and infant welfare, and elementary economics and sociology.
BULLETIN OF THE LEAGUE OF RED CROSS SOCIETIES. Vol. 1, No. 2. Geneva;
June, rgr9.
AS readers of the EUGENICS REVIEW may already be aware, an important
step has recently been taken in the organisation of an international campaign against preventable disease, by the formation of the League of Red
Cross Societies, inaugurated at Paris last May. The admirable idea of
maintaining and applying to the problems of peace the machinery which
has proved so efficacious in mitigating the evils of war, originated with
the authorities of the American Red Cross, and the proposals made on
their behalf by Mr. H. P. Davison were enthusiatically adopted by the
Red Cross Societies and by the Governments of the other Great Powers—
Great Britain, France, Italy and Japan. Definite shape was given to the
project at a Conference of representatives of the Red Cross Societies of the
Five Powers held at Cannes last April, when an extensive programme of
international work was drawn up. The June number of the Bulletin of
the League contains a summarised report of the proceedings at this Conference, together with the general resolutions and the resolutions of the
several sections constituted to report on specific subjects, viz., the sections
on preventive medicine, on child welfare, on tuberculosis, on malaria and
on venereal disease.

The League proposes to establish an International Bureau of Health,
which is to serve as a central organisation for stimulating and coordinating the activities of the Red Cross Societies and similar voluntary
agencies in the different countries which can assist in this crusade against
disease. It was recognised by the Conference that in the initial stages of
the scheme it would be inexpedient, and perhaps, indeed, impossible, to
go beyond the assertion of general principles; and the resolutions adopted
were accordingly confined for the most part to the acceptance of certain
broad lines of policy as to which there is virtually universal agreement,
the details of their practical application being reserved for later
elaboration.

It is satisfactory to note that the League gives a prominent place
in its programme to the advocacy of a reformed and standardised system
of vital statistics, as giving the necessary basis for a definite and
permanent improvement of health conditions; and that it is justly
insistent on the vital importance of encouraging research in hygiene and
sanitary sciences.

These are matters of immediate urgency, in regard to which an international organisation such as the League of Red Cross Societies can do
much to educate public opinion, and to arouse Governments to a sense of
their responsibilities in relation to the health of the people. w.C.s
