SUCCESSFUL REFERTILIZATION OF A MAN
WHO HAD BEEN STERILIZED SEVEN _
YEARS PREVIOUSLY

A Contribution to the Practice of the German Eugenic Courts
(Erbgesundheitsgerichte)

By HANS HARMSEN
Professor of Hy%iene and Public’Health, Hamburg

the German Sterilization Act of 1933

had been applied* revealed a most
interesting case from the files of the Health
Department in D. of a refertilization after
seven years of sterilization.

A CRITICAL screening of cases to which —

Genetic Background

The ancestors of Walter A., born in 1913,
were undoubtedly afflicted with hereditary
taint: Of his grandfather, born in 1854,
it was said that he was mentally ill and that
he committed suicide in 1932. The grandmother, who died in 1937, was regarded in
the village as afi odd person.

Of the three male children of this couple,
one was normal, another was regarded as
odd; the third brother, father of our Walter
A., born in 1884, was a patient in the mental
hospital of Halle/S., because of schizophrenia.
He had passed through the elementary school
and received some elementary training as
a chimney mason. At present, he lives on his
disability pension. His first marriage was to
a woman who had a “ nervous ’”’ condition,
‘also evinced by her two brothers. A second
marriage, contracted after the death of his
first wife, was childless.

During the first marriage of the chimney
mason, four children were born:

1. Walter A. (our patient)

_ 2. Nikolaus A., born in 1919, and the twins

3. Anna and |

4. Hans A., born in 1922.

* EUGENICS REVIEW. 1955. 46,.227-32. ‘‘ The German
Sterilization Act of 1933 “by Hans Harmsen.

155

Hans A. was normal; he was killed during
the war at Stalingrad. His twin sister, Anna,
suffered from rickets as a child, apart from
which she was never sick. In the elementary
school she was the best of her class. In
December 1938 a mental disorder developed
and she was admitted to the University
Hospital of Gottingen. As she was capable
of bearing children, the Erbgesundheitsgericht of Géttingen decided for sterilization
on March 2ist, 1939 because “ there was no
doubt about the endogenous origin of her
condition.’”’ Sterilization was performed ‘on
October roth, 1939 because of manicdepressive insanity.

In the case of Nikolaus, born-in 1919, the
health officer had applied for sterilization
on June 6th, 1936 because of “ congenital
mental defect.’”’ From childhood Nikolaus
had been hard of hearing. He failed in two
classes at school. He did not finish vocational training and worked in different.
places as a farm hand. The application for
sterilization was based on the hereditary
taint in the family and on the hearing defect
which, too, was stated to be hereditary.
When he left school in 1936 an intelligence
test suggested a minor but definite degree of
hereditary mental defect. On September roth,
1936 a further test by the Erbgesundheitsgericht of Hildesheim showed retardation,
and the court regarded Nikolaus as a borderline case. On October 13th, 1936 the
Erbgesundheitsgericht of Gottingen rejected
the application for sterilization, because ‘of
the results of a third intelligence test, in
which he acquitted himself well:

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, October, 1956. 48, 3
156

With respect to these findings, the court
could not be convinced of the existence of congenital defect, as defined by law in §1, section II,
point 1 in the German Sterilization Act of July
14th, 1933. Thus, the application for sterilization was to be rejected.

Nikolaus is living in an industrial districtHe is married and has a boy of two years,
who is also hard of hearing but accessible.

Grounds for Sterilization

Sterilization of Walter A. (our patient)
had been applied for by the Health Department in November 1935 because of congenital defect and with regard to the fact
that he had been brought up in the Vincent
Convent, having been discharged from the
second grade of a school for handicapped
children. On February 15th, 1928 a certificate of a private school of the same kind. as
the St. Vincent House stated:

Walter A. is very hard of hearing, but endowed
with normal abilities. He has been an inmate
of our institution since April 19th, 1926 as a
member of a class for handicapped children
third grade (Hilfsschule) and will advance to the
next grade at the end of the school year. He is
well behaved and ambitious and will succeed
well in school because of his intelligence. During
the two years at our school he learned to read
Gothic and Latin print with some fluency. He
has been able to understand subjects dealt with
during lecture hours. He has learned to calculate

. between one and a thousand. In painting he has
special abilities as shown by some of his drawings
from a model which he performed without help.
The formed character of his handwriting shows
his ability for the job which has been chosen for
him. Furthermore, his manual skill and his
practical understanding will be very helpful.
We can give our best recommendations for him.

In the decision of the Erbgesundheitsgericht of Hildesheim (December 19th, 1935)
the following was stated:

He is trained as a painter and works in this
trade. The intelligence test shows defect,
although of a minor degree. As A. comes from
a family which is considerably afflicted with
hereditary diseases, the diagnosis “ congenital
mental defect ’’ cannot be doubted. Therefore,
the Sterilization Act is applicable.

On February 12th, 1936 sterilization was
carried out in the Municipal Hospital of
Hildesheim by resection of the spermatic

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

ducts. The patient was discharged from the
hospital on February 2oth, 1936.

The Case Reopened

Seven years later, on March a2ist, 1943,
A. applied for the reopening of his case.
He was now twenty-nine years old and asked

to undo the whole matter, that I may be able
to marry a healthy girl. I have felt unhappy and
neglected since that time, and I do not have any
chance of marrying.

In August 1943 he presented himself for
an intelligence test at the State Health
Department at Hanover and showed a large
number of mostly good certificates from
former employers. In a medical statement of
August 18th, 1943 the health officer wrote:

Among other features, facial expression,
attitude and handwriting do not suggest the
presence of mental defect. Some of the tests
showed an intelligence above the normal level.
Mental defect, as defined by the law, cannot be
diagnosed. Socially, he is well adjusted and he
has received good reports from his employers.
Knowing that he is not mentally defective, he
is troubled by the fact that he has been sterilized.
I refer to the report of the school in Cloppenburg
of February 15th, 1928 which described him
as a normally gifted, ambitious and-diligent boy.
The reports of his master-tradesmen were quite
similar, for instance: “A. was a very diligent,
prudent, reliable fellow. I could put him in
charge of any job. He was very well liked by his
co-workers and by the customers.”’

In a session of December 14th, 1943 the
Erbgesundheitsgericht of G6ttingen decided
to quash the decision of December roth,
1935 which had ordered the sterilization.
In the argument the court stated:

Walter A. is extremely hard of hearing, which
makes communication very difficult and easily
creates a wrong impression of his knowledge and
abilities. His outward appearance does not
give the impression of a mentally defective person.
On the contrary, A. looks normal, he is active
and self-confident. The State Health Department of Hanover has stated that A. does not
show mental defect as defined by the law. In’
the examination A. made an impression — of
keenness and intelligence. In some fields his
intelligence was found to be above normal. He
answered promptly, was interested, attentive
and able to think logically. In calculations his
ability was average. Gaps in his formal knowledge could easily be caused by the fact that he
attended, for a period of six years, a school for
SUCCESSFUL REFERTILIZATION

children with normal hearing. Because of his
poor hearing, this school was certainly of no use
for him. Only during the last two years of his
education did he go to a private school for handicapped children in Cloppenburg where he
received more specific help. ... Altogether, it
cannot be said that A. is mentally defective,
even though the family background is unfavourable. Therefore the decision of the Erbgesundheitsgericht in Hildesheim of December roth,

1935 must be quashed as no hereditary defect

in fact existed.

After this decision, Walter A. asked for a
certificate of his hereditary health. Before
the quashing of the above-mentioned decision, he had married a girl who was deaf and
dumb. As shown by several letters to the
health department, this marriage was unhappy: “ My wife is deaf and dumb, her
conduct is unnatural. She does not care for
me, which makes me suffer very much. She
refuses sexual intercourse. In daily life she
is unfriendly to me; this started after our
marriage.’ The health department answered
that Walter A. could not ask the government
and the ministry for permission to marry
a healthy girl without first being divorced.

In July 1944 Walter A. sat for the
‘masters examination of his guild and passed
successfully.

On December Ist, 1944, in the Chirurgische
Poliklinik at Géttingen, this man’s reproductive capacity was restored by a suture of the
spermatic ducts on both sides. After primary
healing of the wounds, the patient was
discharged and kept under observation for
two weeks.

Marriage and a Family

On January 24th, 1946 he was divorced
from his first wife. On March 30th of the
Same year he applied for a certificate permitting him to marry a healthy girl, which

157

he did on April 2oth, 1946. Of this second
marriage four children were born: A daughter, Minna, born in 1947 and now eight years
old, is a delicate but normal and attractive
girl who already cares for her brothers and
sister and shows domestic skill. At school she
had difficulties with learning and had to
repeat the first grade; the mother helps her
with lessons. The son, Hans, now five years
old, was born in 1950; he is healthy and has
good intelligence and will enter school at
Easter. Manfred, born in 1953, is delicate,
but helps to take care of his eight months
old sister. He seems to be quite normal,
though he does not yet speak much. In
1955 Bernadette was born, a fragile and pale
but lively girl.

All children hear well. The public health
nurse reports that home conditions are good.

Conclusions

The case of Walter A. is of interest from
two points of view. First, it shows that a
diagnosis of “‘ hereditary mental defect ”’
should be made with great caution in adolescents. It is specially noticeable that among
the cases of sterilized adolescents, reexamination of the decisions by Erbgesund-.
heitsgerichte showed a considerable number >
of retardations in otherwise normal children.
A capacity later to make a good social adjustment—as in our case—provided the motivation for seeking a quashing of the court order
for sterilization.

Secondly, it seems remarkable that refertilization, even after a long time, is not as
hopeless as is commonly believed. In the
case here described the operation, even after
a period of seven years, had the desired
result and was successful in restoring fertility.
