170 EUGENICS REVIEW.

Drysdale, C. V., D.Sc. The Small Family System: Is it Injurious or
Immoral? London. A. C. Fifield; 1913; price 1s. net; pp. 1109.

WITH such an untiring advocate of neo-Malthusianism as Dr. Drysdale
for author no one can entertain a moment’s doubt as to the answer which
it is the purpose of this book to give to the question contained in its title.
In fact, Dr. Drysdale’s enthusiasm for the artificial limitation of the
family leads him to attempt much more than the supplying of a negative
answer to what is a very pertinent, a very important, and a highly practical question—one, moreover, which eugenics cannot and should not
avoid. And this enthusiasm is the cause of the weakness of the book. It
is just another case of preoccupation with a single idea leading its
possessor to argue in effect that its practice will provide the surest
short-cut to the millenium; whereas one of the most hopeful signs of today is our realization of the truth, that there are no short-cuts to the
perfection of individual and social life, but that progress lies along a
hundred different, though converging, paths. Accordingly, while we are
quite ready to agree with Dr. Drysdale that the artificial limitation of
the family may not be injurious and is not immoral, we do not look for
the same wide and wonderful benefits from its practice. Indeed, it is
impossible to escape the conviction that Dr. Drysdale’s case is not only
weakened, but sometimes rendered positively ridiculous by the lengths to
which his over-zealous advocacy carries him. For instance, he would
have us believe that that complex of problems generally lumped together
for convenience under the title of the housing problem is to be solved
by neo-Malthusianism, because “ we feel that even as things are, a man
and his wife and one or two children can have two rooms and live in
some approach to decency. With a greater number of children this
position is hopeless .... However much we may urge the necessity
for better and cheaper accommodation, we cannot get over the fact that
while this is being settled—and it will only be settled slowly—the most
acute phases of the housing problem would be solved in a year or two
by the adoption of family limitation by the poor.” Can we seriously
regard the adjusting of the size of the working-man’s family to the number
of rooms available as a solution of the housing problem? Such a suggestion if carried into effect would rather appear to us to be a highly
unsatisfactory way of escaping the problem altogether.

The sociologists, whose duty it is to lead us in a scientific study of
social phenomena, have taught us, having regard to the complexity of
all social problems, to look with suspicion upon the too extreme claims
of those who maintain that amazing and unprecedented benefits must of
necessity flow from the particular single line of action which they elect
to advocate. What, then, are we to think of the assertions contained in
Dr. Dunlop’s preface, that, following upon the general adoption of neoMalthusian practices, “ Poverty would, in two or three years time, be
banished from this country, and, in a generation or so, from the whole
world; there would be a rapid improvement in the quality of the race;
and the day of the abolition of war would be actually in sight ” ?

Dr. Drysdale’s consideration of the moral aspects of the question is,
we feel, particularly umsatisfactory. Not at all on account of the conclusion at which he arrives; but because some of the most vital considerations leading to a similar conclusion find no place in his argument.
We await a more convincing answer. R. DIXON KINGHAM.

Webb, Heten. Life and Its Beginnings. London. Cassell and Co.; 1913;
price 2s. 6d.; pp. 137.
Dr. HELEN WEBB treats the subject entirely from a biological stand
point, but the book, though written for girls under 12, should be read by
them with the assistance of an older person with a sound elementary know