C. P. BLACKER,
M.A., M.D.

Voluntary Sterilization:

The Last Sixty Years

. TIME FOR RE-ASSESSMENT

. THE BROCK COMMITTEE (1934)

UB WN =

. CAUSES OF FAILURE

1. TIME FOR RE-ASSESSMENT

N A SHORT introductory article published
[= the October 1961 number of this REviEw,

I drew attention to how ideas on the possibilities of voluntary sterilization have broadened.
During the early years of the century the measure
was mainly discussed in terms of its usefulness
in checking what seemed to be an increase in the
number of mental defectives. But the horizon
broadened. Possibilities were recognized of
sterilization being welcomed by wider circles,
for example by people who had recovered from
mental disorders, by those afflicted with physical
infirmities deemed to be hereditary, and by
mentally and physically normal people (so-called
carriers) who were afraid of transmitting to their
children hereditary infirmities which afflicted
their relatives but not themselves.

Since the end of the second world war, however, the qualitative criterion of morbid inheritance has been superseded. The quantitative
possibilities of sterilization have been explored
for controlling fertility in under-developed
countries; and people have been voluntarily
sterilized in numbers which were unheard of
during the inter-war years. A new assessment of
the potential benefits of sterilization in western
countries is due.

I have been asked to summarize the developments in Great Britain during the last sixty years.
Briefly, these have been as follows: before 1914
the possible benefits of sterilization were recognized by a few far-seeing writers who also

. ACTIVITIES OF THE EUGENICS SOCIETY BETWEEN 1929 AND 1934

. THE JOINT COMMITTEE ON VOLUNTARY STERILIZATION (1934-1939)

advocated birth control. Among these Havelock
Ellis was prominent. But public opinion was
unreceptive, uninformed and hostile. On moral
grounds the reaction was not unlike that now
evoked by artificial insemination; and on administrative grounds it was argued that the
effects of a workable scheme on the incidence of
mental defect would be imperceptible.

The issue was taken up in 1929 by the Eugenics
Society which advanced proposals which had not
before been seriously formulated. These proposals had a mixed reception, but they attracted
attention and provoked discussion. In three
years (1929-1932) public opinion was swung to
the extent that a concerted petition for an
official inquiry was submitted to the then Minister of Health by three weighty organizations.
This petition was sympathetically received and
in June 1932 a Departmental Committee was
appointed. This Committee produced in 1934 a
report unanimously recommending that voluntary sterilization be legalized along the lines
earlier advocated by the Eugenics Society.
Suddenly the Society was heavily re-inforced. A
Joint Committee was formed, and much effective
propaganda was done. Up till 1936 the prospects
of legalization seemed good. But adverse factors
set in. Events in Germany generated a distaste
for sterilization; and political opposition from
the left was re-inforced by the counter-propaganda with which certain religious groups had
responded to the departmental committee’s
proposals. The movement for legalization lost

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, April 1962, 54, 1.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

impetus as the threat of war loomed larger. The
war in 1939 put an end to all articulate demand
and, since 1945, there has been no revival of the
demand.

But since that year the issue has been raised in
a new form and in a big way outside Europe.

Hence the story falls into two parts. The first
covers the period 1929-1934 when the Society
was acting more or less alone; the second,
covering the period 1934-1939, followed the
publication of the Departmental Committee’s
report.

2. ACTIVITIES OF THE EUGENICS SOCIETY
BETWEEN 1929 AND 1934*

Under the presidency of Major Leonard Darwin (son of the illustrious Charles) the Society
had, in the nineteen-twenties, concerned itself
with the possibilities of voluntary sterilization.

A Draft Bill to Legalize Sterilization

In 1929 a draft Bill was drawn up which, as seen
in to-day’s retrospect, had an oblique preamble
and peculiar objectives. The preamble was
worded as follows: “An Act to prevent the
practice of sterilization when morally or socially
objectionable, thus safe-guarding its use for the
better preservation of the races.”’ The draft Bill
was divided into three parts. The first was con
* Sometime in the future it will be accepted as a selfevident proposition that death control must be balanced
by birth control (or, as some prefer to call it, control of
conception). The proposition will appear to be so selfevident that it will seem inconceivable that anyone could
ever have disputed it. Births will soon be controlled by
means of which to-day we know nothing.

An interest will then arise in the early efforts to control
the balance between births and deaths—in developments
of the idea that such control is necessary and of the
methods of control earlier used. Among the latter is
sterilization the history of which may, a hundred years
from now, become the theme of research theses and
monographs.

Hence the events described in this section may have
some historical interest. The Society has played a notable
part in the story which may be worth putting on record.
I write some thirty years after the events I describe. Most
of the people whose names appear in the story are now
dead. But fortunately minute-books, annual reports and
many of the relevant documents survived the war. These
were tied up in large parcels which since 1939 have
reposed in a basement of the Society’s headquarters. I
have selected from and rearranged this material in
chronological order and have prepared an annotated
copy of this article giving references to the relevant
surviving documents.

Io

cerned with mental defectt and insanity; the
second with the prohibition of marriage of
certified mental defectives and insane persons
(unless these had been sterilized or, on other
grounds, were known to be infertile); the third
with “‘pauperism and crime.”

During 1929 it occurred to certain members of
the Eugenics Society that an effective reply to
critics who reproached us with being too much
concerned with theory and too little with practice
would be for the Society to take an initiative in
starting a hospital, or endowing some beds in a
hospital, wherein priority would be given to
candidates for voluntary sterilization.{

This proposal was raised before the Council.
Dr. R.A. Gibbons, long an advocate of voluntary
sterilization, quoting an opinion of Sir Travers
Humphreys, contended that the legal position as
to this measure was so uncertain that the project
of endowing a bed would receive little support.
The argument carried weight with the Council
which favoured, as a preliminary, the establishment of the legality of voluntary sterilization.
Sir Bernard Mallet, who had succeeded Major
Darwin as the Society’s president, supported
this view. I well remember a meeting in December 1929, convened by Sir Bernard in the
Society’s rooms then located at 20 Grosvenor
Gardens. At this meeting Sir Frederick Willis,
than whom few people were better qualified to
express an opinion on the issue of legality, was
present by invitation. Sir Frederick fully confirmed Dr. Gibbons’s view.

Early in 1930, a recommendation that the
Eugenics Society should take an initiative in
getting voluntary sterilization legalized was
accordingly submitted to the Society's Council.

+ At fairly regular intervals the terminology of psychiatry is purged, much as are the political leaders of certain
countries. Current terms are outlawed and expressions,
sometimes unwieldly and circuitous but held to be free
from pejorative innuendo, are substituted. In this article
I will use the terminology current during the period under
discussion.

Several of the persons mentioned below have since
received titles. Their past and present designations will be
given when they are first mentioned in the text. Thereafter they will be named as they were known at the time.

+ For an account of the inner history of how this subject came to be raised and adopted by the Society, see
THE EuGENics REviEw, January 1930. 22, 4, 239-247.
The Sterilization Proposals: A History of their Development.
VOLUNTARY STERILIZATION: THE LAST SIXTY YEARS

This recommendation was conveyed in a memorandum signed by Dr. R. A. (now Sir Ronald)
Fisher, Professor J. S. (now Sir Julian) Huxley,
Dr. J. A. Ryle, Mr. E. J. Lidbetter and myself.
The recommendation was unanimously approved
by the Council which then appointed the
Society’s COMMITTEE FOR LEGALISING EUGENIC
STERILISATION. This at once embarked on an
active career. It was largely because of my
participation in these preliminary activities that
I was appointed in 1931 as the Society's General
Secretary.

The possibility of getting the legal issue settled
by a test case was early explored by the Committee. The matter was put to a solicitor who
submitted that the cost to the Society would be
substantial and that the outcome would be uncertain. The judgement would be as noncommittal as possible. After a conference with
the solicitor, the project was abandoned.

The Committee, of which Sir Bernard Mallet
was Chairman, expanded as its work progressed
and eventually included nearly thirty people.*

Eugenics Society’s Pamphlets

Literature setting forth the Society's case was
prepared and distributed. We produced several
pamphlets with covers of diverse colours. Our
basic statement was set out in what we called our
“buff pamphlet” entitled Eugenic Sterilization.
A. substantial demand quickly arose for this
publication of which, during 1930, some 10,000
copies were sent out, mostly to applicants.
Indeed, the demand was so great that, in 1931, a
second edition was produced the expenses of
which were met by a donation from Lord
Riddell. This second edition contained the text
of a comprehensive Bill which dealt with the
voluntary sterilization of three groups of people,

* In May 1932 the committee consisted of the following persons: Sir Bernard Mallet (Chairman), Mrs. Mary
Adams, Dr. K. B. Aikman, The Lady Askwith, Mr.
Cecil Binney, Dr. C. P. Blacker (Hon. Secretary), Dr.
C. J. Bond, Professor A. M. (now Sir Alexander) CarrSaunders, Lady Chambers, Major A. G. Church, Miss
E. Corry, Mr. D. Ward Cutler, Mr. W. L. (now Sir
Leslie) Farrer, Dr. R. A. (now Sir Ronald) Fisher, Dr.
R. A. Gibbons, Hon. Mrs. U. Grant Duff, Mrs. C. B. S.
Hodson, Sir Thomas (later Lord) Horder, Mrs. Eva
Hubback, Mrs. R. Hussey, Professor J. S. (now Sir
Julian) Huxley, Dr. R. Langdon-Down, Wing-Commander A. W. H. (now Sir Archibald) James, Mr. E. J.
Lidbetter, Miss Hilda Pocock and Dr. J. A. Ryle.

namely mental defectives, mental convalescents
(a term proposed by Dr. R. Langdon-Down to
denote persons who had recovered from any
form of mental disorder), and normal people
who wished to “avoid the risk of transmission to
children or to remoter issue of a transmissible
defect seriously impairing physical or mental
health or efficiency.”

A second pamphlet produced by the Committee attracted attention. It was entitled The Law as
to Sterilization and was written at the Committee’s request by Mr. Cecil Binney who, at this
time, was much in demand as a speaker on this
topic. His thesis was that the sterilization (albeit
at his request) of a person deemed to be mentally
defective was unquestionably illegal; but the
position of other applicants turned essentially on
what could be held to be a misdemeanour. Sir
William Russell had remarked: “The word misdemeanour in its usual acceptation is applied to
all those offences for which the law has not
provided a particular name”’; and “‘it seems to be
an established rule that whatever openly outrages decency, and is injurious to public morals,
is a misdemeanour at common law.” Later Sir
James Fitzjames Stephen, commenting on this
passage, had remarked: “It is inevitable that
when men claim to exercise authority over their
fellows, in broad general terms, and on grounds
which have never been clearly or systematically
expressed, there should be an extensive debateable land in which it is hard to say what is legal
and what is not.”’ The pamphlet contained a full
discussion of the possible relevance of the
Offences against the Person Act of 1861 which
this year (1962) is just over a hundred years old.
Indeed, it reached the statute book many years
before anyone had thought of surgical sterilization and some thirty-six years before anyone
was actually sterilized.

The most disturbing criticism of the Committee’s policy was privately delivered by a keen
supporter of the principle of voluntary sterilization. Dr Havelock Ellis wrote in December 1930
that, by raising doubts as to the legality of
voluntary sterilization, the Committee were
defeating their own ends. The nature of the
operation, especially of vasectomy, was such that
it was absurd to invoke the relevance of the
Offences against the Person Act. The Commit
II
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

tee should ignore such archaic enactments and
should encourage surgeons to continue to
sterilize bona fide candidates who were compos
mentis; it should offer to support such surgeons
financially if, after becoming members of the
Eugenics Society, they were involved in legal
difficulties. If, declared Dr. Ellis, it was a maim
to be vasectomised, it might be held to be a
maim to have one’s hair cut, as happened to
Samson; indeed the Society would be doing less
harm if it sponsored a Committee to legalize
voluntary decapillation.

Subsequent events, such as the attitude taken
up by medical defence organizations and the
experiences of Sweden before and after passing
an enabling act, have not confirmed Dr. Havelock Ellis’s pungent criticisms (reinforced later
by Dr. Marie Stopes) which received careful
consideration by the Society’s Committee and
later by the Brock Committee.

In 1931 the committee produced its “blue
pamphlet”? Better Unborn. This quoted about
forty authenticated cases of irresponsible parenthood by individuals of “borderline”? mentality;
and it brought out the deplorable and socially
burdensome conditions of many of their children. The pamphlet also contained the draft
text of a restricted Bill “‘to enable mental defectives to undergo sterilizing operations or sterilizing treatment upon their own application or
that of their spouses or parents or guardians.”
(Major A. G. Church, M.P., had expressed
willingness to introduce under the ten minutes
rule such a restricted Bill, covering only the
position in respect of mental defectives.) The
pamphlet also contained expressions of approval
of the draft Bill by some distinguished contemporaries among whom were Sir Charles Sherrington, Professor F. H. A Marshall, Professor
William McDougall and Mr. H. G. Wells.

The ‘‘Social Problem Group’’

On re-reading this and other literature of the
period, I have been struck by how different from
now was the climate of opinion. The general
theme of those days was “‘the sterilization of the
unfit.” The main candidates were high-grade
mental defectives and borderline cases. The
country had been shocked by the appearance of a
Report (of the Wood Committee) in 1930 which,

12

after a well-planned ascertainment conducted by
Dr. E. O. Lewis, had assessed the number of
mental defectives in England and Wales at about
300,000, or 8-56 per thousand of the population
of the time. This was approximately twice the
rate (4-56 per thousand) given by a Commission
(the Royal Commission for the Care and Control of the Feeble-minded) which had reported
some twenty years earlier. The Wood Committee
drew attention to the high fertility of the “Social
Problem Group” (a term invented by that Committee) and, after a full discussion of how far
the ascertained increase was apparent rather than
real, concluded that it was “hard to believe that
there had not been some increase of mental
deficiency during this period” (the last twenty
years).*

The period (1929 onwards) was furthermore
over-shadowed by the world depression when
‘prevention rather than cure’ was a muchsounded theme, and when people were looking
for ways of reducing public expenditure. The
attitude of the Society was also influenced by the
findings of Mr. E. J. Lidbetter’s monumental
genealogical survey (supported financially by
the Society) the chief findings of which were
published in 1933 though they had been made
fairly widely known before.t This survey, like
the Booth Survey (Life and Labour of the People
in London. 1891-1903, Macmillan. 18 volumes)
has not received the attention it deserves. It
awaits re-discovery by a later generation.

Sterilization was widely opposed both. on
moral and administrative grounds. The opposition on moral grounds was generally similar to
the opposition to birth control. The hostility on
administrative grounds was largely based on
the manner in which sterilization had sometimes
been advocated as a money-saving alternative to
segregation. (The mis-statement of the issue is
reminiscent of the way in which, to-day, the
world’s population problem is sometimes described as soluble either by restricting the rate of
population growth or by increasing world
resources.) Those responsible for administering
the services for the mentally subnormal were
nervous of the clamour for economy: Steriliza
* Wood Report, Part III. p. 38.
{ Heredity and the Social Problem Group. Edward
Arnold.
VOLUNTARY STERILIZATION: THE LAST SIXTY YEARS

tion, they reiterated, is no alternative to segregation. If there is such a thing as a professional
standpoint, that of the medical staffs of mental
hospitals was then opposed. Opposition was
more or less orthodox.

The Committee put forward the argument that
sterilization should be regarded not as an alternative but an auxiliary to segregation. The two
should be complementary. Certain passages in
the Wood Report about how the institution or
colony for mental defectives should be treated as
a flowing stream rather than as a stagnant pool
were here relevant and were used by the Committee.

These pamphlets and other literature contained particulars of the Eugenics Society; new
members were in this way enrolled.

The Committee’s proposals, later endorsed by
the Brock Committee and now commonplace,
then had a novel emphasis; and some leading
doctors who had previously been opposed. became supporters of the Committee. Prominent
among these was Dr. R. Langdon-Down. Support was also given by certain organizations
among which were the National Association for
the Feeble-Minded, the National Union of
Societies for Equal Citizenship, the Women’s
Co-operative Guilds Congress and the Conservative Women’s Reform Association. But at
this time the Board of Control, though having
stated in an Annual Report that “mentally
deficient patients create centres of degeneracy
and disease which welfare work can never
reach,” was tacitly opposed. It held that the
prohibition of marriage of mental defectives was
a more practicable innovation.

Parliament and Sterilization
On July 21, 1931, Major A. G. Church, then
Labour Member for Central Wandsworth, introduced under the ten minutes rule the Bill which
had been published in our blue pamphlet. The
Bill was vigorously opposed by another Labour
member who said that it was permeated by antiworking class sentiments. The vote was 167 to 89
against the Bill—a rather better result than
Major Church expected. But the first step was
taken. The subject was raised in Parliament.
An argument of which the Committee made
use—an argument later stressed by the Brock

Committee—was that people who could afford
to pay surgeons’ fees could get themselves sterilized. (Indeed, one doctor had written a book
suggesting that vasectomy—the operation by
which males are sterilized—could produce rejuvenating effects.) But the policies of hospitals
were largely shaped by governors and governing
committees which might include religious objectors and who might also hold that the waiting
lists of surgical departments were filled by people
whose needs were urgent. Hence the rich could
pay their way while the poor could not. In this
connection the Society made use of the following
letter, which appeared in the Week-end Review of
May 14th, 1932, and which was printed as a
single-page leaflet:

Sir,—I was born with a deformity of my hands
and feet, by which I have been much handicapped
during my life. I was assured by a doctor on
marrying that this deformity would not be transmitted to my children. I have had six children of
whom the last, born a year ago, has precisely
the same affliction as myself. Having little confidence in birth control methods, and not wishing
any more children to be born handicapped like
myself, I wrote to the Eugenics Society, asking if
it could somehow get me sterilized. I could not
afford to pay any fee to a surgeon and could only
just raise money enough to pay my railway fare to
any place where this operation could be done.
The Secretary of the Eugenics Society did all he
could to get me taken into a General Hospital,
where I could be operated upon, but no hospital
would take me in because of the small legal risk
which is thought to be involved when a sterilizing
operation is performed. Eventually the Eugenics
Society raised a small fund for me, and I was
successfully operated upon as a paying patient in
a hospital. I should say that the operation was
painless and had not the slightest effect on my
general health or married life; it has relieved both
my wife and myself of a terrible anxiety. I would
be grateful if you would publish this letter, because
I think your readers ought to know that the
Eugenics Society in trying to get voluntary sterilization legalized is only trying to make available
for the poor what is now the privilege of the rich.

Yours faithfully,
**HEREDITARY DEFORMITY.”

The Labour party’s attitude was ambivalent.
Some shared the standpoint of Major Church’s
Parliamentary opponent that the Committee’s
objectives were “anti-working class.” Others
supported the argument of the last paragraph of
the above-quoted letter. As time passed, the
second view gained ground. By 1937, there had

13

ER—C
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

been formed an active NATIONAL WORKERS’
COMMITTEE FOR THE LEGALIZING OF VOLUNTARY
STERILIZATION. The president was Mr. Ernest
Thurtle, M.P., the chairman Mrs. Harold Laski
and the honorary secretary Dr. Caroline Maule.

But hopes were raised by Major Church’s
initiative. During the next year (1932) WingCommander A. W. H. James, M.P., an active
and fearless supporter of the Society’s main
activities, formed an all-party PARLIAMENTARY
STERILIZATION COMMITTEE consisting of the
following ten members: The Duchess of Atholl,
Mr. Vyvyan Adams, Mr. C. T. Culverwell, Mr.
Holford Knight, Mr. G. Lambert, Mr. W.
Mabane, Mr. G. Mander, Sir Basil Peto, Sir
Nairne Sanderson and himself as Secretary. In
the preliminary stage of the formation of this
committee, the Society's comprehensive draft
Bill, covering the three categories of mental
defectives, mental convalescents and mentally
normal “carriers,” was considered at a joint
meeting of the medical and scientific committees
of the House of Commons. The unanimous view
emerged that there was not the slightest prospect
of a Bill of such wide scope being passed; a
better hearing, it was said, would be given to a
Bill limited to mental defectives. Hence the
Parliamentary Committee adopted the restricted
Bill which, in July 1931, Major Church had
introduced under the ten minutes rule.

The Parliamentary Committee produced a
sixteen-page leaflet entitled Memorandum upon a
Permissive Bill to legalise the Voluntary Sterilization of certain Mental Defectives; and it included
the text of the Sterilization Act of Alberta. To
this Canadian Act assent had been given on
March 21st 1928; and under its provisions, by
November 1932 when the Committee’s memorandum was published, over a hundred persons
had been sterilized. The Parliamentary Committee took an optimistic view of their prospects.
They concluded their memorandum with the
following words:

It is submitted that since sterilization is already
a recognized practice upon grounds of physical
health, it is unwarranted that it should remain
illegal upon grounds of mental health. The Parliamentary Committee have reason to believe that
an act legalizing voluntary and permissive sterilization would be made considerable use of by the
public. The Parliamentary Committee have been

14

impressed and even astonished, at the widespread
support that has been found to exist in the House
of Commons, and in the country, in favour of
legalizing sterilization.

The following was the
Summary and conclusions:

(1) The measures proposed are voluntary and
permissive and are not compulsory. (The meaning
of the term “‘voluntary”’ as applied to a defective
is explained in the Memorandum on the Bill which
appears on p. 12.)

(2) Sterilization is proposed for mental defectives, for whom it is now illegal, as an adjunct,
and not as an alternative to, segregation.

(3) A large proportion of mental defectives
(over 50 per cent according to most authorities)
owe their condition to hereditary taints in their
ancestry

(4) Probably not more than 10-15 per cent of all
defectives have parents one or both of whom are
defective. This will be the measure of the possible
reduction which could be effected in one generation by preventing all defectives from breeding.

(5) But nevertheless all authorities agree that no
defective, whatever the causation of his defectiveness, should become a parent. It is terrible to
think of a normal, sensitive child being brought
up by a defective parent.

(6) It has been authoritatively recommended
that institutional accommodation be provided for
one-third of the total estimated number of defectives in the country and that the remaining twothirds live under guardianship or supervision in
the general community. Sterilization is applicable
to a proportion of these cases.

(7) The operation of sterilization involves
negligible risks to life and leaves the physical,
mental and sexual powers unchanged

(8) Sterilization has been in effective operation
in other countries and in one part of the British
Empire.

(3) Sterilization, properly safeguarded against
abuses, can therefore be employed as an economical and humane extension of the principle of
preventive medicine.

But by the time the Parliamentary Committee’s memorandum was published (November
1932), the Brock Committee (see below) had
been appointed (June 1932) and was beginning
its deliberations. The Parliamentary Committee
decided not to press its case until after the Brock
Committee’s report had been published.

memorandum’s

A Conference on Sterilization

Another event which formed a landmark during
these early years was a single-day conference
convened on May 23rd 1932 by the Society’s
VOLUNTARY STERILIZATION: THE LAST SIXTY YEARS

Sterilization Committee at Caxton Hall, Westminster. During the morning and afternoon
sessions, the different aspects of the Society's
proposals were explained and discussed. The
chairmen and speakers included Sir Allan
Powell, Sir Thomas Horder, Dr. R. LangdonDown, Mr. Cecil Binney, Professor R. RugglesGates, Professor A. M. Carr-Saunders and
others. The evening session took the form of a
public meeting at which Lady Askwith took the
chair and Lord Riddell was the first speaker. In
her introductory speech, Lady Askwith stressed
the humanitarian aspects of the Society’s proposals. These, if correctly understood, would
appeal to all lovers of children and especially to
women. “It is noteworthy,” she said, “‘that when
Major Church introduced his sterilization bill
on July 21st 1931, not a single woman Member
of Parliament had voted against it.”” The Committee produced as its “grey pamphlet’ (36
pages) a report of this conference.

_ Many meetings, some of them convened in the
private houses of members of the Committee,
were held during the period 1929-1932; and
Mrs. Cora Hodson, Miss Hilda Pocock and I
defended the Society’s position in numerous
debates.

3. THE BROCK COMMITTEE (1934)

Doubtless as a result of the activities of WingCommander James’s group in the House of
Commons and of the Eugenics Society’s activities outside, a trio of important organizations—
the County Councils Association, the Association of Municipal Corporations and the Mental
Hospitals Association—decided to take a joint
initiative. They combined to submit, in February
1932, to the then Minister of Health, Sir Hilton
Young (later Lord Kennett), a request that the
problems and possibilities of sterilization be
investigated by an officially constituted body.
The minister complied. After four months’
deliberation he appointed, on June 9th 1932, a
strong Departmental Committee under the
chairmanship of Mr. L. G. (later Sir Lawrence)
Brock. The terms of reference of this committee
were:
To examine and report on the information
already available regarding the hereditary trans
mission and other causes of mental disorder and
deficiency; to consider the value of sterilization

as a preventive measure having regard to its
physical, psychological, and social effects and to
the experience of legislation in other countries
permitting it; and to suggest what further inquiries might usefully be undertaken in this
connection.

Apart from its able chairman and Mr. Frank
Chanter, its secretary, the Committee consisted
of seven carefully selected persons.*

In the course of the second half of 1932 and of
1933 the Committee held thirty-six meetings and
took evidence from sixty witnesses thus amassing
a large volume of evidence. Among these witnesses was the Eugenics Society which was represented by Dr. C. J. Bond, Dr. A. J. (now Sir
Aubrey) Lewis, Dr. R. Langdon-Down, Dr. E.
Mapother and myself. The Society had been
asked by the Committee to give evidence upon
the investigations carried out abroad upon the
inheritance of mental deficiency. The memorandum which embodies this evidence was printed
as an appendix to my book, Voluntary Sterilization.t| The Departmental Committee, moreover,
promoted a large-scale and original investigation
into the children of 3,733 mental defectives
which was the most comprehensive of its kind
ever undertaken. Information was sought from
all the mental deficiency authorities in the
country. Their responses were better than had
been expected and the report on this inquiry, in
the preparation of which Dr. R. A. Fisher
played an important part, was published on pp.
60-74 of the Committee’s main document. This
inquiry, which provided an important milestone,
has scarcely received the attention it deserves.

In January 1934—just over two years after the
Committee had been appointed—the Brock
Report} (as it quickly came to be called) was
published. Briefly, it condemned compulsory
sterilization but recommended that voluntary
sterilization should be legalized for the three
categories of people who had been included in
the Society’s comprehensive Bill as set out in its
“buff pamphlet”: namely mental defectives,
persons who have suffered from mental disorder,
and people believed to be carriers of (or likely

 

* They were: Wilfred Trotter, R. A. Fisher, A. F.
Tredgold, Miss Ruth Darwin, E. W. Adams, R. H,
Crowley and E. O. Lewis.

+ 1934. Humphrey Milford.

t Report of the Departmental Committee on Sterilisation. 1934. Cmd. 4485.

If
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

to transmit) grave physical or mental disabilities.
These recommendations differed in only two
respects from those earlier put forward by the
Society. The Society had advocated that sterilization should be made possible for mental
defectives and mental convalescents who owed
their abnormalities to morbid heredity; the
Brock Committee more radically recommended
that it be made available for a// mental defectives
and convalescents irrespective of heredity. Also
the proposed safeguards differed in. that the
Brock Committee recommended that the subject’s application, backed by two medical certificates, be approved by the Minister of Health.
The Society had not thought it necessary to call
for the authorization of the Minister of Health.
It was a source of satisfaction to the Society
that the Brock Committee included in the first
paragraph of their first chapter the rollowing
acknowledgment:

To the Eugenics Society we are indebted for a
summary of the chief researches which have been
made in foreign countries. Their memorandum,
which was clear and complete in its arrangement
and detached and critical in tone, has been of
great assistance to us.

I here mention parenthetically another feature
of the Brock Report of which the Society took
advantage. The Report’s Appendix II (pp. 80-91)
is a memorandum submitted by the National
Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children
(N.S.P.C.C.). The following particulars are
included of a Yorkshire family:

HULL AND EAST RIDING DISTRICT.
Case No. 794M.
Father born 1880; mother born 1883. The paternal
grandfather was feeble-minded; two great-uncles
were certified insane and a maternal uncle was
epileptic. This woman has given birth to the
following:
(1) Daughter; died of convulsions |

in infancy These two
(2) Son; died of convulsions in in- | illegitimate
fancy

(3) Daughter; certified M.D.* In an Institution.
(4) Son; certified as imbecile. Died at age of 11.
(5) Son; certified as M.D. In an Institution.

- (6) Daughter; certified as imbecile.
(7) Daughter; died at 11 months.

Son; certified as imbecile.

Daughter; in service.

(0) Son; died in infancy.

* M.D. is an abbreviation for “mental defective’.

16

(11) Daughter; at school, but of very low men
tality.

(12) Son; at school and of average intelligence.

(13) Daughter; aged 9, has never been to school;

M.D.; now in Institution.

(14) Daughter; now aged 8; never been to school;

in M.D. Institution.

(15) Son; aged 5, recently admitted to M.D.

Institution.

(16) Daughter; aged 4.

(17) Daughter; aged 1.

It would be impossible (says the N.S.P.C.C.
Report) to exaggerate the tragic possibilities
which are still likely in this family’s history. The
children now in Institutions are likely to go back
to their place of settlement on reaching the age of
sixteen years. Doubtless, all will have benefited
from their stay and training in the Institutions,
but it is extremely doubtful whether they will make
satisfactory citizens and more than likely that they
will themselves produce deficient offspring.

Miss Hilda Pocock, then a member of the
Society’s staff, took a remarkable initiative. She
obtained particulars of this family, travelled. to
their home in Yorkshire, and persuaded all the
members who were locally accessible (at home
and in institutions) to consent to being filmed.
The family appears in a film later produced by
the Society. (We did what we could to help this
family, co-operating for the purpose with the
N.S.P.C.C.). During the ensuing years, we paid
quite a large annual premium to insure ourselves
against the risks of actions for libel. But we
received nothing but goodwill from the family.
Sir Lawrence Brock was naturally interested in
this film. He agreed that the main impression
made by the family as a whole, and by the old
father (born in 1880) who, in response to a
question, deplored the size and burdensomeness
of his family, was one of pathos.

4. THE JOINT COMMITTEE ON VOLUNTARY
STERILIZATION (1934-39)

The Brock Report had been expectantly awaited
by many organizations which had postponed
decision until its publication. It was widely commented on in the press which, as a whole,
received it with sympathy. It quickly brought
about a veering and crystallization of informed
opinion. It facilitated the taking of decisions by
those public and medical authorities which,
puzzled by the differences between experts, had
earlier been hesitant and non-committal. Here
was the most authoritative communication on
VOLUNTARY STERILIZATION: THE LAST SIXTY YEARS

sterilization that had appeared up till that time
in any country.

Among the earlier-hesitant organizations had
been the Central Association for Mental Welfare, led by Miss Evelyn Fox—a most dynamic
lady—and by Dr. A. F. Tredgold, one of the
leading authorities on mental deficiency in this
country. In consultation with the Eugenics
Society the Central Association took the initiative in convening a JOINT COMMITTEE ON VOLUNTARY STERILIZATION (J.C.V.S.) containing representatives of itself, of our Society, of the
Mental Hospitals Association and of the National Council for Mental Hygiene. The Royal
College of Physicians, which, in October 1934,
had endorsed the recommendations of the Brock
Committee, appointed a representative to serve
on the Joint Committee without powertocommit
the parent organization. Their representative
was Lord Dawson, the president of the College.
Lord Dawson had long been an eloquent and
quite fearless supporter of both voluntary sterilization and birth control. His attitude was
noteworthily courageous in view of his connections with the royal household. The Royal
Medico-Psychological Association likewise
appointed a representative. On June 27th and
July 19th 1934, moreover, the County Councils
Association and the Association of Municipal
Corporations respectively passed resolutions
approving the recommendations of the Brock
Committee; and later (November 21st 1934)
these two powerful associations vigorously supported the Joint Committee whose speakers
(Professor J. S. Huxley, Wing-Commander
James and myself) had opened a discussion
before a large audience which assembled for the
Public Health Congress at the Royal Agricultural Hall, Islington. (It will be remembered that
these two bodies, together with the Mental
Hospitals Association, were the ones which, in
February 1932, had petitioned the Minister of
Health to appoint the Brock Committee.)

Suddenly the Eugenics Society felt itself widely
supported and fortified. The Society's Council
dissolved its own COMMITTEE FOR LEGALISING
VOLUNTARY STERILISATION which became
merged in the Joint Committee.

It would be tedious to describe in detail the
activities of the Joint Committee during the six

years (1934-1939) which followed its appointment. The Committee was fortunate in securing
Lord Horder as its chairman and Sir Francis
Acland, M.P. as its vice-chairman. It will be seen
that each of the four constituent organizations
above-mentioned appointed three members; and
there were seven additional members which included the indefatigable Wing-Commander
James. The Committee’s first secretary, Mrs. M.
D. Silcock, who deftly guided the Committee
through its formative stages, was in February
1935 replaced by Mr. J. Verney Quilliam. The
latter had earlier had wide experience of political
work.

One of the Joint Committee’s first activities
was to appoint a drafting committee under the
able chairmanship of Dr. A. F. Tredgold. This
committee, after much discussion and consultation, produced a draft of a Voluntary Sterilization Bill which embodied exactly and in detail
the recommendations of the Brock Committee.

Mr. Quilliam spent much time in travelling the
country and addressing meetings, so that it
became necessary to appoint an assistant secretary, Miss L. R. Gait, who dealt, in his absence,
with the massive office correspondence. The
Eugenics Society was the main financial supporter of the Joint Committee. It placed at the
Joint Committee’s disposal the rooms on the
second floor of its house (those now occupied
by the International Planned Parenthood
Federation), and all the Joint Committee’s
meetings were held in our library. The Society
contributed 80 per cent of the Joint Committee’s
total income during the six years of its existence
(£3,140 out of £3,902).

A Handbook for Speakers was produced
which Mr. Quilliam and others found useful in
persuading numerous organizations to pass
supporting resolutions. The following is a list of
the Joint Committee’s members as published in
1937. It is followed by another list of the organizations which had expressed support by the
same year:

JOINT COMMITTEE ON VOLUNTARY
STERILIZATION (1937):

LisT OF MEMBERS

Chairman: mo
The Lord Horder, K.C.V.O., M.D., F.R.C.P.

7
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Vice-Chairman:
Rt. Hon. Sir Francis D. Acland, Bt., M.P.

Central Association for Mental Welfare
Miss Evelyn Fox, C.B.E.
A. F. Tredgold, Esq., M.D., F.R.C.P., F.R.S. (Edin.)
Mrs. J. Cooke Hurle

Eugenics Society
C. P. Blacker, Esq., M.C., M.A., M.D., F.R.C.P.
Mrs. Rosamond Hussey
R. Langdon-Down, Esq., M.B.

Mental Hospitals Association
Alderman W. Locke
Alderman J. C. Grime, M.B.E.
L. T. Feldon, Esq.

National Council for Mental Hygiene
R. D. Gillespie, Esq., M.D., F.R.C.P.
Miss Doris Odlum, M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P.
E. W. Neill Hobhouse, Es7.,
M.D., M.R.C.S., F.R.C.P.

Additional Members
J. D. Magor Cardell, Esq., M.B.,
B.S., F.R.C.S., L.R.C.P.
Wing-Commander A. W. H. James, M.P.
W. L. Platts, Esq.
Viscount Dawson of yonn, G.C.V.O.,
K. _K. C.M.G., M. D., P.R.C.P.
Major Richard Rigg, 6. B.E., J.P.
R. Worth, Esq., O.B.E., MB.
Mrs. Patrick R. Green, J.P.
Secretary: Mr. J. Verney Quilliam
Asst. Secretary: Miss L. R. Gait
Offices: 69 Eccleston Square, London, S.W.1
Hon. Auditor: D. Brummer, Esq.
Bankers: Barclay’s Bank, Ltd., 78 Victoria Street,
S.W.1

STANDING SUB-COMMITTEE

General Purposes Committee
Mrs. P. R. Green, J.P. (Chairman)
Dr. C. P. Blacker
Mr. L. T. Feldon
Miss Evelyn Fox
Wing-Commander James
Dr. R. Langdon-Down
Dr. E. W. Neill Hobhouse
Mrs. Rosamond Hussey

Drafting Committee
Dr. A. F. Tredgold (Chairman)
Dr. C. P. Blacker
Miss Evelyn Fox
Wing-Commander James
Dr. R. Langdon-Down
Mr. W. L. Platts
Mr. L. T. Feldon

18

LIST OF AUTHORITIES, ASSOCIATIONS,
ETC. which by March 1937 had passed resolutions in favour of giving legal effect to the recommendations of the Brock Departmental Report:

I

The County Councils’ Association

The Association of Municipal Corporations

The Royal College of Physicians

The Royal College of Surgeons

The Royal Medico-Psychological Association

The Association of County Medical Officers of
Health

The Society of Medical Officers of Health

The Standing Committee on Psychological Medicine of the Medical Women’s Federation

The Central Association for Mental Welfare

The Mental Hospitals’ Association

The National Council for Mental Hygiene

The National Association for the Feeble-Minded

The Eugenics Society

The Mental Hospitals Matrons’ Association

The Women Public Health Officers’ Association

The National Council of Women

The National Council for Equal Citizenship

The National Women Citizens’ Associations

The Conservative Women’s Reform Association

The Women’s Co-operative Guild

The National Conference of Labour Women

The Magistrates’ Association

The Baptist Union of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland

The Church of England Advisory Board for Moral
Welfare Work

British Social Hygiene Council, Incorporated

Church of England Temperance Society

National Association of Women Pharmacists

Federation of Working Girls’ Clubs

II
Organizations connected with the Welfare of the Blind

The Prevention of Blindness Committee

The National Association of Blind Workers

The Association of Workshops for the Blind

The Rossendale Societyfor Visiting and Instructing
the Blind

North Counties Association for the Blind

The Keighley & District Institution for the Blind

The Rochdale & District Society for Visiting and
Instructing the Blind

The Royal Leicester, Leicestershire & Rutland
Institution for the Blind

Gloucester (City) Blind Association

Liverpool Workshops & Home Teaching Society
for the Out-Door Blind

Lindsey Blind Society

Croydon Voluntary Association for the Blind

The Warrington, Widnes & District Society for
the Blind

Barrow, Furness & Westmorland Society for the
Blin
VOLUNTARY STERILIZATION: THE LAST SIXTY YEARS

Hull & East Riding Institute for the Blind

Kent County Association for the Blind

Gloucestershire County Association for the Blind

County Borough of Darlington—Committee for
Promoting the Welfare of Afflicted Persons

Bournemouth Blind Aid Society

Coventry Society for the Blind

East Suffolk County Association for the Blind

Cambridgeshire Society for the Blind

Burnley & District Society for the Blind

The Birmingham Royal Institution for the Blind

The West Ham Association for the Blind

Wakefield District Institution for the Blind

Hampshire Association for the Care of the Blind

County Borough of Bury Blind Persons Committee

Institution for the Blind of Dewsbury, Batley &
District

North Western Counties Association for the Blind

Warwickshire Association for the Blind (through

~ Warwickshire County Council)

Eastern Counties Association for. the Blind

III
Summary of other Organizations
College of Nursing (Branches) &

Nursing Associations ve 37
Insurance Committees . .. 20
Mental Welfare Associations .. 19
City & County Councils... . Li
Women’s Co-operative Guilds .. 80

Various organizations, representing
Politics, Health, Teachers, Unemployed Associations, Friendly
Societies, Women’s Citizens Associations and Women’s Labour Or
ganizations .. 108

333
March 10th, 1937

Total Organizations

Two points are noteworthy about this tripartite list in which, it will be noticed, the British
Medical Association does not appear. The first
point is the number of women’s organizations.
Of the twenty-eight bodies named in the first
Group (among them the Mental Hospitals
Matrons’ Association), nine are composed solely
of women; and in the third group of 335 organizations, over half were likewise composed,
eighty being women’s co-operative guilds. The
second noteworthy point is the particular interest
shown by organizations connected with the
blind. Thirty-two such associations are named
in the second group as having passed supporting
resolutions.

The Churches and Sterilization

An initiative was taken with the Churches. Mrs.
Cora Hodson and Mrs. Rosamund Hussey, both
active members of our Society, undertook, in
December 1934, to establish liaison between the
Joint Committee and various religious bodies.
No less than twenty-eight bishops were interviewed of whom eighteen were reported as
favourably disposed, five as non-committal and
five as definitely hostile. The Roman Catholic
Church was actively opposed; and an organization, the League of National Life, supported by
many Catholics, initiated counter-propaganda.
I recall that at this time I engaged in several
debates against Dr. Laetitia Fairfield, a most
able but invariably courteous controversialist.
An idea of the interest taken by the Churches
may be obtained from the following exchange of
letters, which may have historical interest,
published by The Times on June 17th and 21st
1935:

Sir,—The Report of the Departmental Committee on Voluntary Sterilization became known
to the public in January of last year. Considerable
study has now been given to its contents by most
of the organizations interested in the nation’s
health. A group of associations, representing local
authorities and medical and other societies concerned with the mentally afflicted and child welfare, have combined to prepare a Measure to give
effect to the recommendations of the Report and
have urged upon the Minister of Health its speedy
enactment.

With the scientific and sociological aspects of
such a measure we are not in this letter concerned.
Important moral and religious issues are, however,
involved. Concerning these there is difference of
opinion among the adherents of the various
Christian communities.

The Church of England as a body has expressed
no authoritative judgement on voluntary sterilization. There is, no doubt, some divergence of
opinion on the subject among its Bishops, clergy
and laity. The Church of England Advisory Board
for Moral Welfare has, however, passed the
following resolution:

That in the opinion of this Board there is no
moral principle which would compel the Church
to oppose legislation on the lines of the Brock
Report. That in view of the uncertainty of
results that would follow from such legislation
the Church should not actively urge the introduction of such legislation. On the other hand,
if legislation is passed, the Church should accept
responsibility for the social care required.

Of the Free Churches’ Assemblies none has as

19
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

yet had the question before them. The Council of
the Baptist Union, however, have passed unanimously a resolution in favour of the proposed
legislation, and those Free Church leaders who
have expressed an opinion have without exception
declared that they see no religious objection to the
recommendations of the Report.

It is generally known that Roman Catholics,
though they are not opposed to voluntary sterilization when it is undertaken for the benefit of an
individual’s own health, nor even in principle to its
being inflicted as a penalty, are, since the issue of
the Papal Encyclical of 1930, bound to condemn
sterilization undertaken with a view to preventing
propagation of unhealthy progeny.

We believe that the safeguarding of liberty of
conscience is of as great importance to the nation’s
welfare as any of the benefits which its supporters
expect from the proposed legislation. We would
therefore urge that in any Bill which may be presented to Parliament a clause be included securing
that in every application to the Minister of Health
to permit an operation for sterilization a statement
should be included by one of those recommending
the operation that the person concerned, or his
representative, has been afforded a real opportunity of seeking advice from a recognized minister
of the religious body of which he is a member upon
the moral and spiritual issues involved.

Yours, etc.
RICHARD SOUTHWARK
MARTIN ROFFEN
ALFRED E. GARVIE
J. SCOTT LIDGETT
A. HERBERT GRAY
F. W. NORWOOD
London, June 14, 1935

To the Editor of The Times

Sir,—I have read with interest the letter in The
Times of June 17 signed by the Bishop of Southwark and five other eminent divines. The signatories urge that in any Bill which may be presented to Parliament a clause should be inserted
to secure that the applicant for sterilization has
had an opportunity of seeking advice from a
recognized .minister of the religious body to
which he belongs. May I say that I am confident
that the Joint Committee on Voluntary Sterilization of which I am the chairman, recognizing as
it does that safeguarding the liberty of conscience
is of vital importance to the success of a measure
of this kind, will welcome the inclusion of such a
clause in the Bill which they hope to present to
Parliament in the near future?

Yours faithfully,

HORDER
London, June 19, 1935

In March 1935, Mr. Quilliam started a Voluntary Sterilization League; this he believed would

20

help in his regional work. For sixpence the
members received a quarterly bulletin. Cards
were also prepared for non-subscribing supporters to sign. After fifteen months some 500
members of the League were enrolled. These and
other activities kept the office busy.

The Committee produced an abbreviated
edition of the Brock Report consisting of the
text of the Report (some sixty pages) minus the
appendices (over seventy pages). Lord Horder
wrote a short preface wherein he drew attention
to a noteworthy feature of the report—the
complete unanimity with which the Departmental Committee of nine had reached their
conclusions and formulated their recommendations. This abbreviated and attractively produced
edition, the production costs of which were met
by Lord Riddell, was sold for sixpence. The full
report as first printed is now difficult to obtain;
but this abbreviated edition is still in stock.

Mrs Hodson and I both wrote books.

Further Pressure for Legislation

It was the Joint Committee’s object to have its
draft Bill introduced in Parliament; and various
approaches were considered. The first initiative
was taken immediately after the publication of
the Brock Report (in January 1934) but before
the Joint Committee had become active. On
February 28th 1934, Mr. H. (now Sir Hugh)
Molson, then M.P. for Doncaster, moved the
following resolution in the House of Commons:

That the House considers that the facts set out in

the Report of the Departmental Committee on

Sterilization indicate a state of affairs calling for

action and respectfully requests His Majesty’s

Government to give immediate consideration to

the unanimous recommendations of the Commit
tee in favour of legislation permitting Solunlary
sterilization in certain classes of cases.

Mr. Molson made a restrained yet eloquent
speech. I heard him make it and derived the impression that it was sympathetically received—
more sympathetically than had been Major
Church’s speech in mid-1931. But in 1934 the
position had been much strengthened by the
Brock Committee. Mr. Molson was supported
by Wing-Commander James who was cut short
by limitations of time, so that no vote was taken.

It will be remembered that the Brock Committee had been appointed in June 1932 by the
VOLUNTARY STERILIZATION: THE LAST SIXTY YEARS

Minister of Health (Sir Hilton Young, as he then
was), in response to a request conveyed to him
in February 1932 by the County Councils Association, the Association of Municipal Corporations and the Mental Hospitals Association.
These three, having got what they had asked for,
resolved that the matter should be followed up.
Sir Hilton Young was still Minister of Health,
and hopes were entertained by some.

With the assistance of the Joint Committee,
the three organizations drew up a brief for presentation to the Minister; and on May 23rd
1935—sixteen months after the publication of
the Brock Report—a deputation of fifteen
persons was received by him. The deputation
consisted. of five members of the County Councils Association, three from the Association of
Municipal Corporations, three from the Mental
Hospitals Association and four (Lord Horder,
Miss Evelyn Fox, Mrs. Silcock and myself) from
the Joint Committee. The Minister received us
most courteously and listened attentively to
speeches on behalf of the four organizations by
Mr. E. W. Cemlyn-Jones, Alderman Martin,
Alderman Locke and Lord Horder. Afterwards
the Ministry issued a press notice summarizing
the four speeches and the Minister’s reply. The
Summary was worded as follows:

The Minister of Health thanked the deputation for

so clearly expressing the case for voluntary sterili
zation and said he was bound to attach great
weight to the unamity of view expressed on behalf
of the bodies represented. The presence of the
deputation itself indicated a substantial advance
in public opinion and further progress would
depend on the public being assured that the conscience of any substantial section of the nation
would not be offended. The deputation would
realize, however, that in the present congestion of
. parliamentary business the introduction of legislation would not, in any case, be practicable at

‘present.

Sir Hilton Young, an ex-sailor of distinction
who. had lost an arm in the battle of Zeebrugge,
conveyed to us publicly (further emphasizing the
point to one or two of us privately) that three
years before he had been happy to appoint the
Brock Committee; that he was glad that its
report had been unanimous and constructive;
and that personally he was in agreement with its
recommendations. But he firmly told us that the

‘moment was not propitious for the Government

to take action.

A general election was then not far off (it was
actually held in November 1935). Thinking
things over afterwards we felt that political considerations might have influenced what the Minister said about the need for assurance that the
conscience of any substantial section of the
nation must not be offended. It was not the time
to incur the risk of losing the votes of religious
minorities.

Though there was no gainsaying the logic of
what the Minister had said—indeed some of us
had accurately forecast what his reply would be
—the outcome of this carefully prepared deputation was a disappointment. Nevertheless the
Joint Committee decided that it should maintain
its activities in the hope that, from some favourable quarter, a wind of change might set in.

Before the election in October 1935, no less
than 544 parliamentary candidates were interviewed of whom 259 were returned. Of these 259,
202 had expressed sympathy.

On June 23rd 1936—eight months after the
election—an informal conference was convened
in a committee room of the House of Commons.
In addition to Sir Francis Acland (chairman),
Wing-Commander James and two other Members of Parliament, there were present representatives of the County Councils Association,
the Association of Municipal Corporations, and
the Joint Committee. At this conference it was
agreed that Wing-Commander James’s all-party
Parliamentary Committee of 1932 should be
revived. Its task would be now easier. The Joint
Committee would seek support from as many
members of all parties as possible, and the new
Parliamentary Committee would watch for
favourable opportunities of further action. The
County Councils Association and the Association of Municipal Corporations undertook to
approach those Members of Parliament who
were also members of their respective associations.

On March 16th 1937, thirty-five Members of
Parliament were entertained at a dinner at the
House of Commons by Sir Francis Acland,
Wing-Commander James and Mr. Ernest
Thurtle. Lord Horder, Dr. Tredgold and I
addressed the gathering after the meal. A lively
discussion ensued in the course of which we were

21

ER—D
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

searchingly questioned. We had the impression
that several Members who had previously taken
little interest became potential supporters.
Wing-Commander James felt that his group had
been strengthened.

The Joint Committee and Wing-Commander
James’s committee had their last Parliamentary
innings on April 13th 1937, less than a month
after the dinner. Success in a ballot enabled
Wing-Commander James to introduce a motion
on the civil estimates in supply; and arising from
the estimates of the Ministry of Health he made
his case. The discussion was by order and custom
restricted. The Minister of Health—by this time
Sir Hilton Young had been replaced by Sir
Kingsley Wood—was no more encouraging than
his predecessor. He drew attention to the fact
that the British Medical Association had not
gone on record as supporting the Departmental
Committee’s recommendations; but at the same
time he urged that education and propaganda
should be sustained.

After this second expression of Parliamentary
aloofness, it was decided that a private member’s
Bill, depending on the luck of the ballot, would
provide the best opening. The ballot was held in
October 1937; but the luck did not come.

During the second half of 1937 Mr. Quilliam
continued to tour the country. He also planned
to organize four large conferences in Manchester, Newcastle, Birmingham and Leeds.
Difficulties arose in the first two places and the
conferences did not materialize. In Birmingham,
however, a conference was held on November
24th with Bishop Barnes (a big draw) in the
chair; and in Leeds a conference was held on
November 29th with Professor Maxwell Telling
in the chair. I addressed both conferences and,
with the assistance of Mr. Quilliam and my
chairmen, dealt to the best of my ability with
both friendly and hostile questions. Some of the
latter had by this time to do with Nazi practices.

Indeed, both inside and outside Parliament,
the tide was setting against us. During 1938 the
shadow of impending war was darkening the
political horizon. Immediate problems clamouring for parliamentary time diverted interest
from remoter issues of population and eugenics. And another influence was making itself
felt. About the time (early 1934) that the Brock

22

Report was published, the German National
Socialist Government had introduced a sterilization law, which included compulsory clauses.
By 1938, rumours and reports were reaching this
country of how things were shaping in Germany.
In questions and discussions at meetings these
developments were increasingly raised. We all
heard more of the argument about the thin end
of the wedge.

Some impetus was thus lost. What virtually put
an end to the Joint Committee’s public activities was the discovery that it had been overspending. Early in 1938 a crisis arose. The
Eugenics Society, which had contributed the
greater part of the Joint Committee’s funds, and
had placed at the Committee’s disposal the
second floor of its house, was turning its attention to other things. An increasing fraction of
my own time was taken up by the Population
Investigation Committee and by other activities
outside the Society. Our second floor was also
needed for another purpose—the accommodation of the Family Planning Association.

At a meeting of the Joint Committee’s General
Purposes Committee held on February 2nd it
was recognized that drastic retrenchment was
necessary. Mr. Quilliam and Miss Gait left us.
I became the Joint Committee’s Honorary
Secretary from the period February 2nd to
October Ist 1938 when the appointment was renewed for another year—October 2nd 1938 to
October Ist 1939. But on September Ist 1939 I
was called back into the army and by September
12th I was in France. The Joint Committee
broke up.

5. CAUSES OF FAILURE

There were, I think, four. The Joint Committee
made a good start in 1934 and 1935. It 1eceived
its first check in May 1935 when the Minister of
Health, Sir Hilton Young, politely but firmly conveyed toastrong deputation that the Government
would not take the desired initiative. Secondly,
events enacted in Germany, including the compulsory use of sterilization, were poisoning the
air and making more difficult a reasoned advocacy of voluntary sterilization. Thirdly, the
Joint Committee, which for some twelve months
had been getting diminishing returns on its
activities (in the way of favouring resolutions and
VOLUNTARY STERILIZATION: THE LAST SIXTY YEARS

promises of support), encountered financial September 1939 caused the Committee to disdifficulties and was compelled drastically to cur- integrate. No serious attempt has since been
tail its activities. Lastly the outbreak of war in made to revive it.

23
