INTO THE MADDING CROWD: CEYLON
AND ITS POPULATION PROBLEMS

By RICHARD RUMBOLD

visitor to Ceylon is the extraordinary

fertility of the people matched only by
the wonderful luxuriance and abundance of
the vegetation. But let me try to conjure up
a picture.

I live on the south coast of the island, and
between my bungalow and Colombo, a
distance of about a hundred miles, the road
traverses an almost uninterrupted succession
of coconut plantations, forest upon forest of
coconut palms, whose branches overarch the
road, so that one has the impression of
driving along the aisles of a lofty green
cathedral. And, every two or three miles,
there are villages, with numerous bungalows,
or more likely, little houses roofed with
cadjan—cadjan is the dried frond of the
palm; and everywhere there are people—
people ambling on the road, or sitting on
their haunches by the side of it, along with
the pariah-dogs; or tearing down the road
(the Ceylonese are the worst drivers in the
world) in cars packed to suffocation with
children. Children! They spring up from
nowhere and everywhere. In order to
maintain good relations one asks the village
headman or schoolmaster to tea, and he
turns up with all his children, perhaps half a
dozen of them, perhaps even more, rows and
rows of tiny chocolate-coloured figures whose
voracious thirsts have to be quenched with
lemon squash or ginger pop. Oriental
multiplicity and gregariousness are indeed a
trial and an ordeal to the eclectic Westerner
from abroad accustomed to entertaining one
or two carefully chosen friends.

Part of the truth, of course, is that the
population of this island is increasing at one
of the highest rates in the world. Every
year some 200,000 people or more go to
swell its numbers. According to the Census

Ors of the first things that strikes the

of 1946, there were then about 6-6 million in
Ceylon; today there are close on eight and a
half million; and by 1960 it is calculated that
there will be nearly ten million. These
figures may be compared with those for the
Republic of Ireland, which is roughly the
Same size as Ceylon, where there are about
three million or slightly under. There are, of
course, a number of factors to account for
this steep rise, of which I shall mention now
only one: namely, the control of malaria by
D.D.T. at the end of the second world war.
Owing to the relative smallness of the country
it has been possible to spray pretty thoroughly
the breeding-places of the mosquito, and the
result has been a phenomenal decline in
deaths due to malaria. In 1954 the malaria
mortality rate was only fifty-three per million
of the population, which is the lowest on
record, but until 1948 it was very high indeed ;
and in 1935, the worst year of all, it was no
less than 8,452 per million of the population.
And, in addition to the 50,000 or so people
who lost their lives in that year as a direct
result of malaria, there were thousands of
others—some say hundreds of thousands—
who died from other diseases complicated by
malarial infection. Doctors in Ceylon now
look back upon that year of epidemic as the
worst within their memories.

Before asking ourselves whether this
enormous expansion of population in the
island is a good or bad thing let us explore
the ground a little. For we shall see that the
population question in Ceylon impinges
directly or indirectly on some of the major
problems which the island has had to face
since she was granted her independence
in 1948. I shall consider the question
under four heads: family planning,
economic resources, unemployment, and
racial dissensions.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, July, 1956. 48, 2.
88 | _ THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Family Planning
Interest in family planning in Ceylon

dates back to 1932 when the Women’s

Political Union under the guidance of

Dr. Mary Rutman sent a resolution-to the

Ceylon Medical Council recommending that
birth control and eugenics should form a
recognized part of the curriculum of the
Ceylon Medical College. The resolution,
which was published in the Press, aroused a
storm of criticism, especially from Catholics,
and the matter was more or less dropped. In
1935 and again in 1937 Sir Julian Cahn visited
the island, and his lectures at the Medical
College revived interest in the subject. He
also made a donation of {100 towards the
establishment of a clinic which was opened
in 1937—the first in Ceylon. But during the
second world war it had to be closed down
owing to the difficulty of obtaining supplies
of contraceptives.

_ In 1953, due largely to the encouragement
of Dr. Abraham Stone and Mrs. Sanger, a
family planning association was founded
whose object was “to help in increasing
happiness in marital and family relationships
and in ensuring an improvement in the
domestic life of the people of this island.”’ A
clinic was opened in that year and another in
the following year, ahd the Government,
though at the risk of alienating Catholic
opinion, has made small grants and allocations to the association, one of whose major
difficulties has been to supply contraceptives
at a price which the mothers can afford.

It is not possible in this article to deal at
length with the energetic, but uphill, work
of the Family Planning Association, whose
secretary, Mrs. Sylvia Fernando, is an
extremely able, intelligent and—what is
rarer in Ceylon—civic-minded woman. She
told me that her interest in family planning
was personal and human, rather than
concerned with wider national issues. While
visiting the homes of the poor, she was
appalled by the number. of women who, in
spite of themselves, where condemned to
more or less perpetual childbearing, since
they seemed to regard it as a phenomenon
of Nature which could not be prevented in
any way. She also observed that when

doctors recommended special diet for undernourished children, the parents could not
afford to buy it, because they were already
burdened with large families. Of this I can
bear witness myself, since not long ago I went
round the largest of the children’s hospitals
in Colombo, where I was shocked by the
enormous numbers of emaciated children,
suffering from rickets and other diseases due
to undernourishment, lying in their cots.
The admirable devoted physician in charge
told me he could do little for them owing to
the poverty in their homes.

Amongst other questions I asked Mrs.
Fernando whether she met any opposition in
her work from the Buddhists, who form by
far the largest religious group in the island.
She replied that the Buddhist objects only to
killing or the taking of life, and once it is
explained to him that contraception does not
involve the taking of life, but only its
prevention, there is no opposition. The
opposition comes chiefly from the Catholics,
whose influence in the island has been strong
since its ruthless occupation by the fanatically
religious Portuguese in the sixteenth century,
who incidentally destroyed and plundered
some of the loveliest temples in the island
and tried forcibly to convert the inhabitants,
many of whom still bear the Portuguese
names with which the missionaries baptised
them. De Silva is as common a name in
Ceylon as Smith or Jones in England.

On the other hand, I have been reliably
informed that, amongst backward Sinhalese

‘peasants, social custom tends to favour

childbearing. A woman with many children
is highly respected in her village, whereas one
without children is regarded with pity, if not
with contempt. There is even a saying in
Ceylon that it brings bad luck to look first’
thing in the morning upon a _ bhikkhu
(Buddhist monk) or a_ barren woman.
Another curious reason given for the excessive
fertility of the peasant is boredom. At
6 o'clock in the evening or thereabouts the

-iron curtain of darkness falls in the tropics

with clockwork regularity, and since towns
and other sources of amusement are few and
far between, there is nothing for the peasant
to do after his day’s work in the paddy-fields
INTO THE MADDING CROWD - 8g

except enjoy himself manufacturing more
and more human beings.

A third reason, of course, is the much
lower marrying age of the Oriental, which
makes the childbearing period longer than
in the countries of the West. In 1953 there
were 187 children born of mothers under the
age of 15; 23,154 of mothers between 15
and 20; 96,544 of those between 20 and 25;
and 99,643 of those between 25 and 30.
Thereafter the figure drops.

Economic Resources

The relation between the economic
resources of the island and its population is
such a large, complex and, up to a point,
imponderable issue that it is difficult to sum
it up adequately here. One of the reasons in
favour of population control is that the
economy of the island is a fluctuating and
uncertain one, depending, as it chiefly does,
on its exports of tea, rubber and coconut
products and the ability to command
adequate sales as well as fair prices for these
goods in world markets. Much has been
done under the Colombo Plan and other
schemes to accelerate capital investment,
create new industries and above all, since
‘Ceylon is a rural country, to develop
agriculture. In this connection the Government has leased out large tracts of hitherto
uncultivated jungle land to colonisers, though
these jungle-settlements are by no means
always successful; and one constantly hears
alarming stories of gross immorality because
the settlers, removed from the sanctions of
the village, have swept decency to the winds.
Large irrigation schemes have also been set
afoot, particularly in the dry zones of the
north and north-east, the most famous being
the great Gal Oya scheme, where American
engineers laboured for years to dam and
harness the waters of the Gal Oya river,
which now irrigates thousands of acres of
what was once barren jungle land. But
according to a recently published report of
the U.N. Population Division all these efforts
constitute only a holding action in the battle

between population and the extension of |

cultivable land.
-It would probably be true to say that,

unlike in India, there is little, if any, actual’
starvation in Ceylon, but there is very
extensive undernourishment, even judged by
Oriental standards; there is also extensive
malnutrition, owing to the excessive consumption of starches. A European bank
manager in Colombo told me the other day
that, when he had a rush of work: on, he
found it impossible to obtain an extra effort
from his Ceylonese clerks, which he attributed mainly to their poor and inadequate
diet, which consists mainly of rice and
curry. (Only the educated and Europeanized
minority of Ceylonese eat Western’ dishes
and then, as a rule, only in the evenings or
when entertaining European visitors.) It is
difficult to see how it can be otherwise with
the ridiculously low standard of wages. Even
a dish of rice and vegetable curry in an
ordinary shop or boutique costs the equivalent of about a shilling, and 4s. to 5s. a day is
a fair average wage. In the case of miners,
agricultural workers and household servants,
who usually obtain their food free, it is even
less (I pay my gardener 3s. a day, the
houseboy slightly more and the Tamil cook
about 5s.). One wonders how all these people
can possibly contrive not only to feed themselves and their families, but also buy clothes,

pay rent, and so forth.

The other day I gained some insight into
the living conditions of the colonists in the
jungle areas. I was:out shooting with a party
of friends, and at dawn we came upon a
jungle-clearing—known here as a chena—
where some men were growing kurrakan—a
small bush which yields a flower and a seed
which is ground down into a powder rather
like flour. Worn out with plodding through
the jungle, we were glad to accept the
hospitality of these simple people, who had

been keeping a watch throughout the night

to prevent elephants from trampling down
their crop.

But, heavens! How poor, how destitute of
everything they were, except for their cadjan
huts, their few cooking utensils and one or
two angry-looking dogs. They looked exceedingly emaciated, but they told me they
succeeded in keeping body and soul together
by selling the kurrakan grain in the
90 | _ THE EUGENICS REVIEW

nearby town, in exchange for which they
bought rice and vegetables. There must be
hundreds of thousands of Ceylonese living in
more or less similar conditions out in the
jungle, though if they have guns or spears
they probably manage now and again to kill
a wild boar.

Until recent times the Sinhalese peasant,
if he owned a few acres of paddy or coconut,
could consider himself well off, while his
numerous children, who helped in the fields,
were an economic asset rather than a
liability. But owing to inheritance customs
in the island, whereby each holding is
divided up in equal proportions between the
children, fragmentation of land has reached
ludicrous limits; and it is not uncommon to
find a man owning, along with brothers and
sisters, half an acre of paddy. A situation
which leads, incidentally, to incessant litigation, as well as to disputes and then frequently
to murders, there being an average of one to
two murders a day in the island. The
Sinhalese peasant is therefore becoming
virtually landless. |

One of the communities where family
planning is becoming absolutely vital is the
large Tamil estate population. Their rapidly
expanding numbers are creating a serious
redundancy of labour, particularly as it is
not possible to extend to any appreciable
extent the acreage of tea and rubber at
present under cultivation. Unless there is
some control of their birth rate all the good
work which has been recently done to
improve working conditions on these estates
will be of no avail, and lowered standards will
inevitably produce progressive malnutrition,
greater incidence of diseases, and so forth.
In their report on this community the
Family Planning Association stress as one of

their main difficulties that of obtaining access

to the houses of these Tamil coolies (one calls
them houses but, except for the newer ones,
pigsties would be a more appropriate term),
which are scattered far and wide over the
estates, often with no roads leading up to
them, and in the hilliest part of the island.

Unemployment
A more serious, and indeed more explosive,

situation is created by the devastatingly
high unemployment. Never have I travelled
in a country where so many people are
doing—or appear to be doing—so little. In
such a blissful climate as this the dolce far
niente life does not create anything like the
same spiritual frustrations or humiliations
which resulted, say, from the unemployment
of England and Germany in the thirties,
particularly as the Ceylonese tend to be
rather lazy and unenterprising. Which in
turn is probably due to the enervation of
the climate and the abundance of the
vegetation so that they have never had to
meet the “challenge”’ (to use Professor
Toynbee’s term) of a_ hostile natural
environment.

Nevertheless, there is grave anxiety and
discontent, particularly amongst the middle
classes. Statistical data on unemployment
in Ceylon are not particularly reliable, but a
recent survey undertaken by the Central
Bank showed that 16-6 per cent of the total
work force of the island (estimated at about
three and a quarter million) was unemployed ;
and apart from the Tamil coolies on the tea
and rubber estates, the most badly hit
group are the middle class group, i.e. men
who have been educated up to Senior School
Certificate standard. In this small but
dynamic group, numbering about 60,000,
nearly a half are unemployed.

There are a number of interesting factors
to be considered in this connection. In the
first place, education is virtually free in this
island—a popular move on the part of the
Government, but one which must represent
an enormous economic burden on the State
in the building of schools, payment of
teachers, etc., as well as being, incidentally,
an indirect inducement to childbearing. As
a result, it is no unusual thing for a boy to
remain at school till he is nineteen or twenty,
and after this intensive education he is very
reluctant indeed to work on the land, not to
mention cultivating derelict jungle land, in
which he would probably be of most use to
his country.

Far from wanting to do so, he joins in the
mad rush and scramble for the all-too-few
Government posts, or failing that, for
oo INTO THE MADDING CROWD gt

commercial and clerical posts, which confer
on him, for some reason. or other, an
extraordinary prestige. Moreover, most
Ceylonese youths are bent, when they marry,
on finding a wife whose parents are prepared
to offer large. dowries; and the highest
dowries are paid to daughters marrying
professional men, such as lawyers and
doctors, Government civil servants, and so
forth. In fact, one can almost say (and this
is especially true of the Tamils) that there is
a regular scale of charges, and not long ago I
met a Tamil gentleman who was beset with
anxiety as to how he would earn enough to
provide his three daughters with dowries
large enough to enable them to make
suitable marriages—that is to say, marriages
to young men with promising and socially
esteemed careers.

Communism, both of the Stalinist and
Trotskyist variety, is a force to be reckoned
with in Ceylon, and doubtless it adds to the
restlessness of these middle-class youths,
unable to find jobs in Colombo appropriate
to their educational standards.

Another factor contributing to this restlessness is the influence of Great Britain,
which still pervades and indeed haunts the
island. I do not wish to open up yet another
theme, which though fascinating would take
us altogether too far and deep, but it may be
briefly said that when a small country like
Ceylon has been occupied by foreign powers
generation after generation (starting with the
Portuguese in the sixteenth century) its
indigenous culture and ways of life are bound
to suffer a terrible disruption: and, consequently, as soon as the tide of occupation
recedes, it is apt to be left high and dry, its
people being without roots either in their
native culture or in that of the occupying
power. Almost all the better-class Ceylonese
speak perfect English, have accustomed
themselves to Western ways and standards,
and send their sons, if they can afford it, to
Oxford or Cambridge. It has now been
decided to abolish English as the official
language of the country, which innovation, it
is hoped, will dimmish appreciably the spell
exercised by the West, particularly upon
young men who have tended to regard their

proficiency in English as the passport to a
non-existent job. In the meantime the
rapidly expanding population worsens the
unemployment situation, which, according to
the recent survey by the U.N. Economic
Commission for. Asia and the Far East, is
likely to become particularly acute in urban
areas unless there is far more rapid development of large and small industries.

Racial Dissensions

All of us are familiar with the fact that
rising birth rates in the predominantly
agrarian economies of the East are creating
the threat of ever graver world food shortages,
even as we know that many of these Asiatic
countries are suffering from chronic unemployment with consequent dangers of Communism. But do we, I wonder, sufficiently
realize the danger of racial and communal
dissensions arising from this growing congestion and conglomeration of peoples? To my
mind this is the most interesting feature of
Ceylon’s rapidly expanding numbers, though
population pressure is probably only one of
many causes of the racial dissensions existing
at present in the island.

It may be well at this stage to remind the
reader that Ceylon is a multi-racial island.
The islanders, who to-day number close on
eight and a half million, refer to themselves
as a whole as Ceylonese. But these Ceylonese
are made up of various races and racial ,
strains. Among them are:

(a) The Sinhalese. They are by far the
largest group, amounting to about 67 per
cent of the total population. They are of
Aryan origin, speak Sinhalese, and are
mainly Buddhist.

(6) The Ceylon Tamils. They represent
about 11 per cent of the population, are
concentrated mainly in the north and northeast of the island, particularly in and around
Jaffna, are Hindus by religion and speak
Tamil.

(c) The so-called Indian Tamils. They are
a slightly larger minority group, accounting
for another 12 per cent. Hardier and more
energetic than the Sinhalese, they were
originally brought in by the British nearly a
century ago, under indenture, to work on the
92 THE EUGENICS REVIEW ©

tea and rubber estates, where they provided
a cheap, relatively efficient and probably
“ sweated ”’ labour force.

(@) The Muslims and Malays, amounting
together to about 6 per cent.

(e) The Burghers. They are mainly of
mixed Dutch and Sinhalese origin, though
there is a smaller group of so-called Portuguese burghers; that is to say, Portuguese
whose ancestors married Sinhalese when
Ceylon was invaded by the Portuguese in the
sixteenth century. To my mind the Dutch
burghers, who number about 50,000, constitute the most fascinating community in the
island. Descendants of the Dutch invaders
of the mid-seventeenth century, who married
Sinhalese, they have the misfortune of
belonging really neither to East nor West.

Under the British Raj (which, incidentally,
has left very mixed feelings in the minds of
the people, respect for British justice, probity
and fair play being tempered by evil
memories of the colour bar) all these various
communities lived together in relative harmony, although there always existed jealousy
between them. But since the Ceylonese were
granted their independence in 1948 more
serious dissensions have arisen. In the first
place, a movement sprang up to expel the
Indian Tamils from Ceylon, chiefly on the
grounds that their jobs on the tea and rubber
vestates were wanted for Sinhalese nationals.
So these unfortunate Tamil coolies, unless
they can show that their fathers and
grandfathers were born in Ceylon (often a
difficult thing to prove to-day owing to lack
of pfoper registration in times past), are
faced with a return to far more terrible
economic conditions in the barren lands of
Southern India. Many of them have already
gone back, though not yet in great numbers,
the Indian Government being reluctant to
take them. At the moment the situation is
one of virtual deadlock, not to speak of
appalling confusion for various reasons. But
the measure of the reluctance of the Indian
Tamil to leave the island may be gauged
from the numbers of his countrymen who,
despite patrolling motor boats and the
vigilance of customs and police, illicitly enter

the island from Southern India every year in
search of work.

The position of the Ceylon Tamils is less
insecure since they have been here for
generations; indeed many of them are
descendants of those Indian Tamils who, in
successive waves, invaded Ceylon long before
the European powers — the Portuguese,
Dutch and British—ever set foot on it. But
they are now threatened with discrimination
of one kind and anothen At the moment, for
instance, there is heated controversy all over
Ceylon, in Parliament, in the Press and
amongst the general public, as to whether
Sinhalese is to replace English as the
official language of the country, or whether
Sinhalese and Tamil are to enjoy equal
status as national languages. If the

“Sinhalese Only ”’ faction win, the Ceylon
Tamils rightly feel that they will be at a

grave disadvantage, both culturally and
economically; and there is even a movement
amongst them (they are mostly concentrated
in the Jaffna peninsula) for secession from
the rest of the island.

As to the proud little Dutch burgher
community, they stand to lose whatever is
the outcome of the language issue, since in
the main they speak only English; and all
their orientations are European and Christian.
In any case they allege discrimination
against them by the Sinhalese in the matter
of jobs, and a great many of them have
already left the island, chiefly as emigrants
to Australia. This means virtually the
break-up of their community and its long
traditions.

It may be added that the British planters
here are meeting with much the same fate;
they are gradually being ousted from the
island because their jobs are urgently required
for the Sinhalese. There are thousands of
Sinhalese young men waiting to step into
their shoes as superintendents or assistant
superintendents on tea and rubber estates.

The present Prime Minister* is said to wish
that Ceylon should become the Switzerland
of the East, but his well-meaning intentions
are not reflected in this racial picture existing

* Since this was written there has been a change of
government in Ceylon. EpiTor.
INTO THE MADDING CROWD 93.

in the island to-day. As mentioned already,
there are probably various factors accounting
for it, but one of them is undoubtedly
population pressure: too little food, too many
mouths to feed, and above all too few jobs.
Not long ago a Ceylon Tamil, a prominent
civil servant, concerned with these problems
at high Government level, remarked that, if
it were possible to control the expansion of
the Indian coolie population on the estates,
the Indian Tamil situation might eventually
resolve. itself.

_ In this article it has not been possible to
do more than skim the surface of these

various problems with which the Ceylonese

have had to cope since independence, but it
has been’ made clear, I think, that the
population question finds its way, directly or
indirectly, into most of them, and that it isa
question which, to say the very least, merits |
study and consideration by the leaders of
the country. I cannot resist adding that.
the Ceylonese are, on the whole, one of
the friendliest and most tender people in the
world, while their island, I believe, contains
more natural beauty to the square mile than
in any other comparable area on the surface
of the earth.
