CORRESPONDENCE

pared to support public policies to encourage

larger familes—particularly among those sec
tions of the population who tend to set
standards of family building habits.

As has been pointed out in the editorial columns of the REVIEW the word “explosion” is an
exaggeration. The long term excess fertility is
perhaps of the order of 10 per cent, an average
family size of 2-4 to 2:5 instead of 2-2. This is
about 100,000 births per year. Gross emigration,
welcome to Australia and Canada, is now of the
order of 200,000 individuals per year, balanced by
an immigration of much the same order. Much
of the excess fertility could, if this was thought
desirable, be simply met by a more restrictive
immigration policy. Most members of the

Society will, in contrast to Professor Titmuss,

welcome the modest increase in average family
size in the middle class (an increase which even
now is perhaps only sufficient to raise their
fertility to replacement level) and will reject the
implication that the more fortunately situated
have been wrong to have more children. The
tax allowance figures Professor Titmuss quotes
are compatible with an average family size of
only 2:2, if, as is probably the case, most families
are complete by the time the father achieves a
taxable income of £5,000 a year. The 1961 Census
fertility tabulations, when these are at last published, will show what the real state of affairs 1s;
but the additional cost to the Exchequer of the
modest increase in family size in the middle
classes should be comparatively trivial.

Much more important is that the children in
these largely successful professional families
will be helping out of all proportion to their
numbers to solve “‘the difficulties of staffing the
schools, the hospitals and many other services’’.
It is very much in the public interest that those
parents, whether “‘better-off” or not, who have
the will and the gifts to raise two sons to become
a good engineer and doctor, and two daughters
to be a good school-teacher and nurse, should
not be discouraged from making the attempt.

It is, however, unlikely that resourceful parents
would be much influenced in their family planning by any reduction in tax allowances for
children. The fears that have been expressed
that an increase in the family allowances to the
poor would lead to an increase in the size of
their families are probably likewise not justified.
The eugenically and socially desirable, and ethically correct, way of achieving a reduction in
average family size is to bring family planning
services, as part of the National Health Service

54

(where necessary by domiciliary visiting on the
lines pioneered by Dr. Peberdy and Dr. Morgan)
to all. This will extend to the poorest the knowledge already available to the more privileged,
and enable all parents to decide the size of their
families. Once all families are planned, it is to
be hoped that average size will be close to replacement rate; but it is also very much to be
hoped that the quartile of the population most
competent as parents, whether their income is
high or low, should plan a family size well above
replacement rate. C. O. CARTER

Institute of Child Health,
Guilford Street, London, WC1

GERMINAL CHOICE
To the Editor, The Eugenics Review

Sir,—With all due respect for Dr. H. J. Muller’s
great ability and contributions and as a fellow
geneticist who is well aware that genetic betterment of our species is both possible and desirable, I would like to make a few comments
bearing on the thesis expressed by him in the
letter originally written for The Scientific American
and printed in THE EUGENICS REVIEW 57, 101104.

The crucial points are: (1) what qualities are
desirable and should be selected for? (2) what
is the genetic basis for these qualities? (3) how
can these qualities be assessed quantitatively?

(1) It is by no means self-evident that the list
given by Muller: fellow feeling, wisdom, mental
and bodily vigour and longevity are the most
important or most useful, however attractive in
a humanitarian kind of way they may appear.
What are we aiming at? Peace on earth, less
suffering, full bellies all round, high living
standards, high creative output, increasing
control of our immediate and distant environment, more techniques, technicians and technologists and many other goals could be mentioned. They demand different approaches and
selection for different qualities which in some
instances may be radically opposite in nature.
There is, further, another character which may
be of great importance, that of plasticity or
behavioural flexibility. Individuals possessing
this character in well-developed measure, would
be more than normally trainable and/or retrainable. This would clearly be of importance in, for
example, a society where automation was continually replacing men.

(2) With the exception of intelligence we know
rather little about the personality characteristics
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

enumerated; it seems likely that all, to some
extent, will be found to be genetically determined.
The environmental component may be considerably larger than for intelligence, this will
necessarily reduce the efficiency of attempts at
genetic improvement and may well suggest that
attention would better be concentrated on environmental bettering of phenotypes.

(3) This is, I suspect, a somewhat easier question to answer than the first two; nevertheless
it is clear that an objective rating of a number
of the characteristics given in Muller’s list would
be quite difficult. |

One final point I want to make is this. Who
decides for whom? It is suggested that participation both by donors and recipients be entirely
voluntary. There are, I suggest, two potential
dangers, the first is perhaps minor, but we should
be aware that such a system may well lead to
selection for over-representation of qualities
such as egotism and conceit in the treasury.
Secondly and more importantly the chance of
formation of castes which may be increasingly
genetically differentiated from each other (because of so to speak “‘insemination of the converted’) seems to me not wildly improbable.
For a democratic society this could pose a
problem of principle of the first magnitude.

J. A. BEARDMORE
Genetical Institute,
Rijksstraatweg 76,
Haren (Gr),
The Netherlands.

DR. H. J. MULLER writes: There is much
that I agree with in Dr. Beardmore’s letter. If
he will look up my article in The Control of
Human Heredity and Evolution, referred to in
my previous letter, or my chapter in The Population Crisis and the Use of World Resources
(The Hague: W. Junk, 1964; Bloomington:
Indiana University Press, 1965) he will find that
I emphasized virtually the same aims as he did.
The space limitations of a letter caused my list
there to be shorter, but I believe the very general
faculties there mentioned do, when taken in
conjunction, encompass or result in the more
specific ones detailed by him.

However, I do not agree that those more
general characteristics often conflict. Rather,
they tend to reinforce one another’s action. They
also help to guard against the selection of
paranoid personalities, that I warned against in
these articles. Likewise protective should be the
long period following the donor’s death, and

also the counselling, especially since such a considerable part of the judgement must in “the
foreseeable future” be formed on subjective
grounds and on grounds of over-all performance.

Yet even personality is proving increasingly
analysable. Moreover, the important share of
inheritance in it is becoming clearer (see for
instance James Shields, Monozygotic Twins
(London, 1962; Oxford University Press)). As
for castes, the very personality traits here aimed
at work against their existence, and a gradual
percolation of these traits, genetic and cultural,
both outward and “downward”, would ipso
facto be encouraged by their intensification at
the levels of the more fortunately endowed
individuals.

ABORTION
To the Editor, Eugenics Review

Sir,—Mr. Herbert Brewer’s logic is hard to
fathom. He argues that abortion ought not to
be permitted in cases of rape, for the singular
reason that rape does not always result in
pregnancy. Is it not sufficient to know that it
sometimes does? (As it did in the case of Rex v.
Bourne that altered English common law on
abortion in 1938.)

Perhaps sensing his shaky ground, Mr.
Brewer passes hastily to the supposed ‘‘formidable judicial and administrative problems’ that
legislation on grounds of rape would involve.
I am happy to inform him that these have been
successfully overcome in such .countries as
Denmark, Norway and Sweden, and that nobody
now seriously supposes they could not be
overcome here, too.

Mr. Brewer seems anxious to maintain the
Ultimate Deterrent of the Unwanted Baby for
those “females”, to quote his words, who
acquiesce “‘in sexual liberties up to the point of
no return’. This attitude is not of course unfamiliar to many of us.

Much ill-health, as Mr. Brewer rightly suggests,
results from repeated and unnecessary abortion,
as it does of course also from excessive childbearing. The answer to this is inevitably to be
found in much improved contraceptive facilities
combined with a more realistic and humane
abortion law aimed at reducing unskilled
practice—a solution that the Abortion Law
Reform Association has been advocating these
many long years. MADELEINE SIMMS

Abortion Law Reform Association,
68 Uphill Grove, London, NW7

55
