H. FABRE

Vice-President of the Movement Frangais pour le Planning Familial

| Contraception versus Abortion’

IT IS A GREAT HONOUR for me to address an
IPPF Congress for the first time. Our French
organization is young. It was founded in 1955,
thanks to the foresight and courage of my
friend Dr. Lagroua Weill-Hallé. Our experience
is therefore of recent date, and I have no
pretentions to teach you anything about the
relationship between contraception and abortion
in the world at large. It is a subject you know
well, having dealt with it many times at your
meetings. If I am able, in spite of this, to bring
some new elements to your notice, it is because
I give contraceptive advice in a Roman Catholic
country, where we daily come up against
preconceived ideas and principles, considered
by some to be indisputable. It is one of these
preconceived ideas that I wish to discuss to-day.

There are 40,000 doctors in France. Only
just over 200 prescribe contraceptive methods.
As to the others they make do with telling
women “fend for yourself” or “make your
husband sleep in the cellar!’ Although they are
becoming more and more ill at ease about this
negative attitude, they persist in refusing
contraceptive facilities for two major reasons:

The first is the fear of contraceptives leading
to debauchery. Although this argument may be
of great interest—and quite refutable—we shall
not discuss it here, because it does not enter
into the scope of to-day’s study.

The second reason was put forward by the
Jesuit priest, Father de Lestapis, when our
organization was formed: the legalisation of
contraception has everywhere caused an increase in the number of illegal abortions. This
assertion impresses many of our colleagues, and
constitutes a serious obstacle to the development
of contraception in the French medical world.

* A paper read at the Fourth Conference of the
International Planned Parenthood Federation: Region
for Europe, Near East and Africa, London 8th-11th June
1964. The Proceedings of the Conference will be published
by Excerpta Medica.

21

The arguments of Father de Lestapis are
based principally on the examples of Sweden,
Japan and the United States of America. They
have been adopted without any serious study
by the opponents of the French Movement for
Family Planning.

Even our Minister of Health has used this
bogey. To a Senator who was demanding the
legalization of contraception he answered:

The reduction of the number of abortions is
doubtless a highly desirable objective. But the
example of other countries does not in any way
allow one to assert that a greater diffusion of
contraceptive methods will enable this end to be
attained. Thus in a Scandinavian country where
contraceptive propaganda is free, the number of
known abortions increased seven times, between
1938 and 1957, whilst that of family planning
consultation centres increased in the same proportion.

The Scandinavian country where contraception has apparently caused such disasters is
Sweden. Let us therefore have a look at what
has happened there.

Sweden

The annual number of legal—and therefore
known—abortions, which was 454 in 1938, and
2378 in 1945, went up to 5328 in 1951, and then
fell to 3386 in 1957. What therefore happened
between 1938 and 1957?

At the end of 1938, the Swedish Government
promulgated a law authorizing contraception
on the one hand and extending on the other
hand the reasons permitting therapeutic abortion (allowed since 1921 for medical reasons
only, it was now authorized for medico-social,
humanitarian and eugenic reasons).

In 1946, an amendment permitted the interruption of a pregnancy if, “when taking into
account the physical and social circumstances
of the woman, there are reasons to foresee that

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, March 1965, 57, 1.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

her physical or mental condition would be
seriously affected by the birth of the child and
by the responsibilities arising therefrom”. As a
result, the motive “‘poor state of health’? was
called on more and more to justify interruptions
of pregnancy (21-8 per cent of these were
carried out for this reason in 1947, and 50-7 per
cent in 1950).

Then, from 1952 onwards, the government and
the Swedish medical body, worried by the
constant increase in legal abortions, put on the
brakes, and the number of refusals immediately
began to increase. As for contraception, on
the other hand, the number of family planning
consultation centres has continued to increase
since 1938.

Contrary to the assertion of our Minister of
Health, if the number of legal abortions has
been multiplied by seven since 1938, contraception cannot be held responsible for this.
The Swedish Government and doctors wanted
this increase. Why? Because they were hoping
(whether rightly or wrongly is not the question)
that by legalizing a greater number of abortions
the number of clandestine abortions would
decrease in the same proportion. It is obvious
that there is no connection between the legalization of contraception and the increase of known
abortions.

Japan

Let us now see what has happened in Japan.
Father de Lestapis asserts: “ Let it no longer
be said that abroad contraception is a prophylactic against abortion. In the case of Japan, it is
quite the contrary”.

After the war, Japan, defeated and with an
economy in ruins, had to support on a territory
reduced by 40 per cent a larger population than
before the war. “‘Never in modern times”’ writes
Professor Okasaki, “‘has the problem of population and its subsistence arisen in such an acute
form.”

Lacking confidence in economic recovery
alone, the Government decided to limit the
birth rate. Hence the ““Eugenic Protection Law”
of 1948. This law authorized contraception and
legalized abortion as well. There is nothing
surprising in the fact that it should be an

22

emergency solution, the easy solution (i.e.
abortion) which first showed results: nothing
surprising that the number of interrupted
pregnancies should rise from 246,104 in 1948 to
1,128,231 in 1958. But yet again, we are not
called upon to judge here either the intentions
or the decisions of the Japanese Government.
We can only observe that, on the demographic
plane, the legalization of abortion was a success,
since from 1947 to 1959 the gross birth rate
was reduced by 50 per cent. But yet again,
contraception had nothing to do with this.

Still dealing with Japan, Father de Lestapis
quotes the results of two inquiries carried out
by Mr. Tatsuo Honda, Chief of the Research
Department at the Tokio Institute for Research
into Demographic Problems. According to
Mr. Tatsuo Honda, 39 per cent of the women
who underwent abortions did so before using
contraceptive methods, whereas 59 per cent
of them already practised contraception at the
time of their abortion—hence Father de Lestapis
deduces:

. . It is much easier to go from contraception to
abortion than from abortion to contraception.

Another sociologist, Mr. Riallin, after studying the same investigations, declares that:

. . . the normal process is the recourse to contraception after an abortion, because that operation is
unpleasant enough to make one anxious to avoid
undergoing it again.

How can one explain that Father de Lestapis
and Mr. Riallin, making use of the same
statistics, arrive at diametrically opposed conclusions? It is because the latter studies the
figures as a scientist, whereas the former,
although Professor of Family Sociology, looks
at them as a moralist—and has once and for
all formed his opinion of contraception. So
why should the figures not support his own
argument?

Indeed, it is nowhere stated in the investigations of Mr. Tatsuo Honda that the 59 per cent
of women referred to had abandoned contraception. They were in fact women who, although
practising birth control, had become pregnant.
The figures supplied by the Japanese demographer do not lead to the deduction that
CONTRACEPTION VERSUS ABORTION

contraception facilitates abortion, but that
unsuccessful birth control favours abortion.
Research carried out in Japan in 1959 shows
that, out of a hundred couples wishing to avoid
pregnancy:
29-9 per cent practised periodic abstention
4-7 per cent used diaphragms or caps
8-5 per cent used spermicidal jellies
4-6 per cent used spermicidal tablets
37-7 per cent used condoms

These figures show that, in 1959, few women
used effective methods, and that periodic
abstention was most in favour (do not let us
forget that Ogino was Japanese). It is not very
surprising therefore that the failures of birth
control should have been very numerous; the
59 per cent of women who had abortions were,
in reality, only victims of illusory contraceptive
methods. What Father de Lestapis is in fact
questioning is the effectiveness of contraceptive
methods. And in this particular, I am entirely
of his opinion.

United States of America

As for the United States of America, the
question was discussed at length in 1959, at the
Congress of Arden House. The opponents of
contraception have again raised the points
debated at this Congress, and have widely
quoted all those who made reservations about
the favourable influence of contraception on
the number of abortions, in particular Drs.
Stone, McLane, Kinsey, Kolb, Goldstone,
Nelson, Taylor and Donnelly. This allows them
to declare purely and simply that even in the
United States contraception has caused an
increase in the number of abortions.

Father de Lestapis admits “that under a
regime of legal contraception, it is possible that
there are fewer interrupted pregnancies, owing
to a lesser number of pregnancies occurring,
rather like the decrease in car accidents during
the war, which was due to a shortage of petrol
and to restrictions on traffic, and not to the
greater skill and prudence of the drivers.”
However, how can one accept this reasoning,
knowing that in the United States, country
of contraception, pessimists estimate that the

number of illegal abortions is 20 per cent of
the total number of pregnancies, whilst in
France, a country where contraception did not
exist at the time Father de Lestapis’ study
appeared, they were estimated at 50 per cent!
And yet the birth rate is higher in the United
States than in France. This is therefore because
there are more uninterrupted pregnancies
occurring on the other side of the Atlantic than
in France. To revert to the figure of speech of
our opponent, there are more cars in circulation,
and yet road accidents are less numerous. It is
because, contrary to the assertion of Father
de Lestapis, the drivers are more skilled and
more prudent, and because the use of contraceptive methods has produced a favourable
influence on the number of clandestine abortions.

France

As far as we are concerned, our experience is as
yet too recent for us to be able to reach definite
conclusions. It is none the less true that our
brief experience has allowed us to catch a
glimpse of the successful results of contraception. By its very existence, it has allowed us
to avoid a considerable number of abortions.
Let me explain: women who had decided to
interrupt their pregnancy finally decided against
this when I assured them that it would be their
last, that after the birth I would give them the
possibility of using an effective contraceptive.

Furthermore, I have studied a group of 375
women who were using a diaphragm and a
spermicidal cream, and who came to me for a
check-up between Ist January and Ist September
1963. (I have not chosen a more recent period
because after October 1963 a defect in the
manufacture of our cream resulted in many
pregnancies.)

270 of these women had been practising
contraception for at least a year.

96 for at least two years.

9 for at least three years.

They had in all 660 children between them,
and admitted having had 142 miscarriages:
eighteen of them were pregnant. Of these
eighteen pregnancies, four had been deliberate,
one was due to using a diaphragm without

23
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

cream, the thirteen others were the result of
conception arising through the non-use of a
contraceptive during the so-called safe period,
(three of them during menstruation, four
immediately after, and six immediately before
the estimated date of the next menstruation.)
They had practised contraception regularly
and correctly during the rest of the menstrual
cycle.

It is certainly true that the number of cases
and the duration of the use of contraceptives
considered in this study are not very significant.
They do nevertheless point to an interesting
conclusion: nearly all the failures in contraception were due to the belief in the periodic
infertility of women.

For more than thirty years, moralists in our
country have taught that periodic continence is
the only contraceptive method consistent with
nature—and doctors have praised its effectiveness.
And for more than thirty years unwanted
pregnancies have followed unwanted pregnancies, and abortions have followed abortions.
Faced with this fiasco, moralists and doctors
will not retract, and now recommend the
temperature method. After the abortions of the
calendar, those of the thermometer now appear.

Faced with this imposture, what is our own
attitude, as doctors of the French Movement
for Family Planning? A great number among
us believe that the choice of a contraceptive
method must depend, for each couple, on their
health, their conjugal habits, the standard of
their education, their intellectual level, and
also their religious convictions. They readily
conclude that certain couples should have
recourse to local or “per os’ contraceptives,
whilst others would manage quite well with
periodic continence. This way of looking at
things is, in my opinion, extremely dangerous.
Certainly, we must take different elements into
account—far be it from me to think of neglecting
psychological factors, but religious convictions
should only be taken into consideration in
exceptional cases. Experience shows that in
fact the great majority of Roman Catholics,
when faced with reality, accept contraception
quite readily. High principles are unshakeable
when one is unmarried, or when one has only a
reasonable number of children, but when

24

repeated pregnancies endanger the health of
the couple and the equilibrium of the home,
then even the most intransigent compromise
arguing that theirs is a special case and that it
is not only their right but also their duty to use
an effective contraceptive method, even if it is
forbidden by their religion. Why therefore
should we be more dogmatic than the Catholics?
Why should we place religious convictions in
the forefront of our considerations if those
directly concerned, when faced with reality,
relegate these convictions to second place?

Certainly a couple must be free to make their
own choice, but it is up to us to enlighten
them, and to guide them towards the most
effective method. And if, in spite of everything,
a couple considers that religious convictions
leave them no alternative but periodic continence, then we must give them all the explanations necessary to reduce the inefficacy of this
method as far as possible. In any case, we must
watn them of the risks they are taking, because
a woman is fertile during the whole of her
menstrual cycle, including during menstruation.
Such should be the /eitmotiv of our propaganda.
If we wish to combat abortion effectively, we
must not only make reliable contraceptives
available to women, but also convince them
that they must use them continuously. For the
Ogino-Knaus method is responsible for millions
of abortions, and we must adopt a definite
attitude on this, before the myth of the thermometer causes millions of others.

Efficacy of Different Methods

In order that my investigations should not
solely reflect my own personal feelings, I have
tried to support them by asking the opinion of
two sets of people:

(1) The 260 French doctors of the French
Movement for Family Planning, who prescribe
contraceptive methods.

(2) 2,250 specialists in gynaecology and
obstetrics spread over twelve countries. I was
refused the names and addresses of specialists
in eastern countries; Poland was the exception,
thanks to the kindness of Dr. Bednarski, Deputy
Minister of Health.
CONTRACEPTION VERSUS ABORTION

I put several questions to these doctors, but
I will only deal with two here:

- What is your opinion of the efficacy of the
Ogino-Knaus method, the temperature method,
the combination of cap and spermicide, and
the ovulation inhibitors?

Table 1 summarizes the replies received so
far from doctors in the U.S.A.—eighty-two

TABLE 1

Not very No
reliable Reliable reliable opinion

U.S.A. (82 replies)

Ogino-Knaus

method 1 12 38 31
Temperature

method 2 19 54 7
Cap+

spermicide 42 30 0 10
Ovulation

inhibitors 72 0 0 10

FRANCE (66 replies)

Ogino-Knaus

method 3 0 56 7
Temperature

method 5 32 19 10
Cap+

spermicide 58 8 0 0
Ovulation

inhibitors $2 7 1 6

replies to 536 questionnaires sent, and from
prescribing doctors who are members of the
French Movement for Family Planning—
sixty-six replies to 260 questionnaires. (A further
222 questionnaires were sent to gynaecologists
and accoucheurs in France, and were contemptuously ignored: only fourteen replies were
received.)

Table 2 shows the replies to the second
question: the influence of contraception on
clandestine abortions.

The complete results of this inquiry will be
published later, if enough replies are received.

But the first sample shows that, in the United
States as in France those who believe that
contraception has an unfavourable influence
on the number of illegal abortions are in the
minority (in the United States 16-1 per cent
of the doctors who expressed an opinion, in
France only 1-8 per cent). These replies also
show that the best results are obtained with
ovulation inhibitors, and the combination of
cap and spermicidal cream—that is, just those
methods forbidden by our opponents, and that
periodic continence is not very reliable—that
periodic continence which our opponents persist
in advocating. It is not at all surprising therefore,

TABLE 2
No Decrease in Increase in No
influence abortions abortions opinion
U.S.A. 31 21 10 20
FRANCE 1 52 1 12

_ that unwanted pregnancies and abortions should

be so numerous in our country!

Einstein declared that we are living in sad
times, when it is more difficult to break down
a prejudice than to split the atom. It is in any
case deplorable to realize that though a man is
free to marry or remain single, though he even
has the right to divorce, at least in most
countries, he is denied by some the right to have
children as and when he wants them. In short,
it is distressing to see the freedom of the
individual still hampered by deeply-rooted
prejudices. It was eventually admitted that the
earth is round and that it revolves. It will one
day have to be admitted that freedom to plan
a family is an undeniable right. Dr. Senior’s
prediction that contraception will take the
place of abortion, just as abortion has replaced
infanticide, will then become reality.

25
