MATHEMATICAL DARWINISM

A Discussion of the Genetical Theory of Natural Selection’

By Professor J. B. $. HALDANE

may be divided into two classes. On

the one hand are the text-books which
summarize a branch of science so as to
render it accessible to a new group of readers
or clarify its principles. On the other are
books which, though often inaccurate in
detail, state a new point of view, and lay the
foundations of new branches of science. The
book before us is of the latter class. It is
extremely difficult and highly controversial.
Nevertheless it lays down methods by which
the problem of evolution, including the present evolution of man, can be discussed with
a certain measure of precision. No serious
future discussion either of evolution or
eugenics can possibly ignore it.

The first five chapters are mathematical,
though the conclusions are given in nonmathematical language. The first chapter
is of great historical interest, because it
shows why Darwin, who believed in the
blending theory of inheritance, was logically
forced to postulate external causes of heritable variation—and why in the light of our
present knowledge, blending inheritance
cannot account for any appreciable fraction
of observed variation, so that this necessity
no longer arises. ‘The next four chapters
deal with the effects of selection on populations whose variance is determined by a
large number of Mendelian genes. ‘The
reasoning is often very difficult, and I believe
in at least two cases erroneous, though the
errors do not affect the general conclusions
of the book. The argument, like all mathematical arguments, is hypothetical. That
is to say, it discusses the results which must

S CIENTIFIC books of permanent value

* Fisher, R. A., Sec.D., F.R.S. The Genetical
Theory of Natural Selection. Oxford, 1930. Clarendon Press. This book was reviewed in the
EUGENICS REVIEW of July 1930.

follow from certain premisses. Nevertheless it would perhaps have had more
cogency for the average reader had it been
more copiously illustrated by available
facts. For example, the views developed in
Chapters IV and V would have carried
more conviction had reference been made to
the author’s own proof that Pearson and
Tee’s data on the inheritance of human
stature agree very well with the theory here
developed. And reference could with advantage have been made to the quantitative
work of Pissarev, Sukatchev, and others on
natural selection in cultivated and wild
plants.

Perhaps the most sensational and unexpected conclusion which emerges from
the mathematics is that selection for a
quantitative character may cause a population to go on changing in the direction for
which selection has taken place, even after
that selection has stopped. We have, therefore, an entirely novel explanation of the
apparently useless cases of orthogenesis
which seem to be shown in the geological
record. The sixth and seventh chapters
deal with sexual selection and mimicry.
The treatment is less mathematical, and it
is possible that some of the arguments
would prove to be invalid were they stated
in mathematical terms.

But when all such criticisms have been
made, it becomes fairly clear that during
the next generation any discussions of the
problem of gradual evolution which are
likely to be of permanent value will take
the form of a development, discussion, and
perhaps in some cases a refutation, of the
arguments stated in the book before us. To
quote the author’s preface, ‘‘ It seems impossible that full justice should be done to
the subject in this way, until there is built
up a tradition of mathematical work devoted

II5
I16

to biological problems, comparable to the
researches upon which a mathematical
physicist can draw in the solution of special
difficulties.’’

One important caution must be added. In
the course of evolution there have certainly
_been sudden changes, for example changes
of chromosome number, and in all probability the formation of new species by
hybridization. Dr. Fisher’s theory takes
little or no account of these, and for this
reason cannot be regarded as a full account
of evoiution by natural selection.

The last five chapters will be of most
interest to readers of this journal. The
attempt is made to explain the fact that all
civilizations previous to our own have decayed. Very strong evidence is brought forward that the main cause of changes in the
composition of human populations is the
difference in effective fertility between
different genotypes. It is further argued
that the most important heritable causes of
such difference are differences of moral
temperament. Hence selection has tended
in the past to eliminate the type of human
character which favoured infanticide and
abortion. The variation of fertility in relation to social class is examined, though we
miss any reference to the very remarkable
and perhaps significant state of affairs in
Stockholm, where the poor are breeding no
faster than the rich.

So far most members of the Eugenics
Society will be in agreement with Dr.
Fisher. His last two chapters are likely
to raise a good deal of opposition. He
regards the social promotion of infertility
as the main cause of the differential birth
rate. The argument, which is at times
rather subtle, is essentially a development
of Galton’s demonstration that marriage
with heiresses, who are rich owing to the
infertility of their parents, is a potent cause
of the extinction of families.

His suggested remedy for the dysgenic
character of civilized societies is a very
thorough-going system of family allowances
on such a scale that infertility would no
longer be a cause of social promotion. The
reviewer considers that he has made out an

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

extremely strong case. Indeed, if his biological facts are correct it is probable that
a socialistic state in which no wealth was
inherited would be more eugenic than our
present society, and it is a little difficult to
see why Dr. Fisher’s economic views are
not even more radical.

It is clear that Dr. Fisher’s opinions are
opposed to those of many believers in eugenics. ‘The immediate effects of such a
system as he proposes wou!d probably be to
increase the fertility of some sections of
the poorer classes, for, as he himself admits,
it would be extremely difficult to apply it
to the small but, on the whole, intelligent
section of the population which is not in
receipt of fixed wages or salaries, but rewarded by fees from many different sources.
Hence the first result of such a system
might be the opposite of eugenic.

The following criticisms of Fisher’s social
theory, among others, might be made. If
the number of genes concerned in human
intellectual ability is very large, the conditions in the bulk of the population are more
important than those in the most intelligent
and unintelligent groups. If, however, high
intelligence on the one hand, and mental
defect on the other, are due to rather few
genes, as seems very possible, the eugenist
may be justified in viewing those sections
of the population in which those genes are
concentrated with what would otherwise be
an exaggerated interest.

Again, the arguments regarding the
selection of moral dispositions will be rather
weak until we know more about what is
actually inherited. Dr. Fisher writes as if
fanaticism were inherited as such. It seems
more likely that the innate basis of fanaticism is a special type of suggestibility which
may show itself as fanaticism in certain
envirouments. Among the well-to-do classes
to-day there is a great deal of rather unintelligent Malthusian propaganda. In fact
there is something of a taboo against large
families. Hence a large number of the
parents of large families are people who, just
because they think for themselves and react
against mass suggestion, have not been
affected by this propaganda. People of the
HENRY TWITCHIN

same mental make-up would probably have
limited their families fifty years ago.
Nevertheless if Dr. Fisher is on the whole
correct, civilization can only be saved by a
very radical change of opinion and practice.
And in particular much of the propaganda
of eugenists will prove to have been misdirected. ‘To quote his own words: ‘‘ The
reformer must expect to encounter deepseated opposition in the classes on which
he would naturally rely for an intelligent
anxiety for the future of their country.”’
One conclusion is fairly clear. Before the
eugenic movement commits itself on the one
hand to the further encouragement of the
social promotion of infertility, or on the

117

other to subsidizing the breeding of undesirable groups, a really thorough investigation should be made of the causes of
differential fertility. ‘There can be no doubt
of its existence or of its undesirability, but
several opinions are possible as to the most
hopeful method of combating it.

Dr. Fisher’s book, then, must be read.
But it is not easy reading. It is greatly
to be hoped that within the next ten years
the sections dealing with evolution and
eugenics will both be rewritten in a form
which demands less intellectual effort in its
readers, ‘Till then it is likely to remain the
best discussion of its subjects so far
written.

SO) Oe”

HENRY TWITCHIN

Some Notes on his Family History
By W. T. J. Gun, F.R.Hist.S., F.S.G.

tions to the account of our benefactor

by Major Darwin in the REviEw for
July 1930, and Mr. Leonard Jessop Fulton
has very kindly supplied me with information that he collected some few years ago
in connection with Mr. Twitchin’s pedigree.

Nothing further has been ascertained with
regard to the maternal family, the Lovelocks, nor with regard to the descent of the
Northways, to whom the paternal grandmother belonged. It is to be noted, however, that on this side Henry Twitchin possessed a relative, Edward Northway Butt
by name, who was in business as a chemist
and acquired a considerable fortune. It is
probably from the Northway strain that
Henry ‘Twitchin’s business ability was
mainly derived.

| gens « been asked to make some addi
With regard, however, to the male line
descent some interesting facts have been
brought to light by Mr. Fulton. The direct
ancestry cannot, it is true, be definitely
traced back further than Henry’s grandfather, Andrew ‘Twitchin. The name
Andrew is however significant, as it is frequently found to occur in conjunction with
that of Twitchin in various individuals of
the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries,
yeomen farmers for the most part or men of
similar status, residing in Berkshire or its
immediate neighbourhood.

Having regard to this rather uncommon
Christian name, and very uncommon surname, there can be little doubt that Henry’s
grandfather was descended from a certain
Andrew ‘Twitchin, of Inkpen in Berks,
whose will was proved November 22nd,
