GERMAN EUGENIC LEGISLATION

An Examination of Fact and Theory
By AUBREY LEWIS, ™D., MR.c.P.

eugenic ends has been put forward in

Germany with a vigour that is the
ground for much pride and optimism among
the foremost geneticists in that country. It
is a drastic, even Draconian, measure, compelling the sterilization of a not inconsiderable fraction of the population. The
text of the original law has been translated in an earlier number of the EUGENICS
Review (October 1933, page 179), and a
report on its juristic aspect was supplied by
“ Regierungsrat ’’ in the last issue (page 137).
It is of considerable importance that one
should know how that law is being put into
effect, and what consequences have so far
become evident.

The following is mainly concerned with
the two official Ordinances (Verordnungen)
and the Minister’s “‘ Rundschreiben,”’ with
the semi-official Commentary by Ridin,
Giitt and Ruttke, and the well-informed commentary upon this Commentary by Luxenburger, together with some reports on how
the law is actually working as regards mental
disorder. Finally, a brief account is given of
Professor Eugen Fischer’s view of the biological conception of the Folk-state (“ V6lkischer Staat ’’), of which this legislation is
an expression.

| “seen ens intended to serve

OFFICIAL ORDINANCES

The first Verordnung was promulgated on
December 5th, 1933, the second on May 2oth,
1934: both were issued by the Reich Ministers for Home Affairs and for Justice.

In the first, the following provisions are of
interest (the complete text is not reproduced,
from considerations of space) :

The application for sterilization is not to be
made if great age or other causes render procreation impossible, if the operation would endanger
life, or if the patient has to be permanently

detained in a “ closed ”’ institution. In the last
instance, he may not be discharged or given
parole until the application for sterilization has
been made and the decision given. Sterilization
is not to be undertaken before the completion
of the tenth year. |

Punitive institutions in the sense of the law
are institutions where convicted prisoners or
prisoners on trial are detained, or in which
measures associated with the loss of liberty are
carried out for the purpose of securing or
improving persons.

If a qualified doctor in the course of his
profession gets to know a person who has a
hereditary disease as specified, or who suffers
from severe alcoholism, then he must immediately report it to the official doctor. The same
duty rests on other persons who have to do with
the treatment, examination or advising of
patients.

If the official doctor thinks sterilization is
called for, he shall set about getting the person to
be sterilized or his legal representative to put
forward the proposal. If this fails, he must do so
himself.

The Eugenic Court or Upper Eugenic Court
can, after hearing the official doctor, order the
commitment of the person to be sterilized to an
appropriate hospital for a period up to six
weeks. If sterilization is finally decided upon by
the court, then the official doctor has to call on
the patient in writing to be sterilized within two
weeks ; the appropriate hospitals are to be
enumerated in the notification. If the patient
has not alone put forward the proposal for his
sterilization, he must further be informed that
the operation will be done, even against his will.

If the person to be sterilized has obtained
admission at his own cost to a “ closed ”’ institution, which guarantees that he will not procreate,
then on his proposal the Court orders that the
operation shall not be undertaken as long as he
stays there or in a similar institution. If his legal
representative made the application for this
before the patient had completed his eighteenth
year, then the patient can, on attaining this age,
apply to be sterilized.

If, after the given period, the operation has
not been performed and the person to be
sterilized has not been admitted to a “ closed ”
institution, or has left such an institution, then
the operation is to be carried out with the help of
the police, if necessary by the application of
184

direct force, in an institution designated by the

official doctor. Direct force may not be em
ployed for the sterilization of young people until
they have completed their fourteenth year.

A patient whose sterilization has been decided
upon, but who has been admitted to a “‘ closed ”’
institution, may not be discharged or given parole
unless he has been sterilized or the decision has
been reversed.

Any doctor who sterilizes or castrates a
patient to avert a serious risk to life or health
must report it in writing within three days to the
appropriate official doctor.

In the second Verordnung, published as
from May 2oth, 1934, there are further administrative provisions. As a preliminary to
the application for sterilization, the Amtsarzt
can invite the person to be sterilized to attend
for medical examination, and if necessary
can demand police help for this. Hospitals,
institutions and doctors must supply information to the Amtsarzt on request.

A person with hereditary disease, or an
alcoholic, who is in a “ closed institution,”
may be discharged for special reasons from
the institution with the consent of the local
Amtsarzt, even though his sterilization has
not yet been applied for or ordered.

A circular letter was sent round about
the same time. (“‘ Rundschreiben des Reichsministers des Innern,”’ on May 1ogth, 1934.)
Among other matters, it states that the
doctors in official employment are to visit
non-state institutions in their area, and
with the director thereof to determine which
patients come under the law. A patient may
evade sterilization by betaking himself into
a ‘closed institution.”” He must then be
reported as such. The Eugenic Courts, it is
stated, will find it an advantage to hold
sittings also in the institutions where the
patients are, or even in an institution,
though the patient has been living outside.

GERMAN COMMENTARIES ON THE LAW

There has recently been published a Commentary which can be regarded as having
official sanction. Though it has presumably
no direct juridical validity, it is an authoritative and detailed exposition by three men
who have played a foremost part in the
development of this law. These are Riidin,
the Director of the Genetics Department of

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the Psychiatric Research Institute at Munich ;
Giitt, of the Ministry of Home Affairs, and
Ruttke. It is not possible to summarize the
contents of this work, which also gives the
text and a commentary on the Law of
November 24th, 1933, against Moral Offenders and Recidivists, providing for castration,
etc.; and further contains an appendix on
the surgical technique of sterilization in each
sex.

The most active assistant and colleague of
Professor Rtidin at the Munich Research
Institute has been Professor Luxenburger,
who has this month issued an informative
article in which he examines disputable or
significant points in the Commentary. He
calls attention to the incompleteness of the
Law in that it does not provide for the
sterilization of the healthy uniovular twin of
an affected person, or for the sterilization of
the children of two affected parents. Like
Riidin, however, he looks forward to the
time when, with further research, many more
conditions will have been recognized as
calling for sterilization because of their hereditary nature. He calls attention to the
exclusive nature of the Law: no person not
decreed by the Eugenic Court to be suffering
from one of the diseases named in the Law
may be sterilized, even at his own request,
or though his disorder be undoubtedly
hereditary. Voluntary sterilization is thus
precluded, except for the diseases for which
sterilization is compulsory. Carriers may not
be sterilized voluntarily. It must be borne
in mind that a person must be reported for
sterilization, even though his illness is past
and he has for many years been quite healthy.
Similarly, where an inherited malformation
has been corrected surgically.

Diagnosis is sufficient to constitute necessity for reporting the case, irrespective of
whether the disorder is known to have
occurred in other members of the family.
Doubtful cases must be reported as such.
The actual application for sterilization will
usually be made by the official doctor, or
Medical Officer of Health (Amtsarzt), towhom
the practitioner will report it. Since, however, many of the cases will present difficulties
of psychiatric diagnosis which the Amtsarzt’s
GERMAN EUGENIC LEGISLATION

experience does not qualify him to settle, he
may send the patient, who will in many
instances not be in an institution, but living
at home and possibly earning his living, into
a mental hospital or clinic for the purpose of
diagnosis ; this may be done before the case
is decided by the Eugenic Court. Luxenburger advocates generous use of such
referral by the Amtsarzt. Giitt, Riidin and
Ruttke speak of it as appropriate where the
person to be sterilized tries to evade the
measure. Luxenburger emphasizes the importance of the Amtsarzt in the whole procedure, morally and administratively, and
adds: ‘‘ The Genetic Courts are not everywhere so constituted—nor will they be for a
good time to come—that the fact that an
application has been made could not play a
part in some way in influencing the decision
of the Courts.” From this multiplicity of
negatives one gathers that he thinks an application for sterilization will bias a Eugenic
Court in many instances in favour of sterilization, and he says that to give way to
any agreeable illusions on this point would be
doing a poor service to the law or the ends it
serves. ‘‘ Nicht iiberall sind die Erbgesundheitsgerichte so zusammengesetzt—und sie
werden es auch auf absehbare Zeit hinaus
nicht sein—dass die Tatsache der Antragstellung nicht irgendwie auf die Entscheidung
des Gerichts mit einwirken kénnte. Auch
bei peinlichster Objektivitat und grésster
Gewissenhaftigkeit der Gerichte. Sich hier
irgendwelchen angenehmen Tdauschungen
hinzugeben, hiesse dem Gesetz und der
Sache, welcher es dienen will, einen schlechten
Dienst erweisen. Die Dinge liegen in der
Praxis noch lange nicht so, wie unser
Wunschbild sie uns malt.”

A patient in a closed institution who
appears to come under the Law may not be
discharged, or given leave, until the application for sterilization has been made and
decided. Luxenburger points out some discrepancies. The Commentary on this article
holds that if the appropriate persons have
lodged an appeal against a sterilization order,
then the patient must be detained until the
lapse of the appointed period, or the decision
of the Upper Eugenic Court and consequent

185

sterilization or not has disposed of the matter.

All cases of congenital or early mental
deficiency must be reported, irrespective of
whether they are hereditary or dependent
on birth trauma or other exogenous factors
(cf. Jahrreiss on this point). Among the
psychiatric disorders specified, it is only in
the case of alcoholism that the severity of
the condition is of importance; indeed,
Luxenburger says that it is precisely the
mild cases that must be considered especially
dangerous as regards propagation, and,
therefore, as demanding especial thoroughness in reporting them. In a discussion, however, Bostroem asked for caution in the
reporting of mild manic-depressive disturbances.

Much attention is given to the numerous
persons who, through the mode of manifestation of their mental disorder or their
complete recovery from it, are now at large
in the community. They may be referred to
a mental hospital if preliminary examination
is required, or if there is strong suspicion
that they may try to evade the procedure.
Also, Luxenburger says, commitment is permitted if they are likely to be sexually unrestrained in the intervening period before the
Court has given its decision. General social
and medical grounds would justify it in such
a case, in his opinion.

RESPONSIBILITY OF THE PHYSICIAN

Luxenburger examines the question of
what is to be understood by the statement
that the physician must report all the
relevant cases which he encounters in the
course of his professional work. In his view,
no matter what the condition (sciatica, for
example) which the physician is called in to
treat, if he obtains any information or evidence of the present or past manifestation of
one of the conditions named in the Law, he
must report it. Similarly, if a healthy man
seeks eugenic advice of a doctor concerning
his marriage and he discloses, with his
fiancée’s consent, that she has previously had
one of the diseases named, then the physician
must report her. If her consent has not been
given he need not report her. If the physician
encounters a person with one of the specified
186

hereditary diseases in the course of research,
the matter is still more subtle. Luxenburger
deals with it somewhat casuistically, inclining
to the view that so long as the physician gets
to know of the condition only in the course
of his research he is exempted from reporting
it. Thus the physicians of the Research
Institute, of which Professor Riidin is Director, have authoritative assurance that they
need not report cases that would otherwise
fall under the provisions of the Law, and
Professor Riidin has said that it was intended
by the Legislature that all scientific work in
genetics should be thus exempted. Luxenburger adds significantly that it would be
ruinous for genetic research if the cases that
came to the physician’s knowledge in this
way had to be reported by him. All investigation of families stands or falls by the “ unconditional confidence of the public in the
absolute discretion of the research physician.”
There is not the slightest doubt, he says, that
there is already considerable mistrust : such
mistrust, if in any way justified, would mean
the end of truthful information and consequently of reliable research and of the
prestige of German genetics: so, says Luxenburger, it would do away with the possibility
of giving the Legislature any further useful
foundation for eugenic measures. The following is the actual text of his remarks:

Denn es ware fiir die Erbforschung geradezu
verhangnisvoll, wenn die Falle, die aus Anlass
der Forschung dem Arzte zur Kenntnis kommen, gemeldet werden miissten. Die Folgen
waren gar nicht abzusehen. Alle Familienforschung steht und fallt mit dem unbedingten
Vertrauen der Bevdlkerung auf die absolute
Diskretion des Forschers. Ein nicht unerhebliches Misstrauen ist ganz zweifellos heute
schon festzustellen. Sollte dieses Misstrauen
irgendwie berechtigt werden, so ware es mit der
Aufrichtigkeit der Auskunftgeber und damit
zwangslaufig mit der Zuverlassigkeit der
Familienforschung, dem Ansehen der deutschen
Erblichkeitsforschung und der Méglichkeit vorbei, dem Gesetzgeber auch weiterhin brauchbare
Grundlagen fiir rassenhygienische Massnahmen
zu liefern.

The importance of the above admission
on the part of the foremost active worker
in genetic research in psychiatry nowadays in
Germany can hardly be over-estimated. In

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the latter part of this article some other evidence will be given bearing on the attitude of
patients and of doctors in actual practice
towards the new law. Professor Riidin has
referred to the difficulties attendant on the
dual part which practitioners must now play.

Derselbe Arzt, der als Therapeut, als Heilarzt,
also die tiefe Dankbarkeit der wieder einigermassen brauchbar gemachten Erbkranken erntet,
kommt als Rassenhygieniker, als Rassenarzt, in
die héchste Gefahr, mit seiner Forderung auf
Fortflanzungsverzicht gegeniiber demselben
Menschen, dem er geholfen hat, auf das grésste
Unverstandnis zu stossen. Hier gilt es, geduldig
aufzuklaren und immer wieder zu _ betonen:
Unser Kampf gilt nicht der einzelnen Erkrankheit
selbst, sondern dem, was hinter der Krankheit
steckt, der krankhaften Anlage.”’ Archiv fir
Rassen u. Gesellschaftsbiologie, Bd. 38, Heft 2,

Pp. 230. 1934.

Both the Commentary of Giitt, Riidin,
Ruttke, and the article by Luxenburger,
contain further valuable expositions of the
administrative aspects of the Law: for
example, who is to bear the cost of detention
and operation; how the Courts are to be
constituted ; how the police are to be invoked if necessary, to apprehend the patient,
and apply force before and during the operation, if the patient refuses to submit.

Of particular interest are the sections in
the Commentary which deal with the actual
diseases specified in the Law. No support is
given to the view that the valuable qualities,
even genius, which may accompany manicdepressive psychosis, should be set off against
the disease when the decision as to sterilization must be taken in an individual case ; an
application should be lodged in ali manicdepressive cases, irrespective of the completeness of recovery, duration of good
health subsequently, or other endowment in
valuable qualities. Also, it is explicitly
asserted in the Commentary that, in view
of the varying terminology in medicine, and
especially in psychiatry, a number of other
diagnoses than those specified in the Law will
call for notification. Among them are melancholia, depression, paranoia, confusional
states, delusions of persecution, religious
mania, delirium, paraphrenia, convulsions
and states of excitement. In the section
GERMAN EUGENIC LEGISLATION

dealing with bodily malformation, a wide
range of conditions is dealt with: it is stated
that such a disorder as severe myopia must
be reported (cf. also Max Lange on club
foot, etc.).

In the foregoing, therefore, there is a
descending order of authority : the Law, the
Ordinances, the quasi-official Commentary,
and the personal but very well-informed exposition by Luxenburger (who emphasizes
that he is giving his private interpretation
and pleads for latitude to offer helpful
criticism).

VIEWS OF INSTITUTION
SUPERINTENDENTS

Besides these there are scattered references,
of varying weight and testimony, as to how
the Law is working or how it is regarded. To
collect all these would be difficult: the
following are mostly taken from a journal
which has been for many years the organ of
the Reich Association of German Institutional Psychiatrists. This journal asked for
information from superintendents of institutions about the way the Law is working.
Some, in reply, complain of administrative
delay and of the overcrowding of their mental
hospital. The overcrowding is due to this
delay and the impossibility of discharging
patients who have recovered or would
ordinarily be allowed out under supervision,
and the necessity for taking back into the
institution patients who had been living in
the outside world but who had been diagnosed as having one of the specified illnesses.
One superintendent is alone in stating that
he now gets more thorough and willing information about heredity from the relatives of
patients than ever before. Elsewhere, superintendents say that since the new Law more
applications for discharge or parole are preferred than formerly, but permission is now
tarely granted. Various reasons are given for
the smaller number of admissions this year to
some hospitals. It is pointed out by the
director of a private sanatorium for nervous
conditions that some of the patients, when
ready to go home, have to be transferred to
a public mental hospital under the new conditions because of the financial burden. He

187

adds that the public are still very ignorant of
the nature of sterilization, and it is extraordinarily difficult to make clear to the
relatives in a convincing way the social and
individual meaning of the measure. It is
rarely possible, he says, so far to get the
patient to make the application himself.
Catholic institutions are faced with the
necessity for much larger accommodation,
as it is proposed that the scruples of Catholics
should be met by the opportunity of evading
sterilization by their permanent incarceration. Thus, St. Josef’s Anstalt quotes in its
Annual Report the text of Matthew xviii, ro,
and assumes that most children there will
remain for the rest of their lives. It is reported that Catholic judges and surgeons are
to be exempted from taking part in the
administration of the Sterilization Law. In
reply to an inquirer, Riidin is reported as
stating that Catholic priests and nuns will
have the provisions of the Law applied to
them since, in so far as they are mentally
affected, they are no longer under their vow.
Another superintendent, who says he is in
the far from agreeable position (wenig erfreuliche Lage) of having to apply for the sterilization of 113 people who are living in families
or in hostels, expresses much concern at the
enormous demand the notifications make on
the doctor’s time and work; his wards are
grossly overfilled owing to the recall into the
asylum of so many patients living outside.
Attention was drawn in the EUGENICS
REVIEW (October 1933, page 157) to the
ambiguity of the word “can’”’ in the Law.
This has been partly elucidated: the Giitt,
Riidin, Ruttke Commentary states that the
“can ’”’ is permissive, in that formerly all
eugenic sterilization was generally assumed
to be prohibited, and now, in these specified
instances, it 1s permitted. Where, however,
the diagnosis is certain and none of the
stated grounds of exception obtain (i.e.
where age or health or permanent segregation preclude any further begetting or bearing of children), then it is a question of
“must.’”” Some obscure remarks about
Beweiswiirdigung follow in the Commentary.
A published decision by the Eugenic Court
in Stettin confirms the ‘compulsive”’
188

interpretation—i.e. ““kann’”’ equals “‘ muss.”
This is also the interpretation stated emphatically by Professor Kehrer, of Minster.

THE STATISTICAL ASPECT

A valuable contribution to the statistical
aspect of this problem is supplied by Dr.
Dornedden, an official of the Reich Department of Health. Writing in the Retchsgesundheitsblatt, he gives the figures obtained
from twenty-one selected institutions with
over 24,000 inmates at the end of 1933.
Of these, over 80 per cent. had one or other
of the hereditary mental affections specified
in the Sterilization Law ; 67 per cent. of all
the inmates would have to remain in the
institution till they die; of the remainder,
more than two-thirds would have to be
sterilized before they could be discharged—
i.e. 5,348, of whom 2,593 would be schizophrenics, 1,503 defectives, 169 manic-depressives, and 745 epileptic. Taking the total
population of German mental hospitals and
institutions at 160,000, Dr. Dornedden
reckons on 36,000 sterilizations, excluding
the annual influx of patients and those living
outside institutions. He thinks his figure
probably too low, however.

COMMENTS BY PSYCHIATRISTS

The attitude of doctors in practice is, of
course, difficult to discover. At the lecture
course given by the German Mental and
Racial Hygiene Union, of which Professor
Riidin is the Reichskommissar, and later at
the annual Congress of the German Psychiatric Society, the views of psychiatrists were
partly made evident. Thus Roemer of
Illenau, an influential and respected figure in
German psychiatric institutional circles, said
that among the 400,000 people in the Reich
who are envisaged for sterilization, 360,000
are psychiatric cases; and that mistaken
propaganda was causing much unnecessary
worry in the general population. Other
speakers did not see how space could easily
be found for all the detained or recalled
patients in mental hospitals. Some were not
sure what must be held to justify a diagnosis
of deficiency. Luxenburger said that a
person who had twice failed to pass into the

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

next standard at school and had failed in life
must be regarded as defective. Professor
Bostroem said that whereas the diagnosis of
schizophrenia was sufficient for sterilization,
cases of manic-depressive psychosis ought to
be considered on their individual merits.
Riidin said the Law applied to foreigners,
provided they had the opportunity of leaving
the country offered them.

Professor Kretschmer expressed concern
lest clinics, which were mostly developed on
a voluntary basis, should suffer, seeing that it
would be necessary to use direct physical
force to sterilize some patients; he therefore suggested central stations for such
sterilization. In supporting this suggestion,
Bresler speaks of ‘“‘odium’”’ as likely to
attach to all hospitals where forcible sterilization may have to be carried out. As to
abortion for eugenic reasons, there was some
difference of opinion. Riidin pointed out
that it was at present forbidden but would
come, with concomitant sterilization. Professor Hoffman said that there were certain
kinds of neurotics that would have to be
brought under the operation of the Law.

Professor Weygandt, of Hamburg, proposed the experiment of castrating chronic
turbulent schizophrenics ; it was good for
them, he considered, and resulted in less
noise, etc., in the institution. It is noteworthy
in this connection that books are now appearing in which sterilization and castration are
dealt with as related topics. Thus, the Giitt,
Riidin, Ruttke Commentary contains also
the law about castration of certain moral
offenders, with comments upon it. Surgeons
naturally are also being provided with appropriate literature.

Many psychiatrists were anxious about the
cost of all the work involved in reporting
cases, collecting data, and furthering research. Riidin promised to put in a word for
them with the authorities, to get further
financial support. But it is doubtful if
this could mean much, for Riidin himself,
in the annual report of his Research Institute
in Munich, remarks plaintively on the small
and even diminishing financial support given
by the various State authorities to his department. Most ironically, this follows an
GERMAN EUGENIC LEGISLATION

acknowledgment of the indebtedness of his
Forschungsanstalt in Munich to a publicspirited Jew for its foundation and maintenance at a critical period.

Doctors have also expressed their concern
at the general effect of the Law upon the
relations between the public and the doctor.
Thus, Bonhoeffer, at the Annual Congress of
the German Psychiatric Society, said that
there was danger of psychiatry getting into
discredit through an exaggerated picturepropaganda for eugenics. Doctors, it is often
pointed out, have, in regard to the authorities, no obligation to professional secrecy
where these hereditary diseases are in question. There is evidently alarm on this score
which hinders eugenic inquiries, for the
Fiihrer of the Union of Hospital Doctors
(Verbandsfiihrer Schlayer) has issued a statement urging his colleagues to lay aside their
fears in answering a questionnaire sent out
by Professor Riidin from the Kaiser Wilhelm
Institute to hospitals and sanatoria. He
says: ‘‘ The Kaiser Wilhelm Institute is a
pure research institution and, therefore, is
not obliged to report or justified in making
application [for sterilization] in certain hereditary diseases. Furthermore, data communicated do not come to the knowledge of
the relatives or the patients ; the method of
the Research Institution is expressly to avoid
telling how it has got the information, and
only to concern itself with carrying out the
investigations of the German people desired
by the Government.”

It is perhaps not insignificant that in
regard to sterilization one finds the word
“ condemned ”’ (verurteilt) used occasionally
in medical reports. Thus Dr. Gloz, reporting
on a case of epilepsy from the University
Clinic in Hamburg, says that the patient,
because of his seizures, was condemned by
the Eugenic Court to be sterilized; but it
was more or less fortuitously discovered that
he had a cerebral tumour which was the
cause of these attacks. “This patient
escaped his doom only by the skin of his
teeth.”” The effect of such a miscarriage of
eugenic justice, it is pointed out, would be
to damage public confidence in the eugenic
courts and in the medical profession.

189

Without laying undue weight on such verbal
usage as the word “condemned,” it is
possible that a general attitude is better to
be recognized in such casual passages than in
more deliberate pronouncements on what is
to be encouraged and aimed at.

Professor Bumke, of Munich, has said
that he doubted whether schizophrenia was
actually a single disease, but he thought that
that was of no consequence; one could
cheerfully put up with it or take it into the
bargain if once in a way some insane person,
who was not schizophrenic, got sterilized as
such. In a somewhat similar spirit, Professor
Riidin said that in these matters of sterilization and hereditary disease there could be no
compromise. Defects in the Law and doubts
must not cripple activity ; critics would do
better to join in the work themselves. In
many articles one finds an implicit or explicit
indication that a large number of doctors and
medical teachers now regard eugenic work as
more important than therapeutics. Riidin,
however, discountenances this.

EUGEN FISCHER ON THE STATE

A final word may be given to the general
conception of the State of which this law is
one of the plainest expressions. No more
weighty expositor could be found than the
biologist Eugen Fischer, now Rector of the
Berlin University. In a commemorative
address to the University, he first deplores
the lack of racial pride in the former liberal
national State, where it was forced into the
background by economic questions, falsely
applied “humanity,” and the idea of
equality. The national socialist conception, :
however, is of a Folk State (vélkischer
Staat) with a passionate longing for the old
“common folkness”’ (Volkstum), rejection
of an international intellectualism, and adhesion to a conscious ideal of the Nordic race
of “our German forefathers.’”’ War and
hunger and loss, inflation, contempt and lies
from without, an unsuitable type of Government and moral degeneration led to this
attitude of the whole people. Technical
developments in the way of contraceptives
made it possible to split sexual impulses and
procreation which Nature had so firmly fused.
190

But in Germany, which seemed to be becoming racially moribund, the views of a Gobineau
as to the inequality of different races were
readily exposed as to their mistakes in historical, linguistic and anthropological fact,
while his brilliant fundamental idea (‘‘ glanzende Grundidee) was overlooked. This
“ brilliant fundamental idea ”’ is, one gathers,
that heredity is very important.

Fischer asserts that ‘‘ we know to-day the
genetic differences of the individual races, we
have full knowledge of the racial crossings
and the rules and laws which after such cross
ing determine the reappearance of individual

qualities.”” Racial identity is defined rather
obscurely as consisting in “ homozygous
predispositions of definite qualities of great
propagatory communities” (‘‘ gleicherbige
Anlagen bestimmter Eigenschaften grosser
Fortpflanzungsgemeinschaften bedeuten
Rassegleichheit ’’). No qualification is offered
of the assertion that we know now what race
is in men, and know, moreover, about the
mode of transmission of the different psychical qualities said to be its most important
characteristics. We are said to be beginning
to see the endless significance of hereditary
mental qualities for the course of cultural
history. Now, it issomewhat hardily asserted,
we know the nature of the hereditary diseases, “how they are transmitted, their
immutability and obligatory appearance in
definite generations. Hence comes a new
aspect of the hereditary and racial problem
as it concerns the State. The great Fuhrer
of the national socialist State has not only on
theoretical grounds but also intuitively by
his healthy instinct turned to the old roots
of ‘ Folkness ’.”’

And so, “‘ the aim of the State is not to be
found in a merging in the total human culture
but in the collecting and fostering of its own
people, and only its own people, those who
are of one blood and one stock. The development of the so-called minority rights which
played a part in the Peace conferences, and
afterwards on paper, but only there, is thus
consequentially brought to an end.’ Our
once defective ideas of race and heredity are
now correctly and unassailably established.
The notions as to a powerful influence of the

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

whole environment upon the individual, and
a handing on of such so as to raise a better
generation, are false. The significance of this
may be seen in the history of nations, and on
it is founded the Folk State. The racial and
eugenic point of view must, and will, direct
all internal political activity. The willingness to obey a Leader is biologically wellfounded ; there shall be a nobility of blood
and soil, together with an equality in service
in the station in which fate has placed us ;
the identity of blood in the people must
speak with a louder voice than any differences
of knowledge and position. The old worship
of culture and progress is past.

In a fervently patriotic peroration Professor Fischer thanks God that the rich
springs of German Folkness are still welling
up to save the people from racial decay,
applied as they are according to the programme of the National Socialist Government.

CONCLUSION

No attempt has been made in this article
to examine the German claims or arguments,
however obviously some of them called for
criticism, nor to comment on the working of
the Law and on its by-products. It is scarcely
possible to give any adequate summary of all
that is being done and said, even so far as
it is available in print. Selection cannot do
justice to all that is remarkable in German
“eugenics.” <A factual account has been
the object of the foregoing; those further
interested are referred particularly to the
Giitt-Riidin-Ruttke volume, and still more
profitably, if less “‘ publishably,” to the
observations of English doctors who have
had opportunities of seeing the Law in
action in German clinics.

REFERENCES.

Giitt-Ridin-Ruttke: Gesetz zur Verhiitung erbkranken
Nachwuchses. Minchen: Lehmann, 1934.

Luxenburger: ‘‘ Einige Bestimmungen,”’ etc. Der
Nervenarzt, Jg. 7, Heft 9, p. 437, Sept. 1934.

Der Krankenhausarat, Nr. 9, p. 46, 1934.

Lange, Max: Fortschritte der Neurologie, etc., Jg. 6,
Heft 9, pp. 363, 368, Sept. 1934.

Jahrreiss: Fortschritte der Neurologie, etc., Jg. 6,
Heft 9, p. 380, Sept. 1934.
GERMAN EUGENIC LEGISLATION IgI

Fischer, Eugen: Der Begriff des vélkischen Staates, Gloz: ‘“‘ Zur Differentialdiagnostik der Epilepsie,”’
btologtsch betrachtet, Berlin, 1933. Der Nervenarzt, Jg. 7, p. 460, Sept. 1934.

Psychiatrisch - Neurologische Wochenschrift, 1934, Riidin: Archiv fir Rasse, etc., Bd. 28, Heft 2, p. 230,
Nrs. 2, 3, 9, 10, 20, 21, 23, 24, 26, 28, 32. 1934.

Naujoks and Boeninghaus : Technik der Stertlisterung Ridin : ‘ Bericht iiber die genealogische Abteilung,”’
und Kastration, Enke, Stuttgart, 1934. etc., Zt. f. d. ges. Neur und Psychiat., Aug. 1934.

Statistical Studies in Genetics
and Human Inheritance

ANNALS OF EUGENICS

Edited by R. A. FISHER
(Founded by K. PEARSON)

The forthcoming issue, Volume VI, Part I, will contain articles by

R. A. FISHER J. B. S. HALDANE
J. A. FRASER ROBERTS L. S. PENROSE
M. N. KARN “STUDENT”

Subscription, in advance, 50/- per volume. Four quarterly parts
obtainable separately at 15/- each from Galton Laboratory, Gower
Street, London, W.C.1.

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVI, No. 3.
