THE EUGENICS REVIEW

are put forward to appreciate its value. The important factors are that such an investigation
could and should be repeated in this country without delay and that we now have sufficient
evidence about the development of antisocial behaviour in children to justify a very much
greater concentration of effort and resources in our primary schools.

There are, in every decade, a handful of books destined to become landmarks in the
history of social science research. I believe that Dr. Robins’s book is one of them.

J. CARLEBACH
SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH

Commoner, Barry. Science and Survival. London, 1966. Gollancz. Pp. 128. Price 21s.
Glass, Bentley. Science and Ethical Values. Chapel Hill, N.C., 1966. North Carolina University Press (London, Oxford University Press). Pp. ix+101. Price 28s. in U.K.

FOR MANY YEARS Professor Commoner has been surveying the directions in which
scientific research moves under the guidance of commercial interest, governmental finance,
and the predilection of scientists. The last is the least influential. Commoner has not been
content merely to survey and, as a rule, condemn, but has taken an active part in calling
public attention to the present state of affairs and in devising means of improvement—
notably through participation in the “Committee on Science in the Promotion of Human
Welfare’’ of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, in the St Louis
Committee for Nuclear Information, and in the Scientist’s Institute for Publication Information. The last co-ordinates the work of some twenty scientist’s information groups
throughout the United States. These groups are concerned with spreading information
that interested parties may hope will not become widely known, and are not to be confused
with the scientific cliques that are now appearing and that restrictively distribute prepublication accounts of their latest conclusions.

Hubris among scientists and technologists, and ignorance (or more seriously, ignorance
that they are ignorant) among politicians, are the primary themes of this book. It starts by
discussing the still unexplained power failure in November 1965 over 80,000 square miles
of Canada and USA. From this example of the quasi-epilepsy that can overtake a fully
automated power supply, he goes on to deal with the pollution of the environment with
motor exhaust fumes, detergents, insecticides and herbicides. He contends, not that all
these things should forthwith be stopped at source, but that there should be informed
discussion about the advantages and dangers arising from each potentially polluting
activity.

About half the book deals with two aspects of genetics. The less valid aspects of biochemistry are now conveniently grouped together under the title ““Molecular Biology” with
its cabbalistic symbol: spiral DNA. Commoner naturally does not dispute the significance
of DNA and RNA in the functioning of the cell; all cellular constituents are in varying
degrees significant. What he condemns is nucleic acid obsession and consequent neglect of
other aspects of metabolism. This leads to a spate of premature dogmatic generalization,
and the hubristic, or “nothing but” assumption that we now know the general shape of
phenomena and have only to fill in some details. I have suggested the term alethocleidic
for this pernicious attitude of mind.

The testing of nuclear bombs brings in the other aspect of genetics. It would be charitable to assume that the official experts, on both sides of the Atlantic, made a few honest
mistakes in their statements during the 1950s minimizing the hazards of nuclear testing.
But they cannot all have been mistakes for much of the information later used to reconcile
bomb enthusiasts to the “Test Ban Treaty” was generally available. I surveyed some of it
myself in 1957, and the St. Louis Committee was documenting the issue at the same time.

60
REVIEWS OF BOOKS

As with other forms of pollution, ‘fall-out’? must be judged by comparing the possible
gains with the hazards. In the long run, as Commoner points out, little is gained by lying
about the hazards.

Professor Bentley Glass is more of an “establishment type’’ and consequently is more
restrained. In essence however he agrees with Commoner in stressing the interrelatedness of
organisms, and the need for circumspection in making large scale modifications to the
environment. He is equally forthright in opposition to any actions that will produce “‘fallout” for he is confident that any increases in the mutation rate would be harmful. Glass
does, however, put the matter into non-political perspective by pointing out that mutation
rate depends on temperature and therefore that the wearing of trousers rather than kilts
may produce as many harmful mutations as all the other agencies. Besides dealing with
issues of universal interest, he discusses several that are parochial. There is a curious diatribe against editorial referees and scientific committee men who are accused of delaying
publication, withholding grants, and pinching results or ideas. I am as prone to think ill of
my fellow men as most, but I doubt if conditions are quite as bad as Glass makes out.

N. W. PIRIE
POPULATION

Sheps, Mindel C. and Ridley, Jeanne Clair (Editors). Public Health and Population Change.
Pittsburgh, 1966. The University Press. Pp. xvii+557. Price $10.

THE TWENTY-SEVEN PAPERS in this volume were read at a Symposium organized at
the University of Pittsburgh in 1964. Like the corresponding events which have been arranged annually by the Eugenics Society, its purposes included the promotion of understanding and communication among workers in varied techniques, including biology and
the social sciences. The inter-disciplinary emphasis was here, however, mainly on public
health and demography; thus, Part VII of the book consists of an address by Dr. Crabtree
on the public health aspects of the population problem. Another principal axis of discussion
was the identification of issues upon which research is needed; this is reflected in a Report
on the Symposium, written by the Editors, which appears in Part VI, and in the character
of many of the contributions.

The aspect of population to which attention was principally directed was fertility,
and three groups of papers dealt respectively with natality, the physiology of reproduction,
and birth control. Other topics given special emphasis were population policy and methods
of measurement and evaluation.

Part I of the volume commences strongly with a good account by Professor Glass of
the questions that need investigation if we are to understand better the relationships
between population policy and demographic events. Historical research, as well as the
analysis of present-day statistics, is playing an important part in the development of this
important subject. Professor Thomas McKeown stresses the uncertainty of the contribution of medicine in the past to the fall in mortality in Western countries, which he attributes
more to increasing economic prosperity in the early phases, and to sanitation in the later
ones. He feels that the most important aim for the future is not a pill but to convince
ordinary people in the less developed countries of the need for smaller families. Dr. Judith
Blake, following up on this theme, argues in favour of “policies expressly related to family
roles, and opportunities for legitimate alternative satisfactions and activities’ as the “crux
of future reduction in family size’’. Such policies do not require economic advance as a
pre-condition, and should replace present policies, which are proving ineffective. Professor
Brewster Smith deals with the psychological elements associated with the problem of
conveying, one way or another, to the general mass of the people the message that a new way

61
