PAMPHLETS. 53

various species of resorts are classified as Tenement Apartments, Massage
Parlors, Parlor Houses, Furnished Room Houses, and Hotels. During
the five years parlor houses, w which are simply brothels, have virtually
ceased to exist, and tenement houses, which are “nearly akin,” have
diminished in number from 1 172 to 101, and prostitutes attached to
them from 2,976 to 180. Some description is given of the different kinds
of house accommodation, and the catering to vice in disorderly saloons
and in streets is depicted. J.

Smash the Line. Pp. 53 1917.

Do Your Bit to keep Him Fit. Pp. 12; 1917.

Two tracts issued by the American Social Hygiene Association
(105, West 4oth Street, New York) concerning prostitution and venereal
disease on the occasion of the mobilisation of the United States Army.
Objection is taken to “segregation,” the “Red Light” district, which
is also known as “the Line”; that is to say, a particular district for
prostitutes, which is found in practice to advertise vice, and the medical
inspection to be “faked” and futile. The open trade is a lesser evil, and
soldiers should be provided with entertainment. J. H. W.

REPORTS.

The National Baby Week Couneil, under the patronage of
H.M. Queen Mary, with the Right Hon. Lloyd George as president and
Lord Rhondda as chairman, was formed in March, 1917, and a Baby
Week was held in July with the object of helping to secure “to every
health? in the United Kingdom a birth-right of mental and bodily
health.”

It is a lamentable fact that the average citizen never looks inside
a Blue Book of any description ; hence the appalling figures of our Infant
Mortality Statistics (100,000 b bies lost per annum, a number which,
according to Lord Rhondda, might be halved) came as. news to the great
majority alike of the educated and the uneducated public.

The Council itself consists of the representatives of go national or
central societies, and from them an Executive was elected, whose work
was aided by sub-committees dealing with finance, propaganda, etc., while
about 600 local committees were established throughout the United
Kingdom.

Many voluntary societies and local councils were then brought into
touch, and support was given by the London County Council, the Board
of Education, the Local Government Board, and the County, Borough,
Urban and Rural District Councils.

One of the most hopeful results of the work of the National Baby
Week Council has been the arousing of public interest and creation
of a strong public opinion as to the rights of the citizen with regard
to securing better health, and it may well be that the forming of a
Ministry of Health will do much to carry on this work which is of such
urgent, national and racial importance. N. A.

Seventh Report of the Penal Reform League, 1914-1917, with Memorandum of Recommendation to the Russian. Minister of Justice. London:
68a, Park Hill Road; 1917; pp. 22; price 3d.

Touching on educational reform, on the pensioning of mothers, on
“solicitation ” by street-walkers, on the progress of the probation system
for criminals and inebriates, on forcible feeding in prisons, with “the sad
death of a victim in Ireland.” The “Memorandum ” rejoices to hear
that the Russian Revolutionary Government has abolished the death
penalty and the police, and hopes that these two decisions may never be
revoked. J. H. W.
54 EUGENICS REVIEW.

A National Minimum for Youth, No. 14, Penal Reform League
Serzes. London: 68a, Park Hill Road; 1917; pp. 16; price 3d.

Recommendations of a Committee of the League regarding juvenile
delinquency, approving the provision of compulsory day education schools
for boys and girls between the ages of 12 and 18, the prohibition of street
trading, and the extension of the probation system at the cost of the
Treasury. Mothers should be pensioned from public funds, earning a
living wage by their being mothers. The ideal education should be
in the open air, town children being turned out “on a piece of vacant
land.” This becomes feasible through our tramcars and railway systems,
the cars being empty in the morning on the journey from town to
country, and in the evening on that from country to town. J. H. W.

Committee of Soctal Investigation and Reform, Report, 1916-17. Westminster: 19, Tothill Street; pp. 16.

The Committee consists mainly of women, and the subscribers and
givers of donations are nearly all women, a list of them being appended.
There is an “Employment and Hostel Department,” also an “Office and
Club Room Department” recently opened. Educated girls and women
who wish to make a new start in life are taught hand-weaving. Reeducation is a difficult problem. Gurls fresh from the streets require
exceptional treatment. The work is at present only on a small scale, and
funds are needed for its extension. J. H. W.

PERIODICAL LITERATURE.

ENGLISH.

The Relation of Cancer to Diet and Forests.

SOME HISTORICAL REFLECTIONS ON CANCER. (Harold P. Cooke,
M.A., University, Durham). A learned monograph on the connection
of cancer with food, as suggested by some, while others represent
that the disease is most prevalent in the most wooded districts of England.
Mr. Cooke takes as a crucial example the diet of the Ancient Greeks,
among whom cancer “was familiar,” and the arboreal character of the
country in which they lived, quoting passages from Plato and Aristotle
to show that flesh meat was eaten, and giving the authority of
Mr. Maurice Thompson for the deforestation of Ancient Greece in the
Fourth Century B.c., so that neither alleged cause of cancer seems to
apply. At the same time the Ancient Greeks are allowed to have eaten
but httle meat. Oaks and myrtles are named by Plato, and everyone
knows the tall plane-tree in the Ph@drus. Might not the existence
of “concomitant variation ” still be argued?—Sczence Progress, October,

. H.W

1917; Dp. 324-327.
War and Sexual Laxity in Germany.

MORAL PROBLEMS IN GERMANY, by Marianne Weber. Summary
of a speech made at Berlin in February, 1917. The War has introduced “the lowest forms of sexual indulgence” and recourse to
prostitution by married men; also sexual misconduct of wives and
mothers. Long before the War there was the relation of “ Verbiiltniss,”
or temporary consent, which “is secured by preventive measures against
unwished-for responsibilities.” The exodus of girls from home. and their
factory and other labour are stimulants. In the wealthier classes the
same causes are at work. The tendency to assimilate women’s life to that
of men leads to sexual laxity. The young of both sexes have it instilled
into their minds that abstinence is physically injurious. Young girls
of the better classes enter on temporary sterile relations.—The Sheeld,
December, 1917; pp. 440-446. J. H. W.
