THE

EUGENICS REVIEW

THE FIRST INTERNATIONAL EUGENICS
CONGRESS.

By Epcar ScuustTer, M.A., D.Sc.

INTRODUCTION.

The following account of the proceedings of the Congress
is strictly limited in its aim. An endeavour has been made to
give a summary of most of the papers read, arranged in such
a way as to show their bearing on certain problems, the study of
which forms a considerable part of the science of eugenics. It
is, perhaps, superfluous in the pages of this REVIEW to repeat
Galton’s classical definition, namely, that ‘‘ Eugenics is the study
of agencies, under social control, which may improve or impair
the racial qualities of future generations either physically or
mentally.’’ We do so in order to point out that it should be
interpreted as describing the aim of the science and not as
limiting its scope. In practice the agencies affecting future
generations must be investigated without reference to the
possibility of subjecting them to social control, and since we
know as little of this possibility as we do of the agencies referred
to themselves, its study constitutes an important branch of the
Science, and in the classification here adopted of the problems
discussed at the congress it forms one of the main subdivisions.
224 EUGENICS REVIEW E. Schuster:

As heredity is the backbone of Eugenics, in the first group.
must be placed papers dealing with heredity. Yet heredity itself
can have little effect on a population unless it works in conjunction with some sort of selection for parenthood. The selective
agencies thus follow logically as the second branch of the
subject and papers dealing with them are placed in the second
category. Of these agencies the most important is unquestionably the manner in which the birth rate varies in the different
social and racial groups. The consideration of this leads to.
a secondary question, namely: Is the differential nature of
birth rate to be classed among the causes tending to bring about
racial deterioration or the reverse? In other words, do those
sections of society in which the birth rate is lowest possess an
innate and inheritable superiority, mentally and ‘physically,
over those in which it is highest? Answering this question in
somewhat contradictory ways are three papers dealing with the
qualities of different social classes. An allied problem is to
determine whether the limitation of the size of families affects
the average quality of the children by increasing the relative
number of the earlier born (first-born, second-born, etc.) who
may be superior or inferior to those born later.

Two other selective agencies were discussed at the Congress,
namely war, including therewith the necessary preparations for
it, and the practice of midwifery.

The papers of the third class deal with environmental
causes which acting on the parents may influence the nature of
the offspring. Among the conditions examined are the age of
the parents at the birth of the children. The age of the parents
at marriage. The season of the year at which conception
occurred. Parental alcoholism and syphilis.

In a fourth class may be placed the contributions of
history and anthropology. They endeavour to trace the actual
changes undergone by human races and societies during long
periods of time.

We then come to the application of social control. This
subject is approached by the examination of existing methods
and the suggestion of new ones. For example, American
legislation, eugenic in its bearing, is discussed in two papers.
INTERNATIONAL EUGENICS CONGRESS 225

A third speaker deals with education in England, and proposes
ways in which it might be made more effective eugenically.
Reasons for including eugenics in the medical curriculum
are given in a fourth contribution, and the systematic inspection
of children is advocated in a fifth. Other papers treat of
methods for the prophylaxis of syphilis and the taxation of
alcoholic beverages according to their strength, as preventatives
of two dysgenic agencies. |

I. HEREDITY.

(a) The Inheritance of Epilepsy, Feeble-mindedness
and Insanity.

The cata discussed by Dr. Weeks and Professor Davenport
in their joint paper, ‘‘A First Study of the Inheritance of
Epilepsy,’’ have been supplemented by further researches of
their ‘‘ field’ workers and form the basis of Dr. Weeks’
contribution’ to the Congress. The collection of pedigrees on
which it is based appears to be a most valuable and reliable one
and it is to be hoped that it will eventually be published in full,
with all descriptive notes necessary to make it intelligible.

The author’s theory as to the inheritance of epilepsy and
feeble-mindedness can be briefly stated as follows :—

The presence in the zygote of a particular factor or
determiner is necessary to ensure normal development. If it is
absent feeble-mindedness or epilepsy will be the result.
Individuals in whom it 1s absent are called “‘ nulliplex’’;
according to the older terminology they would be styled pure
recessives, or homozygous with regard to the absence of this
particular factor.

The term ‘‘ Simplex ’’ is used to describe the heterozygote.
Simplex individuals are said to possess an intermediate mental
status, though some are apparently normal. It is nowhere
precisely stated what are the symptoms of the “‘ intermediate
mental status.’* But the majority of persons classified in the
tables as simplex are either alcoholic or neurotic.

9

‘The Inheritance of Epilepsy, by David Fairchild Weeks, M.D., Medical Superintendent and Executive Officer, The New Jersey State Village for Epileptics, Skillman,
U.S.A.
226 EUGENICS REVIEW E. Schuster :

Persons who are really normal are called duplex. They
have the normal development determiner twice over, or are
homozygous with regard to its presence.

If this theory is correct, then when nulliplex is mated
with nulliplex, one would expect to find the offspring all
nulliplex. That is to say that the children of parents who are
both feeble-minded or epileptic should all be feeble-minded or
epileptic themselves. An examination of the tables shows that
there are a considerable number of exceptions to this rule, but
the obvious difficulty of classifying all cases correctly may
account for them. On the whole it may be said that the results
are not incompatible with the theory.

With regard to the other types of matings Dr. Weeks
cannot claim a very close agreement between the actual results
and the theoretical expectation. Difficulties of classification
may be again called in to account for the discrepancy, and in
addition two other factors. One of the two is suggested by the
author, namely, that the percentage of nulliplex (1.e., feebleminded or epileptic) among the offspring, where it is, as it
generally is, in excess of the mendelian expectation, has been
increased by the direct action of parental alcoholism. But there
is another and more obvious explanation which he does not
appear to have taken into account, namely, the manner in which
the material was collected. This has had the effect that almost
all the fraternities considered contain at least one epileptic.
Thus the composition of the chosen families cannot be taken to
represent fairly what would be the character of the offspring of
matings of the various classes considered, if the parents had
been selected entirely according to their own characteristics and
not partly on account of the fact that in most cases one of the
children was an epileptic.

It must be allowed that a good prima facie case has been
made out for the theory advocated by Dr. Weeks, a theory
which if fully established would be a very distinct step in
advance in the study of the inheritance of epilepsy. That it
only covers a small part of the ground he would, no doubt, be
the first to acknowledge. There must be some difference in the
germ-plasm to differentiate such very different conditions as
INTERNATIONAL EUGENICS CONGRESS 227

epilepsy and feeble-mindedness, and in this connection it may
be noted that the tables show a distinct tendency towards the
specific inheritance of these characters, thus the proportion of
epileptic to feeble-minded among the children of wholly
epileptic parents is higher than when one of the parents is
feeble-minded, and considerably higher than when both are
feeble-minded.

Dr. Mott? considers firstly the supposed increase in
insanity. In the County of London since the year 1889 the
amount of registered lunacy has doubled, although the
population has remained nearly stationary. This fact he
attributes not to any real increase of insanity but to the three
following factors: (1) The standard of sanity has been raised,
largely owing to the increased provision of accommodation for
the insane; cases which formerly would have been discharged
owing to lack of accommodation in the asylums are now
retained. (2) Better sanitation has led to a marked decrease in
the death rate from tuberculosis, dysentery and pneumonia in
asylums; in consequence of this the number of chronic incurable
cases is rapidly increasing. (3) The Poor Law Guardians,
induced by a Government Grant of 4s. per week per pauper
lunatic, are now more ready to send cases of senile dementia
to the asylums than to retain them in the Workhouses.

Of the environmental causes tending to produce insanity,
Dr. Mott does not lay very great stress on alcohol. Though
an advocate of ‘‘ temperate measures... for the control and regulation of the liquor traffic and the segregation of the chronic
inebriate,’’? he does not believe that ‘‘ certifiable insanity would
diminish to anything like the extent that is fondly cherished by
total abstainers if alcohol were abolished.’’ He quotes in
support of this view the researches of Dr. Bevan Lewis and Dr.
Sullivan. But if alcohol is not so active as a cause of lunacy
as has been and is sometimes supposed, modern investigations
show more and more clearly the disastrous effects of syphilis.
Twenty per cent. of the deaths in the London County Asylums
are due to general paralysis produced by syphilis, and five or ten

1Heredity and Eugenics in Relation to Insanity, by Dr. F. W. Mott, F.R.S»
Pathologist to the London County Asylums, Physician to Charing Cross Hospital.
228 EUGENICS REVIEW E. Schuster:

per cent. more to brain disease due to the same cause. When
parental syphilis is transmitted to the offspring it causes death
in the majority of cases either before or shortly after birth, but
in spite of this it can now be demonstrated that in many cases
idiocy, imbecility, feeble-mindedness and sometimes general
paralysis result. Thus from a eugenic point of view the disease
is one of greatest importance.

The neuropathic inheritance forms the subject of a research
of very great value which is being conducted by Dr. Mott in the
London County Asylums. A record is being obtained, and is
stored on the card system, of all those inmates who have or
have had relatives in the asylums. The number already
reaches over 3,000. Seven hundred and fifty of these have at
present brothers or sisters, fathers or mothers, sons or
daughters in the asylums. This is, in itself, ‘a strong argument in favour of the importance of heredity as a cause of
insanity, for it cannot be supposed that if we took 20,000 people
from the 4,522,961 inhabitants of London for some random
cause we should find 3°5 per cent. of them so closely related, as
parents and offspring, brothers and sisters.’’ |

From these statistics many questions of importance may be
studied with advantage. They show, for instance, that when an
insane parent has insane offspring, the latter usually develop the
disease at a much earlier period in their lives than the former,
or to speak more generally, since the same phenomenon is
shown when collateral relationships are considered, that when
insanity appears in a stock it appears earlier in the lives of the
younger generation than of the older. This process is of
cugenic value, since through it the unsound elements are more
likely to be weeded out and the degenerate stock from which
they spring either ended or mended. It is also of importance
in prognosis, for it shows that after the age of 25 there is a
greatly decreasing liability of the offspring of insane parents to
become insane.

Some facts which may fail to emerge from statistical
tabulation are shown by a careful study of individual pedigrees,
and the card system inaugurated by Dr. Mott has formed a
good starting point from which such pedigrees may be collected.
INTERNATIONAL EUGENICS CONGRESS 229

Examples of these are included in the paper, but cannot be
conveniently summarized here.

(6) The Inheritance of Fecundity.

Somewhere in the complex of causes, which have brought
about and are bringing about the general but differential decline
of the birth rate, the physiological or anatomical characters
influencing fecundity must be present if unrecognised. Thus
even a purely biological work dealing with the inheritance of
fecundity is most valuable in filling a gap in the science of
eugenics, while a special welcome must be accorded to a paper
which fills it so efficiently as Dr. Raymond Pearl’s.t This paper
must strike the reader as being one of the most remarkable
results of the mendelian analysis yet published. Fecundity in
fowls can only be judged by the number of eggs laid, an
apparently fluctuating character much influenced by environmental conditions, yet Dr. Pearl has demonstrated, in manner
which appears hardly to admit of doubt, that its inheritance
depends entirely on three gametic factors, which are transmitted
in a manner as diagrammatic in its simplicity, as were the green
and yellow seed leaves in Mendel’s peas. Of the three factors
one, designated by the letter F, is anatomical, and two, called
respectively L, and L,., are physiological.

The factor F determines whether an ovary shall be
developed or not, when it is present the zygote developes into
a hen, when absent into a cock. It does not otherwise influence
fecundity because fecundity does not appear to be associated
with the anatomical characters of the ovary. Every normal
healthy hen appears to produce enough egg cells to supply the
demands of the greatest egg-laying capacity, and the number
of egg cells in the ovary is not apparently correlated with the
number of eggs habitually laid. When the factor F is present
and the two physiological factors L, and L, are absent the hen
does not lay any winter eggs, and the failure to lay winter eggs
is taken as the outward indication of this gametic constitution.

1 The Inheritance of Fecundity, by Raymond Pearl, Ph.D., Biologist of the Maine
Experimental Station, Orono, Maine, U.S.A.
230 EUGENICS REVIEW E. Schuster :

When the factor L, is present in addition to F, the hen
lays between o and 30 winter eggs. It is called the ‘‘ first
production factor.”’

The highest degree of fecundity is determined by the
presence of the ‘‘ second production factor’’ L, in addition to
F and L,, when this combination is present the hen lays more
than 30 winter eggs. When L, is present in the absence of L,
it behaves like L, and the hen lays less than 30 eggs. That L,
is quite distinct from L, is shown by the fact that a hen is not
more productive when she is homozygous with respect to the
presence of L, than when she is heterozygous. Whether or no
a double dose of L, would increase the fecundity cannot unfortunately be determined, because it can only be present in males.
The L, is never present in the same gamete with F, and as F
must be present singly in the female, L, can only be introduced
once.

With the exception just noted the factors are inherited as
independent unit characters on strictly Mendelian lines. Interpreted in this way the recorded results agree with the theoretical
expectation in a very striking way in spite of the fact that the
three degrees of fecundity are distinguished from one another
by a method which in some cases obviously leads to a wrong
classification. Yet the rigid and mechanical manner with
which the hens are divided. into three groups, according to the
number of winter eggs laid by them, has the great merit that
it excludes the personal equation and the consequent suspicion
of possible bias on the part of the observer. This fact, together
with the large scale on which the experiments were conducted,
should produce considerable degree of confidence in the conclusions drawn. It must, of course, be remembered that chey
do not form a complete explanation of the facts, as the fluctuations within the individual classes are too high to be neglected,
even if their causation does not involve heredity.

With regard to the bearing of these results in Eugenics the
two concluding paragraphs of Dr. Pearl’s paper may be quoted
with advantage; they run as follows :—

‘‘ From the eugenic standpoint they (the results) suggest,
though of course they do not prove, that possibly some part
INTERNATIONAL EUGENICS CONGRESS 231

of the observed decline in human fecundity in highly civilized
races may be due to the dropping out or loss of one or more of
the genes (factors, determiners) upon which high fecundity
depends, this loss being coincident with the complete cessation
of the natural selection of highly fecund types.

‘“‘ Finally, these results on fecundity in fowls not only
emphasize the importance of analytical studies to determine the
precise mode of inheritance of human fecundity, but they also
furnish a guide and stimulus for the conduct of such studies.
If, as is the actual fact, it can be shown that in one animal
belonging to the great phylum (the vertebrate) to which man
himself belongs fecundity is inherited in simple mendelian
fashion, it encourages one to hope that sometime a solution
of the same problem may be reached for man. It at least points
the way to a mode of attacking this complex problem which
gives greater promise of leading ultimately to a solution than
does any method which has hitherto been applied to it.’’

(c) The Study of Inheritance.

Inheritance was treated in a more general way by Professor
Punnett’ and Professor V. G. Ruggeri.2, The former, whose
interesting paper suffered somewhat under the rule limiting the
length of time allotted to each speaker, pointed out the
importance of studying inheritance by experimental breeding
in animals and plants, in order to guide one in the more difficult
task of solving the problems of heredity in human beings. The
latter gave instances, collected from various published sources,
of mendelian inheritance in man. The characters dealt with
principally depended on the pigmentation of the skin, hair, and
eyes. Full references are given to the original publications so
that Professor Ruggeri’s paper will be found of value as a
guide to them.

1 Genetics and Eugenics, by R. C. Punnett, Professor of Biology in the University
of Cambridge.

*Le Considetti Leggi dell’ ereditarietd nell’ uomo, Prof. V. Giuffrida-Ruggeri,
Universita di Napoli.
232 EUGENICS REVIEW E. Schuster :

Il. THe SELECTIVE AGENCIES.

(a) The Differential Birth Rate.

The differential birth rate is a phenomenon which is
regarded with suspicion and fear, and the examination of its
nature and causes constitutes one of the most important
branches of the science of eugenics. The problem is one of
considerable complexity, and it can only be solved by statistical
treatment requiring a vast mass of data of an appropriate kind.
The Congress is, therefore, fortunate in having secured two
papers on the subject, on the conclusions of which reliance may
be placed, namely, those of M. March and Dr. Hoffman. They
treat the subject from an entirely different standpoint since M.
March has investigated the relative fertility of different sections
of the French people classed according to their occupation,
while Dr. Hoffman is concerned with the relative productiveness
of different nationalities in the American State of Rhode Island.
He has, unfortunately, neglected the economic factor which
may be responsible for some of the international differences of
fecundity which he records. M. March’s! paper may best be
described by quoting a translation of his own abstract of it,
which runs as follows :—

“* Statistics of families furnish, perhaps, the most appropriate data for the examination of the factors which govern the
praductiveness of marriages or their sterility.

‘* Statistics concerning the children born in the eleven and
a half million French families, classed according to occupation,
have been prepared in France for the first time as a result of the
census of 1906. ‘These statistics give information as to the
number of children per family, either alive on the day of the
census or previously deceased, in each occupation, for all the
families in the whole country taken together, and for the
different provinces. Further, a special investigation of the
200,000 families of employees and workmen in the public services has furnished more circumstantial details, which have
enabled the number of children and number of deaths of

1Za Fertiliteé des Mariages suivant la Profession et la situation sociale, par
M. Lucien March, Directeur de la Statistique Générale de la France.
INTERNATIONAL EUGENICS CONGRESS 233

children in a family to be brought into relation with the income
of the head.

‘The results obtained by the method described above are
the subject of this report. The effects of occupation, social
position and income are analysed by means of  co-efficients
expressing the productiveness of marriages, after eliminating
the influence of such factors as duration of marriage, age, and
habitat, all of which may obviously affect the productiveness of
a Marriage.

‘* These results confirm what has been learnt from previous
researches of the fertility of different social classes, but they go
further in that they show that the difference is not - exclusively
dependent on income.

“‘In general there are more children per family in the
families of workmen than in the families of employers, and the
latter contain more than those of employees other than workmen. Further, one finds industries in which the number of
children in the employers’ families is larger than in the families
of workmen in other industries. Thus, differences are introduced by the occupation. Industries employing many hands
seem the more favourable to the production of large families,
both among workmen and among employers. Agriculture, in
which a large number of persons are engaged in France, does
not seem to conduce to fertility. Fishermen and sailors in the
merchant service, on the other hand, appear to form the class
in which fertility is the most considerable.

‘“ The importance of the occupational factor is such that we
could place its influence on the same plane as that of ‘ concentration’ of population, with which it is in close relation, since
persons following certain classes of occupation, as for instance
the members of the liberal professions, and clerks and other
salaried employees are most numerous in towns.

‘*TIt does not appear that in France casual and unskilled
labourers, persons in the receipt of Poor Law relief, etc., are
specially prolific. There is not thus in reality too much risk
of seeing the renewal of the population carried out in a
dangerous manner by its least valuable section. However,
even among the working class the most highly paid occupations
234 EUGENICS REVIEW E. Schuster :

are not those among which one finds the greatest number of
children.

‘* The economic, social and moral burden of children is a
factor bound up in a complex manner, not only with the
individual conditions of existence, but also with the transformations of society, progress in manners and customs, and the
conception which one forms of life.

‘*It is the burden which must be alleviated, where alleviation would be most effective and produce the best results, in
order to put a stop to a movement which may be dangerous to
civilisation.”

Dr. Hoffman’s paper deals with a problem in eugenics of
great importance to the newer nations whose population increases
largely by immigration, namely the fecundity of the different
elements thus introduced, compared one with another and with
the native born. The data used were collected in the State
census of Rhode Island in the year 1905. Whether judged by
the percentage of married women who were childless or by the
average number of children per family, the native born are
found to be considerably less productive than the immigrants.
The latter, divided up according to nationality may be placed in
the following order according to the average number of children
for each married woman:—French Canadians, Russians,
Italians, Irish, Scotch and Welsh, English, German, Swedish,
English Canadian, Polish. The actual numbers range from
4°42 down to 2°31, while the native born come lower than the
lowest with 2°06. Both among native born and immigrants the
percentage of childless married women was lowest among the
Jews and highest among the Protestants, the Roman Catholic
lying between the two. In each religious group the natives
were less productive than the foreigners. Comparison of the
1905 census with that of 1885 shows that the average number of
children for each married woman has decreased from 2°81 to
2°06 among the natives, and from 4°69 to 3°35 among the
immigrants.
INTERNATIONAL EUGENICS CONGRESS 235

(b) The Relative Value, Mental and Physical, of the
different Social Grades.

The consideration of the differences in the rate of increase
of the different sections of society leads naturally to the
question. Have higher social classes an innate superiority in
body and mind over the lower ones? This is a question
obviously difficult to answer, and very little in the way of facts
was brought forward to confine or direct the interchange of
opinions which it aroused. Three papers dealt with it to some
extent. They were read respectively by Professor Loria,’
Professor Niceforo,? and Professor Michels.*® |

Professor Loria affirms ‘‘the absolute independence of
superiority of income and superiority of intellect,’’ and brings
forward some arguments intended to support this view. In
reality they support a very different contention: namely, that
the possession of a large income is not in itself a proof of
superior intelligence. He cannot seriously insist that intellectual capacity does not frequently enable men to rise to an
economic condition superior to that of the majority of those
who started equal with them, or that the skilled mechanic is
not on the whole mentally superior to the pauper. Yet unless
he does so he must admit that the absolute independence which
he affirms does not in reality exist.

Professor Niceforo’s contribution forms an interesting contrast in that his conclusions are so entirely antagonistic to those
of Professor Loria. Professor Niceforo has collected a large
quantity of data in order to determine what differences, if any,
exist between the upper and the lower social classes, with
regard to their physical and mental powers. This evidence is
not contained in the paper, but its nature is indicated, and
references are given to his many publications in which it is
fully set forth. The conclusions drawn from it are as follows:

1 Elite Fisio-Psychica ed Elite Economica. Achille Loria. Il Professore de Economica
Politica, Universita di Torino.

*La Cause de linfériorité de Charactéres psycho-physiologiques des classes inférieurs.
Par Alfredo Niceforo, Professor at the University of Naples.

* Eugenics in Party Organization, by Roberto Michels, Professor of Political Economy,
University of Turin.
236 EUGENICS REVIEW E. Schuster :

Individuals of the lower classes have, relatively to the
members of the higher classes, poorer physical development,
smaller cranial circumference, a lower degree of acuteness of
sensation (as determined by the instruments used in experimental psychology), and of resistance to mental fatigue, a delay
in the epoch when puberty manifests itself, a slowness of
growth, a larger number of anomalies and cases of arrested
development. Speaking generally, if men were grouped
according to a scale of mental and physical development, the
lower social classes would, on the whole, come near the lower
end of the scale.

While fully admitting that the unfavourable environment
caused by poverty is one of the factors tending to bring about
this result, Professor Niceforo considers that it is essentially
due to the selective agency of inborn differences.

—%%Men who are born with physiological and mental
characters of an inferior order tend to sink into the inferior
classes or tend to remain at low level if born there. Vice versa,
men who are born owning superior characters tend to rise or to
remain in the high economic, social and intellectual positions
which they already occupy.”’

In support of Professor Niceforo’s view thus summarized
may be quoted the opinion of Professor Michels, who showed
that in one profession at any rate, namely, in politics, men on
the whole more able and energetic than their fellows, and
superior to them physically and mentally, were enabled by
party organisation to rise from the ranks.

(c) The Eugenic Bearing of the Limitation of Families.

Dr. Ploetz’ examines the relations between Neo-Malthusianism and Race Hygiene. The limitation of families below
the physiological capacity of the mother may exert an influence
on the race by altering the nature or quality of the families
which it affects. But if it has no such action it may still work
selectively in a variety of ways which will be considered later.

1Neo-Malthusianism and Race Hygiene, by Dr, Alfred Ploetz, President of the
International Society for Race Hygiene, Germany.
INTERNATIONAL EUGENICS CONGRESS 237

The advocates of Neo-Malthusianism point to the fact that
the mortality rate is higher among the later born than among
the elder born children in a family, and argue from that the
former are inferior in vitality to the latter. The evidence on
this point is rather conflicting. In the poorer classes the death
rate among the children rises steadily from the fourth child
onwards as shown by Geissler’s figures. Among the well-to-do
families investigated by Ansell, there does not appear to be
any difference in the mortality of the first six children, while
Dr. Ploetz himself, working with Royal families, finds that all
children up to the ninth have the same chance of survival. It
appears, probably, that among the poorer classes, when the
family is large the conditions are less favourable, and there is
thus a higher death rate among the later born children which
need not be due to their lower vitality. On the other hand in
Royal families all the children are so well cared for that even
the weakly ones have a very good chance of survival. In
opposition to the view that the earlier born children are superior
to those born later we have the observations of Pearson and
Heron who found that among the tuberculous, insane and
criminals the percentage of first and second born children was
considerably in excess of the expectation. Dr. Ploetz brings
forward certain criticisms of these figures, and concludes “ that
we have not as yet sufficient scientific material to attack
malthusianism from the standpoint of the deterioration of
offspring, in consequence of the increase in the percentage of
the first two or three births.”

In one respect, at any rate, it has a favourable influence,
for by increasing the intervals between successive births it
decreases infant mortality.

Malthusianism may have a selective action, firstly by
affecting to a different extent families, differing in physical and
intellectual value, in the same stratum of society ; secondly by
being practised to a different extent by different social strata ;
thirdly by affecting some races more than others. Its possible
effects under the first head are carefully and suggestively
considered by Dr. Ploetz, but he is unable to arrive at any very
definite conclusion either for or against it. With regard to the
238 EUGENICS REVIEW E. Schuster :

second point malthusianism is practised more by the higher
social classes than by the lower, and as the former are superior,
at any rate intellectually, it is harmful to the race.

Thirdly, malthusianism puts the Nordic or Germanic races
at a disadvantage in respect to the Poles, Hungarians and
Russians, and is likely to handicap the white in favour of the
yellow races. |

The lesson which Dr. Ploetz wishes to teach is contained
in the following words :—

“‘ If we look on all its effects we must conclude that to-day
the spreading unregulated and misdirected malthusianism has
a harmful effect from the standpoint of race hygiene.’’ ‘‘ To-day
it is necessary, firstly, to combat the propaganda of Neo-Malthusianism. It is making its own progress only too rapidly
without assistance.

‘On the positive side, race hygiene must strive, especially
through the work of our artists—our dramatists, novelists, and
painters—to renew in our young men and women the ambition
for the advancement, the perpetuity and the increase of their
family. But we must go still further, for the narrow interest
of the family is, perhaps, not so much harmed by a mitigated
malthusianism. We must instil in our children greater
courage to undertake the responsibilities of life, a higher
patriotism, a sense of devotion to our race which must
face these great combats, so that they gladly prepare for an
expenditure of energy beyond their own immediate and personal
interest.”’

(d) The Practice of Midwifery.

Dr. Agnes Bluhm’s? paper is a discussion of the facts
bearing on the dictum of Dr. Wilhelm Schallmayer, ‘‘ The
more successfully obstetrics develops, the more necessary will
it become for future generations.”’

She first examines the conditions which prevent normal and
easy child birth, in order to discover to what extent they are
due to hereditary defects. The two principal factors are the
condition of the muscles of the uterus and the shape of the

1 Rassenhygiene und Artzliche Geburtshilfe, Dr. Agnes Bluhm, Berlin, Gross
Lichterfelde.
INTERNATIONAL EUGENICS CONGRESS 239

pelvis. Circumstances independent of heredity may adversely
influence both, thus a sedentary life leads to poor development
of the uterine muscles, while much standing from an early age
may lead to the condition known as ‘“‘ flat pelvis.’”? But
heretary predisposition, far more than the manner of life, produces malformation either directly or through the agency of
rickets. More than half the total number of deformities are due
to this disease, the tendency to which is undoubtedly inherited.

A prio considerations would thus lead one to believe in
the dysgenic influence of obstetrics, and the statistical facts
brought forward by the author tend to confirm this view. These
show that in Hamburg the proportion of operations to the
whole number of confinements has been rising since the period
1885-1889; that in spite of advances in operative technique the
death rate among the mothers operated on has increased; and
that although the death rate among children born with operative
aid has diminished, it has steadily risen in relation to the total
number of births.

Other statistics collected in the Grand Duchy of Baden, of
a slightly different nature, lead to a similar conclusion, though
not in so clear and definite a way.

In seeking an answer to the question ‘‘ How can we prevent
obstetrics from bringing injury to the race constantly, and in
ever-increasing degree?’’? Dr. Bluhm does not suggest that
we should ever set a barrier to the further spread of the art, but
firstly as a counsel of perfection ‘‘ that women who are unfitted
for bearing should, from the very beginning, renounce the idea
of descendants.’’ Secondly, that the obstetrician should
approach his task in a eugenic spirit, or in other words that the
aim of his operations should be rather more than at present to
save the life of the mother and rather less to bring living
children into the world.

(e) War and the Preparations for War.
Professor Kellogg’s paper! deals with the effects both of

war and of military service in time of peace. The dysgenic
action of war arises principally from the fact that the men of

1 Eugenics and Militarism, by V. L.Kellogg, Protessor in Stanford University, California.
240 EUGENICS REVIEW E. Schuster :

whom the conflicting armies are composed are selected as
passing a certain standard of physical efficiency. Thus in
France and Germany from 30-50 per cent. of all those liable to
conscription are rejected as unfit for service because of undersize, infirmities or disease, and in England 4o per cent. of those
wishing to enlist are not admitted. Professor Kellogg brings
forward figures to show how large a proportion of men thus
selected may be killed in time of war by wounds in battle, by
exposure and by diseases in camp or garrison. He has also
collected a certain amount of direct evidence indicating the
ill-effects of war in the average stature and vigour of the nations
engaged.

In peace time military service, according to Professor
Kellogg’s view, is dysgenic because it leads to the spread of
disease, particularly venereal disease. In 1910, in the British
Army, one-fifth of the military hospital admissions were due to
syphilis, and the proportion in the United States is about
double. It is impossible to compare these figures, and others
brought forward, with corresponding ones for the civil population, because there are none. But in the year 1910 in every
10,000 of the men who offered themselves for enlistment in the
British Army, one and a half! were rejected for syphilis, while
during the same period 230 per 10,000 of those actually in the
Army were admitted to hospital for it.

In the discussion which followed this paper General von
Bardeleben and Colonel Melville both contended that military
service was not necessarily unhygienic. The more seriously
the Army is taken and the better its discipline, the healthier
will be the conditions of service. In Germany military service
far from leading to the spread of venereal disease actually
diminishes it.

III. ENviRONMENTAL CAUSES WHICH, ACTING ON THE PARENTS,
MAY INFLUENCE THE NATURE OF THE OFFSPRING.
(a) Parental Age and Season of Conception.

Dr. Marro? endeavours to prove two quite distinct theses:

firstly, that among the children of particularly youthful or

* According to Colonel Melville this number should be 14.
* Influence de l’age des Parents sur les Caractéres Psycho-physique des Enfants par
Prof. Antonio Marro.
INTERNATIONAL EUGENICS CONGRESS 24!

particularly aged parents may be found an exceptional proportion of criminals and lunatics. This he suggests may be due on
the one hand to immaturity and on the other to senility, which
brings about changes in the conditions of the body of a similar
nature to those produced by an intoxication or poisoning.
Secondly, that criminals born of particularly young parents
tend to show in the nature of the crimes which they commit the
psychical traits characteristic of youth, or, if they have sprung
from aged parents, of old age. Further, that among normal
school children a phenomenon of an essentially similar nature
may be observed in the records of their conduct at school.
The statistical material which forms the basis of Dr.
Marro’s work is far too small to form a sure foundation for his
theory. It consists of records of 456 criminals and 100 lunatics,
and for purposes of comparison 1,765 normal individuals (771
new born babies, 917 school children, and 77 adults). All these
individuals were divided into three classes according to the
age of the parents at the time of their birth, parents up to the
age of 25 being described as immature, between 26 and 4o as
completely mature, and of 41 and onwards as decadent. It
was then found that among the normal group 8°8 per cent. of
the fathers were immature, among the criminals 10°9 per cent.,
and among the insane 17 per cent. Among the normal group
24°9 per cent. of the fathers were decadent, among the criminals
32 per cent., and among the insane 36 per cent. This is
practically all the evidence brought forward in support of the
first thesis; it may be as well to examine it before passing on to
the second. Firstly, it must be noted that almost all the members of the normal group were born quite recently, being either
new-born infants or school children. The criminals, on the
other hand, must have been born a considerable number of years
ago, though we are not told exactly how long. The lunatics
were those admitted to the Manicome of Turin in the year 1886,
and as they were probably for the most part adults at the time
they must have been born in the 50’s and early 60’s, if not
earlier. Now since the more or less general decline in the size
of families which has taken place in recent years must induce a
tendency for the births of children to be concentrated at a
242 EUGENICS REVIEW E. Schuster :

particular time in the lives of the parents, one would expect to
find among people who have been born 30 or 40 or more years
ago a greater proportion with very young or with aged parents
than among those born quite recently. Secondly, if both the
abnormal and the normal groups had been born during the
same period, it would be necessary, in order to make a valid
comparison between them, to take into account the different
social classes from which they were derived, since it is well
known that marriage customs differ considerably from class to
class, and affect the age of parents at the time of procreation,
also that the size of the family varies from class to class, and is
supposed to be particularly high in those classes from which
the majority of criminals spring.

In order to establish the second thesis the criminals are
divided into sub-classes according to the nature of the crime,
and for each sub-class the proportion of parents in each of the
three age groups is given. The author’s conclusions can,
however, have no weight attached to them for the two following
reasons. Firstly, the members in the sub-classes are much too
small, and secondly, it is quite impossible to say, unless one
knows all the circumstances, whether a crime shows the
impetuousness and lack of self-control characteristic of youth, or
the absence of affective feelings and the suspicious, calculating
and avaricious temperament, attributed by Dr. Marro to old age.
One cannot avoid the suspicion that he has made his own
decision on these points with regard to each crime, after ascertaining the age distribution of the parents of the particular
group of criminals in his collection who had been found guilty
of it.

The small differences shown in the proportions of young,
mature, or aged parents among the good, mediocre, or positively
naughty children, cannot be accepted as showing any association between the conduct at school of a child and the age of
its parents. If there were no other objections, the fact that
quite different results are obtained from the consideration of the
fathers to those shown by the mothers would entirely destroy
one’s confidence in Dr. Marro’s theory.
INTERNATIONAL EUGENICS CONGRESS 243

A paper of a very different stamp is that of Professor Gini,’
who starts from the fact that the best available statistics show
that the percentage of horses born who reach maturity is much
greater than the corresponding percentage of human beings, even
in the best cared for section of society. This, he suggests, may
be due to eugenic measures taken in the breeding and rearing
of the domestic horse, or it may be a feature common to the
higher animals whether wild or domesticated. He then points
out that the higher animals in the wild state differ from man,
with regard to breeding habits, in three principal ways. Firstly,
they have a special breeding season at one period of the year.
Secondly, they start the process of reproduction as soon as they
are physiologically ready for it. Thirdly, the weak and
diseased are weeded out by natural selection before they reach
sexual maturity.

The first point of difference suggests the questions. Is
there any evidence that there remains in man a period of
“heat ’? during which conceptions occur most frequently? Are
the children who are born from conceptions which take place
during this period, if indeed it exists, or at any other special
season in the year, endowed with greater vitality than the rest ?

From the consideration of large numbers of carefully
prepared comparative tables Professor Gini answers the first
question in the negative. A tendency for conceptions to be
concentrated at a particular period in the year does in reality
exist, but the difference in the incidence of this period in
different countries appears to show that it can be attributed more
probably to factors other than the survival of a period of heat,
such as climate, religious customs, fasts and feasts, and to
fashions in the months for marriage.

The answer to the second question is that the season of
conception does not directly influence the vitality of the child,
but the time of birth does, since among those born in temperate
seasons there is a lower rate for still-births and a greater length
of life. An elaborate statistical investigation shows that the
size and weight of a child is not affected by the age of its

* Contributi Demografici ai Problemi dell’ Eugenica. Dott. Corrado Gini, Professore di
Statistica nella R. Université di Cagliari.
244 EUGENICS REVIEW E. Schuster :

mother at its birth, but that its vitality tends to be lower the
older the mother was at marriage. With the increasing age of
the mother the number of still-births and miscarriages increases
also. |

It is also shown that among lunatics, consumptives, and
suicides the number of children born is less and their mortality
is higher, and confirmation is given to the already ascertained
facts that the number of offspring is correlated with the longevity
of the parents and that longevity is inherited.

(6) Parental Alcoholism.

Drs. Magnan and Fillassier' have concerned themselves
less with the eugenic than with the clinical aspect of alcoholism.
The only evidence offered as to its effect on the offspring are
the statistics compiled by Bourneville. These are cited in a
somewhat incomplete manner, namely, that Bourneville found
among 3,271 children on his list 1,156 cases in which the father
was an excessive drinker, and 100 cases in which the excess was
on the part of the mother; as nothing is said about the nature
of the children it is difficult to see what this statement proves.

Some vivid sketches of the symptoms shown by degenerates
follow, but no particulars concerning their parentage are given,
except that we are told that they ‘‘ result from such unions ”’
(of parents given to alcoholism). The only specific fact as to
parentage cited is that in one of the type cases the mother was
insane.

IV. THE CONTRIBUTIONS OF HISTORY AND ANTHROPOLOGY.
(a) Anthropology.

Among the anthropological contributions are those of
Professor Sergi? and Dr. Soren Hansen.° The former maintains that the two chief types of skull formation recognized by

* Alcoolisme et Dégénéscence. Statistiques du Service Central d’admission des
Aliénés de la ville du Paris, et du départment de la Seine de 1867 4 1912.

M. Magnan, Médécin en Chef du Service Central d’Admission 4 l’Asile Ste Anne,
membre de |’Académie de Médécine et M. Fillassier, Membre de la Societé Clinique de
Médecine Mentale, et de la Societé de Médecine de Paris.

*Variazione e Eredita nell’?Uomo. Professor G. Sergi, Professor of Anthropology,
University of Rome.

3On the Increase of Stature in certain European Populations. By Soren Hansen
M.D., Director of the Danish Anthropological Survey, Copenhagen.
INTERNATIONAL EUGENICS CONGRESS 245

him, the brachymorphic and the dolichomorphic, have persisted
unchanged from the earliest times. They are not blended by
crossing, but separate out in a mendelian manner. The
mesocephalic skulls of craniometry are not in reality intermediate forms but belong for the most part to the dolichomorphic type. There is no evidence of the transformation of
one type into the other. He criticizes the statistics of Boas,
which purport to show that the cranial and facial types of many
immigrants into the United States change rapidly in their
descendants.

Dr. Soren Hansen examines the evidence as to changes of
stature in various European populations during the last century.
The records which leave a good deal to be desired in the way
of completeness show on the whole a fairly definite increase in
most cases. Thus the Danish Anthropological Committee, of

which Dr. Hansen is the president, find that the average height
of the fully grown Dane has undergone a regular and steady

increase, as shown in the following table :—

1852-1856 bee ve 165°42 cm.
1879-1888 bee a 167°78 cm.
1891-1900 wee wee 168°43 cm.
1904-1905 + 0 a 169°11 cm.

Similarly the conscription lists of Norway and Sweden
show an increase of about two centimetres from the middle of
the last century. The average stature of the Dutch has
increased from 165°5 cm. in 1866 to 167 in 1883 and 168 in 1899.
The changes shown by these figures are not part of a steady
secular increase in stature, for ‘‘ measurements of skeletons from
prehistoric times have sufficiently proved that the stature has
not changed sensibly in the last two thousand years or more,
although it may have oscillated periodically about a mean somewhat different in the various countries.’’ It is within the scope
of the science of eugenics to determine what are the causes of
these fluctuations. The recent increase is attributed to improved
hygienic and economic conditions, but the question is complicated by the action of a great many other factors, as, for
instance, the relative increase or decrease of one or other of the
246 EUGENICS REVIEW E. Schuster :

many racial elements making up a population, the migration
to the towns of the best portions of the rural communities, and
the rapidly falling death rate. In this connection the contention brought forward by Professor Kellogg may also be referred
to, namely, that great wars exercise a selective action tending to
diminish the stature and deteriorate the physique of the nations
engaged.

To throw clear light on these problems, a vast quantity of
reliable data is required, and to obtain this Dr. Hansen insists
on the necessity of methodical anthropometric surveys, established and conducted: by Governments.

(b) History.

Dr. Woods’ in his paper, ‘‘ Some Inter-relations between
Eugenics and Historical Research,’’ attempts to meet one of the
commonest objections which is urged against Eugenics, namely,
that there is no proof that mental characters are inherited. People
who hold this view are quite ready to admit that among the
near relations of men eminent or successful in some particular
walk of life may be found an unusually high proportion of other
persons distinguished above the average, but they assert, with
some reason, that this may be due to environmental causes, to
opportunities arising from family influence, to the stimulus of
example, to encouragement, to wealth, and to many other factors
of a somewhat similar nature. Dr. Woods answers, if environment is so all powerful in moulding the mental pattern, why are
such strong contrasts shown between persons reared in more or
less similar environments? These contrasts must be due to
inborn qualities. For example: ‘‘ There is no reasonable cause
why Frederick the Great was so different from his week-kneed
and almost forgotten ancestor, George William of Brandenburg,
except inborn determiners—something in the protoplasm, or,
shall we say, something in the chromosomes.’’ History shows
also that the greatest differences have been shown by reigning
sovereigns in their moral natures as well as in their mental
powers, and as little in the one case as in the other can a satis
* Some Inter-relations between Eugenics and Historical Research. By F. A. Woods;
Harvard Medical School.
INTERNATIONAL EUGENICS CONGRESS 247

factory explanation be found in environmental differences. On
the other hand, where differences in opportunity can actually be
shown, as, for instance, in the case of actual reigning sovereigns
and their younger brothers, there are no corresponding differences in achievement or in eminence.

An argument drawn from evidence of quite a different
kind is also used to show that nature is of more importance
than nurture. It may be briefly summarised as follows:
If distinction is due more to family influence than to
inherited ability, one would expect to find that in a country
like America, where family influence is at its minimum,
there would be less concentration of distinction in particular
families than in Europe. If, however, the reverse is the
case and inherited ability is the preponderant factor, no such
difference should be found. The elaborate study of pedigrees
which Dr. Woods has made shows there is in point of fact no
difference in this respect between Europe and America. Hence
if the premises are sound, the conclusion follows not only that
there is such a thing as inherited ability, but that it is the
dominant factor in the production of distinguished families.
Some other interesting lessons are drawn by Dr. Woods from
his historical studies of royal families ; for instance, it is gratifying
to learn that a certain amount of eugenic selection goes on among
them. The later kings are on the whole better than the earlier
ones, the proportion of bad ones among them being smallest.
This is due to the fact that the worst types have left fewest adult
descendants, ‘‘ probably because of strong and wide-reaching
correlations between normal health and all that passes under the
term morality.’’ At the same time on account of the correlation
between morality and intellect, the average of the latter quality
has also been raised.

Another point to which attention may be drawn, particularly
as it was illustrated by a series of portraits in the Exhibition,
is the change in facial type which has been going on. Since the
beginning of the sixteenth century, when for the first time the
portraits bear the hall-mark of truth, the resemblance to the
mongolian type shown by the English, French, Flemish, and
German nobility, but not by the Italian, has been gradually dis248 EUGENICS REVIEW E. Schuster :

appearing, ‘“‘the eyes are now closer together and more set in
under the supraorbital arch; the upper part of the nose has
become more slender, and the cheek bones less prominent.”’

The point of view of Mr. and Mrs. Whetham,' in approaching the problems of Eugenics from the historical side, is very
different to that of Dr. Woods. While the latter says that
all the evidence of history points to the ‘‘ power and importance
of a very few great personalities’’ in bringing about political
and economic changes, the former attribute the rise and decline
of nations to the relative increase or decrease of their racial constituents. Their paper is an examination of certain outstanding
features of the history of Europe in the light of this theory.
The population of Europe during historical times has been made
up principally of three races: (1) Mediterranean ; (2) Alpine; (3)
Northern; and the diverse nations which exist now or have
existed were all composed of these three elements in different and
ever-changing proportions.

The Mediterranean race is ‘‘ short of stature, dark of complexion and hair, long skulled, vivacious, gregarious, and one
may perhaps add at once restless and easy going.’’ It may be
recognised now in a fairly pure condition in Ireland, Wales,
Cornwall, and parts of the West of Scotland.

The Alpine or Armenoid race is of medium stature, medium
colouring, and has a round skull.

The Northern race is tall and long skulled, and in its pure
condition blue-eyed and fair-headed. It is vigorous, loyal, determined, and persevering, and it loves adventure. It may be
found in its greatest purity in the Scandinavian peninsular and
around the Dutch and English shores of the North Sea.

“It is suggested that the supreme power of Greece and
Rome, each in its own direction, was due to the attainment of a
fortunate balance between the social and political functions of
the constituents of the nation, the directing power being supplied chiefly by the invaders of Northern races, who formed the
dominant class among the Southern indigenous Mediterranean
population. In each case the Northern elements grew gradually
less, through such agencies as losses in war, the selective action

* The Influence of Race on History, by W. C. D. and C. D. Whetham.
INTERNATIONAL EUGENICS CONGRESS 249

of a differential birth rate, and by racial merging into the
more numerous Southern stock. )

The outburst of artistic genius and intellectual pre-eminence
which marked the renaissance in North Italy may perhaps be
due to a similar racial composition, the Northern elements being
supplied by the descendants of the barbarian invaders of the
later Roman Empire.

Great Britain has also similar racial elements. The Mediterranean race, spreading up the shores of the Atlantic, entered
largely into the composition of the people of the South-West.
The Northern element, immigrant from the shores of the Baltic
and the North Sea, is strongest in the East and North.

We know that there are now at work two influences affecting
the average racial character of the English nation: (1) The
increase in the urban population at the expense of the rural; (2)
the voluntary restriction of the birth rate which affects certain
sections of all classes more than others.

It is probable that both these changes tend to favour selectively the Southern racial elements at the expense of the
Northern. Eventually the present structure of society may become unstable in consequence of this racial alteration, and the
necessary readjustment, in its turn, will contribute a chapter to
history.”

V. THE APPLICATION OF SOCIAL CONTROL.
(a) Legislation.

Among the practical measures available for the prevention
of procreation among these classes who form a burden on the
community, sterilization has many advocates. Provided that
it imposes no very serious risk or hardship on the person
sterilized, it may be, even for them, a very desirable alternative
to permanent confinement. Since operations have been decided
which, it is claimed, fulfil the necessary conditions, it is of
extreme importance to collect evidence as to their actual effect
on the individual and as to the practicability of enforcing or encouraging them in suitable cases by legislative action. Such
evidence seems unattainable in the older countries, but in
America, where the existence of separate legislatures for each
250 EUGENICS REVIEW E. Schuster :

State facilitates the introduction of experimental laws, where
the temper of the people is bolder, and sentimentality is less
rampant, opportunities may be found for discussing on a basis
of facts topics which here are only a battlefield for conflicting
prejudices, and opinions formed out of nothing by obscure
mental processes. Special thanks are therefore due to the Committee of the Eugenic Section of the American Breeders’ Association for communicating, through their Chairman (Mr.
Bleecker Van Wagenen), their preliminary report’ on the ‘‘ best
practical means for cutting off the defective germ-plasm in the
human population.’’ In spite of his express denial, Mr.
van Wagenen was represented by certain sections of the daily
Press as advocating the legislation with which he dealt, it would
therefore seem necessary to point out that the phrase quoted
is not intended as a description of such legislation, but as a
definition of the objects for which the committee was appointed.

In eight States of the Union there are laws authorizing or
requiring sterilization of certain classes of defectives and
degenerates, but the question as to whether these laws are constitutional has prevented their being seriously carried into effect
anywhere but in Indiana and California.

In Indiana, which led the way in 1907, any inmate of a
“* State institution, deemed by a commission of three surgeons
to be unimprovable mentally or physically and unfit for procreation, may be selected and compulsorily sterilized by any
type of operation chosen by the commission.’’ The motive of
the State in this enactment is purely Eugenic.

In California the law was introduced in 1909. The persons
subject are the “‘ inmates of State hospitals and homes for the
feeble-minded, and inmates of State prisons committed for life,
or showing sexual or moral perversion, or twice committed for
sexual offences, or three times for other crimes.’’ Those operated on are selected from this class on the recommendation of the
superintendent or resident physician to a board consisting of

1 Preliminary Report of the Committee of the Eugenics Section of the American
Breeders’ Association to study and to report on the best practical means for cutting off
the defective Germ-plasm in the human population, by Bleecker van Wagenen, Chairman
of the Committee.
INTERNATIONAL EUGENICS CONGRESS 25!

himself and three general superintendents and the secretary to
the State Board of Health. The motive of the State is the
physical, mental, and moral benefit of the subject himself.

In Indiana the law was only enforced for two years, 1907
and 1908. During that period 125 men were compulsorily vasectomized at the Jeffersonville Reformatory. Investigations were
set on foot by the committee into the pedigrees of some of these
in order to ascertain the probable eugenic value of the operations, and they feel justified in reporting favourably on them.

In California 220 persons have been operated on, of whom
94 were women. They seem to have been taken exclusively
from the State hospitals for the insane. Compulsory powers
were rarely enforced, as it was decided in all cases to obtain
beforehand the consent either of the relatives or of the patient,
if sound enough mentally to form a reasonable judgment.

Besides the operations recorded above as having been performed under legal authority, a considerable number have been
carried out on persons who have undergone them voluntarily,
so that there are now available a considerable number of records
of their effects on the subject. From a study of these the committee have arrived tentatively at the following conclusions,
among others :—

‘‘(1) That the sterilization of the adult male by vasectomy
is a simple, practicable method of preventing procreation by
him, without otherwise interfering with his sexual functions,
but that it is not certainly permanent in this respect.

“* (2) That sterilization of the adult female . . . . is never
wholly free from danger to life or disturbance of other bodily
and mental functions. Modern surgery and hospital care have
greatly reduced these dangers, but they still exist.

“* (3) That sterilization of adults by any of these processes
does not appear greatly to modify previous sex characteristics
and habits. In females sexual passion is sometimes increased.
In males more often somewhat mitigated.”

With regard to the effect on health and habits of the operation of vasectomy, the Committee obtained a good deal of conflicting evidence. Those who had undergone the operation
voluntarily claimed to have derived considerable benefit from it,
252 EUGENICS REVIEW E. Schuster :

while those compulsorily operated on seemed less inclined to

speak in its favour.
It is worth while to note that, although these laws have been

passed in many States and are contemplated in many others,
they have not been enacted as a result of any general public
demand for them, but owing to the efforts of a few enthusiasts.
It is partly for this reason that they have been so little enforced.

Dr. Davenport’ discusses the biological basis for and practical usefulness of certain laws imposing limitations on marriage. These he divides into three classes, the first dealing
with the degree of kinship of the parties. ‘‘In practically all
States of the Union marriage of brother and sister of parent
and child, even of grandparent and grandchild, is forbidden.

In most States marriage of uncle or neice, or of
aunt and nephew, is forbidden.’’ Such laws he regards as
the crystalization of experience of the evil results of incestuous
matings, and he gives examples to prove the point.

About a third of the States forbid the marriage of cousins.
This prohibition is on the whole biologically justifiable, although such marriages are probably harmless if the stock is
perfectly sound on both sides, but if a defect is present, whether
latent or patent in either party, it is likely to be present also
in the other, and thus to be transmitted to some, at any rate,
of the children. Dr. Davenport is of opinion that the prohibition should be qualified as follows :— .

‘The marriage of cousins is forbidden when in the
parental fraternity which is common to both there is a case of
inability to learn at school, of dementia praecox or manic depressive insanity in any of their forms, of epilepsy, of congenital deafness, of albinism, or of cleft palate.’’

A law against the marriage of cousins would probably be
difficult to enforce at first, but would be useful in educating
public opinion as to the dangers of such marriages. The
prohibition of the marriage of physically or mentally defective
persons for eugenic purposes has not apparently been introduced in any State, though many provide, on legal grounds,

*Marriage Laws and Customs, by Dr. C. B. Davenport, Director of the Eugenics
Record Office, Cold Spring Harbour, Long Island, N.Y.
INTERNATIONAL EUGENICS CONGRESS 253

that if either party is an idiot or insane the marriage is void,
while the marriage of paupers is restricted in some States for
the reason that a male pauper cannot support a wife. Dr.
Davenport does not advocate legislation of this kind, but has
something to say in favour of extending the system of certificates, which some clergymen now require in order to avoid
solemnizing the marriages of persons suffering from venereal
disease. Many States have laws rendering void marriages
between white persons and negros, or descendants of negros in
certain specified degrees, or sometimes Chinese or Kanakas.
These laws are intended to prevent the evil results which may
reasonably be expected to arise from crosses of these races,
but they fail lamentably in preventing such crosses. With
regard to them Professor Davenport gives the following advice :
“* Forget unessentials, like skin colour, and focus attention
on socially important defects. Then, by sterilization or segregation, prevent the reproduction of the socially inadequate.”’

(b) Education.

The education of public opinion is a necessary foundation
for any definite legislative action, and is in itself likely to lead
to the spread of eugenic habits. To the medical profession the
‘public turns for instruction and advice in matters of this kind,
it is therefore of the greatest importance that Eugenics should
be included in the medical curriculum. The object of Mr. H.
E. Jordan’s’ paper is to insist on this point.

Dr. Schiller? deals with the education of the middle and
upper classes in England. The educational system ‘“‘ is remarkable for the comparatively slight emphasis it lays on
intellectual education. It seems to have despaired altogether of
utilizing for educational purposes the alleged desire for knowledge for its own sake, the universality of which Aristotle could
assume as a truism in the Greek world. Not that it is
utilitarian, and offers much that the youthful mind can recognise as useful knowledge. On the contrary, the staple subjects

*The Place of Eugenics in the Medical Curriculum. By H. EF. Jordan, Chairman
of the Eugenics Section of the American Association for the Study and Prevention of

Infant Mortality.
* Practical Eugenics in Education, by F. C. S. Schiller, M.A., D.Sc.
254 EUGENICS REVIEW E. Schuster :

of a ‘liberal’ education seems so ‘ useless’ that it is thought
that only the well-to-do can afford to study them; their real
use is to serve a caste-mark or class distinction. But they
evince their liberality in another way; they are lberally
endowed. Care is taken that it shall pay a clever boy exceedingly well to study them.”

The scholarship system in which the liberal endowment
evinces itself is of distinct eugenic value for the following
reason: it is characteristic of our social system that the
pecuniary rewards for successful professional work, though
adequate, are given rather late in the lives of those who earn
them. Thus, at the time in a man’s life when his children
are being born success is usually not yet assured and his income
is comparatively low. Yet under the existing system, if he is
a man of ability, his children will have a reasonable chance
of obtaining scholarships, and the feeling that this is the case
will militate against some of the prudential reasons for restricting the size of the family.

The Athletic Branch of British education has a moral and
also a eugenic value in that it sets up an ideal of fitness, which
acts as an incentive to self-improvement. Its value could be
greatly enhanced by intellectualizing and spiritualizing this
ideal.

It cannot be claimed that the foregoing account of Dr.
Schiller’s paper is at all adequate, as only the points dealing .
more immediately and directly with eugenics have been
referred to.

(c) Inspection.

Dr. Querton! pleads for the systematic inspection of children. He sees in this a necessary corollary to free and compulsory education in order to ensure its profitable application.
Some sort of examination, physical and mental, should be imposed at the commencement of the school period to determine
on what lines education should be conducted, and this should
be repeated from time to time, as often as necessary, in order

‘Rapport sur l’Organization Pratique de l’Action Eugenique, Dr. Louis Querton,
Professeur 4 ]’Université Libre de Bruxelles.
INTERNATIONAL EUGENICS CONGRESS 255

to ascertain the results of the education received, and to adapt
it further to the needs of the individual child. This systematic
observation should be extended on the one hand to children
who have not yet reached the school age, and on the other to
those who have left school and entered some trade or business.
It should thus be continuous from the beginning to the end of
their period of development.

Dr. Querton suggests a scheme for organising this system
of methodical control. Eugenics committees should be established locally, consisting of persons who are led by their
occupations to interest themselves specially in children. The
local committees, each having for its sphere of action a town
or part of a town, should be related by means of provincial or
county associations, which themselves should be under the
guidance of a national association.

The main object of the scheme is not the eugenic improvement of the stock, but the modification of the environment so
as to adapt it to the needs of the individual during the sensitive
period of growth, but eugenic aims would be furthered thereby.
The eugenic committees ‘‘ would collect the documents necessary to the scientific knowledge of the facts of heredity, and
would supply precise information concerning the effective work
of different social institutions on the transformation of the
race.”’

Further, by inspections of the children it would’ often
be possible to ascertain the dangers of the hereditary transmission of diseases and defects, and to put a stop to further births
when the production of degenerates is certain. The spread of
elementary notions of eugenics would also be facilitated.

(d) Prophylaxis of Syphilis.

Professor Hallopeau after referring to the dysgenic effects
of hereditary syphilis points out that medicine makes a considerable contribution to eugenics if it succeeds in preventing it.

Preventive measures may be divided into three classes:

(1) Prophylaxis by the police, i.e., measures taken by the
State to prevent the propagation of the disease.
256 EUGENICS REVIEW E. Schuster

(2) Prophylaxis by persuasion. It must be pointed out to
syphilitics that they have no right to become parents so long as
they are liable to transmit the disease to their offspring.

(3) Medical prophylaxis, t.e., the cure of the disease in the
individual. The greater part of the paper is occupied with a
discussion of the best treatment, and no account of this need be
given here.

(e) The Prevention of Alcoholism.

Dr. Mjden describes a scheme for the encouragement of
temperance by the taxation of beers according to their alcoholic
content. The paper also contains evidence of the dysgenic
effect of alcohol. We regret that we have not been able to
give an account of it, not having a copy of the paper available.
