REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS. 171

ledge of biology and physiology, who would be able to supply them with
the fuller particulars which would certainly be required by a child who
had read the book with intelligence. It is an excellent handbook for
parents. G. M. CHAMBERS.

Chesser, E. SLOAN. From Girlhood to Womanhood. London. Cassell
and Co.; 1913; price 2s. 6d.; pp. 142.
THIS book can be given to any girl above 12; it explains simply the stage
of development from girlhood to womanhood and gives her sensible and
practical advice as to the best means of becoming a happy, healthy, and
attractive woman. Dr. Sloan Chesser puts forward a high ideal of life.
G. M. CHAMBERS.

Chesser, E. Stoan. Woman, Marriage and Motherhood. London.

Cassell; 1913; price 6s. net; pp. 287.
WE have here another of the popular books of the day dealing with social
questions affecting marriage and motherhood, written chiefly from the
point of view of women. There is much good work in it. The earlier
chapters are historical and treat briefly of the evolution of motherhood, of
marriage laws and customs, and of the legal position of the wife and
mother at various times and places. The results of sweated labour, the
social effects of factory work on the homes and of our prison system are
clearly stated. There is an account of the attempts, both on the Continent
and in England, to provide pure milk for infants, to feed nursing
mothers, and to establish schools for training in the art of home making
and baby rearing.

The most obvious omission is the absence of any reference to religious
ideals and sanctions as influencing matters connected with sex and social
reform. There is also no attempt to deal with the extremely important
variations in outlook upon all these questions which result from the
physiological and psychological differences of sex. It is the necessity
for the constant readjustment of these two points of view—a readjustment
required by the ever varying pressure on one or the other of a changing
civilisation—that constitutes the extreme difficulty of handling these
problems.

It is to be feared that more better organisation of society, with increased inspection and training and more humane treatment on all sides,
although it might achieve considerable temporary improvement and is
therefore worth working for, would not really help much to a more
permanent solution of the eternal problem which confronts humanity.

Cc. D. W.

Sandeman, Georce. Social Renewal. London. W. Heinemann; 1913;
price 2s. 6d.; pp. 150.

“THE collective or individualist theory of society is inadeauate to
its real nature, and is therefore false. Society... is... a real thing
on ifs own account, with a design of its own, a life of its own, and
Principles of its own. This may be called the realist theory of society
...” (p. 33). This great thought is supported by somewhat arrogant
denunciations of the modern social reformer. He is rebuked, for instance,
for supposing the social problem to be entirely one of “heredity and
breeding” (p. 19): as if anybody ever really supposed it so! But
Mr. Sandeman reaches his high-water mark of exaggeration on page 5.
“The workers,” he observes, “. . . desire to enter into possession; they
want abundance of life; they want to grow up... and to be free. The
reformers and philanthropists intend exactly the contrary; their idea is
to elaborate and to aggravate, and to perpetuate the tutelage of the
workers.” After pointing out the more obvious errors of other people,
Mr. Sandeman presents his own discovery. “Real society” is “humanity
itself”; and the only thing that can renew society is “ charity.” There
