REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS 399

The chief defect of the book is the dogmatic attitude adopted. In
lectures to a popular audience this is difficult to avoid, but in preparing
them for publication it is regrettable that the authors did not make
greater effort to indicate more clearly where well-established fact ends
and unproved inference begins. The inference may, in most cases, turn
out to be correct, but until its truth is established some indication should
be given that it stands on a different footing from ascertained fact, and
most of the writers give the impression that their inferences are no less
infallible than their facts. In Professor Davenport’s chapters on “ Man ”
there are also two serious slips—diabetes insipidus (which appears to be
confused with common diabetes) is placed correctly among dominant
affections, but its inheritance is described as if it were recessive (p. 277),
and on p. 286, among the general characteristics of recessive abnormalities,
the statement appears that “two affected parents have exclusively normal
children,” where affected children is, of course, meant. It is unfortunate
that, in a book which, on the whole, is so well suited to the “ general
reader,” more care has not been taken to ensure complete accuracy.

L. DONCASTER.

SOME RECENT AMERICAN PAPERS ON HEREDITY.

1. Davenport, C. B. Light thrown by the Experimental Study of Heredity
Upon the Factors and Methods of Evolution. Amer. Naturalist,
46, 1912; pp. 129-138.

2. Davenport,C. B. The Trait Book. Eugenics Record Office, Coldspring Harbour, N.Y. Bulletin No. 6, 1912.

3. Davenport, C. B. Sex-limited Inheritance in Poultry. Journ. Exp.
2 vol. 13, 1912; pp. 1-18 (seven coloured plates).

4. Arkell, T. R., and Davenport, C. B. Horns in Sheep as a Typical
Sex-limited Character. Science 35, 1912; p. 375.

5. Arkell, T. R. Some Data on the Inheritance of Horns in Sheep. New
Hampshire Experiment Station. Bulletin 160, 1912.

6. Jordan, H. E. Studies in Human Heredity. Bull. Philosoph. Soc.
University of Virginia, 1912; pp. 293-317.

(1.) This is an interesting summary of the changes that recent
genetic research have brought about in our ideas of the process of
evolution. The chief changes are: (1) that attention is now
devoted rather to characters than to species as units; (2) the increased
interest in the relation of continuous to discontinuous variation; (3)
the importance of finding out what can be accomplished by. selection ;
(4) the knowledge that characters are not permanently “ swamped ”
by intercrossing; (5) new light has been obtained on the relations
of somatic to germinal variation; and (6) not all natural characters
are adaptive.

(2.) “ The Trait Book” is a classification of human characters of all
kinds—physical, mental, and pathological—intended for the use of
collectors of pedigrees. Its system is to give every human characteristic a number, arranged on a decimal notation so that the
form of the number classifies the characteristic—all numbers beginning with 4 referring to mental traits, with 42 to feelings etc.,
and so forth. The numbers run up to five figures, e.g., 42,541
represent “ pride,” 42,615 “benevolence vs. malevolence.” Apart
from the doubtful value of many of the “traits,” it would seem
simpler to keep the system of numbers for the larger classes, and within
these to use an alphabetical system for indexing. Many of the traits
are accompanied by “ marginal signs,” intended, apparently, chiefly
tor the indexer. One of these, placed usually opposite conditions
known to: behave as dominants, refers to the instruction, “ Do not
g00 EUGENICS REVIEW

record the unaffected ancestors of an affected person. Field-workers
and collaborators should extend pedigrees of this trait back along
the direct lime of ancestry, as far as possible.” Such an instruction
is surely misleading in any case, and is especially so when the sign
in question is placed opposite sex-limited affections in which both
arents are usually unaffected, and in which knowledge of colaterals is especially important. The case of hemophilia, which also
bears this sign, is even worse, for important authorities maintain
that this disease is never transmitted by those affected, even through
their daughters, in which case no ancestors of affected persons would
be “recorded ” at all.

(3.) In this paper Davenport describes a new case of sex-limited
inheritance of certain sexually dimorphic characters (plumage-colour)
in the brown Leghorn and dark Brahma, which, as in other such
characters in poultry, are transmitted by the female only to her
sons. Other sexually dimorphic characters in the same breeds are
not sex-limited. Previously known cases of this type of inheritance
in birds are reviewed, and the author concludes, with what seems
undue assurance, that such characters are borne by a sex-chromosome
which is present in all spermatazoa, but in only half the eggs. It is
unfortunate that, in summarising the work of Miss Durham and Miss
Marryat on canaries, he should omit any mention of the exceptions
which they obtained, and which are inexplicable on his hypothesis
in the form in which he states it.

(4) and (5.) Arkell and Davenport have repeated and amplified Wood’s
experiments on the inheritance of horns in sheep. The paper in
“ Science ” is devoted chiefly to setting forth a hypothesis to account
for the fact that when a horned race is crossed with a hornless the horn
character appears to be dominant in males and recessive in females.
Full data of the experiments, with figures and horn measurements,
together with a description of the breeds used, are given in the
Bulletin of the New Hampshire Experiment Station. The hypothesis
adopted is that the apparently recessive condition of the horn character in ewes is due to a sex-limited inhibitor for which the female is
homozygous, the male heterozygous, and which is only effective when
it is homozygous and the horn-factor heterozygous. It is thus very
cumbrous, and Castle, in a subsequent letter to “ Science,” points out
that it is not easily reconciled with the fact (recently confirmed by
Marshall, at Cambridge) that castration may prevent the development of horns in the male.

(6.) This paper consists of a considerable series (35) of pedigrees of
left-handedness, with a few of other human abnormalities and
diseases. In the case of left-handedness, it is remarkable that
while in some pedigrees it is clearly recessive to right-handedness,
in others it seems with almost equal certainty to be dominant. The
pedigrees are in general not very extensive, and the author points out
that in a small pedigree of a not very rare condition it is quite possible for a recessive character to give the impression of being
dominant, through appearing in two or three successive generations
in a direct line. This is a point which collectors of pedigrees for
eugenic purposes should remember. The author accepts the conclusion of Hurst that ambidextrous individuals are, usually at least, lefthanded people who have trained the right hand. The other pedigrees
are a miscellaneous collection, very suggestive for further investigation, but not to be regarded as giving final results; in some of them
there are indications of irregularity of dominance.

L. DONCASTER.
