THE

EUGENICS REVIEW

THE EUGENIC AND SOCIAL INFLUENCE
OF THE WAR.!
By PROFESSOR J. A. Linpsay, M.D., F.R.C.P.

 

Two theories are possible regarding the eugenic and social influence of
war in general. The first theory maintains that war is, in the maim,
profoundly dysgenic and anti-social, wasteful of the best life of nations,
destructive of capital and of the fruits of industry, a propagator of
disease, hurtful to the stock, a well-spring of international hatred and
alienation. The alternative theory is the view that war is a tonic, though
admittedly a severe tonic, to the nations; that it promotes the virile
virtues—courage, endurance, self-sacrifice; that it imposes a wholesome
discipline; that it is a great school of patriotism, efficiency, and national
solidarity; that prolonged peace leads to softness of mamners and racial
decadence. . _
Before we seek to determine which of these sharply-contrasted
theories should be approved, it may be well to remind ourselves that the
que stions at issue are extremely complex. The imfluence of war cannot
be compressed into a single, simple and unambiguous formula. Its
influence varies according to the economic and cultural level of the combatants, according to its duration and results, according to whether it is
waged by conscript or professional armies. The psychical influence of
war, upon which so much stress is laid by militarist writers, is one thing
for the victors; another, and very different thing for the vanquished.
War with the simpler weapons of former ages is not comparable to war
waged with all the formidable and sinister panoply of modern science.
But still greater difficulties remain. There are certain large and
fundamental generalisations relating to war which are generally accepted,
but which are not free from challenge. Let me indicate a few of these.
It is commonly assumed as self-evident that war is wasteful of the best
life of nations—young men of robust physique in their early prime, the
best possible potential husbands and fathers. But so eminent an authority
as Professor Arthur Keith will not subscribe to this doctrine. In his
opinion the bravest are not also the best, and’ the brave man, as such, is

1An Address delivered in the University Museum, Oxford, to the Oxford
Summer School of Civics and Eugenics, August 27th, 1918.
134 EUGENICS REVIEW.

relatively valueless in an industrial age, and in an industrial community.
Again, it is generally assumed as needing no argument that military
training, with its regular life, its open-air existence, its systematic drill
and ordered discipline—in a word, its cult of the physical, is eminently
conducive to health. But Professor Sergi, one of our most eminent
anthropologists, holds that if young men are recruited at the age of 18
or 19, before the arterial and muscular systems are hardened and
matured, the effect of military training is in many cases injurious. Once
more, it is assumed by militarist writers, as an historical, incontrovertible
fact that prolonged peace is a cause of racial degeneracy and that some
of the ancient Empires owed their extinction to the absence of the
stimulus of war. It is well to remember that this doctrine is a pure
assumption, and in no sense an accepted datum of history or of biology.
Finally, it is generally assumed that any cause, such as war, which
diminishes the birth-rate must necessarily be evil, but an important school
of thinkers asks us to reconsider this opinion, and to enquire whether we
have sufficient evidence to determine if a high birth-rate is indicative of
national vigour and vitality, or only of reckless and improvident
propagation.

I put forward these four problems, which are closely linked up with
the eugenic and social influence of war, not with the view of attempting
to pronounce upon them, but simply as a suggestion that in our thinking
about war we must avoid premature generalisations, and not too readily
accept as proved dogmas what may turn out to be only more or less
probable, or improbable, theories.

Let us deal with the general question before us as far as possible in
the light of assured facts, and as little as possible in the temper of
hypothesis or prophecy. The literature of the subject is very extensive,
and the materials for forming a judgment are varied and ample.

To begin with the most fundamental question of all—what will be
the wastage of man-power in this war, and what will be the effect of
that wastage? It is impossible, while war still rages, to calculate with
any approximation to accuracy the loss of life involved in the present
conflict. Dr. Louis C. Parkes reckoned the number of males in the five
chief combatant nations to the end of the year 1915 killed or unable to
support a family at nine millions. It would hardly be rash to assume
that this figure has been trebled since the above date. A more detailed
calculation is that of F. Savorgnan, contributed to a recemt issue of
Scientia. In this able article he calculates the number of males of military age in the belligerent nations, the average annual increase of this
class in normal times, the probable losses in war, and the time which
the various nations will require to recoup these losses. The figures work
out as follows :—

A. GERMANY.

Men of military age... i .. ¥3 millions
Annual increment of this class sas ... 168,000
Probable losses in war ... noes os .. 18 per cent.

Period necessary for recoupment... ... 12 years
THE EUGENIC AND SOCIAL INFLUENCE OF THE WAR. 135

B. FRANCE.
Men of military age... ve ... 7% millions
Amnual increment of this class wee ... 19,000
Probakle losses in war . . wes ... 17 per cent.
Period necessary for recoupment vee ... 66 years

C. ENGLAND.
Men of military age... or .. g millions
Annual increment of this class ws ... 83,000
Probable losses in war ... sta sas .. Q percent.
Period necessary for recoupment ... .. ro years

D. ITALY.

Men of military age... «ss «5% millions
Annual increment of this class te w+ 13,000
Probable losses in war . . ve ... Q percent.
Period necessary for recoupment wes ... 38 years

The data involved in the above calculations are 5 somueerbiat precarious
and were based on the assumption that the war would not last longer
than four years. It is probable that the views here expressed do not err
on the side of optimism, and they serve to bring out in lurid light the
vast holocaust of the nations which is now in progress. There has been
nothing like it since the Black Death of the 14th century, which is
believed to have carried off twenty-five million victims. F. Savorgnan’s
general conclusion is that about the year 1930 Germany and England will
have made good their losses in man-power, but that Italy will require
much longer, and that the prospect before France is very grave, as her
population before the war was practically stationary. He thinks the
difficulty of France will be partially met by a large immigration of
Italians and Spaniards, who are traditionally prolific, and who will ally
themselves with French women, the tendency being towards the formation of a solid Latin block.

The loss of life in war is a question not only of quantity, but of
quality. The casualties amongst officers have been exceptionally heavy,
many only sons have fallen, and many old families have become extinct.
The loss to literature, science, politics, and administration has been
very grave. Poets, writers, artists, thinkers and statesmen—the Intelligentsia of the Nations—have fallen in large numbers. The universities
have in some cases been practically emptied, with the inevitable result
that the supply of trained intelligence will hereafter tend to run short.
The nation is spending in this great conflict not only its blood but its
brain, and the latter can be replaced much more slowly than the former.

One of the most obvious results of the slaughter of young men in
this war will be an accentuation of the disproportion between the sexes,
which was already marked in the pre-war period. On a moderate
calculation, there will be three million more women than men in these
islands in the not distant future. The social effects of this disproportion
are likely to be intricate and far-reaching, and are not to be judged
exclusively from the standpoint of matrimony. We must not deal with
this question simply as if the cry of the nation will presently be for
136 EUGENICS REVIEW.

“more babies,” independent of their quality. It is rumoured that our
principal enemy-is already arranging for “secondary marriages,” with
the view of promptly replenishing the stock so sorely wasted at Ypres
and Verdun, on the Somme and on the Marne. Germany wants more
men, especially more soldiers, so that she may soon be ready to fight
again, forgetful of the fact that the rapid growth of her population since
1870 was one of the principal causes which launched her on her present
disastrous career. Before we begin to tamper with the marriage laws
we should carefully enquire whether an increase of population, as such,
should be one of the aims of the enlightened legislator.

The population of England and Wales, according to the usual computation, increased a little more than a million in the course of the
17th century, nearly three millions in the course of the 18th century, and
no less than 23 millions in the course of the roth century. If this rate of
increase should continue, it is reckoned that 300 years hence England
and Wales would have a population of 1,400,000,000! There is evidently
here matter for serious thought. |

The disproportion between the sexes has other issues than those of
which Hymen is the custodian. It is intimately related to the industrial
employment of women and the economtic value of female labour. One
of the most certain results of the present war will be a vast extension
of female employment, not alone ‘because there will be fewer men, but
also because women have fully established their capacity to do work, and
to do it well, which was formerly thought to be naturally reserved for
men. One becomes a shade less impatient of the miserable waste and
wreckage of war when one reflects how the exigencies of war have tapped
unknown or forgotten reservoirs of national energy and national working
power. Women will continue many of their present activities after the
war, partly because they have learnt to like their work, partly because
they have learnt to like their pay, partly because the enormously enhanced
cost of living will render some increment to the household exchequer
welcome or even imperative. Education, it may be inferred, will tend to
fall more and more into the hands of women, as it has already done
in America. The whole question of woman’s work and woman’s sphere
will call for revision. Women have already made their way into the
medical profession and justified their status there. It is not easy to
understand on what, principle they can continue to be denied access to
other professions. The policy of the open door and a free career to
talent are the lines upon which the practice of the future must be guided.
Women must be allowed to do whatever experience shows that they can
do well.

Closely related to the question of man-power, as affected by the war,
are the questions of marriage-rates, birth-rates, and death-rates. As
regards the marriage-rate, it is well knowm that in early days of the
war “war marriages ” were numerous and popular, the marriage-rate for
the quarter ending September 30th, 1915, being the highest ever recorded
for England and Wales, viz., 21.8 per 1,000, and for the whole year 19.4
per 1,000, as compared with 15.4 per 1,000, the average figure for the
THE EUGENIC AND SOCIAL INFLUENCE OF THE WAR. 137

previous ten years. Sir Bernard Mallet has calculated that between
August, 1914, and June, 1917, there were in England and Wales 200,000
people married who, but for the war, would have remained single, and
in Scotland 8,oco such persons. In Ireland there was no increase in the
marriage-rate. The motives for war marriages are various and of varving degrees of validity. Sentiment, the outflow of female sympathy for
men risking their lives in the defence of their country, accounted for
some. Parental caution regarding financial security was naturally less
stringent in war-time. But motives more definitely eugenic were also at
work. The desire for heirs, fears for the extinction of ancient families—
such motives operated and were worthy of respect. Naturally, the high
marriage-rate could not be maintained and soon tended to fall. The
rate for 1916 was 14.9 per 1,000, being 4.5 per 1,000 below the phenomenally high rate of 1915, and the figures for 1917, so far as they have been
ascertained, indicate a further decline.

The question of birth-rates has attracted much attention in recent
years, not only in this country, but im France, Germany, and elsewhere.
As is well known, a rapid and progressive fall in the birth-rate has been
in operation in most civilised countries during the past half-century.
The decline began first in France in the early years of the 19th century,
but was not manifest in England and Germany until the last quarter of
the century. The facts are striking and significant. The birth-rate in
England and Wales was 33 per 1,000 in the year 1850. In the year 1876
it had risen and’ stood at the figure of 36 per 1,000. Thereafter a rapid
and progressive fall set in, and in 1914 the rate had sunk to 24 per 1,000.
The experience of Germany was similar. The birth-rate in that country
was 39 per 1,000 in the year 1850. It rose to 41 per 1,000 in 1875, and
then fell steadily to 27.5 per 1,000 im 1913. You are probably aware that
the cause of this general decline in the birth-rate has been much
debated. The general opinion of experts—there are some dissentients—
is that artificial restriction has played the largest part.

War, for obvious reasons, tends to depress the birth-rate. In invaded and devastated regions the whole machinery of family life is disorganised, and the birth-rate falls to one-half or even less of the normal
figure. This has been the case in parts of France, Poland, and elsewhere.
In Bavaria the birth-rate of 20.7 per 1,000 in 1913 fell to 15.8 per 1,000
in 1915. In England and Wales the rate for the last quarter of 1915 was
19.5 per 1,000, the lowest on record. Thereafter there was a rise in the
rate, we may presume as the consequence of “ war marriages,” which for
the quarter ending September 3oth, 1916, stood at 21.7 per 1,000. For
the whole year 1916 the rate was 20.9 per 1,000, being 4.6 per 1,000 below
the average of the decennium 1905-14, and 1.0 per 1,000 below the rate
for 1915. Sir Bernard Mallet calculates the reduction of natality im this
country due to the war at 12 per cent. in 1916, as compared with 1914,
and points out that most of the belligerent countries have suffered much
more severely. Whether the progressive decline in the birth-rate which
has been operative in this coumtry for half a century will comtinue after
the war cannot be affirmed with certainty, but probability points in that
138 EUGENICS REVIEW.

direction. How far this tendency is evil is a question upon which there
is at present much difference of opinion. Some of our leading authorities
hold the view that a low birth-rate, coupled with a low death-rate, represents the desired optimum. It is well known that the birth-rate is
highest in the least progressive countries. The rate in Russia is 48.1
per 1,000, in Roumania 43 per 1,000, and in Spain 33 per 1,000; while in
Holland it is 28 per 1,000, in Australia 26 per 1,000, in England 21 per
1,000, and in France 19 per 1,000. In all cases a high birth-rate is
associated with a high death-rate. Thus in Russia the death-rate is 28
per 1,000, and in Roumania 23 per 1,000, while in Great Britain it is
13 per 1,000, and in Australia 11 per 1,000. New Zealand affords a good
example of a moderate birth-rate, viz., 26 per 1,000, and a very low
death-rate, viz., 9 per 1,000, and consequently a high rate of natural
increase. We have no accurate statistical information regarding India
and China, but we know that both countries have an enormous birth-rate
and a correspondingly high death-rate. The infant mortality in these
countries rises to an appalling figure—300 or 400 per 1,000. Compare
this with the figure for London, viz., 91 per 1,000. So far as I am aware,
no country presents the association of a high birth-rate and a low deathrate. The wastage of nature in all forms of sentient life is, we know,
enormous. Man is no exception to this rule, but it is probable that
human wisdom and foresight will be less anxious in future to stimulate
birth-production than to improve the quality of the breed, and to secure
that every individual born into the world shall have a fair chance of
health, usefulness, and happiness.

Infant mortality has shown a remarkable decline in England and
Wales during the war. The rate for 1916 was gi per 1,000 births, being
Ig per 1,000 below the rate for the preceding year, and 22 per 1,000 below
the average of the decennium 1906-15. Until we see whether this decline
will be maintained it is somewhat premature to speculate om its causes,
which are not clear.

Let us turn to the large question of the influence of war upon. health
and disease. We must separate two questions which are fundamentally
distinct, viz., the health of armies in the field, and the influence of war
upon the health of civil populations. Before the epoch of the present
war there had been an immense and progressive improvement in. military
hygiene and in the héalth of armies. Some of the figures in this connection are very impressive. The mortality rate of our armies in Great
Britain, which in the period 1817-21 was 21 per 1,000, had fallen im the
period 1907-11 to 2.6 per 1,000. For our armies in India tthe figures for
these two periods were 87 per 1,000 and 6.7 per 1,000, respectively. In
Gibraltar the corresponding figures were 18 per 1,000 and 3.4 per 1,000,
and in South Africa 12 per 1,000 and 3.8 per 1,000. The records for some
of the most unhealthy stations are even more striking. Ceylon in the
earlier period had a death-roll of 111 per 1,000, in the later periad one
of 7.4 per 1,000. The figure for Jamaica had fallen from 185 per 1,000
to. 9.9 per 1,000, while that for West Africa, formerly the white man’s
grave, the murderous figure of 362 per 1,000 of the earlier epoch had been
THE EUGENIC AND SOCIAL INFLUENCE OF THE WAR. 139

reduced to 11.9 per 1,000 for the later. These figures represent a notable
triumph for medical science and military organisation. The improvement in the hygiene and health of armies in the field has been not less
noteworthy. It is well known that in many of the wars of former days
for one victim claimed by the bullet, four, five, perhaps nine or ten, were
claimed by the microbe. The lamentable records of the Crimean War
and the great Boer War are matters of common knowledge. Typhus
fever, typhoid fever, smallpox, dysentery and malaria have at various
times decimated armies in the field. It is believed that the RussoJapanese War was the first war on record in which the casualties from
wounds exceeded in number the casualtics from disease. The present
war has borne eloquent testimony to the efficiency of medical science.
Smallpox, typhus fever, and typhoid fever have ceased to be factors of
importance. Dysentery has proved troublesome in the Eastern areas,
but modern treatment has robbed it of much of its terror. Malaria has
been an important factor at Salonica and elsewhere, but the methods for
its prevention are now well understood and practised with increasing
success. We may say broadly that the health of armies in the field is
to-day as good as, or better than, that of the civil population at home.

When we turn to the influence of war upon the health of the civilpopulation at home we are confronted with ain entirely different set of
problems. The army is composed of adult males presumably healthy on
enlistment. Health is the first condition of efficiency. Discipline is
strict. The first symptoms of incipient disease receive prompt attention.
Medical science is adequate and generally available. Food is abundant
and of good quality. None of these conditions apply without qualification to the civil population. For them war is apt to involve factors which
make for disease—privation, deficient food, unaccustomed labour, the
interruption of the normal rhythms of domestic life. There is a comstant
stream of broken-down men from the front returning to civil life, and
constituting a grave dysgenic factor. Disease in some of its forms
becomes more rife. The tendency is towards the lowering of the general
biological level. It has been affirmed by some good observers that the
long French wars from 1792 to 1815 caused an appreciable diminution in
height amongst the population of France. This statement has been contested and cannot be said to be definitely confirmed, but there is conclusive evidence that, comparing the years 1815 and 1835, exemptions
from military service due to physical defect had largely increased in
France. There is, also, evidence to suggest that the recruits in France
of 1892-3, the “children of the war” of 1870, were inferior in physique
to the children of other years.

Two diseases deserve special consideration in connection with the
question of the influence of war upon civil populations, viz., tuberculosis
and venereal disease. Tuberculosis is a disease of lowered nutrition.
Bad food, bad air, and overcrowding are the chief predisposing conditions. At the present time there is a serious shortage of food in most of
the belligerent countries, and food rationing has become one of the most
urgent of national questions. In some countries the shortage is especially
140 EUGENICS REVIEW.

acute as regards fats and sugars—two of the most essential of foodstuffs.
How far the food regulations in force in various countries are affecting
the health of the people is a question which cannot at present be answered
with certainty. In this connection we may recall the remark of Benjamin
Franklin, “Wars are not paid for at the time. The bill comes afterwards.” Food Controllers have a difficult task set tothem. Physiologists
and sanitarians are not yet agreed as to the best diet for persons of
different ages, sexes, and occupations. Under the influence of Chittenden
and his school it has come to be generally accepted that the usual consumption of proteids is vastly in excess of the real needs of the organism.
This doctrine, however, has not yet had a sufficiently long trial to justify
us in accepting it as a physiological axiom. The minimum of food
mecessary to preserve health and working power may mot, also, be the
optimum. The effect of a reduced diet upon the stock is still wndetermined. Our food habits are of great antiquity and are tthe result of a
long evolution. It is by no means certain that they can be altered in
essential particulars with impunity. Food rationing is more than an
economic question or a matter of patriotism. It is, also, a problem in
physiology and dietetics. The results of the present great experiment
of the compulsory regulation of the food of the peoples of the various
mations have still to be tabulated. A reduction in the average weight of
school children in Germany has taken place. From Germany there is
also reported a large increase in dropsical affections attributed to the
shortage of fats. From many of the Continental cities a large increase
in the incidence of tuberculosis is reported, and there can be little doubt
that bad and insufficient food, and a consequent lowering of the general
standard of nutrition, is in the main accountable for this increase. Professor Sergi has repeatedly warned his countrymen of this danger and
suggested measures for obviating its effects. To get at the facts as
regards England and Wales, Sir Bernard Mallet is of opinion sthat it is
advisable, owing to war conditions, to restrict our comparisons to the
female sex, as we know that the curves of mortality for the two sexes
normally run nearly parallel in their yearly fluctuations. In 1913 the
deaths from tuberculosis per million females living was 1,154. In 1915
the figure was 1,235, and im 1916 it was 1,234—a rise of 7 per cent. It
is probable that workshop conditions account for the larger part of this
increase, but in some countries food shortage has played a large part in
the rise of the tuberculosis rate. Nature will not be denied, and an
underfed nation is likely to fall an easy prey to tuberculosis. It should
mot be forgotten that the rapid fall in the tuberculosis rate in Great
Britain began shortly after the repeal of the Corn Laws had inaugurated
the era of cheap food. The fall in the tuberculosis rate was hardly (perceptible in Ireland, a relatively ill-fed country.

As regards venereal disease, an increase in the prevalence of these
affections seems an inevitable concomitant of war, and constitutes one
of its most serious dysgenic factors.  Staltistics on this subject are
notoriously untrustworthy, but the Registrar-General’s returns point to a
large increase in the number of deaths from this cause at ages over 45.
THE EUGENIC AND SOCIAL INFLUENCE OF THE WAR. 141

Let us turn to another subject of great interest and importance—viz.,
the relation of war to crime. In brief, the war has witnessed a rapid
diminution of crime and of convictions, except among youthful delinquents.
Before the war crime in England was rapidly diminishing. The convictions
per 100,000 of the population had fallen from 586 in 1904-5 to 369 per
100,000 in 1913-14. Since the war the decline has been much more rapid,
the rate falling to 281 per 100,000 in 1914-15, to 159 per 100,000 in 1915-16,
and to 118 per 100,000 in 1916-17. In their report for 1915-16 the Commissioners of Prisons for England and Wales assign three causes for the
decrease in crime, viz. :—

(1) The enlistment of many habitual petty offenders.

(2) The restrictive orders issued by the Central Control Board (Liquor
Traffic), and those made by the justices and the military authorities.

(3) The great demand for labour, rendering employment easy and
well-paid, and resulting in ability to pay fines, this ability being
also aided by Section I. of the Criminal Justice Administration
Act of 1914, which made it mandatory upon the courts to give time
for the payment of fines, and requiring the courts, in imposing
fines, to take into account the means of the offender, and not
to reckon the payment of court fees and police fees.

The report further states that since the war the receptions to prisons
are for the most part confined to the physically and mentally weak.
Amongst the most notable features in recent criminal statistics, is the
marked reduction in the convictions for drunkenness. Thus, in 1913 the
convictions were 153,112 males, and 35,765 females—total 188,877; while
in 1916 the figures were 62,946 males and 21,245 females—total 84,191, a
reduction of 55 per cent. It is to be noted that the decline is marked
amongst women as well as amongst men. The Commissioners are of
opinion that these improved figures are attributable mainly to the early
closing of public-houses, and the general restrictions upon the sale of
liquor—a conclusion which affords an important suggestion for temperance
reformers. It is probable that the increased cost of alcoholic beverages
has also been a factor. The war has emptied the prisons not only of
England and Wales, but also of Scotland and Ireland. The Prison Commissioners for Scotland adduce reasons for this improvement similar to
those suggested by the English Commissioners, but add the remark:
“There has also been a quickening of the sense of citizenship which has
had its effect amongst those who at ordinary times pay little regard to
the law.” France has a similar tale to tell. M. Roux, professor of
Criminal Law in the University of Dijon, reports that the war has emptied
the prisons of France, and “liquidated the criminality of the past.”

This question has another and very different phase. Experience in
France after the war of 1870, and in America after the Civil War, shows
that the diminution in crime in time of war is followed by a large recrudescence of crime in the after-war period. The causes of this increase are
sufficiently obvious. The relaxation of military discipline, the reaction
from the privations of war, the breaking up of homes, the uncertainty of
employment, impatience with the monotony of industrial life—such factors
are obvious and must be reckoned with as tending to crime. War is a good
142 EUGENICS REVIEW.

school of the virile virtues, but it is hardly a school to inculcate increased
respect for the lives, property and rights of others. The delinquent soldier
will exist, and he will raise problems of peculiar delicacy and difficulty.
How to deal fairly with him in the light of his past services and sufferings,
without lowering the sanctions of private and social morality, will require
all our wisdom and forethought. To take one example—it will not conduce
to social stability to condone bigamy, because the offender can display
his wounds or boast his medals.

While crime generally has notably declined during the war, it is
disquieting to find that there has been an increase of juvenile delinquency.
From England, Scotland, and France, there is the same report of an
increase in the number of first offenders. The.causes of this increase are
believed to be mainly two, viz. :—

(1) The lack of a father’s supervision, and

(2) the employment of children and youths in adult occupations, owing
to the shortage of labour. This increase of juvenile crime will
raise difficult problems in the future, and for these problems we
must be prepared.

A very unexpected feature of war-time has be*n the decline of insanity.
That this decline is real and not merely statistical seems to be the opinion
of those best qualified to judge. Robertson of Edinburgh is of opinion
that the war has acted as a mental tonic. He could trace no increase in
insanity due to the war, but regarded dabbling in Spiritualism as dangerous
to certain mental types. Easterbrook of Crichton Royal found only 19
cases of insanity due to “grief,” and was of opinion that war had “only
exposed and accentuated inherent weakness.” Carre of Glasgow reported
only nine cases of insanity due to the war. Robertson thought that the
fall in the female statistics was due to women not being so “shut in” as
before. Graham of Belfast reported a decrease in the number of insane
and expressed the view that “it is not the great tragedies of life that sap
the force of the brain and wreck the psychic organism. On the contrary,
it is the small worries, the deadly monotony of a narrow and circumscribed
existence.” In 1915 the report of the Irish Inspectors of Lunatics showed
that for the first time since 1865, there was no increase in the numbers
of the insane in Ireland; there was, in fact, a decrease of 77. The war
was,assigned as a cause in 1.32 per cent. of cases. Of 150 cases of insanity
in the Navy, reported in 1916, only 15 had occurred since the outbreak
of war.

The above facts admit of only one interpretation—viz., that war, fruitful though it fs in shock cases and neurasthenia, does not increase, but
may even tend to diminish, insanity. The factors of this result are
probably complex. Better employment, higher wages, increased sobriety,
a larger life for women, the general quickening of the national pulse in
response to the stimulus of war may well be presumed to have played a
part. The suggestion that one of the causes of insanity is monotony and
dull routine will probably be generally accepted by alienists. Morbid
excitement, on the one hand, and the absence of wholesome stimulation on
the other hand, are inimical to the preservation of the due balance of the
psychic life. In this connection it is interesting to note that the Officer
of Health for London, in his report for the year 1917, finds that, contrary
THE EUGENIC AND SOCIAL INFLUENCE OF THE WAR. 143

to expectation, air-raids have ndt led to any increase of nervous diseases
amongst children. A limited number of children have suffered, but there
has been no general increase of nervous diseases amongst the young.
The British stock is evidently not easily thrown off its normal balance.

A remarkable and unexpected result of the war has been a decided
decline in the rate of suicide. In the ten years 1901-10, the average number
of male suicides was 157 per million living. In 1914 the figure was 151
per million, while in 1915 the figure fell to 104 (civilians only), and in 1916
it stood at 111. Amongst females, as might be expected, the fluctuations
were much less marked. The female rate in the decennium 1901-10 was
47 per million living, in 1914 and 1915 it was 45, and in 1916 it was 38.
These figures are a further indication that the effect of the war upon
the mental stability of the nation has been tonic, rather than depressant.

The social changes wrought by the war are sure to be immense and
far-reaching. Some of these, such as the increased disproportion amongst
the sexes, and the larger industrial employment of women, have been
already adverted to. The increased cost of living, which will probably
prevail for a considerable period, will operate in various ways. It will
tend to increase national thrift—a lesson which our nation needs to learn
and to practise. It will probably tend to depress still further the birthrate. We shall have increased taxation, a greater burden of poor relief,
and a heavy charge for pensions. There will almost certainly be a large
increase in emigration, and the nation, which has been somewhat neglectful of this subject, would do well to consider betimes the large questions
which it raises. Who should be encouraged to emigrate? Who should
be discouraged from emigrating? What can be done to facilitate his
career in the land of his adoption? Can anything be done to secure that
the men and the women lost to England by emigration shall not also be
lost to the Empire? Our past happy-go-lucky policy in relation to
emigration—latssea-faire at one stage, at another stage the dumping ‘of our
criminals and social failures upon our colonies—will call for drastic amendment. Emigration was active in the three or four decades before the war,
and reached its maximum, so far as Great Britain is concerned, about
the year 1912. The case of Ireland is different. The tide of emigration
from that country which flowed so strongly in the years succeeding the
great Irish famine of 1847, slackened towards the close of the last century,
and it is now relatively weak. Emigration is sure to increase after the
war for reasons which are sufficiently obvious. Many soldiers will have
lost their job. Others will have become unsettled by the conditions of
war service, and will be indisposed to resume the drudgery of office or shop;
Others, again, will have formed new ties which beckon them away from
their native country. The tide of emigration will flow strongly, and it is
a matter of much national concern that it should be guided into the
right channels. :

Perhaps the most fundamental gain from the war will be the increased
interest in education, and the larger measure of attention devoted to it.
The nation has awakened to the consciousness that all is not well with it
in this all-important field. It is in a mood to look for grievances and to
be favourably inclined towards proposals for reform. Mr. R. L. Livingstone has reminded us that “what is really wrong with us, is that as a
144 EUGENICS REVIEW.

nation we do not value intellect.” This is a serious reproach, and, I fear,
a just one, but we are beginning to recognise our deficiencies, and to feel
our way to a better state of things. We know that we need better organisation, a fuller co-ordination of the various educational grades, the provision
of natural stepping-stones from one grade to a higher one; better tests
for efficiency amongst teachers; better pay and more social recognition
for the educator. The study of the psychology of the child and the youth
is becoming general and cannot fail to be fruitful, The nation must learn
to respect intellect and trained efficiency, and to give due honour to the
things of the mind. I have but little sympathy with the conflict between
the old learning and the new, between the ancient languages and the
modern, between linguistics and science. All these things are good, but
not equally good for everybody. To some extent the developing intelligence
must be left to find its own pabulum. Huxley once said: “I care not
what you teach, provided it be well taught.” This is a paradox, but a
paradox which veils a truth.

When we come to count up the gains and losses of the war, there can
be little doubt to which side the balance will incline. The nation will
have lost heavily in man power, in brain power, in capital, and in%industrial
resources. But there will be some not inconsiderable compensations. The
nation will have been through the fire, and will, we may hope, emerge
from the great ordeal purged of some of its defects. Luxury will diminish,
thrift will increase. Food production at home will have received a great
stimulus. Education will be on sounder lines. We shall be more teachable, less self-satisfied, readier to profit by example and by experience.
The national spirit will be newly attuned to high issues. A new epoch
will have been born. War, like the other great scourges of humanity—
famine, tempest and pestilence—is not wholly mischievous. When the
storm is over, and the sky has cleared again, we may be able to say, in
the words of our great poet:

“There is some soul of goodness in things evil,
“ Would men observingly distil it out.”
