REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS. 371

to throw light on the general question of albinism. The seasonal changes
observed in the coat colour of the Norwegian variable hares kept in
Aberdeen are described week by week throughout the year, and illustrated
by a long series of photographs. It is interesting to note that some small
seasonal change in the pigmentation of the eye appears to occur, though
the statistics collected on this point are not sufficiently extensive to
establish it with certainty.

The experimental breeding of albino dogs forms the subject matter
of Chapter X. The pekinese spaniels which were largely used in these
experiments are particularly suitable for the purpose because the type
of albinism which they exhibit appears to resemble more closely that
found among human beings than does the albinism of other animals.
The ee of these dogs is shown on plate LVII. of the atlas to
Part IV. It is a remarkable specimen of drafting as thirteen generations are shown, among which, as is usual in pedigree stock, polygamy
and inbreeding were customary. The result is something very like a
maze, and would take hours of patient study to interpret.

The atlas of Part IV also contains the collection of 654 pedigrees of
human albinism which has been formed by the authors. The text of
this part provides careful descriptions of them, but their statistical reduction and analysis has been reserved for Part III., which has not yet
been issued. Part IV. also contains a valuable bibliography. The
printing and general get up of these volumes are of the highest quality.

EDGAR SCHUSTER.

Herbert, S.. M.D. The First Princifles of Evolution. A. and C.
Black; 7s. 6d. net; pp. 346.
THIS book is not a critical study of the theory of evolution, such as the
title rather suggests, but a summary of the facts and hypotheses on
which the idea of evolution, in the widest sense, rests. It deals with
all sides of the subject—evolution of stars and planetary systems, of the
atom as indicated by modern work on radio-activity, the geological
record, organic evolution in general, and finally that of man and his
societies. It is obvious that in the space available, much of which is
taken up by reproductions of good but well-known illustrations, these
subjects must be discussed very shortly, but the author knows how to
choose the salient points, and to give his readers a clear idea of the principles involved. When the small size of the book is considered, it is
really rather a remarkable achievement, for it is readable throughout, and
should give those who have little scientific training some idea of the
unity of science and of its purpose, the search for satisfying knowledge
of the nature and origin of the world in which we live. One of the most
interesting chapters is that on mental evolution, or, perhaps, we should
say, the evolution of behaviour, starting from the work of Jennings and
others on the Protozoa and tracing the increasing complexity through
the higher forms of life. The chapters on man are greatly condensed,
but there is a long bibliography, which will enable the reader to follow
up the questions which are raised if he wishes to pursue any particular
part of the subject further. It is a book to be recommended to a nonscientific reader who wishes to get a general idea of the subject.
L. DONCASTER.

Ward, PRoressor James, Sc.D. Heredity and Memory, being
the Henry Sidgwick Memorial Lecture, 1912. Cambridge
University Press; 1913; 1s. 6d. net; pp. 56.

In this lecture Professor Ward gives a concise and clear account of

the hypothesis that heredity is a form of memory. In his view, it is no

mere metaphor to speak of heredity as racial memory, but a statement
of literal fact. The principle of continuity demands that if the psychical
be admitted in man, it must exist in lower forms, and we know that
