RACE MIXTURE: A SOCIAL OR A
BIOLOGICAL PROBLEM?

By A. DICKINSON, B.A.

HE ideas of the layman on race are
| curiously distorted. Race is commonly
identified with a given language or
culture, with a group living in a common
habitat or possessing a single characteristic
feature such as pigmentation. Men stubbornly cling to concepts of racial purity and
elaborate these into theories of racial
superiority or inferiority. Needless to say,
this human weakness is often attended by
dire results in a world in which people of
differing physical traits are being herded
ever more closely together as the barriers of
distance are gradually broken down.

Prevalence of Hybridization

Yet objective investigation on scientific
lines clearly shows that only the broadest
classification is possible in respect of physical
traits, a classification which reduces the
teeming millions of the world, and the multitude of self-styled races into which they
divide themselves, into perhaps no more than
five main groups. Likewise empirical proof
has been given that intra-racial variability
often exceeds inter-racial variability in
respect of measurable physical traits. Then
the historian comes to the aid of the anthropologist with evidence of the continuous
migrations of peoples throughout the historical era; and, we may also assume, before
the dawn of history. The philologist steps in
to show that language possesses a mobility of
its own, that it may become seriously modified by the co-existence of groups in adjoining
localities ; to which the anthropologist will
reply that the same is basically true of the
material culture of a people. Finally the
racial psychologist makes his valuable contribution by exploding preconceived theories
of innate racial superiority in intellectual
qualities. Primitive man is shown to be
commonly deeply religious, esthetically
minded, an adept at invention, politically

81

astute. He is shown to possess an astonishingly fertile imagination, which enables him
to rise substantially above the material plane
on which many so-called civilized beings eke
out their miserable existence. In short the
basic differences between the intelligent
minority and the unthinking masses may be
drawn in practically any society in the world.
Intelligence and mental agility are by no
means peculiar to twentieth-century Europeans.

We speak in general terms. It is impossible
to do more by way of an introduction to a
study of race mixture, but it is clear from the
foregoing generalizations that concepts of
racial purity are largely invalid and that the
psychic homogeneity of the human species is
much greater than is commonly supposed.
It is also evident that differences in language
and culture are by no means coincident with
differences in physical traits. A rational
approach to the question is needed—one
which dispenses with what can only be the
dead-weight of national ideologies and which
acknowledges that an excessive degree of
miscegenation must have taken place over
thousands of years to account for the presentday distribution of physical traits and the
variability about a norm which obtains in
even the most race-conscious of societies.
Given the psychological abhorrence of race
mixture which persists as a corollary of
untenable theories of racial purity, we must
endeavour to assess in quantitative and
qualitative terms the indisputable fact of
race mixture as it exists in the world to-day.

It must be said at once that the biological
approach to race mixture cannot be isolated,
that the biological results of miscegenation
must of necessity be modified to a greater or
lesser extent by uncontrollable and immeasurable social factors, that the interplay
of biological and social factors is so intricate
that the two aspects scarcely admit of
82 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

separate treatment. It is therefore proposed
to work from the biological angle and
examine the theories of disharmony and of
hybrid vigour; and finally, in connection
with alleged increased variability, to examine
the position of the anthropologist in relation
to that of the geneticist—all the while
bearing in mind the social factors involved
and endeavouring to see how far they may
modify or even outweigh biological considerations.

Alleged Disharmony in Hybrids

First, then, as to the theory of disharmony
which is advanced in opposition to miscegenation. Its principal exponents are
Davenport and Steggerda, who postulate an
inheritance, following race crossing, of conflicting characteristics of the two parent
groups, which may result in the birth of
organic misfits in the second generation after
crossing or later. The possibility is envisaged
of offspring with, say, a large frame and small
viscera, or long legs and short arms, and conversely in each case. Again, it has been
alleged that the mixture of two groups, one
with large teeth and jaws and the other with
small teeth and jaws may result in offspring
combining, say, large teeth in small jaws.
Mjgen has given evidence of what he considers to be hybrid physical degeneration in
his experiments in rabbit crossing. This
includes increased size in the Fr generation
(a strange criterion of degeneration), decreases in size of some specimens in F4 (again
an odd criterion having regard to his first
point), diminished fertility and increased
infant mortality in F4, which may well, as
Castle points out, be due to an unhealthy
environment or an inadequate diet, and
finally asymmetrical ear-carriage in F4, a
defect which, as has been proved, is by no
means confined to crossbreeds.

Castle indeed justifiably attacks the whole
hypothesis of hybrid deterioration and
organic misfits. His experiments on rabbits
showed no sign of skeletal misfits in F1 or
F2, nor did his animals evince diminution
in fertility or vigour when properly cared for.
He therefore reaches the plausible conclusion that the genetic agencies controlling the

growth of separate organs are identical with
those controlling the growth of the body
itself, and so the possibility of disharmony is
eliminated. Mjgen, transferring his experiments to the human sphere, studied LappNorwegian crossings and again found a
“lack of balance ’’ among the hybrids. But
again Castle urged the social factors which
must be taken into account. Thus, these
hybrids are subjected to considerable disabilities in the cultural and social spheres, as
is so often the case with mixed populations
living in close contact with the relatively
pure parent groups, and it becomes impossible to isolate the biological factor which
could be held to contribute to an indisputable
hybrid lack of mental balance. Further,
before condemning miscegenation on the
grounds of physical deterioration in the subjects studied, and before comparisons are
made between the hybrid and the parent
populations, the characters of the individuals
mating must be investigated. Were they
typical of the stocks from which they were
drawn? Did the mating take place from
choice or otherwise? Was it clandestine or
open? The union of two poor specimens of
their respective races will usually result in
offspring inferior to the average of the
parent populations. All of which merely goes
to show that biological considerations are by
no means all in all, that social factors, difficult to measure though they may be, must
be taken into account when comparing
parent populations and hybrids in respect of
physical and mental qualities.

Hybrid Vigour

Turning now to the concept of “ hybrid
vigour,’ we find evidence both for and
against such a phenomenon. In support
Jennings argues that the form of excessive
outbreeding which is represented by miscegenation decreases the chances of a union
of corresponding defective genes, present in
both parents, with the consequent production of a physical monstrosity such as might
emerge from excessive inbreeding. And as a
corollary he argues that race mixture is a
form of insurance that defective genes in
each parent are more likely to remain, in the
RACE MIXTURE: A SOCIAL OR A BIOLOGICAL PROBLEM ? 83

Mendelian sense of the word, ‘‘ recessive ”’ in
the offspring. Logically, of course, he is
correct, but the so-called races of to-day are
already so grossly hybridized that racial inbreeding is much safer, and inter-racial mixture more hazardous, than might at first be
supposed, Clearly there is little to choose
either way, the races of the world being
already so inextricably interwoven, and only
the closest inbreeding within a family is
certain to result sooner or later in defective
offspring. In support of hybrid vigour we
also have the evidence of Boas, who reports
the half-breed Plains Indians to be taller
and more fertile than the parent races; and
of Fischer, who shows fairly conclusively no
lack of fertility in respect of the Rehobother
Bastaards—the Hottentot-Boer cross—there
being an average of 7:7 children per mating
in F5, and alleges them to be surprisingly
virile from both the physical and the mental
standpoints. Finally Shapiro’s evidence in
respect of the Norfolk Islanders—descendants of the Bounty mutineers—indicates
that their general health, longevity, fertility
and social structure all bear favourable comparison with the standards of the parent
races. Yet at variance with the hypothesis
of hybrid vigour Dunn’s investigation in
respect of Chinese-Hawaiian crossing in
Hawaii, and that of Herskovits in respect of
the hybrid American Negroes, reveal race
mixture to be neither noticeably harmful nor
advantageous, the hybrids in each case being
intermediate between the parent populations
in respect of most of the traits measured.

“* Variability °? in Hybrids

This brings us to the question of the
increased variability alleged to result from
race crossing, and which, in accordance with
strict Mendelian theory, should result from
it. In this respect the geneticist and the
anthropologist are at loggerheads in that
anthropological evidence tends to show that
hybrids form a mean between the extremes
of the parent groups, whereas a strict Mendelian analysis of individual crosses undoubtedly posits in the offspring an increased
variability about a norm in respect of inherited traits. The anthropological evidence,

as Trevor points out, is certainly in favour
of unincreased hybrid variability. Thus, the
Rehobother Bastaards display a particularly
low variability, as do the Norfolk Islanders.
The “‘ Browns” of Jamaica and the NegroWhite hybrids of the United States are more
variable than this though no more than their
parent groups. The hybrid Sioux are more
variable than their European forebears, but
no more so than the full-blood Indians,
whereas in the large numbers of SpanishMaya hybrids measured in Yucatan by
Williams, the variability is less than that of
the parent whites but greater than that of
the parent natives. A similar conclusion is
reached in respect of the Mestizos of Kisar.

All this weight of evidence, as both
Trevor and Herskovits have pointed out,
should be accepted with certain qualifications, for the methods used by investigators
are by no means all that might be desired.
Nor are some of the assumptions made in
respect of the characteristics of the European
parent stocks completely justified. Thus in
the case of the Rehobother Bastaards and
the Jamaican “‘ Browns,” only small numbers of subjects were measured, while measurement of a triad has often been made by
independent investigators, which might well
preclude standardized measurements being
taken. More open to question still is the
assumption, which must unfortunately be
made, that the variability of the parent
types has not changed since the original
crossing, though this may have taken place
many generations ago; and that (to take a
cogent example) measurements taken of a
group of present-day Oxfordshire villagers
correspond by and large to those of the
Bounty mutineers. Again, if the hybrids
were derived from small parent groups, these
latter might not have been typical of the race
from which they were drawn. Finally, it is
difficult to make due allowance for the
amount of back-crossing towards the parent
races which may have taken place since the
original cross.

Bearing in mind all these methodological
qualifications the evidence would seem to be
as conclusive as it could possibly be in the
circumstances, and to indicate that, as the
84 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

differences between the mean values of
physical characteristics of the parent stocks
become greater, the more frequently are the
corresponding hybrid means found to be
intermediate. The Norfolk Islanders are
perhaps the finest subjects for investigation.
They can at least claim to possess a more or
less equally divided racial inheritance, and
their geographical isolation successfully
eliminates complexities which arise elsewhere
from back-crossing to the parent groups.
Further, and more important still, the biological factor can be conveniently isolated
from the social in this one case and the
innate capacity of a hybrid group assessed
with no small measure of objectivity. The
investigation of the islanders is certainly the
nearest possible approach to the controlled
experiment in race-crossing and the results
obtained should be regarded as of greater
value than those obtained elsewhere under
less satisfactory conditions. As has been
stated these results seem fairly conclusive.
The islanders now form a markedly homogeneous group—more so than the parent
populations ; their health is good, their fertility high, they live long and, of vital importance, their social structure, showing
much originality and inventiveness, is
superior to that of their native forebears, and
even to that endorsed by Fletcher Christian
and his compatriots. Thus we must conclude
with Herskovits that the relative homogeneity of a group is by no means a reliable
index of racial purity. Race crossing followed
by inbreeding among the hybrid offspring
would seem to result in an “‘ intensification
of hybrid traits’ to form a new and relatively homogeneous type. .

It is undeniable, however, that anthropological evidence in respect of unincreased
hybrid variability is contrary to genetical
theory. Muller, it would appear, has gone
to some pains to modify pure Mendelian
theory to cover unincreased variability by
positing a recession of the parental intraracial differences in the hybrids, whose new
intra-racial variability is now identified with
the inter-racial variability of the parent
groups. This theory, though admittedly
ingenious, is nevertheless, as Trevor points

out, quite unnecessary if it is remembered
that whereas the anthropologist is dealing
in terms of group intermixture, and often
moreover with hybrid groups some temporal
distance from the original crossing—a situation which leaves scope in the interim for inbreeding, back-crossing or the intrusion of
further new blood—the geneticist is dealing
solely with individual mating. The results
of group investigations of this type may well
conflict with genetic theories without invalidating them in the slightest in respect
of an individual cross.

Summary of Biological Evidence

At this point we may briefly summarize
the biological evidence adduced and the
results obtained, before concluding with a
final word on the social aspects of ‘race
mixture. The “ disharmony ” theory would
appear to be ill-founded. The evidence certainly seems to prove Herskovits’s dictum
that “‘no human crossings carry inherently
lethal determinants for the offspring.’’ There
may on the other hand be something in the
theory of hybrid vigour, but the evidence is
so contradictory as to preclude any final
decision on the matter, save for the widely
observed phenomenon of heterosis in Fr and
possibly F2, which may well decline in succeeding generations. Finally, a group of
hybrids descended from parent groups significantly different from one another will
almost invariably constitute a mean between
these extremes, and, as may be expected, in
respect of any one physical trait, the hybrid
mean will approach more closely the mean
of the parent group which has made the
greater contribution to the racial mixture.

It is thus clear that the undesirability of
race mixture cannot be substantiated by
objective proof, and that from the purely
biological standpoint, bearing in mind the
controlled experiments in Pitcairn and
Norfolk Islands, miscegenation is not inherently bad but may even have its
advantages.

Social Aspects of Hybridization
This of course throws into high relief the
psychological and social aspects of the
RACE MIXTURE: A SOCIAL OR A BIOLOGICAL PROBLEM ? 85

question. A strong psychological prejudice
against race mixture will inevitably result
in the concept of hybrid inferiority. This in
turn will often prevent hybrids from revealing their true potentialities. Widely
regarded as social outcasts they will find it
well-nigh impossible to rise to the position in
society which might well be their due. As a
consequence their minds will become warped
and their personalities stunted. It is not
surprising that hybrids, particularly those
living alongside their progenitors, commonly
reveal a minimum of ability, marked indolence and an astonishing proclivity towards
moral laxity. Yet the condition of such
people can hardly be attributed to biological
factors. Rather is it due to their lack of
opportunity in a society which is at once
prejudiced and highly irrational in outlook.
In the words of Young, “‘ the social behaviour
of hybrids is best considered as a reflection of
their cultural milieu than as resulting from
biological sources.”’ Castle, too, makes the
same point by contrasting the crossbreeding
of black and white and red and white in the
United States. The blacks and the mulattoes
are visited with strong social disapprobation,
their opportunities for advancement are
limited, their numbers decrease and, if the
mulatto compares favourably with his black
progenitors, it is only because in the past the
whites, his blood relations, have shown at
least a modicum of compassion for their unfortunate offspring, whereas the lot of the
pure-blooded Negro has always been an unfortunate one in the land of his enslavement.
That the mulattoes will not stand comparison
with the whites goes without saying. But
their plight should be contrasted with that of
the Indian hybrids in whose case there is no
strong social prejudice. It should be borne

in mind how well they thrive, how they are
assimilated back into the white population,
how they frequently attain positions of considerable authority and responsibility to
which they are fully equal. Here the difference in the results between the aforementioned crossings are not referable to any
biological harmony or disharmony, but
wholly to the social attitude adopted by the
whites, favourable in one case, unfavourable
in the other.

It is difficult to escape the conclusion that
the seemingly insoluble problem of race
mixture is far less biological in character
than it is social and psychological ; but it is
hardly less difficult for that.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Davenport, G. B., and Steggerda, M. (1929), Publ.
Carneg. Inst., No. 395.

2. Mj@en, J. A. (1921), ‘‘ Harmonic and Disharmonic
Race Crossings,’ in Eugentcs in Race and State, 2. 41,
Baltimore.

3. Castle, W. E. (1926), Amer. J. phys. Anthrop., 9.

145.

4. Castle, W. E. (1923), Genetics and Eugenics,
Cambridge, Mass.

5. Jennings, H. S. (1930), The Biological Basis of
Human Nature, New York.

6. Boas, F. (1894), Pop. Sci. Mon., 45. 761.

7. Fischer, E. (1913), Die Rehobother Bastards und
das Bastardierungsproblem beim Menschen, Jena.

8. Shapiro, H. L. (1921), Mem. Bishop Mus., 11.

g. Dunn, L. G. (1921), ‘‘Some Results of Race
Mixture in Hawaii,” in Eugenics in Race and State, 2.
109, Baltimore.

to. Herskovits, M. J. (1923), The American Negro,
New York.

11. Trevor, J. C. (1938), Eugen. Rev., 80. 21.

12. Sullivan, L. R. (1919), Anthrop. Pap. Amer,
Mus., 23..

13. Williams, G. D. (1931), Pap. Peabody Mus., 18.

14. Rodenwaldt, E. (1927), Die Mestizen auf Ktsar,
Batavia.

15. Herskovits, M. J. (1934), ‘“‘ Race Mixture ’’ in
Encyclopaedia of the Social Sciences, 18.

16. Muller, H. J. (1936), Amer. Nat., 70.

17. Young, D. R.
Peoples, New York.

(1932), American Minority

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLI, No. 2
