AIMS AND OBJECTS OF THE EUGENICS
SOCIETY’

Eugenics aims at improving the inborn
qualities of future generations.

Ethical and Scientific Bases

HE ethical basis of eugenics consists in
duties not only to our neighbours but

also to posterity. These duties include
the provision, not only of the best possible
environmental conditions, but also the best
physical and mental endowment.

The scientific basis of eugenics must be
one of sound biological knowledge. Racial
changes have hitherto occurred without conscious human direction. Eugenics seeks to
find the means by which the blind forces of
Nature may be controlled by a consciously
directed policy based on scientific study of
transmissible biological factors.

Among animals and primitive peoples,
racial changes occur through natural selection, i.e. by unrestricted reproduction of all
types, causing a struggle for existence in
which the less capable are eliminated by early
death. Modern civilized man revolts against
submission to this crude process and usually
resorts to the restriction of families. This
may involve the preservation and increase of
weak types—a racial deterioration which improvements in the environment alone are
powerless to check. Rational eugenic selection aims at diminishing the fertility of all
persons below the average in valuable heritable qualities and at maintaining a sufficient
reproduction of those above the average to
ensure that their contribution to the next
generation should become progressively
larger.

Eugenics : A Study and a Practice

The term ‘“ Eugenics’’ implies both a
scientific study and a social practice. By
further study, an attempt should be made to
give precision to our knowledge of the part

* This statement of policy may be obtained in
pamphlet form on application to the Secretary,
Eugenics Society, 69 Eccleston Square, London, S.W.1.

played by heredity in regard to physical and
mental superiority, to human defects and
diseases and to human inefficiency in any
form of society. In particular an attempt
should be made to elucidate the respective
influences of heredity and environment upon
the human type, and to define more clearly
such terms as good and bad stock, and
superior, average and inferior endowment.

But as well as being a study, eugenics is a
social practice. In practice it seeks to realize
the aims of (A) positive and (B) negative
eugenics respectively by :

(A) promoting the fertility of superior,
healthy and useful stocks; and by

(B) restricting through voluntary measures the multiplication of those who
suffer from hereditary infirmities.

An indispensable preliminary to the application of either of these principles is to create
throughout the community a “ eugenic
conscience.”’ This is to be attained not only
by the education of the young in the principles of biology, but also by spreading
among all an appreciation of the effects of
their actions upon future generations. Except in regard to the segregation of lunatics,
mental defectives and certain criminals, the
Society does not advocate the compulsory
application of the principles of negative
eugenics. It seeks to awaken a eugenic or
racial conscience which will influence :

(1) The individual in the choice of a mate
and in the decisions as to parenthood,
and

(2) the community so as to bring to bear
on issues of eugenic importance the
forces of scientifically informed public
opinion.

THE STUDY OF EUGENICS

The Society encourages the study of all
aspects of human heredity and differential
fertility. It considers that the following

133
134

subjects are specially in need of further
investigation :

Population Problems

Further knowledge is needed (a) concerning the relative rates of multiplication of the
different sections of the population, (0) as to
whether a definite relation exists between the
inherited qualities of different sections of
the community and their social and economic status, and (c) as to the eugenic or
dysgenic tendencies of different types of
social structure.

Human Abilities and Disabilities

The Society favours the study of the inheritance of good health and physique and of
special abilities and aptitudes of social value
to the community. It is also anxious to promote the organized study of hereditary deficiencies, diseases and defects, with a view
of ascertaining their prevalence and distribution, and of rendering more accurate our
forecasts of their incidence in affected
families. The co-operation of the medical
profession in this task is essential.

The “ Social Problem Group ”

This term was employed by the Mental
Deficiency (Wood) Committee, 1930, to denote a group of people who are asserted to
exhibit “‘social problem’’ characteristics
such as insanity, mental defect, epilepsy,
occupational instability, recidivism, inebriety
and social dependency. The Society seeks to
determine if such a group can be distinguished and defined, and if any of its
characteristics are of a hereditary nature.

Human Evaluation and Registration

The Society desires to see changes made in
the methods of keeping the relevant statistical
records so that data may be available for
eugenic study. This principle should apply to
the registration of births and marriages and
to records of medical inspection of school
children, so as to make possible the detection
of changes in the physical condition of the
population.

Family Records

Galton stated that every intelligent person
should study his family pedigree. The

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Society has prepared a schedule to facilitate
such study and looks forward to the establishment of facilities for the preservation and
study of pedigrees.

Research into Contraceptive Methods

The Society favours the promotion of
clinical, statistical and laboratory research
with a view to ascertaining the reliability,
the practicability and the effects on health
(both of parents and children) of existing
contraceptive methods; it also encourages
research with a view to the discovery of
methods sound in these respects.

Family Allowances

The Society favours the study of the
eugenic value or danger of different forms
of Family Allowances.

Race Mixture

In certain circumstances, race mixture is
known to be bad. Further knowledge of its
biological effects is needed in order to make
it possible to frame a practical eugenic policy.
Meanwhile, since the process of race mixture
cannot be reversed, great caution is advocated.

Immigration

In view of the possible effects on the
national stock of admitting persons of varying quality, the biological aspects of the
regulations governing immigration, and the
plans for emigration within the Empire should
be regarded as a matter of urgent study.

THE PRACTICE OF EUGENICS
As above stated, this can be divided into
negative and positive aspects.

NEGATIVE EUGENICS
The following measures have, at various
times, been suggested as likely to diminish
the fertility of sub-average persons: birth
control, sterilization, segregation, legal prohibition of marriage and artificial termination of pregnancy.

Birth Control

Instruction on methods of birth control,
under medical supervision, should be provided by local authorities. Such instruction
AIMS AND OBJECTS OF THE EUGENICS SOCIETY

should stress both its value and danger from
a eugenic point of view, and should not be
restricted to women suffering from gynzcological illnesses.

Sterilization

The Soctety advocates that facilities for
voluntary sterilization be provided, under
appropriate safeguards, for persons suffering
from or carrying transmissible defects seriously impairing physical or mental efficiency.

It considers that without introducing compulsion, valuable results can be achieved by
awakening throughout the community an
enlightened eugenic conscience.

Segregation

In cases of mental defect and mental disorder, the Society does not regard sterilization as an alternative to segregation but as
an accessory or ancillary procedure. The
Society concurs with the recommendations
of the Wood Committee that facilities should
be extended and perfected for segregating
and “socializing ’’’ mental defectives. Voluntary sterilization would, from the eugenic
standpoint, be a necessary adjunct to this

policy.
Legal Prohibition of Marriage

It has been proposed that the marriage of
mental defectives should be prohibited by
law. So far as this is intended as a eugenic
measure it is ineffective and undesirable, as
it does not prevent, and may even incite,
propagation by promiscuous unions with their
dysgenic possibilities and other evils. Its
aims can be realized more effectively and
humanely by providing defectives desiring
to marry with facilities for obtaining their
own sterilization and by encouraging marriage when this safeguard has been adopted.

Termination of Pregnancy

The Society advocates the provision of
legalized facilities for voluntarily terminating
pregnancy in cases of persons for whom

135

sterilization is regarded as appropriate, and
in cases of incest and rape.

POSITIVE EUGENICS

The Society holds that married couples of
sound stock who deliberately have fewer
children than they can adequately bring up,
do an injury to the race. It opposes restrictions on marriage which now discriminate
against sound stocks.

The following measures are suggested in
order to promote the fertility of such people.

Family Allowances

The Society favours the provision of family
allowances by the establishment of graded
equalization pools and other systems calculated to have a eugenic effect. It regards as
wholly dysgenic the provision of allowances
through flat rate payments by the State.

Taxation

In order to ease the burden of taxation
where the expenses of bringing up children
are very heavy in relation to the income, the
present system of income tax allowance
should be amended, extended and rendered
more effective.

Education

The Society favours for children of superior
ability the extensive provision of scholarships
sufficient to ease financial burdens, and
thereby promote the further reproduction of
the parents.

Birth Control

The Soctety holds that, since the practice of
birth control in the last seventy years has
acted dysgenically rather than eugenically,
birth control should be practised by persons
of superior biological endowment only with
a view to spacing births.

Marriage Certificates

The Society favours the exchange before
matriage of certificates providing information of eugenic significance.

\ =e Oey

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVI, No. 2.
