ANNUAL REPORT 1939-40

N this Report, the accounts relate to the
| period December 31st, 1938, to Decem
ber 31st, 1939. The rest of the Report
covers the period from March 31st, 1939, to
March 31st, 1940.

APPOINTMENT OF EMERGENCY COMMITTEE

The dislocation of all activities which
followed the outbreak of war at the beginning of September did not leave this Society
untouched. Dr. Blacker was called up for
active service with the R.A.M.C. on September rst, and went overseas on the 15th. At
the President’s request an Emergency Meeting of the Council was called on October roth,
and it was then agreed that the work of the
Soctety should be carried on at 69 Eccleston
Square, and that an Emergency Committee,
consisting of nine members able to attend
regularly, with power to co-opt, should be
empowered to act on behalf of the Council
for the duration of the war. The present
composition of this Committee is as follows :
Lord Horder (Chairman), Sir Charles ArdenClose, Mr. Cecil Binney, Mr. B. S. Bramwell,
Mr. C. F. Chance, the Hon. Mrs. Grant Duff,
Mr. W. T. J. Gun, Mrs. E. M. Hubback,
Dr. A. J. Lewis, Mr. Radcliffe Martin, and
Mr. R. M. Titmuss.

At a meeting on April 2nd, 1940, the
Committee resolved that, since it appeared
undesirable in present circumstances to have
elections of Members of Council, the procedure should be modified for the current
year by the suspension of the annual election,
and that Members of Council who had
consented shall remain in office without
further election for that period with the
powers vested in them.

Darwin Research Fellowships.—Owing to
the war, Dr. Dora Ilse was unable to pursue
her “‘ Genetic Analysis of Psychological and
Physiological Characters with Special Reference to Twins,’ and her agreement was
therefore terminated at the end of eight
months.

Mr. R. H. Pear had practically completed

32

his investigations on ‘‘ The Approach to
Marriage ’’ at the end of the first year, and,
having accepted a Commonwealth Scholarship in the United States, did not apply for
a renewal of the Fellowship. His agreement
with the Society was therefore concluded in
August 1939. The Socizefy is now awaiting
his completed Report. It has been decided
not to offer any further Fellowships during
the war.

Problems of Population.—The necessary
curtailment of the activities of the Population
Investigation Committee has resulted in a
suspension of the enquiry into Fertility by a
questionnaire upon the preparation of which
much time and trouble had been expended.
Of the two full-time Research Workers, Miss
Leybourne accepted a Government appointment in the autumn when her agreement was
terminated, and Mr. Glass has left for
America, having been offered a Fellowship
from the Rockefeller Foundation. Meanwhile, the publication of his book on European Population Problems has been undertaken by the Oxford University Press, and
is now in proof. Miss Leybourne’s book on
the Relation between the Size of the Family
and the Cost of Education has been published, and a contribution towards the
cost of publication has been made from
the grant of £250 voted by the Eugenics
Society for 1940. Dr. Kuczynski has made
considerable progress with his Report on the
Investigation into the Demographic Problems of the British Colonial Empire, and
hopes to complete and publish a full Report
this year. This investigation is being
financed by the Carnegie Corporation of
America. The Carnegie United Kingdom
Trust also made a grant, which enabled the
Committee to commission Dr. Elsas and
Dr. Moshinsky to make investigations into
the relation between population and housing
policy. It is hoped that their reports will be
published in due course.

The work of the Population Policies
Committee, appointed by the Eugenics
ANNUAL REPORT 1939-40 33

Soctely and P.E.P., has been carried on in
spite of difficulties resulting from the war.
Mr. Lafitte’s Report, which it was arranged
should be submitted in February 1940, has
been delayed and will not be ready until
July or August. The Committee has not yet
decided whether or not it will be published
during the war. Mr. Lafitte was asked to
undertake at some future date, on behalf of
the Eugenics Society, the study of Family
Allowances from the eugenic point of view.
The Committee felt that since the Report
would in fact cover this question, research
on this point could be included in the work
on the Report, if an additional month were
allowed for this. The Emergency Committee
agreed to this proposal and Mr. Lafitte will
prepare for the Soczety a full-length study of
the consequences of differential fertility, a
summary of which will appear as a chapter in
the Population Policies Report.

Education Department.—The activities of
this department, formerly the Propaganda
Department, are controlled by an Education
Committee.

In the summer lecture season 33 lectures
were given—25 on heredity and aspects of
eugenics, and 8 on population problems and
voluntary sterilization—with a total attendance of about 1,722, an average of 52 persons
per lecture.

The Soczety’s Exhibit was shown at the
Merchandise Centre, Oxford Street, London,
the West Hartlepool Health Week, the Royal
Sanitary Institute’s Health Exhibition, and
Orpington Health Week. The estimated
attendance was 71,392. The Exhibit, which
included two new diagrams, was awarded
the Bronze Medal for the third year at the
Royal Sanitary Institute’s Exhibition.

At the Merchandise Centre the film
“From Generation to Generation’ was
shown twice daily for two weeks to audiences
totalling approximately 12,000. Both the
film and the introductory talk aroused great
interest. Sound and silent copies are
now in increasing demand for schools and
colleges and letters of appreciation are being
received from biology masters and headmasters.

Members of the Eugenics Alliance (annual

subscription 2s. 6d.), formed for those who
cannot afford the ordinary subscription to
the Society, have received a quarterly News
Sheet. Owing to the war, there has been a
slight reduction in membership which now
stands at 210 individuals and 20 affliated
societies.

The two educational pamphlets written
by Dr. Blacker—‘“ Sex Education for
Children ”’ (price 3d.) and “‘ Mating and the
Birth of Children ’’ (price 2d.)—continue to
have a ready sale.

The National Council for Maternity and
Child Welfare—The Eugemics Society is
now affiliated to this organization, and it is
hoped that much good work will result.

The Family Planning Association.—This
name was adopted for the organization
which includes the National Birth Control
Association, the Birth Control International
Information Centre, the Birth Control Investigation Committee and the Society for the
Provision of Birth Control Clinics. New
branches have been formed in four districts,
and seven new voluntary clinics have been
opened. Thirty-five additional local authorities have taken action since last year to
provide contraceptive advice on medical
grounds. On the international side, work is
now being carried on in India, and includes a
practical investigation into the usefulness
of tropical ‘“ Volpar.”” Superseding the
Birth Control Investigation Committee, a
Scientific Advisory Committee, with Lord
Horder as Chairman and Dr. Blacker as
Honorary Secretary, has been formed, but
owing to the war has only been able to hold
one meeting. The Association continues to
occupy the second floor at 69 Eccleston
Square, the Eugenics Society remitting the
rent for the period of the war.

Finance.—The usual statement of Income
and Expenditure, Balance Sheet and List of
Investments are included at the end of this
Report, with corresponding figures for the
previous year. It will be seen that the excess
of expenditure over income is £1,890 13s. 7d.
It is regretted that, owing to the war, the
value of the Society’s investments continues to
show a depreciation. The Soczety has received
notification of a legacy of {100 from the late
34

Mr. C. J. Bond, whose death is recorded
elsewhere in this Report.

Library.—The Library has been increased
by seventy volumes, the total now being
2,796. The number of books received for
review has fallen considerably since the
outbreak of war. The Society is again
greatly indebted to Miss Corry for her
valuable work in connection with the Library,
and it is much regretted that, being now
out of London, she is not able to devote so
much time to it.

Review. — With the growth of the
Society’s activities, the REVIEW has exercised
a correspondingly greater influence and is
now widely read outside as well as within the
ranks of the Society. The American Eugenics
Society takes 500 copies of each issue and
the Eugenics Societies of Canada and
Victoria (Australia) take 100 copies each.
At the present time the REVIEW is giving
particular attention to the changing demographic situation and to the eugenic implications of measures proposed or adopted for
the prosecution of the war. It is very much
hoped that Fellows and Members qualified
to review technical works and periodicals
will communicate with the Editor, stating
both their specialities and linguistic equipment.

Galion Luncheon and Lecture.—Owing to
the war, the Galton Dinner arranged for
February 16th was cancelled, and it was
decided that a Luncheon on the 17th should
take its place. The address at this luncheon,
which was held at the St. Ermins Restaurant
and attended by fifty-eight members and
their guests, was given by Lord Horder, who
took as his subject the Soczety’s activities in
war time.

Members’ Meetings.—The following have
been held :

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

May 16th, 1939 (Annual General Meeting).
—‘‘ Some Problems of Population,” by Mr.
A. M. Carr-Saunders, M.A.

June 17th, 1939.—‘‘ The Approach to
Marriage,” by Mr. R. H. Pear, B.Sc. (Econ.).

Three lectures, arranged to be given
respectively by Mr. Block, Dr. Blacker and
Dr. Penrose in October, November and
December, were cancelled on account of the
war.

January 25th, 1940.—‘‘ The Health of
Working Women and its Significance in
War Time,” by Mrs. Margery Spring-Rice,
M.A.

March 19th, 1940.—‘‘ Abortion—Right or
Wrong,” by Mrs. Dorothy Thurtle.

Obituary.—We regret to announce the
deaths of the following: Mr. C. J. Bond,
Mr. A. E. Brown, Dr. Stanley Colyer, Mrs.
Daman, Mr. Havelock Ellis, Prof. Mapother,
Mr. E. P. Poulton, and Miss Florence Rich.

Register of Fellows and Members.—An
analysis is presented of the Soczety’s Register

for the period April Ist, 1939, to March 31st,

I940:
Life

Fellows Fellows Members Total

Total, March 31st,

1939 es + 973 254 297 624
Elections 1939-40 6 16 22
73 260 313 646

Less
Deceased ww. 2 2 4 8
Resigned 21 22 43
Lapsed ... wee 3 6 9
Total, March 31st, — — — —.
1940... .» JI 234 281 586
Affiliated Societies 4

As recorded elsewhere, the Eugenics
Alliance has a membership of 230.

|
