THE PHYSIOLOGY OF GENETICS

Recent Work and its Bearing on Human Problems

By E. B. FORD

been studied in comparatively recent

years. Indeed, it could not have been
investigated until a considerable body of
evidence bearing on the mechanism of inheritance had been obtained. Such evidence
Wwe now possess.

Much light has been thrown on genetic
factors and on the behaviour of the characters for which they are responsible, but we
are still largely ignorant of the developmental processes by which such characters
are produced. Professor Goldschmidt in
Germany was one of the first workers to
bring forward evidence on this part of the
problem **”*. He was led to postulate factors controlling the rate of sex-differentiating substances in his study of sex determination, and later in other characters, in
moths. However, these are animals which
pass through sudden metamorphoses, so
that the characters of the perfect insect
appear only when it leaves the pupa, after
which no further change can take place.
The effect of the factors can thus be detected
only at a single point in the life-history of
the animal. Such species are therefore
somewhat unsuitable for an investigation of
developmental processes.

This difficulty has in part been met by
Professor Goldschmidt himself by a study
of the larval forms, and by other workers
who have used as material an Amphipod
Crustacean, Gammarus chevreuxi, which
grows and differentiates throughout life.
Mrs. Sexton at Plymouth was the first to
describe genetic factors in this species”,
and her valuable work on the subject has
been continued up to the present time. In
addition, it has been investigated with reference to the problem under discussion, that of
genetic physiology, and has yielded certain
results’ “°° "

The eyes of normal Gammarus chevreuxi

: | 'HE physiology of genetics has only

are black with white inter-facetary pigment.
A red-eyed mutation exists, and Mrs.
Sexton noticed that the red darkened to a
brown or chocolate shade in certain of the
older animals. Another recessive mutation
“* no-white ”’ inhibits the appearance of the
white inter-facetary pigment, and this form
has been used in all experiments involving
estimation of colour changes in the eye,
since these are more easily detected when
the facets are not separated by the white
pigment.

In Gammarus the young are hatched in a
brood pouch and extruded a few days later.
If the eggs be removed from the female and
hatched in well-aerated water, the earlier
stages in development can easily be
observed. It is thus found that the eyes are
at first colourless and then become bright
red; later they darken through shades of
brown and chocolate to black, which they
reach about the time of normal extrusion.
Thus the young are born, and always
remain, black eyed. If the red-eyed mutant
form is kept at a high and constant temperature (23°C.) the eyes begin to darken and
become a deep chocolate shade. Darkening
in both cases is due to the deposition of a
stable black melanin pigment ; the red being
easily soluble in alcohol, to which the black
is resistant.

Thus we find that the red-eye mutation is
not in reality a mutation for the production
of red eyes, but that it simply slows down a
normal process in the body, that of melanin
deposition. About the same amount of
melanin is deposited in three weeks as is
normally laid down in two days. Here we
have a factor controlling the rate at which
pigment is produced.

The speed at which the red eyes darken
is, however, not constant. It depends both
upon the genetic constitution of the individual and upon the environment. ‘These

114
PHYSIOLOGY

two considerations must be dealt with
separately.

In a given environment, with a constant
temperature of 23°C., the rate of melanin
deposition has been found to vary considerably owing to the action of certain genes. A
pair of factors is concerned in speeding up or
slowing down the rate at which melanin is
deposited in red eyes, the faster deposition
being nearly dominant. No effect can be
detected in the wild type black eye, presumably owing to the rapid saturation with
black pigment which in any case occurs.

Such a pair of factors as these will segregate normally, the difference between the
two classes being at first nil; the divergence
between them gradually increases until
about the 23rd day, after which it
diminishes. Finally, the two phenotypes
reach equilibrium positions which are close
to each other and lie within their normal
range of variation. Segregation is thus once
more obscured, except that a slightly bimodal curve can be obtained by plotting the
numbers against the colour.

The action of this pair of factors can be
complicated by an accessory pair having a
similar but less marked effect. Segregation
in this case is not apparent, owing to the
number of phenotypes produced ; true breeding strains can, however, be extracted at the
ends of the series in the F2 segregation of
a cross involving both pairs.

It will thus be seen that these two pairs
of factors, as in the original case of black
as compared with red eyes, are wholly concerned with the rate and time of onset of
pigment production.

Two other types of factors may here be
considered. One slows down the rapid deposition of pigment in the red eye until
sexual maturity; the other controls the
whole growth of the body. This is a recessive, its action being to retard growth but
not to alter size at maturity.

The effect of the factors enumerated above
is greatly influenced by the environment.
The conditions described obtain at a constant temperature of 23°C.; at 13°C.
melanin deposition begins only after five or
six months and the equilibrium position is

OF GENETICS

115

quite a light brown. Even in the standard
conditions general body growth has a
marked effect. The eyes of the larger
animals darken more slowly than those of
the smaller, for a given quantity of melanin
has presumably to be spread over a larger
area.

It is therefore to be expected that the
factor for slow growth previously mentioned
should interact with those for pigment deposition to influence the eye colour. This is in
fact the case, and its analysis throws some
light on the mode of operation of the factors
concerned. ‘The eyes of the slow growing
form rapidly darken to a jet black, but
facets formed later, as the eye enlarges,
darken at the normal speed. It has been
suggested, therefore, that a melanin precursor is formed in the eggs. This will be
in excess of that required by the slow growing animals, since the eggs are of normal
size. Later supplies will, however, be produced in proportion to body size, and the
eyes will darken at a rate characteristic of
the factors carried. This suggestion receives
considerable support from the work of
Sexton and Pantin" who were led to postulate a pigment precursor in the egg of
another mutation in this species.

It is probable that rate factors controlling
the speed and time of onset of processes in
the body, such as have been detected in
Gammarus, play an important part in mammalian development. Attention may in particular be drawn to those cases where specific
differences are dependent upon developmental rates. Thus the Harp Seal (Phoca
groenlandica) is born covered with a white
stiff wool which falls off in two or three
weeks and is replaced by the ordinary hair.
The young of the Hooded Seal (Cystophora
cristata) also has the woolly coat, but it is
shed and replaced by hair before birth’.
Comparable conditions exist in coat colour
differences between two species of African
buffaloes’. Further examples, and some discussion of this part of the problem, will be
found in Ford and Huxley’.

In the human species such factors should
be of special importance. It has recently
been pointed out” how many of the adult
116

human characters represent those possessed
by the young of apes, and that the differences between man and the anthropoids are
quantitative rather than qualitative. Such
differences are presumably to be interpreted
as depending on the action of factors controlling the speed or time of onset of processes in the body. Some such cases are
already well known as, for example, human
eye colour. Coloured eyes may either be
brown or blue, depending upon a single
factor pair, brown being dominant. All
babies are, however, born with blue eyes
which (according to the factorial composition) may either remain in this condition or
gradually darken, owing to the deposition of
brown pigment. Thus the study of the
behaviour and physiology of such factors as

\
MU

As
ee
Pre

‘Sula xg *
it
LL)
‘ A

pA) <i

oa »

A?

Op

g Ais

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

these should throw much light on the problems of human inheritance.
REFERENCES.

1. Bartlett, R. A. (1927). Journ. Mamm. viii, 207.

2. Bolk, L. (1929). Amer. Journ. Phys. Anthrop.
xiii, No. 1.

3. Christy, C.
London.

4. Ford, E. B. (1928). Journ. Genet. xx, 93.

5. Ford, E. B. and Huxley, J. S. (1927). Brit.
Journ. Exp. Biol. v, 112.

6. Do., (1929). Arch. f. Entw. mechan. (in press).

7. Goldschmidt, R. (1923). Mechanism and Physiology of Sex Determination. Trans. by W. J. Dakin.
London.

8. Do., (1927).
bung. Berlin.

g. Do., (1928).
senschaft. Berlin.

10. Huxley, J. S. and Ford, E. B. (1925). Nature,
cxvi, 861.

11. Sexton, E. W. and Pantin, C. F. A. (1927).
Nature, cxix, 119.

12. Sexton, E. W. and Wing, M. B. (1916). Journ.
Marine Biol. Assn. xi, 18.

(1924). Big Game and Pigmies.

Phystologische Theorie der Verer
Einfiihrung in die Vererbungswis
 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXI, No. 2.
