ORIGIN AND WORK OF THE SOCIETY
(1907.8)

Origin—On November 15th, 1907, a Meeting was held at
Caxton Hall, Westminster, at which certain Members of the Committee of the Moral Education League and a number of people
interested in Eugenics attended. After discussion, a Provisional
Council was elected to draw up a constitution for a new Society to be
called ‘‘ The Eugenics Education Society.” Many Members of the
Moral Education Committee resigned their places on that Committee
and offered themselves for nomination on the new Council.

On December gth, 1907, the Provisional Council (of which
Dr. Slaughter was elected Chairman) convened a Meeting, at the
offices of the Sociological Society, when the rules of the new
Society were approved, and the officers of the Society and a Council
of twenty-one Members were nominated for future election.

First General Meeting.—On February 14th, 1908, the first
General Meeting of the Society was held at Denison House, the Hon.
Sir John Cockburn in the chair. At this meeting the above rules and
nominations were duly ratified and confirmed. Dr. Saleeby drew
attention to the then recent action of the London County Council in
closing the Homes for chronic Inebriate women in the Metropolitan
area, and the following resolution was unanimously passed :

‘‘That the Eugenics Education Society enters a protest against the
recent administration of the Inebriates Act (of 1898) whereby, through the
closing of the Inebriate Homes, some hundreds of chronic inebriate women
will be set adrift in London, with an inevitably detrimental result to the
race.”’

Copies of this resolution were sent to the Home Secretary and
the London County Council. On March 14th a letter was received
from the L.C.C. stating that the resolution of February 14th had been
laid before the Public Control Committee, which had directed that a
full statement of the reasons determining the action of the L.C.C.
should be furnished to the Society.

The L.C.C. maintained that as the class of inebriates to which
52 ORIGIN AND WORK OF THE SOCIETY

the resolution pointed had been proved to be incurable, it was no
longer the duty of the locality to provide for their maintenance but
the duty of the State. On this ground, and also because the grants
in aid made by the Government were deemed insufficient, the L.C.C.
had “ decided to revert to its original policy and to limit its action to
providing reformatory accommodation for inebriates likely to be
reformed.”

A reply to this letter was sent by the Society, signed by Sir James
Crichton-Browne, its President, stating that all other County Councils
were satisfied with the grants in aid, and enlarging on the danger of
ignoring the duty of the localities concerned to maintain their own
inebriate paupers. It was pointed out that the Act of 1898 gave
optional powers which could be used to detain chronic inebriates on
grounds other than the prospect of cure, and that of these other
grounds there could be none more important than the public injury
done by the liberation of non-cured and incurable inebriates. The
immediate result of the action of the Public Control Committee would
not only be a return to the cruel and disastrous system of short
sentences, but doubly injurious in that it added to the cruelty to the
individual the certainty of encouraging the births of diseased and
degenerate children, who in their turn might become the parents of
equally degenerate offspring. That drunkenness was no effective
hindrance to fertility, was shown by the fact that of criminal inebriate
women convicted in 1905-6, 365 who were committed to reformatories
had given birth to 2,200 children between them—an average of five
to six children apiece.

This correspondence was published im extenso in the Times of
April 18th, 1908.

Members of the Society exerted themselves to arouse public
opinion on the subject, both by speeches and through the Press, and
their efforts undoubtedly contributed to the appointment by the Home
Office of a Departmental Committee of Enquiry into the administration of the Act of 1898. The Society was invited to assist this Committee by answering a series of questions in writing, and a SubCommittee was appointed to furnish answers. These answers were
embodied in a memorandum which is included in the official Report
of the Departmental Committee.

Monthly Meetings.—During the first session, from February to
June, Monthly Meetings were held on the second Wednesday in each
month at 7.15 pm. The speakers and subjects were as follows:
ORIGIN AND WORK OF THE SOCIETY 53

Dr. Saleeby—* The Scandal of London’s Inebriates.”
Miss A. Ravenhill—“ Eugenic Education.”
Mr. G. P. Mudge—* Mendelism and Human Society.”

4. Dr. Robert Jones—“ Mental Integrity and how to attain it.”

Many Members requesting that evening Meetings should be held,
these were also arranged for, and the following programme was
carried out:

A. At the Grafton Galleries on the second Wednesday in the
‘month at 5.15 p.m., October to December :

1. Mr. Francis Galton— Local Associations for promoting
Eugenics.”

2. Mr. A. D. Darbishire—“ The Inheritance of Sex.”

3- Miss Ethel Elderton—‘‘ The Marriage of First Cousins.”

B. At Denison House on the fourth Wednesday in the month,
at 8.30 p.m., October to December :

1. Dr. Saleeby—* Parenthood and Race Culture.”

2. Mr. David Heron—“ The Work of the Eugenics Laboratory.”

3. Surgeon-General Evatt— Beauty as a Eugenic Object.”

Drawing-Room Lectures.—A course of six Lectures was held
between March and June, Lady Emily Lutyens, Lady Ottoline
Morrell and Mrs. MacNeill, very kindly lending their drawing-rooms.
Addresses were given by:

1. Dr. Coit—‘* Moral Education.”

2. Dr. Saleeby—‘ Heredity.”

3. Mrs. Penrose—‘‘ Eugenic Education in the Home.”

4. Dr. Slaughter—“ Selection in Marriage.”

5. Mrs. Clare Goslett—‘* Eugenic Education in the School.”

6. Dr. Lionel Tayler—“ Social Application of Eugenics.”

Evening Debates.—Several informal meetings of Members of
Council were held at which outside experts on special subjects were
occasionally present. These discussions proved very useful for the
interchange of opinions.

Other Work of the Council.—Many requests were received for
representatives of the Society to speak at Clubs, Debating Societies,
etc. Several Members of Council offered their services for this
purpose. Dr. Slaughter, Dr. Saleeby, Dr. Gordon Wilson, Mrs. Clare
Goslett and Mr. Kingham, represented the Society at (amongst others)
the Sesame Club, the Cosmos Club, the Emerson Club, the Ealing
Women’s Association, the Dulwich Debating Society, Fulham Ethical
Society, and Highgate Debating Society.

PP
54 ORIGIN AND WORK OF THE SOCIETY

International Moral Education Congress.—Dr. Slaughter acted
as the representative of the Society on the Council of this Congress, |
which was held in London in September, and read a paper on
‘‘ Eugenics as a Factor in Moral Education.”

Sub-Committees.—The following were appointed :

1. Organisation.—This Sub-Committee organised the public
Meetings of the Society and arranged what papers and addresses.
should be given and under what conditions.

2. Education.—This Sub-Committee arranged several discussions on the ‘ Position of Eugenics in Education.” Various influential Educationists were interviewed and efforts made to introduce
Eugenics into the new course of household economics at King’s
College. A circular letter, together with a pamphlet by Miss Ravenhill, was sent to all head-mistresses of girls’ schools, proposing the
organisation ofa conference and stating the Eugenic standpoint with
regard to education. After consultations with several head-mistresses,
the idea of a conference was abandoned for that year, but it is hoped
that it may be held in the Autumn of 1909. In the meantime many
mistresses have promised to distribute the Sub-Committee’s leaflet
to the parents of their scholars.

Drawing-Room Meetings on Education were held in various
places and Addresses given by Mrs. Penrose, Miss Ravenhill, Mrs.
Clare Goslett, and Mrs. Pooley.

3. Library.—This Sub-Committee drew up a Bibliography of
Eugenics and purchased books for the formation of a Lending
Library.

General.—In May, Mr. Francis Galton paid the Society the high
compliment of consenting to be its Honorary President. It is not too
much to say that it is mainly owing to his help and advice that the
Society has made such rapid progress during the first year of its life.

The number of Members and Associates is steadily increasing.
In Liverpool a branch in which several members of the University are
interested is shortly to be opened, and it is to be hoped that branches
will be formed, at no distant date, in other cities and towns of Great
Britain.
