INTELLIGENCE AND SIZE OF FAMILY*

Their Relationship in an Adult Group of High Educational Standard
By H. T. HIMMELWEIT, M.A., Ph.D.

N recent papers Fraser Roberts (4), Burt
| (2) and Thomson (8) have reviewed the

problem of the relationship between size
of family and intelligence. A considerable
body of experimental data on the subject has
accumulated over the last twenty years.
These investigations indicate that a correlation of -—-20 to -—:25 represents, at our
present state of knowledge, the relationship
of intelligence to size of family. There is,
therefore, a slight tendency for the less
intelligent to be found more frequently in
larger than in smaller families.

Most of the investigations on which these
findings were based were carried out on
English and Scottish school children between
the ages of ro and 13, the most complete
being the inquiry by Fraser Roberts (4) and
his collaborators at Bath. Much care has
been taken in some investigations to study
the effect on the correlation of making the
groups relatively homogeneous with regard
to certain variables. Thus in Sutherland’s
inquiry (7) the socio-economic level of the
families from which the children were recruited was held constant by including children of one occupational group only, namely
coal miners ‘‘ at the face’’; in Thomson’s
study (8) the size of the family was rendered
artificially more homogeneous by restricting
the sample to children whose fathers had
fallen in war within one year of the child’s
birth. In both these inquiries, the correla
* This investigation, which formed part of a large
inquiry into the selection of students, was made possible
through a grant from the Social Science Research
Division of the London School of Economics. The
writer is greatly indebted to Sir Alexander CarrSaunders, Director of the London School of Economics,
for permission to carry out the project, to Professor T.
Marshall, Chairman of the Social Science Research
Division for his active support, to Dr. J. Blackburn,
Lecturer in Psychology, for his interest and stimulating
criticism, and to Mr. C. Wrigley, Research Assistant,
for ably carrying out the considerable task of testing
the students.

‘income.

77

tion, while reduced in size because of the
homogeneity of the groups, was still significantly negative.

The present paper extends the field of
investigation to the study of the relationship
between size of family and intelligence of
adults. In this study, unlike many others
reported on children, the group was in no way
representative of the general population,
being highly selected with regard to intelligence and to a lesser extent with regard
to socio-economic status.

The study of this selected group was considered of value, since it would provide an
experimental answer to the hypothesis,
recently put forward, that the negative
correlation between family size and intelligence could be explained on environmental
grounds. In a review of Burt’s pamphlet (2),
Blackburn (1) argued that the relatively low
scores obtained by children of larger families
might be due to the unfavourable circumstances of poverty, overcrowding, etc., which
prevented these children from developing, to
the same extent as others, the ability necessary to pass intelligence tests. The distinction was thus made between innate intelligence and ability to pass intelligence tests.
If this view be accepted, then clearly these
deleterious effects would be seen more in
families with many children than in families
with fewer children living on the same
Blackburn suggested that this
hypothesis could be put to the test by
complementing Sutherland’s study of a
homogeneous group at or below the povertyline with a study of a group coming from
families of relatively higher socio-economic
status.

The population of the present investigation
would appear to constitute a group of the
kind suggested, the majority of students
coming from families of the professional,
managerial or clerical classes.
78 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

I. The Subjects

The experimental group consisted of 450
British-born men and women, students of a
college of the University of London,* who
were tested in the course of a larger inquiry
into the selection of students. The students
completed a questionnaire, the relevant
items of which were : |

1. How old are you ?

2. Describe as precisely as possible your father’s
occupation, giving as many details as are
indicated in the following examples :

(a) Teacher of mathematics at an L.C.C.
secondary school ;

(b) Proprietor of a bookshop in $.W. London
employing three assistants ;

(c) Foreman in a leather factory with ten
men working under him ;

(d@) Accountant at Messrs. Dorman, Long &
Co., civil engineers.

If your father is not an employer or an inde
pendent worker, state name of the organiza
tion where he is employed, and the nature of

the business. If your father is retired or

deceased, give details of the last occupation

and put in brackets after it (Ret.) if retired,

and (D) if deceased.f

3. Give the names of the last two schools you
attended and indicate the number of years
you spent at each, and the ages during which
you were there ?

Nameof Type of No.of Boarderor Ages at
School School years spent Day which you
there Scholar entered
and left

Example :

High Secondary 1938-40 Day II-13

School,

Padding
ton

I.

2.

4. Including yourself, how many live born
children did your mother have ?...

5. If you have any half-brothers and sisters, how
many have you on your mother’s side?...
How many on your father’s side? ...

The students were also asked to state the
size of their father’s and mother’s sibships.

* They had been admitted to the college on the basis
of having passed matriculation. Those admitted in
1946 had in addition taken an entrance examination
and had been interviewed. The decision of the board
to accept or reject candidates was not influenced by
the numbers in their families.

¢ The author is very grateful to Dr. D. V. Glass,
Reader in Demography, for advice on the wording of
this question.

Il. (a) Age of the Subjects

The average age of the students was
23°85+4-22. The mean age was relatively
high because the majority of students in
1947 were ex-Service men and women.

Two advantages resulted from using an
adult group for an inquiry of this type. First
the students were able to give fuller information than children. In addition to stating the
number of brothers and sisters they had, they
were able to state the number of live births
of the mother, thus enabling us to include in
the inquiry children who might have died
soon after birth. Secondly, the likelihood
that their sibships were complete was greater

TABLE I
CLASSIFICATION OF THE OCCUPATIONS OF THE FATHERS
OF 443 STUDENTS
(the occupations of seven could not be classified)

Total Men | Women
I. Professional --| I42 57 85
Medical _... as 24 6 18
Legal sms ane 12 5 7
Politics wae wee I ° I
Armed Services
(Officers) may 18 Io 8
Church wee wee LO 5 5
Journalism a 2 o 2
Public Administration, wee eee 27 8 19
Arts 3 2 I
Applied Scientific
Work ss... 15 3 8
Accounting (higher |
grades) ... 10 4 6
University |Research 8 3 5
Teaching ... was II 7 4
Librarian ... sae I oO I
II. Managerial I20 39 SI
Industrial ... wee 15 9 6
Commercial «| 92 25 67
Financial ... wee 13 5 8
III. Clerical and Retail
Distribution wee 82 56 26
Public wee wee 26 15 II
Private we eee 31 24 7
Personal Service ... 3 3 oO
Retail Distribution 22 14 8
LV. Skilled Workmen
and Farmers... 71 45 26
Skilled manual
workers ... wee 58 38 20
Farmers... 13 7 6
V. Unshkilled Workmen
and other Ranks
of Armed Services 28 2r 3
Other Ranks a 9 7 2
Unskilled Workmen, 19 14 5
INTELLIGENCE AND SIZE OF FAMILY 79

than it would be for 10- to 13-year-old
children.

If. (b) Socio-Economic Status of the Subjects

This was inferred from the occupation of
the students’ fathers, which were classified
into five broad categories :
| Professional

Managerial

Clerical

Skilled Workmen

Unskilled Workmen
Table I gives the distribution of the students
falling within these categories and a more
detailed enumeration of the occupations
which have been linked in each broad
category.

The distributions were plotted separately
for men and women sinceit was found that the
women students belonged to the professional
and managerial class to a significantly larger
extent than the men. Table II gives the percentages of men and women belonging to the
different occupational groups and the critical
ratios of the difference between them.

TABLE II

PERCENTAGE DISTRIBUTION OF THE FATHERS OF
STUDENTS IN THE DIFFERENT OCCUPATIONAL GROUPS

 

 

Pro |Mana-| Cleri- |Skilled| Un- | Total
fes- | gerial| cal skilled
sional
Men 26°2 | 17°9 | 25°7 | 20°6 | 9:6 | 100-0
Women...| 37°7 | 36°0 | 11°6 | 11-6 | 3-1 | 100-0
Combined | 32:1 | 27°1 | 18°5 | 16-0 | 6°3 | I00°0
Critical
Ratio...| 2°62] 4°39 3-861 2°59! 2°82

This difference became more pronounced
when the professional and managerial groups
were combined and contrasted with the remaining occupational groups, clerical, skilled
and unskilled. A x? was calculated and was
found to be significant at the -oor level.
This difference between men and women
students with regard to their socio-economic
background may be due to the fact that, in
our sample, there was a significantly higher
percentage of ex-Service men as compared to
ex-Service women. Ex-Service men and
women are entitled to a grant which covers
their fees and living expenses during their
university training. In the case of students

who were not ex-Servicemen or women, the
university education would have to be
financed by the parents, scholarships, or,
what is frequently the case, by a combination
of these two; the scholarship not being
sufficient to cover all expenses. These
students are, therefore, to some extent, at
least, dependent upon their parents for
financing their university education.*

A study of Table I indicates that our
population comes from various socio-economic groups, yet on three main grounds there
is reason to believe that it is less heterogeneous than would appear at first sight.
Although, first, 22:3 per cent of the students
came from families of the skilled and unskilled occupational groups, these were in no
way representative of the large groups of
unskilled and skilled workers that form the
bulk of the population. They were atypical
with regard to intelligence, number of sibs,
and educational background. In view of
known correlations between the intelligence
of parents and children, it is very probable
that our sample formed the more intelligent
section of these occupational groups.

Secondly, the differences in standard of
living between the five groups were less than
in the general population because the families
in the lower groups were significantly smaller
than in the working population as a whole.
From Hajnal’s report (6) it would be expected
that students from the lower occupational
groups would come from significantly larger
families than those from the professional,
managerial and clerical groups. The figures
are presented in Table III, and have been
studied by analysis of variance both for the
whole group and for men and women
separately. No significant differences were
found, showing that in our sample there is no
association between occupational class and
size of family.

Table IV gives the mean number of siblings for the various occupational groups.

* A member of the staff of the college pointed out that
this difference in the socio-economic background of
men and women students had already been observed
before the war and could be accounted for in part by a
tendency of parents of the professional and managerial
groups to send a higher percentage of their sons than
daughters to Oxford or Cambridge.
80 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

(None of the differences is statistically
significant.)

Since, therefore, the families of the skilled
and unskilled workmen were on the whole
small, the children might well have been
brought up in homes less poor and overcrowded than those of families with more
children managing on the same income.

Thirdly, it is worth recalling that education must have had a compensating effect
upon any adverse home influences of an
economic nature. All students, in order to
be admitted to the university, have to pass
through a series of educational sieves, finally
taking the Matriculation examination or its
equivalent.

It is therefore unlikely that any of our

TABLE IV

MEAN NUMBER OF SIBLINGS OF 408 STUDENTS IN FIVE
OccUPATIONAL GROUPS

 

 

 

 

Profes- | Mana- |Clerical} Skilled| Unsional | gerial skilled
Mean 1-831 | 1-681 | 1°569 | 1°714 | 1°636
Standard
Deviation] 1-499 | 1°445 | 1°471 | 1°578 | 2°035
Number 130 gi 102 63 22

Board of Education—namely public schools,
grant-aided schools, secondary schools and
miscellaneous. In the questionnaire the
students were asked to record the last two
schools they had attended to avoid the fallacy
of treating as representative of a student’s
education a school at which he might have

TABLE III

PERCENTAGE DISTRIBUTION OF THE SIZES OF THE SIBSHIPS (INCLUSIVE OF THE STUDENTS) IN THE DIFFERENT
OccUPATIONAL GROUPS*

ee ee | A, fe Pf yr re i ei Sa rs

gs | eR | te a SS | nents - pg aN,

No. of Children Professional Managerial
8 and above 0:8 = (I) I-r (tr)
7 3°8 (5) Ir (t)
6 0°8 = (1) 2:2 (2)
5 8+5 (x1) 5°5 (5)
4 8-5 (11) 143 (13)
3 30-8 (40) 24°2 (22)
2 30°0 (39) 29°6 (27)
I 16°8 (22) 22:0 (20)
Total 100°0 (130) 100-0 (91)

Clerical Skilled Unskilled
2-0 (2) 1°6  (r) 45 (1)
I:o (x) 0:0 = (0) 0-0 ~—=_ (0)
0-0 = (0) 7°9 (5) 4°5 (1)
7°8 = (8) 1:6 (rz) 0°0 = (o)
8-8 (9) 15°9 (Io) 9° (2)
23°5 (24) 15*9 (10) 22°7 (5)
32°4 (33) 34°9 (22) 27°4 . (6)
24°5 (25) 22°2 , (14) 31°8 = (7)
I00°0 (102) 100:0 (63) 100-0 (22)

The figures in brackets give the actual numbers in each category from which the percentages were calculated.

students were brought up in home conditions
which handicapped them in doing intelligence tests. This point is clearly of the
greatest importance in view of Dr. Blackburn’s hypothesis of the effect of adverse
home influences on ability to do intelligence
tests—a theory for which evidence is obtained
mainly from cases of extreme environmental
privation where adverse home influences
have been reinforced by irregular school
attendance.

II. (c) Educational Background of the
Subjects
The schools of the students were classified
into four groups set out in a circular by the
* Based on a sample of 408. The information of 42

students was incomplete with regard to occupational
status and No. of siblings of parents.

spent only a few months. A school was considered as characteristic for a student if he
underwent there the major part of his education between the years 13-16. Table V gives
the percentage of students who had attended
these four types of schools.

TABLE V

PERCENTAGE OF STUDENTS WHO HAD ATTENDED THE
FOLLOWING TyYPEs oF SCHOOLS. N=449

 

 

Public Grant- | Secondary |Miscellane-| All
Schools | aided Central jous Schools| Schools
Schools Schools
13°8 5°8 63°7 100-0

 

Men and women were grouped together,
since they did not differ significantly with
INTELLIGENCE AND SIZE OF FAMILY

regard to the type of schools they attended.
It will be seen that by far the greater proportion of students attended a secondary
school (63-7 per cent as compared to 19-6 per
cent for public and grant-aided schools combined). Table VI gives the distribution of the
size of the student’s family for each type of
education.

Table VII gives the mean number of
siblings of the students attending the different types of school.

81

In spite of these differences the students
can be regarded as a group reasonably homogeneous in educational background.

Il. (d) The Intelligence of the Subjects
There can be no doubt that the group was
far more uniform with regard to intelligence
than were the groups of children studied by
Burt, Thomson and Fraser Roberts.
It is not possible to give exact I.Q.
equivalents for the scores obtained on the

TABLE VI
PERCENTAGE DISTRIBUTION OF FAMILY SIZE FOR DIFFERENT TYPES OF SCHOOLS (N=449)

Public School ...

39°7
(19)
Grant-aided 26°9
School (7)
Secondary School 21-0
(60)
Miscellaneous 24°0
(18)

 

No. of Siblings

Total
3 4 5 6 & over
16°1 4°8 3°2 3°2 100
(10) (3) (2) (2) (62)
7°7 3°9 0-0 0-0 100
(2) (z) (0) (0) (26)
10°8 4°9 2°8 4°2 100
(32) (14) (8) (12) (286)
I2°0 8-0 I*3 0°0 100
(9) (6) (r) (0) (75)

The figures in brackets give the actual numbers in each category from which the percentage distribution was
calculated.

TABLE VII
MEAN No. oF SIBLINGS OF STUDENTS WHO HAD ATTENDED THE FOLLOWING TYPES OF SCHOOLS

 

All Schools
Public Grant-aided |Miscellaneous| Secondary | other than | All Schools
Schools Schools Schools Schools Secondary Total
Schools
Mean arare ame 1°887 1°92 1°573 1°734 1°632 1°697
Standard Deviation 1*449 I-1I0 1°236 1°658 1°325 1°546
Number wes 62 26 75 286 163 449
The following significant differences intelligence tests used in the present inquiry.

emerged : However, data from other investigations

1. The No. of sibs of students attending the
grant-aided schools is slightly smaller than
that of either the public school or secondary
school groups (C.R. 2°44 and 2°27 respectively). It is difficult to account for this fact.

2. The secondary school group does not differ
from the students of «ll other types of schools
as regards size of family. It does differ from
the others, however, in the range of size of
family as indicated by the standard deviations (C.R.=3°53). This group is therefore
more heterogeneous with regard to number
of siblings than are the other groups.

giving I.Q. averages for student populations
as compared to the general population, suggest that the average I.Q. level of students
falls somewhere around 126. This indicates
that the students would find themselves at
the upper end of the distribution curve of
intelligence for the general population, 1.e.
about 14 standard deviations above the
mean.

Not only is the average level of the students’ irtelligence higher than that of the
82 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

general population, but its range expressed in
terms of its standard deviation is smaller.*

II. (e) Number of Siblings of the Subjects

The size of each student’s sibship was
arrived at by deducting any half-siblings
from the number given in answer to question
5. The average number of siblings was
found to be 1:716 +1-559.

This contrasts sharply with the corresponding figures for the 3,305 cases studied
by Fraser Roberts (4) who found an average
sib number of 2-583 +2-185. It is, therefore,
clear that in the present sample there are
fewer sibs per family. The fact that the sibships are of more uniform size than those
found in Fraser Roberts’s inquiry must decrease the correlation found to exist between
number of sibs and intelligence.

Ill. The Tests

The students were given tests of general
intelligence and tests which in addition to
“‘ g ’”? measured group factors such as verbal,
arithmetical and spatial factors. Tests had
to be found which differentiated sufficiently
between persons of high intelligence. Thurstone’s tests of primary ability and Thorndike’s test battery C.A.V.D. were found suitable, as they had been devised especially for
students. Since the students in our inquiry
were preparing for honours degrees in
economics and sociology or for diplomas in
social sciences and not for science degrees,
relatively more tests measuring verbal rather
than non-verbal factors were included. Each
student was given eight tests. Three of the
four verbal tests were adaptations of Thurstone’s vocabulary, verbal classification and
verbal analogies tests, the fourth an adaptation of the “‘C ”’ or sentence completion test
of Thorndike’s C.A.V.D. battery. Three of
the four non-verbal tests were adapted from
Thurstone’s battery ; the arithmetical test,
the formboard test, and the code test measuring intelligence in a non-verbal medium. As
a fourth non-verbal test, N.I.I.P. Test 70/1
was added. Out of the 59 tests comprising

* The increased homogeneity of the student population as compared to the general population must be
borne in mind in interpreting the correlations calculated
in the present investigation.

Thurstone’s battery of tests of primary
ability, the six tests enumerated above were
chosen as being relatively highly saturated
both with the general factor and with the
group factors they were measuring. All
scores were transformed into standard scores
to allow for a combination of the verbal and
the non-verbal scores into one composite
score.

IV. Results
The following three correlations were
calculated :

1. Between size of family and the total verbal
score.

2. Between size of family and the total nonverbal score.

3. Between size of family and the combined
score of all eight tests. Table VIII gives the
size of the Pearson product-moment coefficients.

It will be seen that the first two correlations of —-o98 and —-096 would arise by
chance in one trial out of 20 (P. -05) and the
third of —-133, based on the combined
results of both verbal and non-verbal tests,
would occur by chance in only one trial out
of 100 (P. -or). The correlations are therefore significant.*

TABLE VIII
PropucT MOMENT COEFFICIENTS BETWEEN SIZE OF
FAMILY AND

(a) composite score on four verbal intelligence tests.
— °098+ -047 S.E.
composite score on four non-verbal intelligence
tests. —-096+ :047 S.E.

(c) composite score on four verbal and four nonverbal intelligence tests. —-133+-046S.E.
N=450.

In view of the homogeneity of the group
and the considerations in Section I, the negative correlation found between intelligence
and fertility is particularly interesting. Compared with the figures of —-20 and —:-25
quoted by Burt and Thomson, the sizes of
the correlations reported here are significantly
smaller. This is explained in terms of the
greater homogeneity of the group with
regard to the two correlated variables.

* Correlations were calculated separately for students
coming from professional, managerial, clerical, and
working-class families. No significant difference in the
size of the negative correlations were found. This
suggests that, in the present sample, the negative

tendency operates equally in the different socioeconomic classes.

(b

—
INTELLIGENCE AND SIZE OF FAMILY 83

It seems interesting to compare these
findings with those of Fraser Roberts (4) who
analysed his data in relation to educational
background. He split his sample of 3,305 into
four groups in accordance with the type of
school the child attended. He found differences in the average number of siblings
for the various types of schools and also
differences in the magnitude of the correlations between size of family and intelligence.
The correlations remained, however, consistently negative.

Table IX gives the correlations obtained
for special place secondary school children
and for private school children, the two
groups whose average sib number corresponds most nearly with that of our sample.

TABLE IX
CORRELATIONS OBTAINED BY FRASER ROBERTS IN
I10-13-YEAR-OLD CHILDREN BETWEEN SIZE OF FAMILY
AND INTELLIGENCE IN RELATION TO TYPE OF SCHOOL

ATTENDED
Type of Mean Number | Correlation
School Number of Tested Obtained
Sibs
Special Place
Secondary
School r°816+1-824 369 — -069
Private
School 1°432+1°379 292 — -096

It will be seen that the correlations
obtained by Fraser Roberts in a child
population were similar, although somewhat
smaller than the ones obtained in our adult
sample. Allowing for a reduction in size of
correlation due to the relative homogeneity
of the two correlated variables, size of family
and intelligence, it seems justified to argue
that relative homogeneity of educational
background and of socio-economic status
does not materially affect the negative relationship observed by other investigators
between intelligence and size of family.

This investigation therefore lends no support to the thesis that the negative correlations obtained in previous inquiries can be
explained in terms of differences in opportunity for acquiring the ability necessary to
do intelligence tests. It suggests rather that
there is a slight tendency for a group comprised of members of large families even in a

highly selected sample to contain a higher
percentage of persons of somewhat lower
intelligence than is found in groups recruited
from smaller families. Although the tendency is but slight, Thomson (8) and Burt (2)
amongst others have pointed out that its
effect would be cumulative and would lead
to a considerable lowering of the mean intelligence level of the population within a
few generations. The reasons for this tendency can, at present, be only conjectured.
One very tentative explanation—that the
less intelligent had not the intellectual
ability or foresight to plan their families—
can be dismissed as being only applicable to
groups much lower in intelligence than those
studied here.

Other suggestions regarding the cause of
the negative trend must be highly speculative, especially since we lack such essential
information as the intelligence Jevel of the
mothers or the age of the parents at marriage.
The following are some factors which might
play a part, and it is hoped that future researches will investigate them :

1. Differences in ease of conception operating in
favour of the less intelligent—an unlikely
hypothesis ;

. Delayed marriage of the more intelligent ;

3. A longer period between marriage and first

conception among the more intelligent ;

4. Differences in desire for larger families. These
might be due to the wider outside interests of
more intelligent wives. Alternatively, the
more intelligent parents may limit their
families more rigidly in order to ensure a
higher standard of educational and other
opportunities for their children. It is worth
noting that the majority of students in our
sample or their older siblings were born
shortly after the 1914-18 war, and it may be
that the more intelligent parents, feeling less
secure and optimistic about the future,
decided to limit the size of their families.

These are all tentative hypotheses and
very probably different families will have
been affected by different factors to varying
extents. Further research, with more social
and psychological data about the parents,
will be needed to account for the negative
relationship between fertility and intelligence found in the present inquiry.

A Note on Family Size
By asking the students to record the size

NS
84 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of their mothers’ and fathers’ sibships, comparison between these and the size of the
students’ sibships could be drawn. The
average number of siblings of the students
was 1°716+1-559, that of the father
3°616+2-362, and that of the mother
3:558+2:352. These figures indicate clearly
the decline within two generations of the
average size of the family. The difference in
size between the student’s sibships and that
of his parents is very significant (P < -oor).
There is no significant difference in the size
of the fathers’ sibships as compared to that
of the mothers’. Correlations between the
number of the student’s sibs and those of his
parents were insignificant (+ -018 + -047 for
the maternal and + -015 + 047 for the paternal side). These low correlations suggest that
factors other than imitation of or reaction to
the patterns of childhood were operative.

Summary

The intelligences of 450 British-born men
and women students cf a college of the
University of London (average age nearly 24)
were tested by means of eight verbal and
non-verbal tests (four each) standardized on
people of high intelligence.

By means of a questionnaire filled in by
each student, information was obtained
about the number of full sibs, father’s occupation, and the schools where he/she had
been educated.

No association was found between the
number of a student’s sibs and his/her social
class (as judged by the father’s occupation).

Nevertheless, it was found that in the

group as a whole there was a tendency for the
more intelligent student to have fewer siblings. A negative correlation of —-133 + -046
is significant to the extent that the finding
was likely to have occurred by chance once
only in a hundred trials.

It has been argued by some writers that an
unfavourable early environment of poverty
and overcrowding handicaps a child in doing
intelligence tests. But in this selected group
the differences in home and school background were less than would be found between unselected samples from the same
social classes. It is not likely that the differences in our sample’s backgrounds were
large enough to handicap the students in
doing the tests. Yet the students of all
classes who did best in the tests had the
lowest number of sibs. The cause of the
negative correlation is unknown.

REFERENCES

1. Blackburn, J. (1947). ‘‘ Family Size, Intelligence
Score and Social Class,’ Population Studies, 1, 165-76.

2. Burt, C. (1946). Intelligence and Fertility. Occasional Papers on Eugenics. The Eugenics Society and
Hamish Hamilton, London, pp. 43.

3. Burt, C. (1947). ‘‘ Family Size, Intelligence and
Social Class,’’ Population Studtes, 1, 177-86.

4. Fraser Roberts, J. A., and others (1938). ‘‘ Studies
on a Child Population. III. Intelligence and Family
Size.” Ann. Eugen., 8, 178-215.

5. Guilford, J. P. (1939).
McGraw-Hill, pp. 566.

6. Hajnal, J. (1947). “‘ The Estimation of Total
Family Size of Occupation Groups from the Distribution of Birth by Order and Duration of Marriage.”
Population Studies (in press).

7. Sutherland, H. E. G. (1929). ‘“‘ The Relationship
between I.Q. and Size of Family.” J. Educ. Psychol.,
20, 81-90.

8. Thomson, G. (1947). ‘“‘ The Trend of National
Intelligence, ’’ EUGENICS REVIEW, $8, 9-18.

Psychometric Methods,

PHYSIOLOGICAL ZOOLOGY

Edited by Warder C. Allee, the University of Chicago.
In the October 1947 number:

THE EFFECT OF TEMPERATURE ON THE INTERSEX CHARACTER OF DAPHNIA LONGISPINA, By Katuerine K.
ANFORD.

Te eee OF CERTAIN DEPRESSING AGENTS ON INTRACELLULAR OXIDATION OF INDICATORS IN HYDRA.

y C. M. Crip.

RESPONSES OF FISH MELANOPHORES TO CHEMICAL WARFARE AGENTS. By C. Lapp Prosser, BRUNO von LiwBAcH
and GEoRGE W. BENNETT, with Technical Assistance of MARIAN F, JAMES.

EFFECTS a TESTOSTERONE PROPIONATE ON SEX DEVELOPMENT IN FEMALE AMBYSTOMA LARVAE, By
EATRICE MINTZ.

THE EFFECT OF MALE HORMONE ON AGGRESSIVE BEHAVIOR IN MICE. By Euzasetu A. BEEMAN.

PHYSIOLOGICAL ZOOLOGY is published quarterly in January, April, July. and October
Subscription $10 a year Canadian postage 20c. Single copies $3 Foreign postage 48c.

THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS, 5750 Ellis Avenue, CHICAGO
Eugenics Review, Vol. XL, No. 2

 
