THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Eugenic Bearing of Measurements of Intelligence
in the United States Army.

By Ropert M. YERKES.
(National Research Council, Washington, D.C.)

Eugenics, the art of breeding better men, imperatively demands
reliable measurement of human traits of body and mind, of their
inter-relations, and of their modification by environmental factors.
Scientific method has been commanded effectively to make available
facts concerning bodily form and physiological processes. Anthropometry, anthropology, morphology, physiology, pathology, have made
their notable contributions and continue to supplement and to render
more precise our knowledge of man as organism. But in the case of
those hu an traits or functions which we traditionally call mental,
both methodological and observational progress has been more slowly
achieved and less satisfactory. At last, however, the method of
science is being applied in thorough-going fashion to the investigation
of human experience and behaviour.

An historical survey of the development of man’s knowledge of
man is encouraging, for in the last half century psychology and psychotechnology have progressed steadily, and in some quarters and
respects, marvellously. Psychology is now numbered among the
natural sciences, and man, as conscious and self-conscious being, is
studied intensively. It is assumed that like other natural] objects he
is understandable, modifiable, controllable. The method of speculative reflection has been replaced largely by systematized, controlled
introspection, and that in turn has been supplemented by varied objective methods akin to those of the physical and biological sciences.

Following the determined effort of the psychologists of the last
century to measure mental processes, there has developed a technique
of research and a body of knowledge which command the respectful
attention and hopeful interest of laymen as well as scientists. For this
notable change in the status of psychology we are largely indebted to
the faith, initiative, energy, and ingenuity of such men as Francis
Galton, Alfred Binet, Hugo Muensterberg—to mention only those
‘whose great work is finished—and their successors.

Methods of mental measurement are continually being devised
and perfected for the conduct of research, and simultaneously many of
them are being adapted and standardized for practical] (technological)
use. As ‘‘mental tests’’ they do not necessarily lose their scientific
character, though often they are used and abused by persons who are
incapable of safe observation or interpretation of results. Like other
natural sciences, psychology has an exacting technique, a considerable
226 EUGENICS REVIEW.

body of facts and laws, and like every branch of engineering, psychotechnology has its basic information and its scientifically determined
and evaluated practices. These essential facts about the science and
its technology tend to be overlooked. Anyone, it would appear, may
parade as psychologist or psycho-technologist ; but only the adequately
trained and competent may be relied upon for valuable service. The
public has increasing reason to beware of those impostors and charlatans.
who are psychologists only in name.

Those among us who think of applied psychology or of ‘‘mental
testing’’ as the application of the methods of Binet are sadly out of
date. Binet’s crude but ingenious procedure for the mental classification of children at the beginning of the present century gave an impetus to the educational and medical application of results of mental
measurement which is largely responsible for the rapid development of
psycho-technology. But more important by far than the Binet tests
is the influence of their results on the lay mind and on the
interest of professional psychologists. New and better scientifie
methods of mental measurement, and, indeed, of classifying children

are now available, and the time approaches when ‘‘Binet testing’’
will have no other than historical significance. |

To-day many of the forms of behaviour which are primarily intel
‘lectual can be measured with reasonable facility and accuracy, but by
contrast, behaviour of the affective sort,—traits of temperament and
emotional expressions,—are imperfectly and incompletely measureable. Doubtless what has been achieved in the measurement of intelligence presently will be achieved also in the measurement of the affec
tive aspects of life. Already indeed, progress in this direction is substantial. Yet, whereas quickness of reaction, sensory acuity , memory
span, and scores of other forms or aspects of behaviour may be measured
readily and serviceably, interest, timidity, fear, honesty, cannot be so
measured. The best we can do at present is to labor over these characteristics with methods of research which are difficult of manipulation,
unstandardized, and wholly impracticable for psycho-technological
use.

Eugenics needs accurate and reasonably complete description of
human behaviour as partial basis for methods of control. It may look
to psychology hopefully for accurate descriptions of traits of mind and
their expressions in action, for measurements of the manifold features.
of intellect, feeling, will, temperament, character—in fine for the
scientific description of the human personality. When this is possible,
and the start already made justifies the prophecy that the coming generation will achieve it, eugenics may fruitfully compare individuals,,
families, tribes, races, nations, occupational or other social groups,
may observe and experiment and above all may intelligently strive for
scientifically defined and evaluated ideals of human form and conduct.

The most impressive demonstration of the practical availability
and serviceability of methods of mental measurement occurred in the
Army of the United States of America during the Great War. I have
been asked to tell the readers of the Eucenics REview something about
the methods and results of this vast experiment in psycho-technology,
and I gladly do so. But in undertaking the task I beg to remind my
MEASUREMENTS OF INTELLIGENCE IN THE U. S. ARMY. 227

readers that it is impossible to do justice to it in a few pages. Even
the voluminous official reports are disappointing because of their
incompleteness .*

The methods used to measure intelligence in the United States
Army are of two sorts: group examinations and individual examinations. The group examination was developed and perfected in response
to the compelling demand for speed, and the individual examination
to assure a greater measure of accuracy and fairness in doubtful cases.
Although in general army psychological methods were adaptations of
those previously used for research or technological purposes, several
new tests were devised, and certain of the assemblages of tests for use
as group examinations were essentially new. Of peculiar importance
are the performance tests, devised by army psychologists fOr the
examination of foreigners and illiterates.

Psychological examining was originally undertaken with a group
examination which required ability to read and write English, but the
unexpectedly high frequency of men illiterate in English necessitated
the development of a non-linguistic type of examination. The group
examination for literates finally adopted is known as examination
Alpha, that for illiterates as examination Beta. Whereas Alpha consists chiefly of linguistic tests, Beta is made up wholly of non-linguistic
or performance tests. By means of Alpha and Beta, men can be
examined in as large groups as available space and the vocal power
of the examiner make possible. In the Army the numbers usually
varied from one to three hundred. As many as five hundred men have
been examined simultaneously.

Three principal varieties of individual examination were developed, for different types of subject. They are the Performance Scale
Examination, the Yerkes-Bridges Point Scale Examination, the
Stanford-Binet Examination. The first was developed primarily for
the examination of illiterates and the last two were used mostly for men
of low-grade intelligence and limited education in English.

Each examination was made up of tests carefully selected to measure important intellectual processes. It is impracticable to describe

*(1) Psychological Examining in the United States Army (official report). Memoirs of the National Academy of Sciences, Vol.15. Washington, D.C., 1920.
Pp. VI 1890. (Available through the Superintendent of Documents,
Washington, D. C.)
(2) Psychology in Relation to the War. By Robert M. Yerkes. Psychological
Review, Vol. 25,1918. Pp. 85—115.
(3) Report of the Psychology Committee of the National Research Council. By
Robert M. Yerkes. Psychological Review, Vol. 26, 1919, Pp. 883—149.
(4) Army Mental Tests. Edited by C. S. Yoakum and R. M. Yerkes. Pp.
xiii+303. Holt & Co., New York,. 1920.
(5) Intellectual and Educational Status of the Medical Profession as Represented
in the United States Army. By Margaret V. Cobb and Robert M.
ne Bulletin National Research Council, Vol. 1, No. 8, 1921. Pp.

(6) The Personnel System of the United States Army. Vol.1. History of the
Personnel System; Vol. 2. The Personnel Manual. Published by the
War Department, Washington, D. C., 1919. (Available through the
Superintendent of Documents, Washington, D . C.)

(7) A Study of American Intelligence. By Carl C. Brigham. Princeton University Press (In press .)
228 | EUGENICS REVIEW.

all of the tests in detail since there were some two hundred included in
the several types of examination. <A few of the simplest must serve
to indicate general characteristics. |

Group examination Alpha consisted of eight tests, the descrip
FORM 6 GROUP EXAMINATION ALPHA GROUP NO.._22....
Name. 8 ooo cecccccsccccesceceeseeteteteses sitttettitititnee Rank oe ABQ. .
Company... cee ee , Regiment spar gke ompaneanenaymonansal wee AIM. ee Division... 0...
In what country or state born? 0... eee eects Years in U.S.?..0 ww. Race.
Occupation............... bette tee eeeees Weekly Wages 
 

Schooling: Grades,! 1.2.3.4. (5.6.7.8: » High o or + Prep. ‘School, Year 1. 2.3.4: College, Year 1. 2.3.4.

TEST 1

1 OOOOO
2 O®@OOQOOOOO

s. (Z\

>

C) —O C) Yes No
OOOO0O
ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOP

OOO MILITARY GUN CAMP
. 34-79-56-87-68-25-82-47-27-31-64-93-7 1-41-52-99

10. (Td
1. br] A@A® LIA®@® LL]

12.12345678 9

Division of Psychology, Medical Department U.S. A.
Authorized by the Surgeon General, Feb. 8, 1918, Edition, Aug. 16, 1918, 200,006.

7

COR I0

Fie. 1.
MEASUREMENTS OF INTELLIGENCE IN THE U. S. ARMY. 229

tive titles of which are: (1) oral directions or commands test ; (2) arithmetical problems; (3) practical judgment; (4) synonym—antonym ;
(5) disarranged sentences; (6) number series completion ; (7) analogies ;
(8) general information.

To facilitate description of the oral directions or commands test,
the page of the Alpha record-blank which includes this test is reproduced—three-fifths original size, as figure 1. In giving this test the
military examiner, after general instructions to his group of subjects,
proceeds as follows:

‘‘Attention! ‘Attention’ always means ‘Pencils up.’ Look at the circles at
1. When I say ‘go’ but not before, make a cross in the first circle and also a figure
1 in the third circle—Go!’’

After waiting for five seconds to allow the subjects to execute the
command the examiner continues : .

‘*Attention! Look at 2, where the circles have numbers in them. When I
say ‘go’ draw a line from Circle 1 to Circle 4 that will pass above circle 2 and below
circle 3.—Go!’’ .

So, in accordance with definitely prescribed rules, the examiner
continues through the twelve items of the test. The items are arranged
in order of increasing difficulty ,the initial ones being very easy so that
all subjects can respond correctly at the start.

Like the commands test, the remaining tests of examination Alpha
consist of numerous items arranged from easy to difficult. Response
requires little or no writing, for in almost every test the subject records
his response by making some such simple mark as a cross, a check
mark or an underscore. This at once facilitates reaction, eliminates
difference in ease and speed of writing as a source of error, and makes it
possible to score examination records by the use of transparent stencils
on which correct responses are indicated by position.

The maximum number of points allowed for examination Alpha
was 212. For convenience of report and use of intelligence grades by
army officers, the scores for all types of examination were converted
into letter grades in accordance with the data of table 1, from which it
will be noted that a score of 135 points or more in examination Alpha,
or of 100 or more in examination Beta classed a man as of A grade
intelligence; and that a score of 14 or less in Alpha or of 19 or less in
Beta classed him as D. It is important to note that the letter-grade
classification is somewhat arbitrary. For practical reasons the range of
scores included in A, for example, was so chosen that not more than five
per cent. of recruits should receive that grade.

TABLE I.
DEFINITIONS OF INTELLIGENCE GRADES.
Intelligence Definition. Score(Alpha) Score (Beta)
A Very superior 135—212 100—118
B Superior 105—134 90—99
C+ High average 75—104 80—89
C Average 45—74 65—79
C— Low average 25—54 45—64
D Inferior ~15—24 20—44,

D- Very inferior 0—14 0—19
230 EUGENICS REVIEW.

Examination Beta consisted of seven tests known as (1) the maze
test ; (2) cube analysis; (3) X—O series; (4) digit-symbol; (5) number
checking; (6) pictorial completion ; (7) geometric construction. This

Test 7

 
MEASUREMENTS OF INTELLIGENCE IN THE U. S. ARMY. 231

examination could be given, if necessary, without the use of language
by the employment of pantomime, charts, or blackboard , and demonstration. Whereas in examination Alpha all directions are given orally
and the subject must be able to understand English readily, read it and
write words and figures, examination Beta can be given satisfactorily
to men who are entirely unfamiliar with English, for the examiner in
ease of each test begins by showing the group what is to be done.

Test 7 of Beta is reproduced, one half original size, as figure 2.
In each item or part of the test the geometrical forms at the left can be
arranged to make a square. The subject is expected to indicate the
proper placement of the forms by drawing with his pencil proper line
or lines in the blank square at the right. As a preliminary to the test
the examiner demonstrated with blackboard and pieces of cardboard
how a certain assemblage of forms can be fitted together to make a
square. This pantomime explanation was conducted slowly and
repeated with four different sets of forms. Then the subject was
required to go ahead with the ten parts of the test and to supply in each
the necessary lines.

In the Army non-linguistic or performance tests were devised and
used extensively and to excellent purpose. Had the exigencies of the
situation permitted, or had the war continued another year, doubtless
a single non-linguistic group examination would have been developed
as a substitute for Alpha and Beta. The practical importance of performance tests as contrasted with linguistic tests for the comparative
measurement of native intelligence is very great. For they escape
individual differences in language, dialect, schooling, facility and
speed in reading and writing, and native linguistic gift. If available,
satisfactory non-linguistic or performance tests and examinations
might be given to primitive as well as civilised races, to immature as
well as mature individuals, to uneducated as well as educated persons.
There is urgent need for a practical system of examination with this
degree of flexibility, applicability and comparability of results. The
psychologists of the United States Army took a long step toward the
development of non-linguistic methods of measuring intelligence, and
although examination Beta is not entirely satisfactory for general use,
ait clearly points the way to further methodological developments which
are sure to be of the greatest significance to eugenics.

The several types of individual examination used in the Army are
too well known to justify description of the constituent tests. All were
adapted to military needs. In some of them new types of tests appear.
Those who desire detailed descriptions of methods, with measures of
their value should consult the official report.

Probably the most important aspects or characteristics of Army
psychological examining are (1) the utilization of mass measurement
instead of individual examining. Previously the achievement of an
examiner had been limited to ten or at most fifteen examinations per
day. In the United States Army a psychologist examined as many as
1000 men inaday. (2) Objectivity of measurement. For all examanations were made in accordance with definite rules, and scored by
rule, with the use of stencils so that the scoring clerk performed merely
the mechanical function of indicating right or wrong responses. (4)
282 EUGENICS REVIEW.

The use of examinations in series to increase accuracy of measurement
and to assure justice to the individual. Ifa subject failed in examination Alpha it was assumed that inadequate education or familiarity
with English might be partially responsible, and he was examined also
by means of Beta. Failing in the latter he was given an individual
examination, if time permitted. (5) Unprecedented utilization of nonlinguistic tests as contrasted with those which demand facility in the
use of spoken or written language.

The following ‘‘explanation’’ of intelligence examining and grades
was supplied by army psychologists for the enlightenment of officers in.
command of troops. It will serve at once to indicate briefly the
principal purpose or uses of intelligence grades, the meaning of the
different letter-grades employed, and important limitations of value.

EXPLANATION OF THE INTELLIGENCE GRADES.

The purpose of the psychological tests.— In no previous war has military efficiency
depended so much upon the prompt and complete utilization of the intelligence of
the individual soldier. The purpose of the psychological tests is to give a quick and
fairly accurate classification of the men according to general intelligence. They
aid:

(a) In the discovery of men whose superior ability recommends their advance
ment.

(b) In the prompt segregation in the Development Battalions of intellectu
ally inferior men whose inaptitude would retard the training of the unit.

(c) In building organizations of equal or appropriate strength.

(d) In selecting suitable men for various army occupations or for special

training in the technical schools.

(e) In eliminating the feeble-minded.

What the tests measure.—The tests give reliable index of a man’s ability to
learn, to think quickly and accurately, to analyse situations, to maintain a state of
mental aleriness, and to comprehend instructions. They do not measure loyalty,
bravery, dependability, or the emotional traits that make a man ‘‘carry on.”” A
man’s value to the service is measured by his intelligence, plus other necessary quatifications.

What the grades mean .—All men are classified by the tests as A, B, C+, C,
C-,D,D—,orE, as follows: |

A Very superior intelligence -—High officer type, when backed by other

necessary qualities.

B Superior intelligence.—Commissioned officer type and splendid: sergeant

material.

C+ High average intelligence.—Good non-commissioned officer material with |

occasionally a man worthy of higher rank.

C Average intelligence.—Good Private type, with some fair to good non
commissioned officer material.

C— Low average intelligence —Ordinary private.

D Inferior intelligence —Largely illiterates or foreign born... Wsually fair

soldiers, but often slow in learning.

D— Very inferior intelligence , but considered fit for regular service...

E Mental inferiority, justifying recommendation for Development Battalion,

special service organizations, rejection or discharge.

The grades should be consulted _{a) in the selection of candidates. for officers’
training schools ; (b) in the selection of all non-commissioned officers ; (c), in. balancing organizations ; (d) in picking men for special detail ; (e) in the classification and
training of men in Development Battalions; (f) in court cases ; (g) in the better
understanding of men who are in any way peculiar or exceptional ; (h) the tests have
also been used effectively in the selection of nurses, Y.M.C.A. personnel, etc.

IMPORTANT POINTS.

1. Commissioned officer material is found chiefly in the A and B groups..
Men grading C should be accepted for Officer’s Training Camp only after careful
scrutiny.
MEASUREMENTS OF INTELLIGENCE IN THE U. S. ARMY. 233

2. The majority of non-commissioned officers rate A, B or C+. Men below
C+ should not be entrusted with complicated paper work.

3. D men are rarely suited for tasks requiring special skill, forethought,
resourcefulness or sustained alertness.

4, It is unsafe to expect D— or E men to read and understand written directions.

5. Only high score men should be selected for tasks that require quick learning and rapid adjustments.

6. A man’s value to the service should not be judged by his intelligence rating
atone.

Every effort was made to emphasize the incompleteness of psychological examination of the soldier. It was recognized that the
methods employed tested or measured only certain important intellectual processes and that grades were assigned merely for what is
popularly known as ‘‘brightness,’’ ‘‘mental alertness’’ or ‘‘general
intelligence.’’ In emphasizing this limitation of psychological report
it was pointed out that certain other psychological traits, as for example
leadership, courage, reliability, may be equally important with
intelligence for success in military duty. These affective or temperamental traits also would have been measured by army psychologists
had suitable methods been available or readily developed. It is
regrettably true that only half the mind, or reactive capacity, of the
soldier was measured. Had it been possible similarly to measure
traits of temperament and character, the practical value of psychological examining would have been increased tremendously. But here the
army psychologists faced a condition which still persists, namely, the
lack of simple, effective, standardized methods of measuring the affec
tive traits or aspects of behaviour.

Description of methods of mental measurement, even of the psychotechnological sort, for the enlightenment of laymen becomes increasingly difficult as the technique of the science grows varied and complex.
It is hopeless to give adequate knowledge of even the general characteristics and values of the methods used in the United States Army.
Those who desire accurate detailed descriptions are referred to the
official report or to manuals of mental tests. Those who are sceptical
of the reliability of even the well-established and highly standardized
mental tests, and doubtful of the utility of their results, are urged to
investigate them directly and especially to have the methods tried on
themselves. For there is nothing more illuminating and safely convincing than the self-revelation which comes from a thorough-going
psychological examination, conducted by a competent examiner.

A disproportionate amount of space has been given to method or
technique. We may now turn to results of psychological examining
in the United States Army which have significance for the eugenist..

Almost the first achievement in army intelligence examining was
the differentiation of important military groups and the revelation
that men of inferior intelligence are burdensome in the military
machine, as elsewhere. Figure 8, one of the charts early used by army
psychologists in describing results and military values, indicates at
once the prevalence of superior intellectual ability among officers and
among privates rated as ‘‘best’’ by their officers, and the amazing
prevalence of inferior intelligence among disciplinary cases and men

66

rated by their officers as of ‘‘low military value’’ or ‘‘unteachable.’’
234 EUGENICS REVIEW.

D.O-.E C+ C Ce A and B
Commissioned Officers
8810

C3 RSME ITALENT HLH

O0,T, S$, Students

9240
t Cc) eT UNL

Sergeants
3393
B C3 re
Corporals

4003
‘Cc ___ nn

“Ten Best Privates

606
nO

White Recruits

77299
on
Disciplinary Cases
491 Camp Diz

Zz (9 oi

“Ten Poorest’ Privates

§82
Ce |
“Men of Low Military Value’

147 Camp Custer

“Unteachable Men”
255 Camp Hancock

a
Fic. 38.

It was difficult for the military man to believe that the psychologist
in a few minutes, by what appeared to be absurdly simple tests, could
obtain an intelligence grade which generally agreed very closely with
his own judgment of the man’s ability based upon weeks or months of
observation in connection with military training and duty.

The most reliable general statements of results of intelligence
measurements in the Army of the United States are those based upon
the so-called ‘‘combined scale,’’ which was fashioned so that the results of all types of examination could be converted into it. The
range of scores on the ‘‘combined scale’’ is 0 to 26 points. The percentage distribution of scores for such important army groups as officers,
white draft, negro draft, and men individually examined, are presented
in the accompanying table 2. Attention is particularly invited to the
median scores of these groups and to the fact that almost all of the
officers are above the median for the white draft, and all but about 11
per cent. of the white draft, above the median for the negro.

The graphical representation of these facts (figure 4) is particularly
impressive because it so strikingly indicates the wide range of intelligence and the surprising differences between groups as well as within
them. Assuming that the curve for the white draft in this figure applies
TABLE 2.

ON COMBINED SCALE

OF OFFICER AND DRAFT GROUPS.

DISTRIBUTION

PERCENTAGE

Negro individual

White individual

 

MEASUREMENTS OF INTELLIGENCE IN THE U. S. ARMY. 235

   

LETTE PPP rd ibid dd peseseeoerseso

Seroroeguaed
SSASr BGA °

   

Sum.

   
  

  

  
  
 

oe e e 8 ee e ee ee @ @

ONO CO =
Saaan te

N discha
Grant)

PITTI TTP ILE Pi lise etsoraes

  

| | | | CSCEOroowmontDoewmoomortnone

eo e© © e@© @ @ © @© #© © © e® © e@ ee e 8 #@ 8 @

a a a
re

    

Sum.

   
 

DDDADAAIAAaVWDHMrION

(Grant)

| | | | [ SRS et ED ee A A a a

eo e© © @ #© @ © «© # e© #® © © © © © ee @ we @

SCOSmOooooonrresreamanooe
rarest QU re

White discharge

   

Distribution

    
 
  
  

 

E LILI | leraserescoooooveans
| ° SESSSSSSSSRSAMESS
eo =

o
2) 22 11111] | lepeneescocorenenol
B32 SOMAAMDHADOOSOSOSOOS

   

I} | | | pepreesewsconosworeno|

       

- | € {IIL  lexreesereororcorsac

|? SSSSSSERTTGAPAMWOSSS

fue

eo

wks

lo ge (11111 | leeeerasecaesonsgage
= 3 SGOCCOHPFODMHONVHOCOOO
Axa aA

  
     
   
 

eo 2e© «© #® @# e@ e#® © e© e@ e© © #® ee ee ee «@

Z2VQRwVORNN MIO ¥FOMOS
SADADDE OI GOA

| | COMMOVOH SON MO NWA | | | | {

 

e

 

 

e e e ee # e* 8 j\e8 8 e¢ e& je* e* #8* 28 ee @

CmMHOPrDAAASmAoCmMMHOCS
as

 

Distribution

 

| | | | | SSO PFoOSSE SHAS MOSS | | | | |

= g DAROHOADAGNSTAGE FOAMS AGS | |
33 a PAOBADSLTODDHHAYRODAMOMMOSCOOS
58 BOSHBSBSBBOODOE OWA

i
3:
= 8

3 . ee «© ® #® e€© @#® @ @® @® @ e#® @® @ @® e#  @  @®  @® @® @® e® &® @«@

2

UO

    

SPCPHRVWDOMUVVGIASHOHOSMUWMSS | | | | | | | | |

SSASASVFIRSSNAARAMASSOSOS
SSSSESGNOR AEA

 

   
 

Officers Group V1

ee e@ e© @ @#© © @® # e# e€© @ 8 8 «@
ee e® ee &© © © © © © © @ © © @ @ 8 ® @ @ @ © @ @ 8 @
2 0©«© © 8 8 @® #@# @ @® @® @© ® © @# #@ @ @ @ ® @ @ e© #® @ e# ¢
eo e@ © © © © @© @© © © @ © #8 #@© @© @ @¢ @ @ @ 8 @ @ @ e ©
e ef © © @® ® &® @ © @® 8 8 8 © @ 8 @ 8@® @ €© 8 @® @ e* @# *
e oe @¢ e8© © @® @ © ®©® @® @© @ @ @ @ © @ 8® @® €© * je€ %@ @ 8 @¢
ee e e© #® ® 6 e@ @® &® 8 8 @ ee @ e@ @ @ @© @ @* @ @ © ¢ 4#

eo ee @© e e ® 8» @ @© # e#® # ee #® ee ©

Combined Scale

  
236 EUGENICS REVIEW.

to the total adult population of the United States, it appears that a
person who scores 15 points on the ‘‘combined scale’’ falls in the

OFFICERS, GROUP WZ —WHITE ORAFT, GROUPS 1,121.0 a
WHITE DRAFT, GROUP Ko FR TR TR
NEGRO DRAFT, GROUP IW niet aS TA aS aes ee RRR NeRR BEN na aRRRAN Nase TEATS
WHITE DRAFT, INOIV. EXAMS. (SHERIDAN) Se SS TE
NEGRO DRAFT, INDIV EXAMS (SHERIDAN ———
WHITE DRAFT, DISCHARGE RECOM. (GRANT) aot cence eee c cee seme cee cceeans tacacnmecsanevecees

NEGRO DRAFT, DISCHARGE RECOM, (GRANT) —-———-—-----------
26

25

COMBINED SCALE

 

20 30 ao 50 © 60: ° 0 20 90 100
DERCENTILES

Fig. 4.
MEASUREMENTS OF INTELLIGENCE IN THE U. S. ARMY. 237

seventieth percentile, while he who scores 21 points or over falls in the
ninety-ninth or one hundredth percentile. This method of representing the intellectual status of a population, of a racial, institutional, or
other group of individuals, is likely to come into general use because
of its definiteness of meaning and convenience. It is of considerable
interest to the individual, as well as of practical importance to the
examiner, to be able to compare a subject’s score with the racial distribution of scores, and to read directly the percentile location of the
Individual.

[| D-| D {| C-{ €C |] C+] Bt] A |

Laborer e . e ——_——_-_-----—C- Gen. miner e e e renee

TPOAMStST 65 meee

Barber e ° e e e ° i

HOYSOSHOOCT © oo mee
Bricklayer 66 6mm
COOK 6 ue
Baker 5 6 6 eo 0 emf
PELMCOT oo te een
Geri. DLACKSMi tl 5 ee
Ger. CATPEMtE 6 6 6 ee pee
Butcher 0 0 5 5 666
Gen. machinist © 50 5 —_ee—
Hand riveter oo 6 5
CS Tel. & tel. lineman . ——J/OU

Gen.pipefitter ... - — °
Plumber . 2. «© «© «© «© «©

Tool and gauge maker . .

Gunsmith . . 6 0 6 6 6 5 ef

Gers MOCHamL oe 6 6 ceeteciepe

Gen. auto repairman . .. ——_|_E
Auto engine mechanic ee

Auto assembler ...

 

Ship carpenter .. .
Telephone operator .

Concrete const. foreman —————_}——____
Stock-keeper . 6 6 6 6 6
Photographer . . 6 0 6 5 ef
Telegrapher «oe 5 6 65 mmr

C+ RLR. Clerk © 0 6 0 8 0 6 6 0 8
Piling clerk © 2 0 0 5 6 6 6 6 6 mnmenmmmb
Gen. clerk 2 0 0 5 5 6 0 0 06 0 meee
Army nurse e e e e e e e e e e e e —
Bookkeeper . « «+ «© «© «© «© © e « « Of
Dental officer . 6 ee 5 0 6 6 6
Mechanical draftsman 6 6 6 6 6 meee
B Accountant .« « © « «© e © «© © e © « @ si ts
Civil engineer . 2. - 2+ «+ e+ e+ eee ——_—__|__—
Medical officer... 5 ee ee ee ee ee
A < sngineer officer © 6 6 6 ee ee ee ee ee ee

1 D- D C- C C+ B A
Fig. 5.
238 EUGENICS REVIEW.

Novel and suggestive of varied practical applications in industry
as well as in eugenics are the relations of intelligence measurement to
civilian occupations, indicated by army statistics. The accompanying figure 5 will serve to show some of the principal points. For the
several occupations listed, the median intelligence is indicated by
vertical cross lines. The horizontal line represents the middle 50 per
cent. of cases under each occupation. It therefore fails to show the
complete range of intelligence engaged in an occupation.

The median intelligence for the white draft is practically identical
with the median for such occupations as blacksmith, carpenter, butcher,
plumber, gunsmith, general mechanic. By contrast, the median
intelligence of laborers, miners, teamsters, barbers, is distinctly below
the general median, whereas the medians for clerks, book-keepers,
draftsmen, accountants, engineers, physicians, are very much higher.
These results clearly enough indicate the possibility of securing for
practical vocational use reliable intelligence specifications for all
important occupations. Both the range of intelligence actually engaged
in a given occupation and the median should be known and proficiency
or degree of success should be correlated with intelligence score so that
limits may safely be fixed on the one hand for the minimum of intelligence necessary for success, and on the other hand for the maximum of
intelligence usable without waste. For it is clear that the individual
may have either too little or too much intelligence for a given task or
occupation. Of course in addition he may be temperamentally quallified or unsuited to the occupation. There unquestionably is quite as
serious human wastage on account of needlessly high grade intelligence
in a given task as because of inadequate ability.

It would be inexcusable to overlook results which analyse the
scores instead of presenting the single intelligence grade. Examination
Alpha consists of eight tests which make radically different demands
on the intellect of the subject. When the scores on these several tests.
are computed for individuals or for such groups as medical officers,
engineer officers, chaplains, it is manifest that there are significant
differences from test to test. Graphic representation of these differences yields what may be called an intelligence profile or psychograph
for the individual or the group.

In figure 6, examination Alpha psychographs for nine army groups.
are presented. All are plotted about the fiftieth percentile and for
each test the departure of a given group from that percentile is indicated. In test 1, ora] directions, medica] corps officers fall below the
thirtieth percentile; chaplains at the forty-eighth; engineers at the
seventy-second. On test 4, opposite or synonym-antonym, the medical group is relatively much higher, forty-eighth percentile ; engineers
relatively much lower, sixty-second percentile, and the chaplains unprecedentedly high, eighthieth percentile. On test 6, number series.
completion, which demands detection of certain types of logical relationship, both medical officers and chaplains are low, whereas engineers
are high.

By comparison with the dissimilarity of the psychographs for the
several army groups of figure 6 the family resemblance of those of
239

MEASUREMENTS OF INTELLIGENCE IN THE U. S. ARMY.

 

QOTZ BemL6 FUT

satzoteuy
UoTzeTdwoo
Ssatzes rJequnyg
— — £IeTTI2 27
spoctttt 4x, 08 FUT
gsoue,ues
suTetdeqg peszuerzestg¢
Bdrog!TeOT pen
\-- edz09 Te3uSeq.
seytsoddo
q,ueus pnt
TBOTPORAT
OF} OU FAV
su0T oer Tp
T8I0

~

"9

°2

*T
48a]

Fie. 6.
240 EUGENICS REVIEW.

Gest
20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90

   
     

\\

2. Arithmetic IN

    

  

3. Practical judgment

 

   

- Opposites

   

Surgery,
Roentgenology, —-—
J

   

Gynocology and obstetrics, -—.--.}.

  
 
 

. Number series et 14

completion Tutvernsl medicine,

    
 

Mental and nervous,

|
All medical officers
- Analogies

   

 
 

8. Information

oe ——

figure 7 is significant. In the latter figure the group of medical officers
has been resolved into its principal army specialities. It is noteworthy
that the several psychographs are closely similar and that except for
the somewhat higher scores of ‘‘internal medicine’’ and ‘‘mental and
nervous’’ all would fall within a narrow percentile range.

Whether or not the psychograph or some similar method of representing the status of important intellectual functions in the individual
will come into general use is difficult to predict. The writer is inclined
to think it will, because it gives infinitely more valuable information
about the individual than does the intelligence score or grade. Indeed
what we most need and desire to know about individual or group is
the status of essential traits in relation to the norms for sex, age, race,
occupational or other groups.
MEASUREMENTS OF INTELLIGENCE IN THE U. S. ARMY. 241

The psychographic differences appearing in figure 6 may or may
not have occupational significance. Perhaps they are due to fundamental differences in the intellectual make-up of men who choose
engineering, medicine, or the ministry, or perhaps they are due to professional training and experience. The same possibilities obtain in
the case of differences in the psychographs of individuals. For
although psychologists are striving to devise methods which shall
yield clean-cut measurements of native capacity versus acquired ability, it is clear that they have not ideally succeeded, and that in most
instances they measure primarily the one or the other, but something
of both. So long as this is true, it will be impossible to say certainly
whether and to what extent psychographs are descriptive of menta}
constitution and possess educational or vocational significance.

I wish to avail myself of this opportunity to emphasize the inexcusable waste of scientific effort in the presentation of mental age,
letter grade, or numerical score as the sole descriptive result of ‘‘intelligence examination.’’ If and when an individual has been subjected
to an examination consisting of a dozen or a score of different types of
test, each of which contains from ten to fifty different items, it is only
a matter of common sense to present a statement of results which shal!
indicate achievement in the different types of test. Thus it is possible
to exhibit the status of different functions instead of summing up the
whole, and, thus hiding perhaps, the most significant features of the
results, in such a simple statement as mental age or score. In this
respect the so-called ‘‘Binet testers’? have been, and continue to be,
the worst offenders. Little indeed for the advance of scientific knowledge of mental development has resulted from the i mense number of
Binet examinations made all over the world. If we could to-day
replace the Binet tests by a method of measuring specific intellectual
and affective functions which would permit of psychographic or other
suitable means of indicating the relative status of each function, we
should take a tremendously important step forward in the interest
alike of eugenics, of education, and of other types of human endeavour.

Far more interesting doubtless to the practical eugenist than
occupational differences in intelligence or specifications are the racial
differences which appear when the foreign-born American draft is
analysed into its principal constitutent groups. The difference even
of median score or letter grade distribution are so great as to be significant alike to the American people and to the eugenists of the world.

The contrasting intellectual status of the white versus the negro
constituents of the draft appear from table 38. Few residents of the
United States probably would have anticipated so great a difference.
That the American negro is 90 per cent. illiterate only in part accounts
for his inferior intellectual status.

TABLE 38.
INTELLIGENCE OF AMERICAN NEGRO VERSUS WHITE.
Race. Number of Percentage making grade
Cases A B Cc Cc — p—
Whites .. o- 93,973 4-1 8:0 15-0 25-0 28-8 17-1 7-0
Negroes .. os ee 18,891 O-1 0-6 2-0 5-7 12-9 29-7 49°0
e
Northern negroes a 4,705 O-% 2:7 %-2 18:0 25:8 31-2 14:4
Southern negroes a 6,846 O-1 0-2 OF 3:4 9:6 29-2 57-0
242 EUGENICS REVIEW.

Scarcely less marked than the contrast between white and negro.
are the differences among the white racial groups. Again, the best
basis for comparison available in the report of army examining is the
‘‘combined scale.’’ By the kindness of Professor Carl C. Brigham of
Princeton University , who recently has carefully re-examined the army
data relative to nativity and length of residence in the United States,
I am able to present in table 4 the median scores on the ‘‘combined
scale’’ for those racial groups which were most largely represented in
the United States Army. The table presents also the rank-order of
the groups with respect to increasing percentage of intellectual.
inferiors, as designated by letter grades, and similarly the rank-orderfor diminishing percentages of intellectual superiors.

TABLE IV.
INTELLIGENCE RANK-ORDER OF NATIVITY GROUPS UNITED STATES.
ARMY. | —

Rank Average score on Rank Average score on.

order ‘‘combined acale.’’ order. ‘‘eombined scale.”’
England .. = a -. 14-87 Ireland is oe -- 12-82:
Scotland .. se we -. 14°34 Austria. .. - ¢ i w.' 12-27
Holland .. on «is -- 14°82 Turkey =... . ..: «2: 12°02;
Germany .. a nie -- 18°88 Greece... si we -- 11-90.
Denmark .. a --  « 18°69 Russia .. ee) owe ‘oe 11-84.
Canada .. . . -. 183-66 Italy .. ° .. we ee DOL
Sweden .. .- .. -- 13°30 Poland. -- 10-74.
Norway .. .- ~-» = «+ 12:98 Native born white draft -. 18°77
Belgium .. we +e -. 12-79 oo, .
Rank Percentage Rank Percentage.
order D, D—, E. order | D, D—, E.
England .. 7 oe os 8-7 Norway 7 7 : 25-6.
Holland .. a es ei 9-2 Austria.. es - oe 37°5
Denmark .. ws 7 “a 138-4 Treland wa ae _ 39-4.
Scotland .. ws <. +2 138-6 Turkey as we < 42-0:
Germany .. oe ss “ 15-0 Greece .. _ a 43° 6.
Sweden... es a A ® 19-4 All foreign countries ws we 45-6
Canada .. “n a ae 19-5 Russia . ws ws - 60-4
Belgium .. mm ms we 24:0 Italy .. “m we ws 63-4
White draft as “2 we 24.1 Poland.. .. es se 69:9
Rank Percentage of Rank Percentage of
order A and B. order A and B.
England .. ws se ‘ 19-7 Ireland.. ‘ TT 4-1.
Scotland .. ia ws os 13-0 All foreign countries .. 3-0.
White draft a 6 we 12-1 Turkey .. ei 3°4
Holland .. + ie 8% 10-7 Austria.. 3+ 4:
Canada .. a #4 gs 10-5 Russia .. 2-7
Germany .. as we we 8-3 Greece .. 2-1
Denmark .. “on es as 5-4 Italy 0-8.
Sweden «s ws . 4-3 Belgium 0:8.
Norway 4-1 Poland. 0-5

It is not suggested, much less maintained, that these general
ethnic results indicate the relative intellectual status of the several
nationalities concerned, or of the total racial groups, the world over.
Selective factors doubtless have markedly affected the intelligence of
immigrants. Possibly Poland, Russia, Ireland, have not sent as
nearly representative samples of their populations to this country as.
have England, Scotland, and Germany. In any event, the results.
offered are terribly significant for the United States of America.
MEASUREMENTS OF INTELLIGENCE IN THE U. S. ARMY. 243

Professor Brigham in a forthcoming book on intelligence and race,*
which is highly commended to the reader in supplementation of this
article, uses the effective device of figure 8 to present graphically the
conspicuously important results of army psycholgical examining with
respect to racial differences in intelligence.

Too much space has already been given to the sampling of general
results. Readers who desire all the facts must be referred once more
to the official report. To sum up the story of psychological examining
in the United States Army :—One and three-quarter millions of men
were examined. In all, more than two and one-half millions of examinations were made. About 42,000 of the number examined were
commissioned officers. More than 83,000 enlisted men- were given
individual examinations in addition to Alpha, Beta, or both. Just
about two men in every hundred were found to be so inferior mentally
that they could not safely be recommended for regular military training and duty. Some of these were discharged, others were assigned to
development battalions or to labour organizations. Had the United
States Army rejected or discharged immediately on the basis of psychological examination the lowest one hundred thousand of its recruits,
it would have lessened by at least one half military crime, difficulty and
delay in training due to stupidity, and inequalities in strength of
organization.

As in the light of war-time experience and its conspicuously important psychological results, we consider the relation of psycho-technology to education, industry, and eugenics, we are impressed prin arily
by the necessity for the wise and skilful development of methods of
observation and likewise of safe statistical methods of treating and
stating scientific results. No less important is the indicated need of
standards of judgment or norms in connection with psychological
measurement. In the main, mental testing, so called, has been
carried on with no other standard of reference than that of chronological
age. Now age undeniably is important, but least important of all
ages perhaps is the chronological. Most important of all ‘‘ages’’ is
the physiological, and equally important with this, or in certain cases
even more important, are norms and standards for sex, race, social or
educational status, occupation, etc. Not until we have safe and serviceable standards of judgment can we use to advantage even accurate
results of mental measurement. Many, it is true, doubt the importance of special norms for sex, or for race, but whatever may be our
belief or conviction regarding sex or ethnic differences in mental constitution, we are compelled to admit that safe comparision must rest
on statistically established facts and not upon accidental preconceptions.

All civilized nations periodically take stock of material resources
and population, that they may have at hand reliable information for
the guidance of their governments. But never yet has census been
taken of the mental, or even of the intellectual, resources of a country,
nation, or race. The United States of America demonstrated in its
army the practicability of a wholesale mental inventory and discovered

*A Study of American intelligence. Princeton University Press (In press).
244 EUGENICS REVIEW.

 

19
' US (Offcers) 18.84 —— —
1718
16
17
16 15

15

England [4 87 _
14
Scotland 1434. _———_—
Holland 14.352 
13.88 ‘*
nar? — —_
U See 1399 —— ——

Denmart |IB9
Canada 1466

Sweden 5.30 —— 13] —__
Norway 12.98 —— 13 —
Belxurn 12.79 —— —_———

Ireland 12.52 ~
Austria 12.07 
Tarkey 1202 ——--—12 1%
Greece 11.90 ———

| |

  
 

Russia 11.340. ——

j=
Age

Italy 1.0. ——
Poland 10.74 ——

ae

US.(Colered) 10.41 ———

Cornbined = Scale
Merittal ™

pa
o

Fic. 8.
MEASUREMENTS OF INTELLIGENCE IN THE U. S. ARMY. 245

certain uniquely valuable results. Is it rash to predict that in the
near future, census or inventory of mental resources will become established as a means of securing information invaluable for the guidance
of national, and ultimately of world, affairs? The group method of
examining, given suitable tests for the most important intellectual and
affective aspects of behaviour, would enable a country to sample the
mentality of its population periodically at reasonable cost.

Not content with prophecy in this matter, I definitely suggest both
the extreme desirability and the practicability of mental census, and
urge upon all nations the importance of thus providing information
essential to the wise direction of educational, industrial, and governmental affairs. |

EXPLANATIONS OF FIGURES.

Fic. 1.—Test 1, of Examination Alpha.

Fic. 2.—Test 7 of Examination Beta.

Fic. 3.—Frequency of low, medium, and high grade intelligence in military groups.

Fic. 4.—Percentile curves for intelligence scores (on ‘‘combined scale’’) for
various military groups. Reproduced from Memoirs Nat. Acad. Scs., vol.
15, p. 786.

Fic. 5.—Intelligence by occupations. Vertical bar marks median; horizontal bar
represents middle 50% of ratings (distance between first and third quartiles) .
Reproduced from Memoirs Nat. Acad. Scs., vol. 15, p. 829.

Fic. 6.—Scores on Alpha tests (profiles or psychographs) for officer groups in the
Army of the United States. Reproduced from Bull. Nat. Res. Council,
No. 8, p. 477.

Fic. 7.—Scores on Alpha tests of groups of medical specialists, United States

. Army. Reproduced from Bull. Nat. Res. Council, No. 8, p. 479.

Fic. 8.—Relative intelligence of nativity groups, United States Army. Average
scores on ‘‘combined scale’’ in left margin; estimated mental age in right
margin. Reproduced by the courtesy of Professor Carl C. Brigham.
