The Cytogenetics of Sex in Man’

C, E. FORD
B.Sc., Ph.D. Medical Research Council, Radiobiological Research Unit, Harwell.

EITHER CYTOGENETICS NOR even gen
etics had received their names as branches

of biological inquiry in Darwin’s day,
though the study of the movements of the chromosomes in mitosis was advancing rapidly at the
time of his death and Mendel’s immortal contribution to knowledge was already made, awaiting
rediscovery. Sex, however, has always been with
us. It presented important biological problems
then, as now. Darwin took a particular interest
in one of them, the consequences of sexual selection, and was led to assemble a considerable
amount of information about the relative
numbers of the sexes of many species.

The first clues to the nature of the cellular
events and mechanisms that lie behind the sex
ratio and the determination of the direction
of sexual development did not emerge until
some twenty years after his death. Then, within
the space of ten years, the sex chromosomes,
the heterogamety of one sex, and sex-linkage
were discovered, Goldschmidt began his
classical work on _ sex determination in
Lymantria, and Morgan established the Drosophila Group at Columbia, New York. Goldschmidt’s conclusions have been particularly
important in connection with subsequent thinking about sex determination and differentiation.
Essentially they are: first, that the egg naturally
destined to develop into the one sex nevertheless
contains within it the potentiality of developing
into the other; second, that the phenotypic sex is
determined by the quantitative relationship, or
balance between the aggregate strengths of
multiple male and female genetic determiners;
and third, that when these strengths are nearly
equal and the balance equivocal, development
may proceed as for one sex up to a certain stage,

* A summary of the first Darwin Lecture in Human
Biology delivered in London on November 23rd, 1960.
This summary also appears in the Institute of Biology
Journal. The full text of the Lecture will be published in
the Journal of Reproduction and Fertility.

or turning point, and continue thereafter as for
the other.

Bridges’ equally classic work on the genetics of
sex in Drosophila was commenced a little later.
He also put forward the idea of sex differentiation
being a consequence of the balance of opposed
sets of genetic factors, and he was able to find
convincing evidence for the location of the
feminising factors on the X chromosomes, and
the masculinising factors on the autosomes: the
Y chromosome, he found, had virtually no effect
on sex differentiation.

This interpretation accounted satisfactorily for
the sex phenotypes of several types of fly
with anomalous sex chromosome constitutions,
among them certain intersexes. This prompted
Painter to suggest that some types of human
intersexuality might owe their phenotypes to
abnormality of the sex chromosomes.

The Sex Chromatin Test

The need for such study was given new point
and urgency several years ago when the application of the sex chromatin test to intersexual
conditions revealed several anomalies. Sex
chromatin is a prominent darkly staining
chromatin mass that commonly lies close to the
nuclear membrane in suitable cells of normal
females, but which is absent from the corresponding nuclei of normal males. It is now believed to
be derived from one of the two X chromosomes
which may exhibit a different cycle of condensation and staining behaviour from the other at
mitosis. Smears of cells from the buccal mucosa
are the preparations of choice for the detection
of sex-chromatin and in expert hands the
distinction between normal individuals of the
two sexes is so certain and absolute that it serves
as a criterion of sexual normality. Two important
findings quickly emerged from its use. Klinefelter’s syndrome occurs with a frequency of
about 1 per 1,000 of the general population. The

21

EUGENICS REVIEW, April 1961, 53, 1.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

patients have exceptionally small testes and
atrophied seminiferous tubules. Notwithstanding
their essential maleness, about 80 per cent of
them have sex-chromatin bodies in their buccal
mucosa cells, as in normal females. Patients with
Turner’s syndrome occur rather less frequently,
perhaps 1 in 10,000 of the general population.
They present a female phenotype, but with short
stature, one or more of a range of congenital
defects, absent ovaries, failure of secondary sex
development at puberty and primary amenorrhoea. In this condition also about 80 per cent of
patients resemble normal members of the other
sex in lacking sex-chromatin. For the anomalous
majority in each of these conditions the possibility of “‘sex-reversal,” i.e. development of male
phenotype from an XX zygote and vice versa,
was seriously considered.

Chromosomes in Klinefelter’s and Turner’s
Syndromes

Very recently three general methods for obtaining good quality preparations of human somatic
chromosomes have been introduced, requiring
specimens of bone marrow, skin, and peripheral
blood respectively. Preparations are made from
cells incubated or cultured in vitro for periods
ranging from a few hours (bone marrow) to ten
days or more (skin culture). Use of these
methods has demonstrated that the chromatinpositive Klinefelter cases have an XXY sex
chromosome constitution with a total of fortyseven chromosomes; and that the chromatinnegative Turners are XO with forty-five chromosomes. These discoveries immediately accounted
for the sex-chromatin anomalies and disposed of
the hypothesis of sex-reversal.

The chromatin-negative Klinefelter syndrome
is probably aetiologically distinct: the patients
have forty-six chromosomes, like normal males.
In some chromatin-positive Turner patients the
chromosome number is also forty-six but with
two presumptive X chromosomes as in normal
females. No entirely plausible explanation can
yet be offered for the association of the one
abnormal phenotype with two distinct karyotypes in this condition.

Other Sex Chromosome Anomalies

Other chromatin-positive Turner patients, |

however, proved to be mixtures of XX cells with

22

two X chromosomes and of XO cells with only
one. Three other kinds of sex-chromosome
mosaicism are now known: XX/XXY, XO/XY
and XO/XXX. The identification of mixtures
such as these implies either non-disjunction or
elimination of sex chromosomes at an early
somatic mitosis. The last kind is particularly
interesting since the only plausible explanation is
non-disjunction in a normal XX cell at such an
early stage of development that only XO and
XXX cells were included in the germinal disc of
the blastocyst.

This makes it reasonable to consider seriously
the possibility of origin of an XXY soma from
an XY zygote, and of an XO soma from either an
XY or an XX zygote. However, the genetic
evidence provided by colour-blindness tests
makes it possible on statistical grounds to exclude such a mechanism of origin for at least the
majority of XXY Klinefelter cases. The alternative is to suppose that abnormal XX ova or XY
sperm (or both) are formed and are viable. Nondisjunction is doubtless a universal, if rare, error
and may be most frequent during the first
meiotic division in gametogenesis. This would
account not only for the occurrence of XX ova
and XY sperm but for the complementary types
of abnormal gamete lacking any sex chromosome at all. If all these gametic types should be
viable, three further sorts of abnormal zygote
should occur: YO, XXX and, with perhaps
exceptional rarity, XXXY. YO individuals have
not been detected: if zygotes of this constitution
are formed they are presumable inviable. The
occurrence of XXX and XXXY cases is now well
established.

Eight individuals with forty-seven chromosomes and a presumptive XXX constitution have
now been identified. They are all women who
have presented no striking clinical features in
common other than a general lowering of mental
performance, a feature which is also characteristic of the Klinefelter and Turner patients. Two
of the eight are of proved fertility and have a
total of five sons, all of whom are chromatinnegative. So there is at present no evidence of a
tendency to produce abnormal XX ova, which
would be expected if a trivalent configuration of
X chromosomes were to disjoin at random during
the first meiotic division of oogenesis.
THE CYTOGENETICS OF SEX IN

Two cases with a presumptive XXXY constitution are known. Both are males and show a
strong clinical resemblance to patients with
Klinefelter’s syndrome. However, both exhibit a
more extreme level of mental defect than is usual
among Klinefelter cases.

Non-disjunction at the second meiotic division,
or at both first and second divisions, would yield
a series of other possible abnormal gametic types
and point to the possible occurrence of zygotes
with still further kinds of numerical unbalance
of the sex chromosomes. In fact, XXXXY and
XXYY individuals have been reported. Both are
male, once again with essential clinical features
of Klinefelter’s syndrome.

A most interesting and unexpected finding in
the multiple X-chromosome cases, whether male
or female, is the occurrence of some cells with
additional sex-chromatin bodies in buccal mucosa
smears. Cells with nil, one and two bodies have
been found in all the XXX and XXXY cases
known at present, and in the XXXY case some
cells contained three bodies. On present evidence
there is no exception to the empirical rule that
the maximum number of sex chromatin bodies is
one less than the number of X chromosomes.
This points to a functional difference between
one X chromosome and the remainder and is in
accordance with the evidence for differential
behaviour of the two X chromosomes at mitosis
in normal females that I have already mentioned.
Whatever the explanation, this discovery provides
an admirable simple method of screening for
suspected multiple sex chromosome anomalies
among the patients of mental institutions.

Chromosomes and Sex Determination

Of the types of patient I have discussed so far,
all that have a Y chromosome are unquestionably
male, whatever the number of Xs, and all that
lack a Y chromosome are as certainly female.
The simple inference is that the Y chromosome
carries masculinising genes and is necessary for
the formation of the testes. However, two types
of female are known with chromosomes like
those of normal males and this might seem to put
the conclusions in doubt.

The discussion of these cases will be aided if
some of the basic findings regarding sex differentiation are kept in mind. The brilliant experiments

MAN

of Jost in Paris have shown that if the gonads of a
rabbit embryo are ablated at a suitably early
stage of development, that rabbit will develop a
female phenotype regardless of its naturally
destined sex. He therefore regards the female as
the basic or neutral phenotype. Further experiments of Jost’s and other general evidence
indicate that the differentiation of the Wolffian
ducts into typical male internal genitalia including epididymis, vas deferens and seminal
vesicles, proceeds on each side of the body
independently under the local evocating action
of the gonad on that side. In the absence of
evocator from either side the Wolffian duct
degenerates and the Mullerian duct transforms
into Fallopian tube and partial uterus. Transformation of the external genital rudiments into
the masculine form, on the other hand, is determined by a circulating morphogenetic substance
normally liberated by the testis. In short, primary
sex differentiation can be divided into three independent phases; first the gonads themselves, then
the internal genitalia, and finally the external
genitalia.

One of the two types of XY female exhibits
the condition known as testicular feminization
Typical affected individuals have a feminine conformation with well-developed breasts but
sparse or absent pubic and axillary hair. They
may have a short vagina but no uterus. The
dominant anatomical feature, however, is the
presence of undoubted testes in which there may
be a certain amount of active spermatogenesis,
lying either in bilateral inguinal hernias, or, more
rarely, intra-abdominally. The condition is
familial, being transmitted only through females,
and there is a marked deficiency of normal males
in the affected sibships. The affected individuals
are about equal in number to their male sibs, and,
like them, are chromatin negative. There is little
doubt that a single mutant gene is involved which
could be either a sex-linked recessive or a sexlimited autosomal dominant. Developmentally it
may be supposed that the normal allele of the
mutant gene acts on the third phase of male sex
differentiation and that in the mutant state either
the normal circulating morphogenetic substance
of the embryonic testis is not produced, or that
the external genital rudiments are incapable of
responding to it. However, this evidence for the

23
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

existence of a gene necessary for normal male
development that lies on a chromosome other
than the Y does not invalidate the hypothesis that
the Y chromosome also bears genes that play
an essential part in the process.

The second type of XY female exhibits an
extremely rare condition known as “pure gonadal
dysgenesis.”’ Those affected may be tall and have
limbs that are disproportionately long. There is
primary amenorrhoea and poor or absent
secondary sex development. In the few cases
where a laparotomy has been performed,
ovaries were absent, but fallopian tubes and
rudimentary uterus were present. The one case
that so far has been examined cytologically was
chromatin-negative. Some cases are chromatinpositive, but in none of them is the chromosome
constitution known. It may be that this condition presents the naturally occurring analogue in
man to the rabbits with experimentally ablated
gonads. If so, the occurrence of both chromatinpositive and chromatin-negative forms is understandable. Most of the cases are sporadic, though
there is a familial history in some of them.
However, whether a genetic factor is involved or
not, the question of the masculinising action of
the Y chromosome is not affected: on the evidence presented so far it is still possible to assert
that presence of the Y chromosome is necessary
for normal male development but not sufficient
to ensure it.

True Hermaphroditism

True hermaphroditism provides a further and
final test. In this rare condition, by definition,
there are gonads of both kinds, or of one kind
and an ovotestis, or two ovotestes. They present
an apparently bewildering array of anatomical
variation though all may be reconciled with the
three-phase scheme of sexual differentiation I
have already outlined. Chromatin-positive cases
appear to outnumber chromatin-negative cases
by about four to one. Seven have been examined
cytologically and all have been reported to be
XX with forty-six chromosomes like a normal
female. The one chromatin-negative case studied
was claimed to be an XO/XY mosaic.

24

Two mutually exclusive genetic hypotheses of
true hermaphroditism are possible: the gonads
(or gonad regions) may be anatomically and
histologically distinct either because the constituent cells are genotypically distinct, or, notwithstanding their genotypic identity. The first hypothesis invokes mosaicism. There was no evidence
of gross chromosomal mosaicism in the seven
chromatin-positive cases. However, all the
observations were made on bone marrow, or skin
cultures, or peripheral blood, so that there is
no information regarding the chromosome constitution of the actual gonads themselves.
Nevertheless, if gross chromosomal mosaicism
were a regular or frequent feature of true
hermaphroditism it seems unlikely that it would
have been identified only in one out of eight
cases, and that one the sole representative of the
chromatin-negative state. The possibility remains
of a more subtle type of chromosomal mosaicism
perhaps involving the transference through
structural change of a portion of the Y chromosome to another chromosome.

If any form of mosaicism is excluded in all the
XX cases, or even in some of them, it would
become necessary to reject the hypothesis that
the Y chromosome is essential for development
of testicular tissue. The alternative is to suppose,
with Goldschmidt, that there are multiple opposing genetic factors involved in sex determination,
and, in particular, that there is a sufficiency of
masculinising factors in the normal chromosome
set of the female for their aggregate strength
sometimes to be so nearly in balance with the
aggregate strength of feminising factors that
through chance local embryonic events the scales
could be tipped differently in different regions of
the body and different paths of gonadal differentiation result.

The use of cytogenetic methods during the last
two years has added much to the understanding
of the various sorts of human intersexuality and
more may yet be achieved, but there remain
some problems, particularly that of true hermaphroditism, which may require the development
of other methods of investigation for their
solution.
