Some Birth-Rate Problems.”

(continued) .
By Masor Leonarp Darwin, Sc.D.

7. Existing conditions tend to create a correlation between
the rate of wages and natural efficicncy.

In searching for some method of distinguishing the less fit from
the more fit in the hope of being able to affect their relative fertility,
we see that educational tests present many advantages; for they might
be applied in accordance with general rules applicable to all,.and they
would thus in some measure escape criticism on the ground of class
favouritism. The Binet-Simon and other similar tests are now used
in helping to detect mental defect sufficiently marked to justify segregation; but the less fit must be held to include large numbers of the
mentally defective of such a high grade as not to be certifiable. Educational tests might also be of racial value when used in regard to the
award of scholarships; for by such means the fertility of the more fit
might perhaps be increased. No other methods of utilizing educational standards for racial purposes occur to me; for it is probably
chimerical to suppose that any widespread differential treatment, if
affecting the probability of fertility, and especially if compulsory,
could ever be applied on such a basis.

Those who feel compelled to admit that compulsory methods,
such as segregation and sterilization, would alone be inadequate to
safeguard a nation against the harmful effects of any differential rates
of multiplication between the different sections of the community,
whatever method of selection might be employed, may be forced to turn
their attention to voluntary birth limitation as the most obvious and
possibly the only method of greatly affecting fertility. Now when
seekirtg to promote racial progress, it is always wise to consider whether
it isnot possible to utilize methods which might also be advocated
on account of their anticipated immediate effects; and if it should be
admitted that birth limitation may have to be accepted as a safeguard against the dangers of over -population, this forms an additional
reason for studying its uses for eugenic purposes. No doubt it will be
held by many that birth limitation could do all that was needed in
regard to over-population if the best methods were made widely
known ;. but, even if this were granted, we yet should have to enquire
what would ‘be the effect of such a policy in regard to the racial qualities of future generations. If it were true that all the different sections of the population which are multiplying more rapidly than the
average, were in no degree inferior in racial qualities to the groups

* The opinions expressed in this article, though written by the President, do not:
represent a policy authoritatively adopted by the Council,
280 EUGENICS REVIEW.

multiplying more slowly than the average, then there might ve no
serious racial danger to be feared, and a check on the fertility of the
grossly unfit might be all that was needed. But if th’s is not the case,
that is to say if there is any correlation whatever between the rate of
increase in numbers and inferiority in natural qualities, then even if
the total numbers were to remain stationary, the average quality of
the nation would keep deteriorating, and a eugenic remedy would
still have to be sought. We should even then have to prevent the
somewhat inferior stocks from continually overflowing into vacancies
caused by the infertility of the better stocks.

In whatever way the nation may be divided into sections, it will
be found that the worse paid groups are now, as a general rule, multiplying more quickly than are the better paid ; and we are, therefore, led to
enquire whether there are any corresponding differences between these
groups in regard to their racial qualities. As already remarked, individuals endowed with superior natural qualities are continually beng
transferred from out of the lower paid grades into those receiving on the
average higher wages, and vice versa; with the result that a correlation
is being promoted between the rate of remuneration and innate efficiency. It is unquestionably very difficult to prove whether this
correlation does now exist or not, because of the difficulty of discounting the effects of environment; and no such investigation will
here be attempted. But those who console themselves by dwelling on
this admitted difficulty should remember that even if such a correlation does not now exist, the gradual removal now taking place of the
barriers which make it hard either to rise or fall in the social scale,
and the consequent more frequent interchange between the social
classes, will steadi y increase the tendency for low pay to become
associated with natural inefficiency. It is the rates of pay and not
inherited wealth which should be held in view; for though wealth may
indicate an ancestry endowed with energy, it may also be a reason why
its possessor is not found amongst those who have obviously failed in
life. Moreover, since wealth in any form, whether inherited or acquired, facilitates the winning of more wealth, it might be right. when
considering what measures other than persuasive appeals should be
taken in consequence of any such correlation, to confine our attention
to such a broad distinction as that between those who can and cannot
win a living wage; for by confining any measures to those who had
failed to win such a wage, we should in normal times in a properly
constituted society be dealing with persons endowed with some defects
in natural qualities, whether mental or physical. Unfortunately
if it be suggested that a correlation almost certainly does
now exist in some degree between low pay and_ natural
inferiority, this is often held to be equivalent to an _ attack
on the roor; whereas all that is asserted is that many of. but
not all, the persons belonging to the worst paid sections of the population
are endowed with certain natural qualities which are in part responsible for their want of success. In any case, if low wages are or will
soon ke associated on the average both with a high rate of multiplication and with somewhat inferior biological qualities, this is a fact
which must not be passed over in silence; for it means that racial
deterioration is now actually in progress or will be shortly.
SOME BIRTH-RATE PROBLEMS. 281

8. How can the fertility of the less fit be lessened ?

Those who believe that a correlation does exist between the
rate of multiplication and innate inefficiency must, therefore, admit
that merely to prevent the population from increasing would not be
a sufficient safeguard; for on this hypothesis, in order to prevent
racial deterioration from taking place, the rate of multiplication of
the now more rapidly multiplying sections of the community must
be lowered until it becomes no greater then that of the now less rapidly
multiplying sections. In seeking to produce this result, every effort
should in the first place be made to persuade the less fit to multiply
less rapidly. Reasons have, however, been given for believing that
both a low rate of remuneration, and certain natural qualities often
associated with it,would militate against a campaign in favour of voluntary birth limitation amongst the inefficient. This method of reducing fertility is, moreover, now certainly failing to produce an adequate
effect in many directions; and as there is a widespread desire to lessen
by further state aid the burdens of parenthood, and thus to remove all
existing checks on an increase in numbers; it seems most unlikely that
a mere advocacy of birth limitation amongst the less fit would in the
future reduce their rate of mul iplicat on to the leve of that of the
more fit. And as the practice of birth limitation may in the coming
generations increase the strength of the natural qualities which now
hinder its adoption, the difficulties of such a campaign may be expected
to increase rather than to decrease. Does it not, therefore, seem essential that some further pressure should be applied with the object of
making the less fit more disposed to limit their families? We have
seen that the ideal p'an would be to select the parents on whom pressure should be applied according to their individual qualifications;
but such a proposal would be hopelessly impracticable with regard to
any scheme applicable to the great mass of the population The pressure ought to be widespread ; it should be such as cannot be evaded by
parents ; it should be applied on a system governed by general rules; and
the liberty of the individual should be secured as far as possible. Can
any methods of applying pressure, other than such as act through the
agency of finance, be suggested which would meet these conditions?
I know of none.

What should be the nature of the financial pressure which might
be applied to parents in order to lessen fertility amongst the less
fit? This would obviously depend on the methods of limitation generally held to be justifiable; for the greater the self-restraint needed in
employing them, the greater would have to be the pressure necessary
adequately to promote their use. The suggestion which first presents
itself to our minds is that parents should be under an obligation to pay
for the proper maintenance of their own young children without public
assistance from state or charitable funds; for such a pressure would
tell more on the less efficient, and would increase with the size of
the family. This to many will sound a harsh proposal, and it would
undoubtedly cause suffering however carefully safeguarded. But if
any methods of birth limitation not involving very great restraint
should come to be generally admitted as justifiable, and if
such methods were to be made widely known, then the bringing of
282 EUGENICS REVIEW.

a child into the world might come to be regarded as a purely voluntary act. And if any persons by purely voluntary acts do bring a
heavy burden on the state—that is on their fellow citizens—is it
wrong to make ‘hem suffer sufficiently to induce them to avoid a
repetition of that procedure? Whether it be right or wrong it seems
probable that the skilled artisan, for example, who is now limiting his
family too much, will wish to deal with the situation drastically
when he realizes how heavy is the burden thrown on him on account
of the amount of assistance given by the State to the large families of
the ne’er-do-well population. Moreover Trade Unionists now see
clearly the advantage of belonging to a limited and close corporation;
and when they also realize that they are thus only partial y hedging
themselves in against the evils of over-population, leaving its main
harmful effects to be suffered by those outside the pale of strong trade
organisations, they will wish to deal with the population question
equally drastically. _

Unfortunately the situation is not quite as simple as the foregoing remedy would seem to suggest; for every parent throughout the
land receives some financial assistance from the State, direct or indirect. The kind of help received by all ranges from a direct subsidy
on the bread eaten by the family to the protection given by the police
in the streets. Perhaps the only rule that could, therefore, be laid
down would be that State aid to parents should not be given in such a
form and to such a degree as to maintain, by stimulating a relatively
high birth rate amongst the less fit, a correlation between fertility
and natural inefficiency. The kind of persons whose fertility it is
especially desirable to check are those little capable of taking thought
for the future; and, on this account, the pressure on parents should be
such that they could not fail to realize that it would be applied immedi ately on the family becoming unduly large. From this it follows that
it is particularly undesirable that married couples with large familie’
should be relieved of all the costs incident to childbirth and on the
rearing of young children. On the other hand it must not be forgotten
that childless marriages are in many ways exceedingly undesirable
in regard to their more immediate consequences. This tangled conflict of opposing considerations would possibly best be met by a firm
resistance to the modern tendency to remove by State aid all the
financial strains falling on parents as such, and by allowing no discriminate assistance, or assistance not received by all alike, to be
given out of public funds in such a manner as to lessen the ‘cost. of
bringing up young children at home when the family in all numbers, |
say, more than four or five, both parents being alive; the poor law
being always available in ‘the background. The strains falling on
those habitually earning a living wage ought to be met by some system
of insurance. No such reforms as these may now be possible; but it
might nevertheless be essential to adopt some such policy if national
deterioration is to be prevented.

9. Indiscriminate motherhood endowment is likely to produce
a dysgenic differential effect on the birth rate. |

Those who look to quantity, and not at all to quality, will regard
with equal satisfaction a decrease in the fertility of the more fit and
SOME BIRTH-RATE PROBLEMS. 283

of the less fit, granted that their fear is that of over-population. On
the other hand, those who look to quality without reference to quantity will observe with equal satisfaction an increase in the fertility
of the more fit and a decrease in that of the less fit; because an increase
in the numbers of the more efficient, and a decrease in the numbers
of the less efficient, would equally tend to raise the average racial qualities of the whole. If both quality and quantity are to be taken into
account, then it may become necessary to choose between two evils,
namely, between the pressure of increasing numbers and national
decline due to deteriorating racial qualities; and, in these circum-.
stances, the eugenist would doubtless prefer to face the sufferings.
due to over-population as the less enduring of the two evils. The
object which eugenists have in view is to improve the racial qualities
of future generations; and for this purpose no doubt, the less fit cannot
multiply too slowly as compared with the more fit. But if our sole
aim should be the more restricted one of preventing actual deterioration in the race, then every increase which could be brought about in
the birth rate of the more fit would make it by that amount less
necessary to decrease the birth rate of the less fit; for, in order to secure
a racial equilibrium, all that would be necessary would be to bring
down the rate of multiplication of the less fit until it was on a level with
that of the more fit. From this it follows that if we are looking solely
to the amount of the pressure which would have to be applied to the
less efficient sections of the community in order to make them lower
their birth rate to a sufficient degree to prevent racial decline, we should
lighten our difficulties by increasing the birth rate of the more fit. To
increase the rate of multiplication of the more efficient stocks is,
therefore, unquestionably the right policy to pursue as long as there
is any risk of racial deterioration.

As to the possibility of increasing the fertility of the more fit,
the endowment of motherhood by the State has been claimed as being
a method, not only of producing that result, but also of diminishing
the fertility of the less fit. The amount of the money which a married
woman of the working classes receives in order to cover all her expenses is often entirely independent of her own exertions and entirely
dependent on the will of a wage earner, from whom she can only sever
her connection with great difficulty; and it is urged that the more
intelligent the woman, the less likely is she to put herself in such a
position. Any economic independence, such as would result from
motherhood endowment, would therefore stimulate the birth rate of
the more cautious amongst women.. In addition to this valid plea, it
is also urged that even in the great majority of households where the
man does ‘‘ bring home. his money’’ with great regularity, the lessening of the economic strain of parenthood would increase the birth
rate of the more fit along with the rest. As to this latter argument,
it overlooks the main aim of the eugenist, which is to increase the
birth rate of the more fit, not actually, but relatively to that of the
less. fit. -And as it is almost certain that any scheme of motherhood endowment would be on a flat rate, it would be of comparatively little
value to the well paid, and would therefore only affect their birth
rate to a relatively small extent. If low pay is correlated, however
284 EUGENICS REVIEW.

slightly, with inefficiency, it follows that in this respect motherhood
endowment, by producing a greater increase of fertility amongst the
ill paid, would be dy-genic in its effects. In direct opposition to this
conclusion, it has been maintained that the endowment of motherhood
may be expected on the following grounds actually to decrease the birth
Yate of the less fit. Parents drawing better pay have doubtless smaller
families on the average than those drawing worse pay; and as motherhood endowment would have an effect similar to that of a rise of pay,
on these premises it is contended that such a reform may be expected
to reduce fertility, especially amongst the poor. But this argument
is quite unsourd, because it takes no account of the probable causes
of the correlation between inefficiency and fertility. Reasons have
been given for believing that this correlation is in part due to differences in the inborn qualities of the more and of the less fit; and such
differences could not be affected by motherhood endowment or by any
other change of environment. This correlation is also partly due to
greater wealth opening out to its owners more of those possibilities
which compete in attractiveness with marriage and parenthood; and,
in order that the possession of wealth should put a check on fertility,
it follows that it must be possible for the potential parent to use it
to satisfy some desire other than those depending on parenthood,
The endowment of marriage without reference to parenthood might
lessen fertility, it is true, because the sums received might be expended
as the parents chose. Another consideration to be noted is that selfish
husbands might make an addition to the family income, resulting
from an addition to the family, an excuse for bringing home less to
the wife; and endowment might act as a direct premium on parenthood
with such undesirable beings. Thus the plea that motherhood endowment on a flat rate would relatively increase the birth rate of the
more fit represents the reverse of the truth as regards average results.
Possibly if the endowment, besides varying with the wages received,
were to be made to altogether cease if the family* increased in numbers
above a fixed limit—as has actually been proposed—then such a reform,
whilst it would certainly act as a material check on the birth rate
amongst those unable themselves to provide for a large family, might
also produce certain positive eugenic results by giving economic
imdependence to careful women. such a proposal is now out of the
question, and motherhood endowment under present conditions would
certainly have to be classed amongst the dysgenic methods of expending the public revenue.

10. Several methods of increasing the birth rate of the more
fit should be considered.

Passing on from the methods of stimulating birth limitation, if
and when it ought to be stimulated, to the methods of repressing
thesé practices, when harmful, we have to ask, putting aside motherhood endowment, what can thus be done to increase the fertility of the

*The definition of the word ‘family’ would present difficulties. If by it were
meant the children of the same two parents, then under this proposal by changing partners the numbers of allowances for children obtainable by each individual might be indefinitely increased, and a premium might be placed on divorce.
SOME BIRTH-RATE PROBLEMS. 285

more fit? Birth limitation is now so largely practised that certain
classes of the community may be fairly described as dying out, and to
lessen this practice amongst those well endowed by nature should be
regarded as the most pressing of all eugenic problems. Here again
persuasion, on the grounds of morality and patriotism, must be
made to do all that is possible in this direction; but here again it is
certain to be insufficient to meet the situation. As to repressing these
practices by external pressure, in order to advocate the right kind of
pressure it is necessary to ascertain what are the reasons which now

rompt parents to limit their families; and these seem to be
In the main the fear of the economic troubles likely to
arise from the appearance of more children, and the desire to
give such children as have arrived as many advantages as possible.
As to the economic fears felt by parents for their own futures, it is
worth considering whether it would not be possible to legally entitle
parents to draw direct from the employer, say 5 per cent., or 10 per
cent. if both are alive, of the excess of the salary earned by each son
over a certain fixed minimum wage; thus making the production of
a large and well paid family an enduring financial advantage. Even
if such rights were not widely exercised, legislation of this kind would
indicate clearly the financial obligations of children towards their
parents. Another means of lessening the financial burdens of parenthood would be by a further increase in the allowances made on
account of children in the assessment of the income tax; a subject
which has been already sufficiently discussed.* It may, however, be
as well to remark that the eugenic arguments in favour of such a reform
seem to me to be entirely dependent on the existence of a correlation
between income and natural efficiency.

As already remarked, educational tests would be far the best
methods of distinguishing between the more and the less fit for eugenic
purposes; and from this it follows that to lessen the burden falling on
parents on account of the education of their children, if proved by properly conducted examinations to be well endowed, would be a suitable
method of diminishing the practice of birth limitation amongst the
more fit. Ifthe remuneration of manual labour should become on the
average higher than the remuneration of mental labour, then this
argument would fall to the ground—and our civilisation would be
doomed It has been seen that it would be dysgenic to go too far in
lessening the costs thrown by the young on their parents; and for this
reason, and because there would be no raclal advantage in promoting
mere precocity, the easement of the financial strain due to parenthood
should not begin before the child is, say, ten years old, if it be merely
intended to be racially beneficial. Besides giving large grants to all
secondary educational establishments, an entrance examination being
insisted on, scholarships should be awarded which, in the case of the
more highly g fted, should cover all costs, including maintenance in
such a home as that of the skilled artisan. These scholarships must

*See article by Mr. Crofton Black in ‘‘The Eugenics Review’’ of July, 1920
Vol. XII., No.2. Also **The Eugenics Review’’ for January, 1920, Vol. XI.,
No, 4. Evidence before given the Royal Commission on Income Tax by the
President.
286 '  BUGENICS REVIEW.

be very freely given if their anticipated award is to have any effect on
potential parents in regard to birth limitation.

- Whether all these measures together would have sufficient effect
may well be doubted when it is remembered that the aim of the parent
o‘ten is to safeguard the existing children, on whom all thoughts are
concentrated. To make economic pressure certainly effective, would
it not have to be of such a kind as would make parents feel that the
appearance of another child would be actually advantageous to those
already born? Unfortunately all the plans which occur to me for
bringing about such a result will, I fear, be classed as visionary. It
would doubtless be possible in income tax assessments to make the
allowance per head for each child actually to increase concurrently
with an increase in the number in the family; scholarships might be
given.more freely and on better terms to members of large fami'ies;
whilst in accordance with the proposal of some thorough-going German
eugenists, parents might be prohibited from bequeathing their entire
estate to their children unless numbering at least four, part of the
surplus being confiscated to the State.* It is not difficult to imagine
the kind of comments with which any of these proposals would be
received. The well-to-do should, however, remember that if the
receipt of benefits not fully covered by the payments made, and coming from institutions aided by government funds or private endowments, ought to be described as charitable assistance, then nearly
every parent in this country who has a son or daughter at a public
school or college is in the receipt of charity. Those who advocate
any limitation of charitable aid to the unfit on eugenic grounds should
raise no objection to financial pressure being applied to themselves
with similar objects in view. Perhaps it is not out of place here to
remark that the opponents of eugenics will urge that if the more fit do
not choose to multiply sufficiently rapidly to keep up the strength of
the nation, they have no right to complain at being taxed to cover
the expenses of parenthood falling on those who do do their duty in
this respect. Is not the only effective reply on the part of the wellto-do to such a contention to begin to multiply less slowly ?

Birth limitation amongst the more fit would not be altogether
dysgenic in its results; for, if practised for the sake of lengthening the
interval between births, it would have certain eugenic consequences,
besides lowering the infant mortality rate and improving the health
of mothers. One of the racial advantages of children appearing at
longer intervals would be because the less fit on the average die at a.
younger age than do the more fit; with the result that, with a wider
voluntary spacing between births, the less fit would in consequence
have relatively fewer progeny than if birth limitation were not practised with this object in view. Then, again, with wide intervals
between births, the elder children of a family, if of superior ability
and winning scholarships covering all costs, would have ceased to
be a.burden on their parents before it was too late for other children

 

- *Journal of Heredity, February, 1920, p. 64. The plan of drawing money
direct from the employers of the sons might also be limited to parents of large
families.
SOME BIRTH-RATE PROBLEMS. 287

to appear; and worthy parents would be encouraged by the award of
scholarships to their children to increase the size of their families.
The desire for more children is readily obliterated in thoughtful parents by the presence of many infants in the home at once, and wider
intervals between births, due to voluntary limitation, would add to
the eugenic effects of the above proposals. a

11. The less direct selective effects should also be considered.

The foregoing considerations apply to the main eugenic needs of
the situation, leaving the more indirect selective effects still to be
considered. We have seen that the advantages possessed by small
families in regard to material advancement will tend to produce a
correlation between higher remuneration, natural efficiency, and
natural infertility, including that resulting from the inborn qualities
which favour birth limitation. We have just seen that the aim of
eugenic reform should be to make the illpaid and, on the average,
somewhat less efficient citizens multiply to say the least no more
quickly than the better paid and, on the average, somewhat more efficient types. If success should attend such efforts, the results would no
doubt do something towards preventing the further spread of the evil
then already created by the growth of this correlation between efficiency and infertility; for under these conditions the naturally more
fertile but less efficient stocks would no longer keep encroaching on
or swamping the less fertile and more efficient. But this might only
be a partial cure; for the smaller and naturally less fertile families
might keep winning their way to the front. As long as this was the
case, the more efficient would be becoming more infertile, the difficulty of preventing racial deterioration would keep increasing, and
this would go on as long as the smaller families possessed any material
advantages and could in consequence more easily win their way to the
front. To insist on a pass examination in the case of all reaping
advantages from State or private funds in regard to secondary education would be beneficial, but would not put the smaller families on
an equality with the more fertile. To produce the desired safeguard,
scholarships covering all costs might with advantage be freely given
on specially favourable terms to members of large families; for by
this means certain naturally fertile stocks would be passed into the
ranks of the better paid, thus tending to obliterate this harmful
correlation. Such a scheme, together with others tending to give
advantages to large families, all of which it has been suggested will be
classed as visionary, would also by stimulating competition, increase
amongst the well-to-do the probability of members of small but inefficient families falling down into their appropriate places in the
social scale. In fact many plans could be suggested for checking the
growth of the correlation between inefficiency and fertility by giving
advantages to large and thoroughly efficient families; though all of
them would increase the more immediate dangers to over-population.

Another of the more indirect selective effects which has to be considered is that due to the fact that the practice of birth limitation
to-day must tend to promote the increase in the coming generations
of all those natural qualities which will then tend to check birth limita288 EUGENICS REVIEW.

tion. Those who consider that birth limitation is advantageous thus
find themselves in difficulties; for by promoting these practices to-day
they are not only thus tending to lessen thern amongst future generations, but they are also taking steps calculated to slowly eliminate
certain qualities which even. the opponents of birth limitation will
admit to be beneficial. To prevent the slow growth of this natural
impediment to birth limitation, the families of those naturally averse
to these practices would have to be no larger than the families of those
naturally tempted in this direction; and this would, it will be seen, be
in a measure the result of effective eugenic reform. Those who take little
thought for the future, including nearly all who are slightly mentally
defective, as well as those whose natural qualities lead either to an
absence of any desire for self-improvement or to intemperance, would
not only be the types which would be eliminated by successful eugenic
reform, but would also comprise many who are naturally little drawn
to practice birth limitation. In fact in so far as a desire to practice
birth limitation, by its use amongst the well-to-do, has come to be
correlated with the natural qualities which facilitate the winning of
good wages, all the methods of relatively increasing the birth rate of
the better remunerated would tend to increase in future generations
the natural qualities favouring birth limitation. It should not be
forgotten, however, that all the natural qualities promoting birth
limitation—excessive pains in childbirth, for example—are not good ;
and that these bad qualities would be increased in future generations
by any check on the practice of birth limitation. In regard to all these
less direct selective effects perhaps all that can now be done is to call
attention to the extreme difficulty of the problems involved.

12. Conclusion.

What I have attempted in my address has been to suggest certain
basic questions concerning birth limitation which have to be decided
in order to ascertain in what directions eugenic reform should proceed.
Every one admits that the unquestionably unfit ought not to become
parents, and nearly all agree that persuasion, segregation, and some
add sterilization, are methods which are available for this purpose.
But can we rest content with considering only the exceptionally fit
and the flagrantly unfit? Must not believers in the laws of heredity
hold that a relatively more rapid rate of multiplication of the less
fit—that is of those stocks which are below the average in the natural
qualities held to be desirable—would inevitably lead to racial deterioration? And if it be granted that any differential birth rate, which
would tend to produce an increase in the numbers of the less fit in the
coming generations, ought to be prevented from arising, what steps
could legitimately be taken with this end in view? As to compulsory
methods, such as the segregation or sterilization of the unfit, it will
hardly be held even by their warmest advocates that they could effect
all that might be necessary in order to cover the wider field of the more
and the less fit. Reasons have, moreover, been given for believing
that persuasive appeals, aiming at reducing the rate of multiplication
of the less fit and increasing that rate in the case of the more
fit, though they sbould be utilized to the utmost, could not
SOME BIRTH-RATE PROBLEMS. akg

alone be relied on to afford an adequate safeguard. How then are we
to deal with the situation? It will be generally admitted by those
who have studied the question that the total abolition of birth limitation would result either in a great increase in numbers in all civilised
countries, or to a great increase in infant mortality, or to both; and
to those who regard these evils, together with their probable consequences of famine or war, as a necessity, I have nothing to say. But
of those who are not prepared to face these consequences, we must ask
whether it would not be hypocritical, if not dishonest, not to openly
acknowledge our indebtedness to birth limitation as one of the causes
of our present immunity from these troubles, such as it is? And if
forced to acquiesce in the necessity for birth limitation because of its
more immediate consequences, must we not consider what objections
can be raised against the promotion of its more extended use for racial
purposes by means other than mere persuasion ?

Certainly no equality in the rate of multiplication of the different
sections of the community now exists, and we are, therefore, next led to
enquire whether all these sections are all alike in racial value. Andas
statistics clearly indicate that the birth rate is lower on the average
amongst the well-to-do than amongst the ill-paid, and as we are
rightly continually fighting against the higher death rate now associated
with poverty, it becomes necessary to ascertain if there is any correlation whatever between the rate of wages and natural efficiency. Even
i. facts do not enable us to answer this question with great assurance
as regards existing conditions, does not the present tendency to remove
all hindrances to transfers taking place from one economic grade to
another strengthen the arguments for believing that such a correlation is
in any case likely to arise in the future? Since the existing differences
in the rates of multiplication appear to have mainly arisen during the
last seventy years or so, is it not futile to appeal to history to prove
that no evil effects are now thus being produced? Ought we not, therefore, to face the question boldly, and to consider whether the relatively higher rate of multiplication of the ill paid, and the relatively
lower r te in the case of the well-to-do, should be allowed to continue
indefinitely ? Can any methods of equalizing these rates be suggested
except such as are dependent on the utilization of the agency of birth
limitation, its stimulation in certain quarters and its repression in
others? To lessen the practice of birth limitation amongst the more
fit might be, and I believe would be, the most important of all
eugenic reforms; yet, as it may be a very difficult direction in which
to advance, does not this make it all the more necessary to reduce
the birth rate amongst the less fit? Finally, would not such
financial pressure as would result from parents being obliged to
cover the bulk of the cost of rearing their own young children produce
the needed stimulus in the least objectionable way? Eugenic reform
cannot advance on a wide front until these questions have been
answered.

Every reform passes through two stages, that of proposal or preparation and that of accomplishment; and, in regard to most eugenic
reforms, the interval between the two is likely to be a very long one.
Does not the probability of great delay before the fruit is gathered make
290 EUGENICS REVIEW.

any timidity in clearly setting forth our opinions all the more inexcusable? To those who like myself have come to the conclusion that the
tendency of the financial pressure of poverty to reduce fertility ought
not to be combated but rather promoted, it is of little use merely
pointing out the drawbacks to all such schemes, for they stare
us in the face. We long to find other efficient methods
of safeguarding the nation against deterioration, and to produce a
better scheme would be the only reply we should regard as effective.
Many eugenists are racial Micawbers, hoping for something to turn
up; but the differential fall in the birth rate is too recent and too
formidable a fact to allow of any such policy of procrastination. All
of us ought to come out into the open and show clearly what endeavours
we think ought to be made to distinguish and deal with the less fit as
well as with the unfit. Many thoughtful eugenists fear that the stigma
of class legislation will be attached to some of the schemes here suggested
for consideration; and their fears may be well founded. But however
much the reputations of individuals may be damaged, a cause seldom
suffers in the long run from honest mistakes being made or from unpleasant truths being spoken. Measures intended to deal with the
less fit in order to be effective must be just, widely accepted, and
widespread in action; and if stimulated birth limitation should prove
to be the only method which fulfils these conditions, ought we not for
the sake of the nation of the future to press for its adoption? Let no
eugenist sit still with folded hands and say that the situation is one
which cannot be met. |
