EUGENICS IN CZECHOSLOVAKIA

By DR. B. SEKLA
(Secretary of the Czechoslovak Eugenics Society)

Population Trends

HE eugenics problem in Czechoslovakia is complicated by the somewhat exceptional position of this
country in respect to its population development. For a long period of history the two
branches of the Czechoslovak people were
under the influence of rather different
cultural environments; Czechs in the socalled historical parts of the State—namely,
Bohemia, Moravia and Silesia, which formed
the ancient kingdom of Bohemia and for the
last 300 years belonged to the “‘ Austrian ”’
part of the Austro-Hungarian monarchy ;
and Slovaks (and Carpatho-Ruthenians),
who were included in the Hungarian part of
the Habsburg Empire. There were always
cultural relations between both national
branches (the differentiation of the written
Slovak language was effected only in the
middle of the last century, and the noncatholic confessions in Slovakia still use the
Czech language in church); and a number
of leaders in the movement for the revival
of Czech national feeling in the beginning of
the nineteenth century, as well as several
personalities prominent to-day in the political and cultural life of the Czechoslovak
Republic, were born in Slovakia.
fn spite of these cultural relations and the
essential spiritual and national unity of
Czechs and Slovaks, the whole complex of
the economical, cultural and mental environment was different for both parts; and the
inhabitants of Bohemia, Moravia and Silesia
were earlier in following the downward trend
in population numbers, which was manifested
in all countries of the West-European
cultural sphere. The inhabitants of Slovakia
and Carpatho-Ruthenia on the contrary,
retained their more eastern population type,
which corresponded also to their geographical
position and above all to their political

115

inclusion into the eastern part of the old
monarchy.

The present effect of this difference in
development is that while in Bohemia the
birth-rate curve is on almost the same level
as in the great West-European countries
(e.g. England and Germany), we find in the
extreme East of Czechoslovakia birth-rates
which are among the highest in Europe.
Some data on the population trend from
1923 to 1934 are as follows :

eee

Total
number of
inhabitants*

Birth- | Birthrates for | rates for
1934

15-1

Net surplus
in in
1923
58°18

   

17-2
24°1

40°91

56°89
tho
Ruthenia

Czechoslovakia

14°53
170'32

34-1
18-6

 

 

From these figures it is evident that there
is a marked differential fertility between
different parts of the State, though of course
it is far from having any qualitative meaning
in the unfavourable sense of the term. On
the contrary, all ethnological and anthropological evidence we possess favours the view
that the population of Slovakia represents a
relatively unselected group of normal and
sound constitution; and the growing intimate interpenetration of both branches,
which is to be expected as a result of new
conditions in the common State, can have
only a favourable effect on the constitution
of the future population of the whole country.

A few words may be said about the population problem of the minorities in the Czechoslovak Republic. There are about 22-3
per cent. Germans, for the most part in the
western part of the State, and especially
in the industrial districts in the North of

* Estimate for 1934. + 1930 Census.
116

Bohemia. This is undoubtedly one of the
reasons why the Germans, considered separately, have a lower mean birth-rate than
the Czechs (e.g. 18:2 for the Germans,
against 19°8 for the Czechs in 1930). The
other great minority, the Magyars in Slovakia
(about 4:8 per cent.), follows on the whole
the birth-rates of the respective groups of
the Slovak population in which its members
are living. |

The figures quoted above not only indicate
the existing differences in the birth-rates of
different constituents of the State, but from
them we see also that the development continues in the same direction in all parts ; the
birth-rates are falling in direct proportion to
the penetration of modern ways of life and
to the mental influences accompanying this
process. The downward slope of the natality
curve is even a little steeper in Slovakia than
in the west of the State. This is perhaps
explicable by the influence of two independent factors: first, in Slovakia there is a
decline from a relatively high absolute birthrate; and secondly, the penetration of
modern ways of life with the accompanying
psychical atmosphere above referred to are
taking place at an increasing rate.

This statement about the falling birthrates deals of course only with the quantitative aspect of Czechoslovakian population
development. But as we know, it is behind
this that the qualitative eugenic problem is
hidden. We must assume that here, as in any
country with a similar decline in population
numbers, there is a differential fertility ;
whence it follows that this period of transition from the naive to the rational type of
population development brings with it, as
studies from different countries suggest,
increased dysgenic risks for future generations. In this period the process is continuing
on such a large scale that an impoverishment
in the hereditary endowment of the population must result.

Organization

The Czechoslovak Eugenics Society was
founded in 1915; the constituent Committee was convened by Dr. Haskovec,
professor of neurology and psychiatry, and

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

comprised the following members: Dr. VI.
Ruzitka (professor of biology ; died in 1934),
Dr. Brozek (later professor of genetics ;
died in 1935), Dr. Herfort (professor of
paedo-psychopathology), Dr. Krizenecky
(now professor of animal breeding, Agricultural College in Brno), Dr. Cada (professor of
philosophy ; died in 1918), Dr. Drachovsky
(professor of national economy and financial
law), and Dr. EF. Benes (then a lecturer in
sociology). Dr. Benes, now President of the
Republic, was, of course, soon diverted from
this special field in pursuit of a much wider
end—the creation and stabilization of the
new State. |

The activity of the Society was primarily
directed to the propagation of eugenic ideas
among the public. Soon after the war, the first
attempts were also made to penetrate the
legislature with eugenic principles. In 1919,
on the initiative of Professor Ha&skovec, a
proposal was put forward for compulsory
medical examinations before marriage.
Though not accepted then, this remains one
of the first aims of eugenics in our country.
Such examinations, it is recognized, can also
serve as a valuable means of promoting
general health and preventing contagious
diseases, etc., and have, therefore, a general
medical and hygienic, as well as eugenic,
interest. So it is probable that in due time
this proposal will be accepted. The Ministry
of Public Health has lately become interested,
and the matter has also been discussed in
the Social-Hygiene Committee of parliament.

In 1926, a discussion was opened about the
reform of a paragraph in the penal law, dealing with criminal abortion. On this occasion,
the late President of the Soctety, Professor
Ruzicka, put forward the claim that, if in
some cases the artificial interruption of
pregnancy should be permitted, this should
be in the first place on eugenic grounds, i.e.
where there was a probability of defective
offspring. The proposal was not accepted
then, but the discussion continues.

A Eugenic Research Institute was founded
by the Society in 1924 by the aid of the
Ministry of Public Health. This Institute is
now the centre of both eugenic research and
propaganda. In spite of its limited means,
EUGENICS IN CZECHOSLOVAKIA

it has produced a considerable series of
papers on different aspects of eugenics,
including the genetics of physical and mental
defect in man, vital statistics, and differential fertility. It has also issued several
propaganda pamphlets. Larger works on
eugenic subjects have been produced by
Professors Ruzitka, Brozek, Haskovec,
Krizenecky. A translation of Major Leonard
Darwin’s excellent book, What is Eugenics?
has been issued by the Medical Publishing
Association.

The Society also created a pre-marital
eugenic bureaui in Prague (now attached to
the university polyclinic); and similar institutions have been established in two other
large towns of the country. In Prague, the
register offices draw the attention of candidates for marriage to the importance of a
health examination and the possibility of
obtaining it in the eugenic bureau.

In the whole, we can claim a growing
public interest in eugenic matters. Different
corporations of public importance have
formed eugenic sections or committees, as
for example, the Masaryk Academy of Work,
and the Committee of Mental Hygiene,
constituted under the auspices of the Ministry
of Health. Recently, under the influence of

  

 

SCIENTIFIC BOOKS |

Current and Standard ENGLISH, FRENCH and GERMAN Literature
in MEDICAL, CHEMICAL, BIOLOGICAL and PHYSICAL SCIENCE
supplied from stock, or obtained promptly to order.

A visit to this Department is respectfully suBgested.
Please write for CATALOGUES, mentioning interests.

H, K. LEWIS & Co. Ltd.,

117

the German sterilization law, several discussions on this subject have taken place in
the meetings of medical as well as juridical
societies. It is satisfactory to note that these
accept eugenic ideals with understanding ;
and in the German law, it is only the compulsory clause that is opposed to the general
feeling. Eugenic problems are discussed also
in the Press, and members of the Society
frequently speak at meetings of different
organizations, which are called for the propagation of eugenic ideas.

Some distrust of negative eugenics and
sterilization was aroused in the general public by the close connection of German
eugenics with the unpopular race theories
and the idea of the inequality of European
races. These misunderstandings are being
dissipated by systematic instruction of the
public.

At present, Dr. J. Drachovsky, professor
of the Law Faculty, is President of the
Czechoslovak Eugenics Society and its representative in the International Federation of
Eugenic Organizations; and among the
members of the Committee of the Society
there are several professors of the medical
faculty. The present address of the Society
is: Prague—r1 Albertov 4.

  

 
       
     
 

136 GOWER STREET
LONDON W.C.1

    

    

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVIII, No. 2.
