-PROBLEM FAMILIES’
By PAUL S. CADBURY, C.B.E.,
MURDOCH MacGREGOR, M.D., D.P.H.,
and CATHERINE WRIGHT, M.B., D.P.H.

Mr. PAUL S. CADBURY

YWENTY-FIVE maladjusted families
have been cared for at Crowley House
and Lee Crescent in Birmingham during
the past two years. At Crowley, mothers
and younger children are cared for. At
Lee Crescent there are five flats in which
whole families are living. A warden and her
assistant occupy a sixth flat. This is a very
small sample and it is of no importance
statistically. Nevertheless, as there are only
a handful of organizations doing work of
this sort the experience gained may be of
some importance. Of considerably more
value will be an enquiry which the Joseph
Rowntree Trust are undertaking into the
results at all the homes for maladjusted
families, Brentwood, Mayflower, Spofforth
Hall, Crowley, etc.

Crowley House and Lee Crescent are
owned by the Trustees of the Middlemore
Homes. The Middlemore Homes were started
over eighty years ago as an emigration home
for deprived children. Crowley was an
orphanage for poor girls. These two old
Birmingham charities which were amalgamated about ten years ago have secured the
agreement of the Charity Commissioners
and the Ministry of Education to change the
nature of their work. In the past this was
concerned with the care of deprived children. They are now concerned with the
care of children within the family unit.

It is recognized that the best place in
which to help maladjusted families is in their
own homes on. the lines carried out by the
Family Service Units. The cases coming to
Crowley are not amenable to this type of treatment. They fall into two main categories:

* A Symposium given at a Members’ Meeting of the
Eugenics Society on November 2oth 1957.

31

1. Health cases referred by the Medical
Officer of Health where a physical build up is
considered to be necessary. |

2. Probation cases where residence at
Crowley is the alternative to being sent to
prison for child neglect.

This work is experimental and some
failures are inevitable. Nevertheless, if the
causes of failure are carefully measured, a
failure may be as important in building
knowledge as a success. |

The following points of importance have
emerged during the two years in which this
work has been carried on:

1. At Crowley the accommodation was
designed to receive mothers and _ their
younger children. It was very soon clear that
an effort would have to be made to maintain
the family unit intact and to secure the
father’s interest. In practically every case
the father now stays at Crowley over the
weekend and, where possible, children over
five are accommodated for short periods.
The accommodation at Lee Crescent was
designed for whole family units.

2. In a good many cases there is a history
of maladjustment going back for one or two
generations. Frequently too there is a
reference to low mentality in one or both of
the parents. It would seem that one generation creates a pattern of maladjustment for
the next. In looking through the case
histories, the word “ illegitimacy ’’ occurs
seven times, either referring to one of the.
parents or to one or more of the children in
the family unit. Surprisingly, there are few
references to broken homes. On the contrary, the affection of husband and wife and
parental affection are referred to as occurring
in nearly every case, even when there has
been a court case for cruelty. The cruelty
seems to arise not because the parents do

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, April 1958. 50, 1.
3200—~COC~«™ _° THE EUGENICS REVIEW

not love their children but because they have |

reached a situation in which they cannot
cope with the ordinary day to day problems
of family life.

3. Ill health is very often mentioned.
Whether it is a cause or a result of a low
standard of living, it is hard to judge but
there is undoubtedly a considerable health
problem in most cases. Illness of a parent is
mentioned twelve times in the case histories
and of these, five are described as ‘‘ mental
ill health.’”’ Frequency of pregnancy is
mentioned three times as a cause of maladjustment. In these cases there were twelve,
thirteen and thirteen pregnancies.

4. The Committee is clear that good

personal relations with families of this sort
cannot be established in a short time.
Unfortunately the cases referred by the
Medical Officers of Health are often only sent
for one month which is too short a period to
make much improvement.
_ 5. A typical ptoblem family in which the
Committee has failed is a case which we may
call Mr. and Mrs. Jones. They had seven
children, four under five years. The mother
herself was an illegitimate child; the father
had spent his youth at approved schools and
Borstal and had served prison sentences. He
suffered from a serious inferiority complex
which even at a time when he was out of
work made him tell the Children’s Officer that
he was earning £13 a week. While the mother
was at Crowley he was therefore assessed for
payment for the two older children who were
in care and it took a good deal of effort to
disentangle this particular problem. When
he did get work he came up to Crowley
with presents for his children. He had
spent over £1 of his first week’s wages on
sweets. Unfortunately he cannot maintain
himself in employment and has again been
convicted for theft and sent to prison, this
time for three years.

The lesson of this case is not that it was
hopeless but that sufficient time and care
could not be given to the reformation of this
particular family unit. Both the Family
Service Unit and Crowley felt that if they
had been able either to start earlier or to
“spend more time with the Joneses they might

have turned the corner. As it is the family
will probably be broken up and potentially
there will be seven more problem families in
ten or fifteen years’ time.

Dr. M. MacGREGOR

Special Home Helps
Families

IE recent years the problem family has

Problem

for

increasingly attracted the attentions of:

the resources and services of the Health
Department of the London County Council.
A recent survey of 172,000 families showed
that 1-43 per cent of the total were either
potential or hard core problem families. A
detailed analysis of 1,000 of these families in
the survey showed that emotional instability
combined with low intelligence or deficiency
was present in 19-1 per cent of the potential
and in 45:8 per cent of the hard core problem
families. Probably the most that could be
achieved with these families was to keep
them together at a level high enough to
enable the next generation to avoid repeating
the behaviour of their parents. On the other
hand, the analysis showed emotional instability combined with normal or above
average intelligence in 35-4 per cent potential
and 25:8 per cent hard core problem families.
It is hoped to help an appreciable number of
these families towards rehabilitation. As I
have already said, the efforts of a wide range
of workers and a number of special services
are playing their part in this field, but my
contribution to this Symposium will be
confined to a review of one year’s experience
in London of a scheme for providing special
home helps for problem families. It mav
serve our purpose best if I give a general
description of the scheme. It was recognised
that these helps would require to be handpicked for personal qualities and given
specific training if success was to be attained
in improving the environment of these
families and so giving the children some
chance of taking their place in society as we
now know it. The real function of such helps
would be to teach the mother, by practical
demonstration’ and example, how best to
manage her household. Most of the homes
- PROBLEM FAMILIES _ 3

at the outset would require thorough clean
ing to give a semblance of orderliness and in

those cases where basic household equipment
was lacking, and not forthcoming from
voluntary sources, this would be required
to be supplied on loan from the local authority. This special service would be called in
by health visitors and social workers when,
in the course of their work, they met families
- where it appeared to them that a break-up
was a possibility. The amount of help
required—full-time, part-time or merely a
few hours per day—would vary according
to the circumstances of the family and would
be assessed by the organizer of home helps
in consultation with the health visitor or
social worker to whom the family was wellknown. No limit is placed upon the amount
of service that can be given to any particular
family, but it is a feature of the scheme that,
aS a measure of improvement becomes
apparent, the amount of service is gradually
reduced so that the mother may progressively
accept more responsibility for the running of
the home, until the ultimate objective is
reached, namely that the mother can manage
the household efficiently without the
assistance of the trained home help.

The staff concerned, e.g. the health visitor,
the home help organizer and the trained
home help, keep in touch, and, where there
are schoolchildren in the family, liaison is
maintained with the school care committee
organization. Regular consultations are held
on the progress made with individual
mothers.

When the service of a trained home help
is withdrawn, the family is still supported
by the health visitor who would arrange for
“ booster ”’ visits by the home help if signs
of reversion to former unsatisfactory standards become apparent.

In the early stages of the scheme, it was
thought advisable to select families where
there was a reasonable hope of achieving
something constructive. It was not
suggested that homes where the family has
already broken up, or where children have
already been received into care, should be
excluded, but it was considered that the
long-term value of the scheme, and the

building up of the confidence of the home
helps themselves, would best be served by
not attempting too much at the outset. |

Supply of Basic Household Equipment

With regard to the provision of household
equipment, it. was necessary for five families.
to have assistance; four required the loan of
only one or two items, such as a frying pan
and saucepans, or cleaning utensils; the
fifth family had practically no equipment
and the provision of a wide range of articles
was necessary before the home help could
begin her duties. In this last case many of
the items—bedding, furniture and clothing—
were obtained from voluntary sources, but
such things as knives, forks, spoons, plates,
handbrooms, etc., were provided through
the Council’s scheme. In four other families
where special home helps were provided,
equipment came entirely from voluntary
sources.

It will be seen that it has not been necessary to make use of this part of the scheme
to any large extent, but in the few cases
where it was used it proved of great value.
Indeed, in one case the home help could not
have worked had the necessary equipment
not been supplied.

This whole scheme of trained home helps,
including the loan of kitchen equipment
where necessary, was provided by the
Council under the powers given to them
under Section 29 of the National Health
Service Act of 1946.

Arrangements for Selection and Train- |
ing of Home Helps

It was considered of fundamental import-.
ance that only those helps with the right
personality and character should be engaged
for this work and during the first year of the
working of this scheme, and the one which
I am reviewing, eighty-nine helps in all were
engaged, eighty-five of whom volunteered ~
from the existing home help service, the
remaining four being recruited specially for
this purpose. All were specially trained —
prior to undertaking their special duties. In
34 | THE EUGENICS REVIEW

some parts of London difficulty was encountered in recruiting sufficient numbers
of the right calibre. Resignations and
withdrawals from this work accounted for a
loss of eighteen of the eighty-nine trained
personnel. The course of training took place
in ten half-day sessions and we have during
the year provided two such courses. The
content of the syllabus has been altered in the
second of these courses in the light of
experience and there is now more emphasis
placed on practical as distinct from theoretical training. It may interest the meeting if
I briefly refer to the main structure and
content of this course of training:

Ten

half-day Subject
Sessions
ist (a) Short introduction to course.

Film: Problem Families.
(b) General talk on the basic needs for
full development of children.
Film: Play.
Discussion.
Teaching by example, showing, explaining, repeating.
Cooking with little equipment.
Cuts of meat and their uses, etc.
Keeping milk fresh and pure.
Methods of improvisation.
(b) Packed meals.
Household hints.
Improvised methods of storing, etc.
Budgeting: use and abuse of instalment plans; other methods of
borrowing.
(b) Preparing a weekly menu for a family
on limited income.
Detailed exercise.
Discussion.
Buying and storing of foods.
Practical exercise.
Discussion.
(b) Care of bottles and teats.
Preparing bottle feeds.
Short outline of maternity and child
welfare service, its aims and purpose.
The work of the health visitor.
(b) Household hints.
Demonstration.
Discussion.
Film: The clean house.
Short outline of the school health
service.
Discussion.
(b) Washing napkins and methods of
dealing with soiled linen.
Washing woollens.
Wise use of cleaning materials.

2nd (a)

3rd_— (a)

4th (a)

5th (a)

- 6th (a)

7th (a) Gaining the co-operation of the
family,

Ways of helping, attitude of friendliness, patience, encouragement,
respecting confidences, etc.

(b) Discussion—arising out of difficulties
home helps have met with in their
work,

Home accident prevention.
Awareness of ordinary risks in the
home, gas, slippery floors, scalding,
etc.

Film: Playing with fire.

(b) Guidance on the relative importance
of different jobs in particular circumstances.

oth (a) Special needs of the adolescent.

(b) Care of cots and prams.

‘Observing children in a day nursery.
1oth General discussion on aspects of the
whole course.

8th (a)

Supply of Service

During the year in question, eighty-six
families with 368 children were provided
with this special service. The amount of
service given ranged from ten hours a day to
one hour a day. There was a known unsatisfied
demand for the special service in some
divisions, but the training of further selected
home helps as they become available in the
future should help in this respect. It should
be mentioned that some home helps who
have not received the special training have
done very good work with problem families,
and it is the normal practice, where a trained
help is not available, to supply a specially
selected ‘‘ ordinary’’ home help to work
with a problem family.

In only five of the eighty-six families
helped was difficulty experienced in obtaining the entry of the home help for her special
duties. One father refused further help
after only two visits by the home help. In
another instance, the behaviour of the
mother and children made it impossible for
the home help to continue her work in the
household. In yet another case, the home
help met with hostility on her first visit, but
was accepted after the first day’s help had
been given.

In all, fifty-five families refused the special
service when it was offered. This figure,
however, may not present a complete
PROBLEM FAMILIES _ 35

picture, as it is the normal practice for the
health visitor, who is essentially the spearhead of the team, to sound exhaustively the
family’s likely reaction before a firm offer of
special help is made, and such an offer would
not normally be made unless there was some
likelihood, however remote, that resistance
to the special service might be overcome.
The importance of the health visitor’s
approach cannot be over-stressed, and the
utmost care and tact are necessary on her
part. Any attempt to press a family to
accept help which they are emphatic they do
not want, might undermine what relationship and confidence the health visitor may
already have established with the family. I
will deal later with the charge for these
services.

Assessment of Results

It is gratifying to note that in only ten
instances, out of the eighty-six families given
the special service, can the scheme be said
to have failed. In the remaining cases,
varying degrees of improvement have been
reported, ranging from “ marked improvement ’’ to “slow progress.’ It is still too
early to produce evidence of permanent
improvement in any of the families helped,
although in one case a better standard was
still evident five months after the special
service had ended.

Apart from the immediate and apparent
success in varying degrees of this scheme,
we have hopes that many of the children
concerned in these families will have an
introduction to a way of life which might
have advantages and attractions for them,
and it may be this long-term effect, which of
course we cannot judge, which may be the
real value of this public venture.

Financial Effect

The net annual expenditure on the scheme
was £3,500. The home help service is not
provided free; the householder, as in all
provision of home help services, is required
to make a contribution towards the cost. A

scale of charges, and payment of these

charges according to a standard scale, is
6—ER

in being, but many of the families would be
entitled to have the service provided free. It
was recognized that it might be necessary in
many cases, if the object of the scheme was
to be achieved, to provide the service free
even though the assessment of the families
showed that a payment on their part was
required. In such cases the Finance Committee of the Council have been asked to
write off as irrecoverable this income which
should have been received under the
Council’s scale. Indeed in sixteen instances
the completion of the application form,
which includes particulars of means, was
not requested as it was thought that such a
request would have led to a refusal to accept
the special services. The amount received
by way of contributions was £102. Fortytwo families, who were liable to pay under
the. approved assessment scale for the cost
of the service, paid either nothing or only
part of the assessed contribution; payment
in full was not pressed in these cases as it
was considered that such action would have
jeopardized the continuance of the service
and the prospects of improvement in the lot
of the family. In these cases, and in those

where particulars of means were not directly

sought, a sum of £394 was written off by the
Council. Fifty-eight families were relieved
of payment due out of our total of eighty-six
families assisted in order that the scheme
could be introduced and continue.

Payment to Trained Home Helps

The ordinary rate for home helps—
3s. 34d. an hour—was augmented by an
additional 4d. an hour on account of the
special training necessary and the exacting
nature of the work with these families.

Dr. CATHERINE WRIGHT

CANNOT claim to be engaged in any
[wor to help problem families, except

insofar as I meet them in my work as
a Maternity and Child Welfare Officer, but
I have been in the same large industrial city
for twenty years—long enough to see a
second generation marrying. Problem
families have interested me since I realized
36. | | - THE EUGENICS REVIEW

that they do not yield to the civilizing
blessings of the Welfare State and, wondering why, like others before, I began to study
them. |

Since I am not competent to discuss
practical ways and means of helping these
families as a group, I should like to mention
some of the special factors which have to be
taken into consideration in our approach
to them.

Types of Problem Families

I no longer attempt to define a problem
family, as it is impossible to encompass one
and do justice to it in any neat formula.
Social workers and others in contact with
them apply the term from the standpoint of
their own particular professional bias. Thus

to the Probation Officer, the family which

breeds a series of delinquents is a problem
family; the N.S.P.C.C. Inspector and the
Health Visitor will lay emphasis on squalor
and observed cruelty to children. The
Children’s Officer considers. these to be
problem families in which the parents fail
to support their children. For the psychiatrists and marriage guidance counsellors
those families are problem families in which
family tensions and mental instability are
causing serious disturbance of personal
relationships. Families exhibiting these
social failings have an essential common
factor and our preoccupation with them
hinges on this—namely an environment
liable to cause serious damage to the
personalities of the children—the kind of
damage which will handicap them for the
rest of their lives and lead them into difficulties in adjusting themselves to the
community. This should be the criterion
for adjudging a family a problem family and
if this is conscientiously applied the label
will stick to families in all social grades—
of all levels of intelligence—to the dirty and
the clean. I cannot speak of the problem
families in stately homes nor discuss their
etiology—for both parents and children of
these the psychiatrist’s couch may bring
some relief and we must be glad of that.
.My remarks, therefore, will be confined
‘to the classical problem family which is less

accessible to therapy and which is known
so well to so many social agencies as to
make the niceties of definition irrelevant.

Second Generation Problem Families

One argument for a very determined
onslaught on these families is that they
present characteristics resistant to rapid
change and one of these is their long-range
influence on their descendants. Whether
this be due to what has been called
transference of environment or hereditarily
determined incapacity, the result—a form
of transmissible cruelty—is the same for
the victims.

From one large housing estate in
Sheffield six years ago, I was given the
names of twelve problem families. All of
them had, at that time, been known to the
Health Visitor on the district for twelve
years and I asked her recently to obtain
up to date information about them.

The parents showed mental dullness,
instability, psychoses, excessive drinking,
epilepsy, inadequacy and _ irresponsibility.
All but one of these families have ceased to
grow, the exception being a second family
by a second wife. There are eighty living
descendants. Half of those over fifteen have
appeared in court at some time—the males
usually on account of housebreaking and
stealing and the females—less often—for
stealing and truancy. Thirty-three have
formed thirty-two marriages. Fourteen of.
these are known to be satisfactory but three
have been married less than a year. Five
not in the City are said, by relatives, to be
happy (this I think is not to be relied on).
Five are broken; in the case of two others
the husbands have repeatedly had such long
prison sentences as to amount to broken
marriages and six are thoroughly unsatisfactory. This amounts to a 40 per cent
failure at the lowest estimate.

Naturally one speculates as to the timing
of preventive measures when faced with
these unfortunate marriages. One also
wonders whether the bad marriages which

hold together—as did ten of the original

twelve—do more harm in the long run than
PROBLEM FAMILIES 37

those which disintegrate; on the other hand
one broken marriage often starts off two

others. Some of the children were probably

incapable of forming a lasting and satisfactory union, others perhaps made an
ill-judged choice of partner and obviously in
many cases success or failure hinges on this.
We can at least see the argument for giving
unsparing attention to every child in a
problem family home from as early an age
as possible and, following this, with support
in the early years of marriage even where it
may not appear to be required.

Changing Social Conditions

The economic and social environment
into which children are born has changed
rapidly in one generation. When the young
couples I have mentioned were children our
clinics were crowded with mothers driven
by the slump and unemployment to seek
free food for them. More lived in slums than
do now and there was no Family Service
Unit to help them. Time alone may not be
on the side of problem family children but
those who can just make the grade have less
against them than had their parents and we
need not be too pessimistic.

The Children’s Position

I should like to emphasize an aspect of
problem families which is perhaps not

particularly obvious unless they are seen as °

a group, namely the number of children in
these families who are step-children or
illegitimate.

Sometimes the children of a marriage
remain with one parent when the family
breaks up, a living reminder of the previous
marriage, to the new partner. Sometimes
when both husband and wife remarry each
has a new family and the children of the
original marriage, detached from both, are
by force of circumstances left high and dry
with little affection from either parent.
They are at the tender mercies of any relative who will give them shelter only until
delinquency commences, at which point
they become prodigal children without a

parent to whom they may return. These
children while still adolescent are in the
position of. having literally no one in the
world who cares anything for them. For
those who do not remember ever doubting
their parents love for them, and have built
their personalities ‘on this security, this
situation is difficult to imagine. We refer
to:them as maladjusted children, but we are
surely wrong in implying an ability to come
to terms with quite intolerable family
situations. My impression’ is that these
children come into care too late when the

‘damage already done is irreversible. It is

not easy to find a sufficient number of largehearted individuals to supply one for each
resentful, unpredictible and often unlovable,
juvenile, and this is what is required.

The adolescent girls of this type, in their
eagerness for affection, readily get into
trouble with the opposite sex. These oddments of society present the most pathetic
picture I meet in my contact with Children’s
Department Homes.

Mental Deficiency and Problem Families

I would like to say something about
mental deficiency and problem families and
incidentally about a type of problem family,
the defectives family. It is accepted that.a
poor level of intelligence and instability are
responsible for what has been described as
the intractable ineducability of the hard
core problem family, and the work of Dr.
Mary Sheridan, starting from a group of
neglectful mothers, provided confirmation
of this. It seemed it would be informative,
in order to understand more about the interplay between nature and nurture in these
families, to study a group of married
defectives to see what proportion of
defective parents fail or succeed, and the
reasons why. The mental defective who
owns a chain of shops serves the flatearthers well, and the suggestion that
primary amentia in parents brings social
repercussions, serious enough to lead us to
discourage marriage is usually countered by
the statement that some defectives mak
good parents. .
38 wo ‘PROBLEM FAMILIES

It seemed that if a sufficient number of

incontrovertibly defective parents could be
found it would be possible to compare the
successes and failures in marriage and
_ perhaps draw some useful conclusions. In
the last few months, with this symposium
in view, I have been trying to trace defectives who have married, and up to date
accurate information is available for seventyfive of these. The defectives traced have all
been ascertained as such and supervised for
varying periods; many have been certified
and spent some time in institutions. Most
were discharged from supervision before
marriage but some though married are still
supervised. The I.Q. of most is around
sixty-five—some lower, but a few as high
as seventy-five. This group consists merely
of married defectives who have so far been
traced and no attempt will be made to
generalize from the conclusions. It would
be unwise, however,
evidence that there exists a large number of
similar families showing quite different
characteristics.

Case Histories

The first point which strikes one about
these defectives is that the majority have
been reared in extremely bad homes. This,
of course, is in line with what is already
known of primary amentia. It is obvious
that the socialising influence of their homes
has been nil. On the contrary unemployment, illegitimacy, broken homes and mental
defect in sibs characterize most. They have
therefore entered marriage doubly handicapped.

P.K. a male. Both parents are illiterate—the
father is unemployed for long periods, indeed
hardly ever works.
pletely unreliable. Of thirteen pregnancies
nine children survived, eight of whom have
been ascertained as defective and seven of
whom are married. P.K. has married and has
a family of six.

E.M. a male whose mother attended a school for
defectives, but was not ascertained. The
father now dead was illiterate. There are ten
children in this family, half of whom are
ascribed to the lodger. Four are ascertained
defectives. E.M. married a girl from a problem

to assume without 
Both parents are com
family and is separated from his wife. His
two children are being brought up in his
family home.

L.P. is a female whose mother is stated to have
been a mental defective and to have had two
defective cousins. Of nine pregnancies two
survived. L.P. married the son of a mentally
defective woman. Her first two children are
her husband’s from whom she is now separated.
The following four children are of varying
paternity.

In the group under observation a number
of the marriages broke up very soon after

_ they were contracted, one or other partner
discovering the other’s disability too late

and retreating from the situation. In other

cases the marriage survived: longer before

one or other deserted and divorce or separation occurred. This appears to happen in
about one in four marriages of defectives.
It is surprising how many defectives marry
twice.

There are no very large families, due to a
high death and still-birth rate, but as the
ages of the mothers in these families range
between twenty and forty-eight only a
proportion have ended child-bearing. All
the families with over four children are, with
one exception, problem families.

The seventy-five families about which I
have accurate information fall into three
groups. One-third are of the worst type of
problem family. One-third are unsatisfactory families with all-round low standards,
some of which are prevented from becoming

problem families merely because they are

living with relations, and one-third fall into
neither category. Considering these latter
in more detail, of the twenty-six marriages
nine are broken leaving no children, or one
only in care of one parent; three are childless
marriages; three are at present childless
because recently contracted. Of the
remaining eleven, seven have one child and
live with relatives; three families have two
children, of which one of these families lives
with in-laws and would not manage alone.
One family with five children is fairly
satisfactory.

It is obvious that the salvation of the
defectives family is for it to be no bigger
than one or two, but I must hasten to add
THE EUGENICS REVIEW | 39

that some of those with only one or two
children are already in the problem family
group. |

Defective marries defective with disastrous
results; for example, the defective daughter
of an alleged imbecile woman married a man
with an I.0. of fifty-six. Of their six children
one is in an institution for mental defectives
two are at special schools and the three
youngest who are under school age promise
no better. All are in care. Almost equally
bad families arise when a defective marries
an unstable dullard. Thus two male
defectives who have married notably dull
'women have so far two children each, all
four being ineducable.

Some of the children of these families are
already ascertained defectives, some attend
ordinary schools, others special schools; but
since many of the children are young and
there are more to follow the full story is not
yet unfolded. .

The children of almost all the families in
which the father only is a defective have
remained in their homes, whereas the
families with a defective mother more
readily come into care. Children of single
female defectives (which is another story)
most consistently come into care, and are
difficult to place for adoption, and in
foster-homes.

It is not difficult to see the various ways
in which these families feed the problem
family group. Some are problem families

 

The Reference Lib
rary may be con- From the beginning dealing with all aspects of birth control and Demonstrations to
marriage problems.

sulted by anyone.
The Lending
Library is for Mem
_ bers of the Society. Address: 106-108, WHITFIELD STREET, LONDON, W.1

Society for Constructive Birth Control
and RACIAL PROGRESS ‘

The First Birth Control Clinic in the World
THE MOTHERS’ |

Founded by DR. MARIE STOPES, March r7th, 1921

OPEN DAILY (not Sats.) 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. FREE are regularly given.

themselves and transmit this status. Others
on the border-line, with poor standards do
likewise, transferring their environment plus
dullness to their children. The children
from these families who come into care (and
there are many), are in early adult life
thrown on the world dull and ill-equipped
for it. |
I have looked for a glimmer of hope in
contemplating these families and frankly I
do not see one. The problem families in
which mental deficiency . dominates are
notoriously unresponsive to efforts directed
towards their improvement, as every Family
Service Unit worker knows. Defectives are
not prevented from marrying and will continue to do so. The present tendency to
speak -euphemistically about them will
encourage rather than discourage this—but
whitewash defectives as we may we cannot
whitewash problem families which arise
from them, and we would be well advised to
teach high grade defectives home-craft and
parent-craft as well as handicrafts.

_ The discharge from statutory supervision
of a defective who has proved a competent
kitchen hand for a few years and who is
self-supporting, under her mother’s eye may
mark the end of an episode, but it is often
the prelude to a very long story.

[The views expressed are personal and not
necessarily those held by the Sheffield City
Council. ]

    
  
 
 
   

CLINIC |
Special Lectures
and _ Instructional

Members of the
Medical Profession

Application by letter
necessary.
