CONSANGUINEOUS MARRIAGES.
By the late E. NETTLESHIP, F.R.S., F.R.C.S.?

I TOLD our Secretary a few months ago,—rashly as I now
find—that I would try to fill a gap at one of these meetings and
suggested consanguinity of parents as a subject that might
interest the audience and suit my possibilities. I regret to say
that I have not been able to make adequate preparation and
can only ask you to excuse shortcomings and to bear with me
if I say some things that are perhaps as familiar to my audience
as to myself. For I can neither treat the subject exhaustively
nor say anything new and must be content to bring together
a few leading facts, to cite a few examples and draw one or two
tentative conclusions.

The subject of marriage between blood-relations should,
I think, engage the attention of all who are interested in
problems bearing upon the improvement of the race; it is at
any rate one upon which there has been, and perhaps still is,
much diversity of opinion. Such differences of view are
doubtless often based, on the one hand, upon the experiences
of certain single families where serious defects or degeneracies
have appeared in the offspring of consanguineous marriages,
and on the other upon acquaintance with families in which
nothing undesirable has followed the marriage of first cousins.
Indeed those who object, from what we may call individual or
single-family experience, would perhaps be surprised to find
that the children of cousins sometimes showed a decided
improvement upon their parents. In short I venture to think
that the subject is one upon which we may well seek more
knowledge and greater clearness of thought.

The fundamental questions are (first) whether the
offspring of consanguineous parents display inferior or
degenerate characters in larger proportion than do the
offspring of unrelated parents? And (secondly), if such an
effect can be shown, is the appearance of these undesirable

1 Read before the Haslemere Branch, Eugenics Education Society, October
31st, IgIo.
CONSANGUINEOUS MARRIAGES. 131

characters attributable to something produced de novo by the
union of parents related in blood, but who themselves contain
no trace of such characters, either manifest or hidden? Or are
the defects only a result of both parents being tainted, but not
tainted badly enough to show?

The second question is not merely academic. For if consanguinity can produce something bad, good, or indifferent that
had never occurred before in the genealogy then no cousin
marriage is safe. But if it is only a case of inheritance from
both parents, a tainted pair who have no community of blood
will, so far as we know, be as likely to have undesirable
offspring as if they were tainted cousins; whilst cousins who
are free from taint will be expected to yield normal children.

It must be said at once that the data for answering the first
question upon statistical grounds do not exist because no one
up to the present time has been able to obtain sufficiently
accurate returns of the relative numbers of consanguineous and
unrelated marriages.

In 1862 a French writer, M. Boudin, came to the conclusion that close upon one per cent. of the marriages in France
between the years 1853 and 1859 were between first cousins
(counting in a few between uncle and niece or aunt and nephew).
And he considered that if second-cousin marriages had been
included the total percentage would be two per cent. This
conclusion was based upon the official records of more than 20
million marriages. It is obvious that such a return would err,
if at all, on the negative side; especially in a Catholic country
such as. France was then. In the Roman Catholic Church
marriage between near cousins is forbidden unless an indulgence be obtained by payment; and obviously the liability to
such an exaction would sometimes lead to concealment of
cousinship. Somewhat later returns (up to 1875) showed a
rather higher proportion (1°5 per cent.) of first-cousin marriages,
the consequence, apparently, of instructions from head quarters
to make the enquiries more thorough. Further, M. Legoyt
(Chief of the Statistical Department for France, quoted by
George Darwin), at about the same date, came to the conclusion
that the true percentage of first-cousin marriages for the whole
132 EUGENICS REVIEW.

of France was much higher than Boudin had supposed, viz.,
about three per cent.

In 1875 George Darwin published a long and careful paper
upon ‘‘ Marriages of First Cousins in England and their effects.”’
In this memoir the author made the important point that in
England and Wales cousin marriages are probably much more
frequent, relatively, in the aristocracy than in the general
population, and least frequent in London. He estimated that
3°5 per cent. of aristocratic marriages were between first
cousins, but only 1°5 per cent. of all London marriages. The
paper was the outcome of great labour and care, but the exact
figures of the cousin marriages were admittedly open to
revision.

In 1908 Professor Karl Pearson made a limited contribution to the subject. He found that of 1,600 members of the
medical profession no less than 4°5 per cent. had married first
cousins, and that if the lesser degrees of consanguinity were
included the total was 7°5 per cent.

This 4°5 per cent. of first-cousin unions may be compared
with Legoyt’s estimate of about 3 per cent. for the whole of
France, and George Darwin’s 3°5 per cent. for the British
aristocracy.

Pearson further, from an examination of the books of the
hospital for sick children in London, found only 1°3 per cent.
of cousin marriages of all degrees up to third cousins, recorded
in the histories of 700 in-patients. This so far as it goes confirms George Darwin’s conclusion that consanguineous marriage
was relatively infrequent in London; but the family histories of
these 700 hospital in-patients were probably far from complete in regard to the point and 1°3 per cent. is almost certainly
too low.

From these discrepant, and avowedly incomplete, materials
it seems probable that a class or clan or caste influence operates
in certain cases to produce a high proportion of consanguineous
marriages, and that therefore conclusions as to any effects of
consanguinity, whether bad or good, drawn from a mass
population would not necessarily apply to all the groups of
which the population was composed. However this may be,
CONSANGUINEOUS MARRIAGES. 133

one certainly finds that in some individual genealogies cousins
often marry, and in others seldom or never.

As to the second question: Are the defects sometimes
observed in the offspring of consanguineous parents due to the
consanguinity as such or on the other hand to both parents
being tainted ?

In regard to the de novo origin of defects in children of
cousin parentage we find Charles Darwin’ stating his belief as
follows after having devoted much attention to the subject, ‘I
hope to show in a future work that consanguinity by itself
counts for nothing, but acts solely from related organisms
having a similar constitution, and having been exposed in most
cases to similar conditions ’’; and a recent authority, Professor
J. Arthur Thomson,” of Aberdeen, considers that ‘‘ the idea
that there can be any objection to the marriage of two healthy
cousins who happen to fall in love with one another is preposterous.’’ Many similar, and also some, but I think a
diminishing number of, opposing, opinions might be cited.

What then is the origin of the view, or at least the
suspicion, held by many, that consanguineous unions are
injurious as such ?

Without going back to the very early history of marriage
customs and prohibitions—a task I am not competent to undertake—it is I think enough to say that the early Christian
Church appears to be chiefly responsible for the existing residue
of prejudice against the marriage of cousins. The church put
its ban upon consanguineous unions; at first in connexion with
the cult of asceticism and celibacy, later because it was able by
the sale of indulgences to make money by allowing consanguineous couples to break the Canonical rules for a consideration. That this was so is confirmed by the subsequent extension
of the prohibitions to various affinities, or even accidental
associations, between persons not related at all by blood.

Thus—to quote from Huth’s ‘‘ Marriage of Near Kin”’
(p. 122), (1887)—the council of Trent in the middle of the
sixteenth century issued the monstrous declaration ‘‘ that the

1 Darwin. Animals and Plants under Domestication, II. 94. 1875.
2 Thomson. Heredity. 1908. P. 392.
134 EUGENICS REVIEW.

person baptized, his parents, godparents, and the priest who
baptized him were as much inter-related as though they were
relatives by blood to each other,’’ so that, as the author continues,
‘“no tolerably near relative of the priest could marry either the
godrelations or relations of any child that priest had baptized ’’;
and there is much more to the same effect. Without enquiring
too closely as to whether such absurd regulations were always
carried out we may, I think, safely agree with Mr. Huth when
he says that “‘ The prohibited degrees were far too useful to
abolish.”’

Of course other causes have been and are still at work in
both encouraging and discouraging consanguineous marriages.
Any such influences as may possibly depend upon supposed
social inconveniences or inexpediencies arising from these
marriages are outside my purview. I think the most operative
cause of such hostility to these unions as still exists is the confusion, already referred to, between inheritance of a defect from
two slightly tainted, but apparently normal, parents and the
supposed creation of an entirely new thing by union between
those of related blood. Such confusion is only too natural,
and all of us have, I daresay, fallen into the pit at times—
certainly I have done so formerly. For instance, if amongst
the children of a pair of seemingly normal cousins there should
be some born deaf and dumb the calamity cannot be hidden
from the friends, and, as casual enquiries about cause are
seldom carried further back than the parental generation, as
most of us have a fatal facility for stopping at the first plausible
excuse, no surprise need be felt if the cousinship, as such, is
blamed ; although had enquiry been possible or been permitted,
cases of the same malady would very likely have been discovered in ancestors or collaterals.

That consanguinity of parents repeated through many
generations is compatible with the maintenance of a high
standard of health and vigour (mental and bodily) is demonstrated by well-known instances.

Near the mouth of the river Loire, on the Atlantic coast of
France, is the small Commune of Batz, situated on a peninsula
that is almost shut off from the mainland by a salt-marsh, so
CONSANGUINEOUS MARRIAGES. 135

that the inhabitants have (or had prior to 1864 when the
investigation now referred to was made) very little communication with the people of the mainland. The principal occupation
is salt-making; and the inhabitants live an extremely simple
life and crime is almost unknown. They have intermarried
amongst themselves for, as it is put, ‘‘ countless ’’ generations.
In 1864 M. Voisin, interested in the effects of consanguineous
marriage, spent a month in personally examining the facts on
the spot. Amongst the total population of the Commune, at
that date 3,300, he found 46 marriages that he counted as conSsanguineous. He made no attempt to tabulate the marriages
of very distant cousins but states that the great majority of the
marriages were of that kind, 7.e., he found but few married
couples who were not related by blood in some degree. To
begin with, the fertility of the 46 marriages detailed as consanguineous was decidedly higher than the average fertility for
the whole of France. Next, he failed to find amongst the
entire population (3,300) a single case of any of the various
diseases and defects that are always named as being supposed
to result from consanguinity of parentage, and he describes the
people themselves as healthy, robust and intelligent. The
death-rate of those who grew up was very low and many of
them lived to a great age. The infant mortality, however, was
very high, chiefly from acute diseases of the chest and throat
and especially ‘‘croup.’’ It is of course possible that amongst
these young children who succumbed to acute infantile diseases
there were some who would have shown inferiorities or defects
had they lived; but even if we grant that, it is difficult to
believe that not one of the survivors would have suffered in
some corresponding way. Nor does it seem likely that the
acute diseases of childhood would have selected a specially large
proportion of those who might afterwards have shown
degeneracies.

A very similar account was given in 1885 of the small
fishing village of Staithes between Whitby and Saltburn.
And quite a number of almost identical cases are upon record.

Of course plenty of examples are to be found where an
excessive proportion of diseased and degenerate are found
136 EUGENICS REVIEW.

amongst the offspring of cousin-parents. But these prove no
more than that if such degeneracies exist in the stock they may
be transmitted.

That inbreeding, very much closer in degree and repeated
far more often than anything in modern human society, does
not necessarily lead to degeneracy but quite the contrary is
shown by the history of modern breeds of domestic animals.
For it is of course admitted, not only that the marvellous
improvements effected during the last 150 years in the breeds
of horses, oxen, sheep and pigs—to name only the more
important kinds of live stock—have been reached by careful
selection of the individuals possessing the characters desired ;
but that, as we are constantly told, the only way to secure and
to fix such desirable characters is to carry out this crossing of
near relations; t.e., we are told that the desirable characters
come as the result of crossing parents both of whom possess
them in some degree. Doubtless the same parents sometimes
also contain the rudiments of undesirable characters and
degeneracies also, but such individuals will as far as possible
not be used for breeding, and the production of the weaknesses
they show will thus to a large extent be checked. It may
therefore be asserted that the history of modern breeds of
domesticated animals affords little, if any, support to the doctrine
that marriages of blood-relations can produce qualities—good
or bad—that are not represented at all in either parent.

There does however seem reason to believe that fertility is,
or may be, diminished by very close in-breeding, repeated for
several generations (Darwin. Animals and Plants under
Domestication. II., 1o1, etc.); I mean, e.g., by mating, say,
brother (a) with sister (b), and subsequently the father (a) with
their daughter (d), and again with her daughter (e) and so on
or vice versa as to sex. It is further asserted that when’ such
infertility has reached a dangerous degree it can often be
counteracted, 1.e., the normal fertility of the race or species be
restored by crossing with a non-related stock; or what appears
still more strange, by crossing with a very distantly related
member of the same stock,—one derived from another branch
of the same stem but perhaps reared under somewhat different
CONSANGUINEOUS MARRIAGES. 137

conditions. We may perhaps take comfort from this and,—
whilst fully admitting that what is true for some of the lower
animals may not always be true for man, especially in regard
to the higher and distinctively human attributes,—conclude provisionally that if it should ever be shown that human cousin
marriages were less prolific than others this defect would most
likely be neutralized by the next out-marriage.

Huth (‘‘ The Marriage of Near Kin,’’ pp. 193-96), summing
up the material then available (1887) as to the number of
children born to parents who were blood-relations and to those
that were unrelated, respectively, found that the consanguineous
marriages appeared to be more fertile than the others; and
although he thinks that, owing to unconscious selection on the
part of some of the authors whose data he quotes, the statistics
are not entirely trustworthy, the conclusion is that consanguineous unions have certainly not been proved to be less
productive than others, and that the probabilities point to their
being more so.

The only contribution I can make at the moment to this
subject shows very little difference between the number of
children born to parents who were, and were not, cousins
respectively. The data relate to the chronic progressive eyedisease, Retinitis pigmentosa; the numbers are not nearly large
enough for final conclusions, and the information on which
they are based was sometimes unavoidably incomplete. But I
give them for what they are worth. In 93 completed families
of children (childships) the offspring of non-consanguineous
parentage, containing cases of the disease just mentioned, there
were 591 children, or 6°3 to each marriage (average). In 48
childships the offspring of consanguineous parentage (usually
first cousinship) there were 259 children or an average of 5°5 to
each marriage. The difference of fertility, such as it is, is
against the cousin marriages, but as already stated we could
not safely draw conclusions from such a small series, even if it
were certain that consanguinity had been recorded in every
instance where it had been present.

I think, therefore, we may conclude that marriages between
cousins are as safe from the eugenic point of view as any other
marriages, provided the parents and stock are sound.
138 EUGENICS REVIEW.

The difficulty, of course, both for consanguineous and outmarriages is to decide upon this vital point; and as for obvious
reasons the family history is more likely to be forthcoming for
a pair of cousins than for an unrelated pair, we have here a
part explanation of the aversion to cousin marriage met with in
some families. This explanation will tell with special force
if the disease or defect is relatively rare for then it will be more
likely to occur, though in a latent form, in two cousins than in
two strangers. But if the defect apprehended be a frequent one,
e.g., tubercle, the chances of the hereditary liability to it? being
present in both parents and intensified in their children may be
much the same whether the parents were cousins or not.

It seems to me that since we as yet know next to nothing
of how the various transmissible characters, good, bad or
indifferent, are, or at least may be, linked together in inheritance; and that there are many other factors in marriage beyond
those relating directly to race improvement or the reverse; it is
best, in the present state of our information, not to discourage
marriage between cousins unless there be a clear case; e.g.,
inferiority or instability of a definite kind, or the history in the
stock of such distinct diseases, or liabilities to them, as the eye
disease, Retinitis pigmentosa (illustrated in Figs. I. and II.),
or deaf-mutism and others, more familiar to us, that could be
named.

It is I quite admit difficult at first not to believe that consanguinity as such may have the power of producing qualities,
bad or good entirely anew, when we see in a large pedigree only
a single member showing some pronounced defect, and that
member the child of first cousins. Such a pedigree shown
in A Monograph on Albinism in Man (Atlas, Part IV., Plate
XIX., Fig. 137) where a single case of albinism is seen
amongst three children of a marriage of first cousins. It
will be noticed that other first-cousin marriages occur in this
pedigree, but in a different branch, and that their children
were all normal. Such cases—and they are met with from
time to time in other conditions than albinism—can be readily

explained on the supposition, Mendelian or other, that the

1 I assume that the liability to tubercle is hereditary; there is, I know, some
difference of opinion on this point amongst those best able to judge.
CONSANGUINEOUS MARRIAGES. 139

defect, which will probably be one of an infrequent sort, is,
as already pointed out, more likely to occur in a latent or
undeveloped form in two cousins than in two strangers. It
is probable that albinism had occurred in an earlier generation
of this genealogy, for we know from other instances that this
peculiar deficiency of pigment may disappear for several
generations and then emerge again, and you will see that only
two generations above the albino are recorded with anything
like completeness.

Diagram I., illustrates the occurrence of the same hereditary
disease (a form of chronic failure of the sight) in the offspring
of a pair of cousins and of an unrelated husband and wife, in
the same pedigree.

Diagram II. shows how fallacious an enquiry may be if
limited to the direct ascendants of the affected person. The
disease is the same as in Diagram I., and might have been
attributed to the close consanguinity of the, apparently normal,
parents (uncle and niece) had investigation not proved that a
collateral, viz., a sister of the patient’s mother, was also
affected.

DIAGRAMS.

 

Diagram I. Diagram II.

I. A pedigree showing a disease (Retinitis pigmentosa) in two different childships, one the offspring of consanguineous parentage, the other not. (Ret.
pigmsa. paper, Part I., p. 55, Fig. 33) (Webster’s Case).

II. Shows the same point as I. in another way. (Ibid: Fig. 34) Trousseau’s
Case.)
