THE HEREDITY OF THE TUDORS

And the Common Characteristics of the Family

By W. T. J. GUN, F.R.Hist.S., F.S.G.

heredity are always faced with the

difficulty of ascertaining from which
ancestors the traits of a given individual
are probably derived. In the case of most
men and women, whether of note or otherwise, little is known as a rule of the characters and attainments of most of the various
ancestors for three or four generations ; bare
mames are usually all that can be ascertained. For this reason the heredity of
monarchs presents, on the whole, the best
held for investigation, as in their cases
much more is known as to the character of
ancestors. Among English monarchs the
Tudors and Stewarts are the most favourable for this purpose. The personalities of
the Plantagenets were quite as interesting,
but the further we go back in time, the less
we can ascertain of ancestral characteristics.
The Guelphs, on the other hand, though
later, are both in themselves and in their
ancestors of far less interest than are the
Tudors and the Stewarts.

I do not pretend in this study of the
Tudors, or in the one which will follow of
the Stewarts, to have altogether solved the
problem of their characters, but, as will be
seen, most of the ten monarchs in question
do appear to show quite clearly the influence
of heredity.

In the case of each monarch, the names
of the parents, four grandparents, and eight
great-grandparents are set out. I have not
given the names of the sixteen great-greatgrandparents, partly for consideration of
space, but mainly because diffusion renders
the tracing of characteristics from this generation a matter of great complexity. I
propose at times, however, to refer to cer
B ELIEVERS in the importance of

IrrI

tain members of the sixteen, especially
where there is a double descent.

It may be added that in the immediate
Tudor ancestry there is no case of doubtful
paternity, so far as I am aware.

KING HENRY VII

PARENTS.

Edmund Tudor, Earl of Richmond.
Margaret Beaufort.

GRANDPARENTS.
Sir Owen Tudor.
Katharine of Valois.
John, Duke of Somerset.
Margaret Beauchamp.

GREAT-GRANDPARENTS,
Meredyth Tudor.
Margaret Vaughan.
Charles VI, King of France.
Isabel of Bavaria.
John, Earl of Somerset.
Margaret Holland.
Sir John Beauchamp.
Edith Stourton.

The character of the first of the Tudor
monarchs stands out distinct in history,
cold, wary, sagacious, unlovable, avaricious, possessed, however, of a genuine love
of learning. His hard and difficult early
life may account to a certain extent for his
character, but what further can we learn
from his ancestry? In the first place, it is
singularly unroyal; apart from the line of
Katharine of Valois, and an ultimate Plantagenet descent through the Beauforts,
Henry sprang from either the nobility or
quite ordinary gentry. In those turbulent
II2

times most of his ancestors were forced to
struggle, and did in effect struggle very
successfully. Owen Tudor must quite
clearly have been an exceptional personality to have fascinated the Queen Dowager,
while Margaret Beauchamp, whose origin
was not much more exalted than that of
Owen, must have been possessed of considerable attractions to have won the affections of the head of the great house of
Beaufort. ,

Of the earlier Tudors and Beauchamps
little is known, but the former were prominent and energetic supporters of Owen Glendower who, it is interesting to note, was a
relative. Of Margaret Beauchamp it is said
that she carefully educated her excellent
daughter, from whom Henry certainly derived his love of learning and probably
most of his sagacity, though some of the
latter may have come from the Tudors,
none at any rate from the foolish Katharine
of Valois, who sprang from an essentially
weak stock—this was fully brought out in
her son by her first marriage, Henry VI.
From the earlier Beauforts Henry VII may
have derived some qualities; there were resemblances between his character and that
of Cardinal Beaufort, the famous brother of
John, Earl of Somerset. If Henry had on
the one side a successful adventurer among
his ancestry in Owen Tudor, he had on the
other an equally successful adventuress in
Catharine Swinford, the mistress of John
of Gaunt and progenitor of the Beauforts.

To sum up, of the four immediate lines
from which Henry VII derived descent, he
appears to have owed little to the Valois,
though there were certainly resemblances
between him and that strange character
Louis XI of France, his first cousin once
removed. He probably took from the
Tudor, Beaufort, and Beauchamp descents
in perhaps equal degrees. From all these
he could well have derived worldly wisdom,
and from the Tudor and Beaufort ruthlessness, though this latter trait was certainly
no part of the characteristics of his mother.
Assuming, as I think we may, some ability
in the Beauchamps, three of the four lines
were distinctly able, one alone was the re
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

verse. On the doctrine of chances, Henry
should therefore have proved able, and able
he proved to be.

KING HENRY VIII

PARENTS.

King Henry VII.
Elizabeth of York.

GRANDPARENTS,

Edmund Tudor.
Margaret Beaufort.

King Edward IV.
Elizabeth Woodville.

GREAT-GRANDPARENTS.

Sir Owen Tudor.
Katharine of Valois.
John, Duke of Somerset.
Margaret Beauchamp.
Richard, Duke of York.
Cicily Nevill. :
Richard Woodville, Earl Rivers.
Jaquetta of Luxemburg.

The character of the second of the Tudor
monarchs stands out even more clearly than
that of his father. With mental capacities
well above the average and a_ superb
physique till he ruined it by self-indulgence,
nature had bestowed many gifts on Henry,
but not the capacity to use them wisely.
His complete selfishness and ruthlessness
are commonplaces of history; these characteristics were certainly derived in part
from his father, who was, however, far
more sagacious in his methods. ‘The
Seventh Henry was wily and tortuous, while
the Eighth went straight to the point; here
the great difference in early environment
undoubtedly played some part, added to
which the position of the son was always
far more secure than that of the father.

Henry VIII’s straightforward ruthlessness was certainly mainly derived from his
maternal ancestors, but not from his mother
herself, Elizabeth of York, who was a gentle
and lovable character. There were, however, many resemblances between Henry
and his maternal grandfather, who equally
THE HEREDITY OF THE TUDORS

ruined a fine physique by self-indulgence,
and who also possessed decided mental
abilities, though of a more sluggish disposition than his grandson, and with far less
love of learning and culture. These last
qualities Henry would seem to have derived
from Margaret Beaufort, while Elizabeth
Woodville, an ambitious, sensual woman
with much feminine charm, certainly trans
mitted characteristics to her grandson, who.

thus derived something from at least three
of his grandparents. Of the disposition and
attainments of the fourth, Edmund Tudor,
who died at an early age, no record remains.

Turning to the eight great-grandparents
we find an exact counterpart to the handsome adventurer Owen Tudor, in the handsome adventurer Richard Woodville. The
careers of these two were extraordinarily
alike, each marrying widowed princesses
far above themselves in degree. The earlier
Woodville stock, of which, like the Tudor,
very little is known, was almost certainly
efficient. The character of Jaquetta of
Luxemburg bore obvious resemblance to
that of Katharine of Valois; she came,
however, of a somewhat abler stock, which
showed no traces of the Valois degeneracy,
though morally on an equally low plane.
Henry’s love of learning, though probably,
as has been said, mainly derived from the
Beauforts, may have also owed something
to the Woodvilles. | Elizabeth’s brother,
Anthony, Earl Rivers, a highly cultured
man, was the great patron of Caxton. But
the ruthless determination of Henry’s
character, derived from several sources,
came most conspicuously from Richard,
Duke of York and Cicily Nevill, the parents
of Richard III, who himself exemplified this
trait to the highest possible degree. The
Duke of York was remarkably like his
great-grandson, while the Duchess, ‘ Proud
Cis,’ was almost the latter’s female counterpart. This ruthlessness and determination
were special characteristics of her family,
the Nevills; her mother was a Beaufort,
thus giving Henry VIII a double descent
from John of Gaunt, turbulent but cultured,
and from the latter’s mistress, the successful adventuress, Catharine Swinford.

113

Henry’s characteristics may now be
traced from his ancestors in the following
detail :

(1) General ability—

Conspicuous in his father and in Margaret Beaufort and to some extent in Edward IV and in Elizabeth Woodville among
his grandparents. Among the great-grandparents in various ways in both the Duke
and Duchess of York, in Richard Woodville, in Owen Tudor, probably in the
Duchess of Somerset, not so obviously in
the Duke, who came, however, of an able
stock.

(2) Pitiless determination—

Conspicuous in the father, in Edward IV
and both his parents, probably in Owen
Tudor and Richard Woodville, and certainly in various Beauforts. In this respect
in particular, the double descent from John
of Gaunt and Catharine Swinford must be
taken into account.

(3) Physical good looks—

Notable in the mother and in both her
parents. Owen Tudor and Richard Woodville won their positions largely through
this attribute, so probably did the Duchess
of Somerset, and so almost certainly did the
double ancestress, Catharine Swinford.

(4) Love of learning and culture—

Most decidedly through Henry VII from
Margaret Beaufort, and in that line ultimately from John of Gaunt, possibly a further portion from the Woodvilles.

On the whole it will be seen that the
qualities of Henry VIII are very referable
to heredity, and that the chances were considerable that a son of Henry VII and
Elizabeth of York would prove a strong
and intensely virile character. It has already been remarked, however, that Elizabeth herself shared good looks only with
her son, otherwise. her own gentle nature
was in the strongest contrast to his, though
a consideration of her ancestry shows
clearly why qualities other than her own
could be transmitted. But it must be ad114

mitted that it is most difficult to explain
Elizabeth herself. Her paternal ancestry
for some generations back showed essentially
different qualities, nor does gentleness seem
to have been any characteristic of the
Luxemburg family. One can only refer her
to some unknown Woodvilles. Of her
children, Mary, Duchess of Suffolk, resembled her the most, as to a marked degree did the latter’s granddaughter, Lady
Jane Grey. Henry’s other sister, Margaret,
Queen of Scotland, had, as an old Scottish
writer remarked, ‘‘a great twang of her
brother’s temper.’? She had certainly
something of his robustness and ability, and
a very great deal of his selfishness; she
must on the whole have taken from the same
group of ancestors as did Henry. To her
gentler sister Mary fell a much greater
share of the good looks so widely spread
among their ancestors.

KING EDWARD VI

I do not propose to take the case of this
monarch in detail, as owing to his early
death, his character was left undeveloped.
Already, however, a love of learning was
conspicuous, and some obvious resemblances
to Margaret Beaufort. Possibly in him the
gentle nature of Elizabeth of York might
have become apparent. His maternal ancestry bore resemblance, in a general way, to
the maternal ancestry of his half-sister
Elizabeth, though there was no family in his
quarterings to compare for ability with the
Howards in hers. On the whole, Edward
had a fine heredity, and might well have
proved a great monarch.

QUEEN MARY I

PARENTS.

King Henry VIII.
Katharine of Aragon.

GRANDPARENTS.
King Henry VII.
Elizabeth of York.
Ferdinand, King of Aragon.
Isabella, Queen of Castile.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

GREAT-GRANDPARENTS.

Edmund Tudor.
Margaret Beaufort.
King Edward IV.
Elizabeth Woodville.
John II, King of Aragon.
Johanna Henriquez.
John II, King of Castile.
Isabella of Portugal.

The character of this unfortunate queen
is less clearly defined than that of her
father or paternal grandfather, and in her
case circumstances played a specially large
part. She had unquestionably a strong will
and high spirit and considerable mental
capacity, coupled with the family love of
learning. Ruthlessness, too, was clearly a
feature of her character, but to a less marked
extent than has often been stated. While
her father was on the whole with the flowing tide, she was against it, and it was that
rather than any inherent weakness in her
character which accounted for her failure
and his success.

Her strong will she derived from both
sides. Her mother was far from being a
meek and yielding woman; married to
many men she would have dominated, but
no woman could have dominated Henry
VIII. Between Mary’s four grandparents
there was the most striking general resemblance. No two monarchs could well have
been more alike than Henry VII and Ferdinand of Aragon, and the character of
Henry, as stated above, applies almost word
for word to Ferdinand. Elizabeth of York
and Isabella of Castile were not so exactly
alike, for the latter was a more determined
and also a more bigoted woman; but still on
the whole they resembled each other in general excellence of character.

The parents of Ferdinand, John, King of
Aragon, and Johanna Henriquez, were
alike able and domineering, the wife even
more so than the husband, both utterly
ruthless. John of Castile was, on the
other hand, amiable and weak, while his
wife was greatly his superior in ability, the
Portuguese family from which she sprang
being by far the ablest of those that have
THE HEREDITY OF THE TUDORS

ruled over that country. Coupling these
great-grandparents with those on the Tudor
side, we find a preponderance of strong,
hard, domineering characters, and a very
decided amount of ability. But while Mary
derived something from her father’s side,
some part certainly of her strong will, she
lacked the gift of realism so marked in
that line, also conspicuous in her grandfather Ferdinand. On the whole, she seems
to have taken most from the direct female
line to Isabella of Portugal. The resemblance to Isabella of Castile is specially
noteworthy. Isabella was a successful ruler
while Mary was not, but this was due almost wholly to the varying circumstances.
The grandmother suited the Spanish temperament, while the granddaughter did not
suit the English.

QUEEN ELIZABETH >

PARENTS.

King Henry VIII.
Anne Boleyn.

| GRANDPARENTS.

King Henry VII.
Elizabeth of York.

Thomas Boleyn, Earl of Wiltshire.
Elizabeth Howard.

GREAT-GRANDPARENTS.

Edmund Tudor.
Margaret Beaufort.
King Edward IV.
Elizabeth Woodville.
Sir William Boleyn.
Margaret Butler.
Thomas Howard, Duke of Norfolk.
Elizabeth Tilney. .

The ability of this most remarkable
woman has no doubt at times been exaggerated, but when all deductions have been
made, no question can remain as to her
greatness. In fact it is doubtful whether
in all history any woman, certainly any
woman of affairs, can definitely be said to
have been her superior. This being so, the
question of the influence of her heredity is

II5

one of special interest, and it is unfortunate
that the characters of several of her immediate ancestors on the maternal side remain unknown. The broad lines of her
own character are familiar to all. As
tyrannical and domineering by nature as
her father, and most inordinately vain, with
a considerable, though perhaps over-estimated, love of learning, her most marked
characteristic was undoubtedly her astuteness, which involved mental gifts of a high
order. A thorough realist, no one ever
steered a course more successfully through
innumerable difficulties. In these respects
it is obvious at first sight that her character was largely compounded of those of her
father and paternal grandfather, the iron
will of the former with the astuteness of the
latter. But the astuteness was the more
prominent and the resemblance to the
grandfather the greater. Keeping to the
paternal line, Elizabeth bore no resemblance at all to her grandmother on that
side, but there were likenesses in her attainments to those of Margaret Beaufort and in
her character to that of Elizabeth Woodville, while the influence of the Plantagenet
strain is evident.

How much was derived from her mother’s
side? Her extreme vanity is usually felt
to have been inherited from the mother herself, and this was probably so; quite as certainly some of her astuteness is attributable
to this descent, not least to her Boleyn
grandfather. Thomas Boleyn was in many
ways a most despicable character, though
great allowances must be made for those
who lived under the tyranny of Henry VIII;
but, like his granddaughter, he showed
great ability in steering his way through
dificulties. Nothing is known of the
character of his father, Sir William, but
the latter’s father, Sir Geoffrey Boleyn, was
an able business man who became Lord
Mavor of London. From this strain Elizabeth may have derived some of the avarice
and general carefulness in money matters
which distinguished her; qualities referable
also to Henry VII, her personal extravagance being as far as possible at the expense of others.
116

Of her great-grandmother, Margaret
Butler, and her grandmother, Elizabeth
Howard, no characteristics seem to have
been preserved, but the former sprang from
a race of Anglo-Irish nobles above the
general average in capacity, while the latter
belonged to one of the most distinguished
families of the times. All her brothers were
men of more or less mark, still more notable was her nephew, the poet Earl of
Surrey. Thomas Howard, second Duke of
Norfolk, the victor of Flodden, was in all
respects a striking figure, as was his father
the first Duke, the ‘‘ Jockey of Norfolk ”’
of Shakespeare’s ‘‘ Richard III.’’ The lastnamed was primarily an ambitious domineering character, while the astuteness to
which so frequent reference must be made
was predominant in his son. Unquestionably, Queen Elizabeth owed something to
the Howard strain. Elizabeth Tilney was
probably responsible for some of the distinction of this family, for though her own
attainments are unknown, her son by a first
marriage, John, Lord Berners, showed, like
Lord Surrey, considerable literary ability,
and was specially distinguished for his
vigorous translation of Froissart.

In view of Queen Elizabeth’s marked
ability a summary of the degree of mental
attainments reached by her fourteen immediate ancestors may now be added. Henry
VII, Henry VIII, Margaret Beaufort, and

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Thomas Howard were much above the average in ability; Edward IV and Thomas
Boleyn somewhat above the average;
Elizabeth Woodville, Elizabeth of York,
Anne Boleyn, and, almost certainly, Elizabeth Tilney well up to the average at least.
While the characters of the remaining four
are practically unknown, there is no evidence that any one of them was a weakling,
and we have in fact to go right back to the
remote Valois strain before we find any
ascertainable weakness in Elizabeth’s ancestry. Among all the near ancestors we
find, on the other hand, striking evidence
of strength and virility, and the chances of
ability in a child of Henry VIII and Anne
Boleyn were great and were abundantly
fulfilled.

It will be seen that the influence of
heredity on the characters of the Tudor
monarchs was without doubt considerable,
more marked in the cases of Henry VIII
and Elizabeth than in those of Henry VII
and Mary, but sufficiently so in the latter.
The patriarch of the male line, Owen Tudor, raised his family from obscurity by his
marriage, which had, however, little or no
eugenic value. Each of the subsequent
marriages, however, to Margaret Beaufort,
to Elizabeth of York, and to Anne Boleyn,
connected the male line with sound and able
stocks, with results to which history bears
witness.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXII, No. 2.
