THE HEREDITY OF GROWTH

Some Biological Aspects of School Medical Inspection

By ALFRED A. MUMFORD, M.D.
(Medical Officer, Manchester Grammar School).

OWEVER clear may be our
appreciation of the common laws of
heredity when we consider the
phenomena of growth in relation to animal
biology, yet as school medical officers we
soon find that considerable obscurity surrounds our path when attempting to apply
these laws to the assessment of the capacity,
or to an analysis of the causes of high
attainment of the adolescent school child.
Sometimes the influence of heredity is
clear and outstanding—high attainments
displayed by a boy in particular directions
being associated with similar high attainments in other members of the family. At
other times the influence of heredity is
masked, and no such association between
high attainments in the boy and similar
attainments on the part of other members
of the family can be found. Here it is
probable that any unusual capacity which
existed in other members of the family may
have found no opportunity for display or
may have been diverted into less evident
channels. It is difficult, therefore, to express the relative influence of heredity and
circumstances during school life in any
mathematical form. ‘The influence of heredity, however, is very evident to those doctors who at any thorough entrance medical
examination are in the habit of discussing
with parents the hopes entertained for the
future of the boy who has recently gained
an entrance scholarship from an elementary
school. The school medical officer, as well
as the head and the assistant masters, in any
advanced day school will, I think, almost
universally admit that, among the benefits
which our national system of education has
conferred upon the efficient working of the
body politic, not the least has been the

29

numerous opportunities it has afforded for
the development in children of innate powers
which their parents had in many instances
possessed, but had not had the opportunities
for development and expression. National
education is a stabilizing influence in so
far as it helps the best to rise. It is, however, fatally easy for us to rest satisfied with
the attribution to heredity of any outstanding merit in intellectual capacity, in physical prowess, in musical ability, in skill in
handicrafts, etc., without endeavouring to
identify and understand in detail the precise
powers which have been inherited or the
precise circumstances which have favoured
their development.

THE NATURE OF GROWTH

In any attempt we may make to separate
the relative influences exerted by heredity
and circumstance in school progress,
whether physical or mental, we find there
are naturally two separate lines of inquiry :

(1) By the study of purely physical
growth—i.e., the progressive changes in
actual structure.

(2) By the study of the growth of functional co-operation and the development of
the separate parts.

Efficient growth is a complete growth,
both of structure and of function, in the
separate parts as well as in the whole. In
neither structure nor function of parts does
growth proceed at a uniform rate nor to a
uniform extent. We have, therefore, to
consider a ‘ time increment’ in different
parts as well as a time increment of the
whole—e.g., there is a separate growth in
the size of the head, of the trunk, and of
the limbs, but growth in each does not proceed at the same rate nor to the same extent.
30 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Consequently any single completed individual is not the exact replica of his brothers
and sisters in all forms of growth, though
he may be in some of them.

Besides such separate growth of structure of parts, there is also a separate development of powers of the blood circulation,
of the range of respiratory exchange, of food
transformation and utilization, of muscular
power, and of nervous activity. During the
period covered by school life—eight to
twenty years—these functioning systems,
like the structural basis upon which they
rest, all develop at different rates and to a
different extent, not only in brothers and
sisters of the same family, but even among
those as closely related as twin children.
So marked is this that the study of ‘‘ unlike ’? twins becomes separate from that of
‘* like ’? twins. :

To make any substantial progress in our
inquiries as to the relation between heredity
and training, we must, therefore, assess
each child in many directions, and each
assessment must be in terms of time increments.

Confining our attention, for the time
being, to growth of structure, we notice
that this may be expressed in terms of absolute. height, weight, and chest girth. If
we had discovered some uniform and perfect
physical type of humanity, we might assess
each individual in terms of such perfect
type. There is, however, no such perfect
type. There are as many types as there
are groups of circumstances under which
human life can be led. We are drawn,
therefore, to express the height, weight,
chest-girth, etc., of each growing child in
terms of some average or mean, and to say
that his or her growth is in excess or in
defect of such mean by so much time increment. When, however, we inquire into the
fitness of any child to put forth some particular effort, or to sustain some particular scholastic strain, standards of total
height, weight, and chest girth alone are of
little avail. We want something which will
represent other differences, which have a
close relation to structure yet are still
measurable. Still confining our attention

to structure, and still neglecting, for the time
being, the question of function, we therefore
pass from the measurements of total body
height, etc., to the measurements of body
proportion—i.e., the relative size of different
parts to each other and to the whole.

PHRENOLOGICAL BEGINNINGS

Proportion is expressed now by means of
‘indices’ or ‘ ratios.” Albert Direr (died
1526) was the first to propound for artists
some of the laws of such body proportion,
and to claim that it was only by the study
of body proportion that the artist could
depict temperament—that is, the habitual
tendency of human beings to behave in
special ways. Since Diirer’s time, both
artists and anatomists have continued to
make studies of body proportions in order
to understand and depict varieties of human
beings. Anthropometry, the science of the
measurement of man, began when Casper
and Blumenbach attempted to express the
relation between the skulls and faces of mankind and of animals in terms of the relative
importance of the mouth-function of seizing
and manipulating food, compared with the
skull development as indication of general
intelligence displayed in the whole conduct
of life. Gall and Spurzheim carried similar
inquiries still further, but they early
abandoned such ‘ Craniology ’ as was based
upon comparative anatomy, and confined .
their attention to ‘ Cranioscopy ’ or ‘ Phrenology,’ in the attempt to establish a correspondence between the outward configuration of the skull and those mental
propensities and aptitudes which distinguish
particular individuals.

Comparative anatomists did-not, however,
long content themselves with the study of the
relative proportions of head and face. They
soon turned their attention to the study of
the proportions of other parts, especially of
the limbs. . Political agitation about the
equality of man and the justice or injustice
of slavery increased the interest taken in
these scientific inquiries, which began to
consider whether mankind was of one or of
several distinct species, and consequently
whether men of all races possessed equal or
THE HEREDITY OF GROWTH 31

unequal social rights. | Anatomical collections were made of human remains from all
over the world. Body measurements showed
that the Negro had longer arms than the
European and in this way approximated to
the configuration of the higher apes. The
science of ethnology soon became merged
into that of anthropology. In order to study
how far each race possessed the peculiar
body form and physical conformation which
has enabled it to meet its particular climatic
and other demands and to maintain existence
under its particular conditions, the Archduke Maximilian, later Governor of the
Kingdom of Lombardy and Venetia, fitted
‘out an Austrian frigate to make a voyage
round the world. ‘The tour was made during the years 1857, 8, and 9, and the anthropological collections and measurements made
by Drs. Schertzer and Schwartz were
examined and edited in great detail by Dr.
A. Weisbach. (Osterreichen Fregate Novara
um die erde Anthropologische Theil, Wein,
1867.) Their work formed the basis of the
modern study of anthropometry. Further
anthropometric material was collected during the voyage of H.M.S. Challenger to the
Pacific Islands under Sir Wyville Thompson. The examination of the human remains
and their comparison with specimens in
various museums by Sir William Turner’
added greatly to anthropometric knowledge
by the establishment of standard proportions
or ‘ indices ’ of separate parts—e.g., radiohumeral, to distinguish between the long
fore-armed and the short fore-armed type,
the tibio-femoral index to distinguish between the long-legged and the short-legged
types. Sir William Turner summarizes his
conclusions as follows :

““T do not find, therefore, in the comparative study of the skeletons of the
races of man, evidence that any one race
predominates in all its characters over
other races, nor that any one race in all
its characters is lower than other races.

 

* Challenger Reports, 1886, Part XLVII, Zoology :
also Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh,
Vols. XLXI, XLVII, L; and Professor Cunningham,
Cunningham Memoirs, Dublin.

Nevertheless there can be no doubt that
the Europeans in many of their most important skeletal characters, more especially those of the skull and the pelvis, are
more widely removed from mammals
generally than is the case with Negroes,
Kaffirs, Bushmen and Australians.’’

The fact that racial differences are associated with aptitude to meet special conditions becomes of importance when we consider the varieties to be met with in the
physical framework and body build of school
children. We must be prepared to recognize among adolescent school children as
many types or varieties as there are types
or varieties of physical and other occupations and varieties of sports. Without the
guidance of the work of such anthropologists
and anatomists as have studied body proportions in terms of the concurrent conditions of life, we cannot measure the results,
nor even consider the wisdom or unwisdom,
of the various methods of training school
children.

From this point of view it is with singular
satisfaction that we turn to the extensive
series of 500 anthropological measurings of
225 girls, between the ages of 15-19, taken
by Dr. Gertrude Grutzner’® of Zurich. In.
this study, 30 different absolute measurements of total or special parts are tabulated
in age periods of 15-16, 16-17, 17-18, 18-19.
Many of the girls appear in two tables, some
in three. The means, maximum and minimum, and standard deviations for each are
given. Other tables of 30 relative proportions of the parts are given, the whole constituting, perhaps, the most complete individual study of the structural growth of a
considerable number of adolescent girls of a
particular nation that has yet been made.
Although the figures are confined to a particular group yet they provide preliminary
standards by which we may consider the
significance of the differences in limb proportion as regards occupational or other
aptitude.

In order to do this we must first consider

* Archives of Julius Klaus-Stiftung for the Study
of Heredity, Social Anthropology, and Race Hygiene.
32

the circumstances under which growth of
limb takes place. Limb bones are laid
down in the form of soft cartilage in which
certain foci or centres of ‘‘ ossification ”’
appear, one in the middle of the shaft
(diaphysis), several smaller ones at the extremities (epiphysis). Hard bone formation
extends from these centres at a progressively diminishing rate. The diminution
and final cessation of growth is secured by
the action of the internal secretions of the
body, or hormones. These cause bony union
of the diaphyses with the epiphyses at a fixed
period of development and cessation of
growth. As regards the influences of
exercise and activity of limb upon growth it
is interesting to note that, while, in the leg,
growth is taking place more extensively
and continues for a longer time at the knee
than at the hip or the ankle, yet, in the arm,
growth takes place more extensively and
continues for a longer time at the wrist and
shoulder than at the elbow (G. Kenelm
Digby, Journal of Anatomy, Vol. 41).

This greater degree of growth, and the
later period at which it takes place, at the
shoulder, wrist, and knee joints, compared
with the elbow, hip, and ankle joints, is related to the wider range of movement and
greater variability found among individuals, and probably has much to do with
differences in individual aptitude, as well as
with the possible effect of greater or less use
and training during periods of rapid growth.
Researches in X-ray photography have
shown that the process of ossification and
the union of parts of the long bones follow
very definable laws, and that, even at birth,
there is a marked difference between the two
sexes, so that the process in. girls is more
rapid than the process in boys, firstly by
days, then by weeks and months, and, by
the age of 16, by years—ossification in the
girl being then 1%-2 years ahead of that
in the boy. About this time, growth in
height in the girl almost ceases, while that
of the boy often goes on till 18 or 19 and
even later. As cessation of growth in length
of limb bone is associated with increased development of limb muscle, this fact must
have important bearing upon any different

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

results which may follow from physical
training. Since these processes are under
the influence of the hormones, whose
activity, though capable of disturbance by
disease, is largely a matter of natural endowment, it is by a study of them that we
may hope to get in closer touch with some
problems concerning the relation between

heredity and circumstance.

MENTAL AND PHYSICAL APTITUDES

We have already referred to the high
selective value of our national system of
public education. It is very important to
notice that great attention is now being paid
to vocational aptitude, not only by industrial
psychology but by anthropometry. The
Industrial Fatigue Research Board has
recently published a Report (16c) by Eric
Farmer on the relation between arm-proportion, span, etc., and skill among certain hand
workers in a chocolate factory. At the instance
of the Board of Education attainments in
handicrafts and drawing are accepted as
contributory subjects for passing the School
Certificate Examination. The recognition
of the part played by handicraft in mental
development and attainment is, to my mind,
at present still very incomplete, but even
partial recognition shows that the undue
stress hitherto placed upon memory and
receptive intelligence and language facility
during school life is becoming realized.
Handicraft (including writing) is partly a
matter of suitability of the muscles of the
fore-arm for particular movements, and
partly a matter of the nervous control of
those movements, guided by a focussing of
stereoscopic vision on that point on the
vertical plane.on which hand movements are
naturally conducted. Stereoscopic vision
at this point is obtained by the convergence
of the two eye balls and by the accommodation to near vision of the two lens on a
near vertical plane, which is quite a different mechanical problem for stereoscopic
vision on a more distant horizontal plane.
The part played by the relative size and
musculature of the fore-arm has not, so far
as I know, yet been studied.
THE HEREDITY OF GROWTH 33

Realization of the importance of proportional length of limb to other parts of the
body in relation to various forms of physical
activity and manual dexterity, together
with Mr. Eric Farmer’s special inquiry
already alluded to, led me to undertake at
the Manchester Grammar School a somewhat similar inquiry to that undertaken by
Dr. Gertrude Grutzner at Zurich, not, however, for purely anthropological purposes,
but in order to help clear up some of the
obscurity which surrounds the presence or
absence of aptitude for special forms of educational training. I desired to establish the
existence of special types of body build
along the lines of proportional limb development.

The proportions calculated were :

(a) Relative length of arm and leg in
proportion to sitting height or trunk length.
(b) Proportional girths of upper chest and
waist, shoulder, upper arm and fore-arm in
relation to sitting height or trunk length.

Although the inquiry is still very incomplete and only clinical experience without
mathematical proof is at present available,
vet the clinical indication is considerable
that the short-armed boy differs from the
long-armed boy in his greater command
over the smaller ranged muscle movements
of the fore-arm, and therefore in his greater
dexterity and skill in certain forms of
handicraft and draughtsmanship; and that
the long-armed boy shows greater aptitude
for such sports and activities as require a
wide reach and range of movement.

The limitations of this paper prevent any
full reference to the influence of exercise
and training, that is, of outward circumstances, upon the attainment of special skill
as compared with natural aptitude. This
must be left for a later inquiry. Enough
has, however, been said to suggest that if
in our attempts to separate the relative
influences exerted by heredity on the one
side and by circumstances and training on
the other, as regards physical activities and
handicrafts, we are helped by beginning
with a study of structure and body proportions (which are unquestionably largely

hereditary) then it may also be true that
when we desire to separate the relative influences exerted by heredity and by circumstances on intellectual activity and attainments, we should be wise to approach the
subject by a preliminary study of certain
structural conditions.

THE BIOLOGICAL MECHANISMS

The system of phrenology introduced by
Gall failed to provide a satisfactory basis
for discovering the true relations that exist
between special forms of cranium and
special aptitudes and acquirements, not
because Gall did not make very thorough
dissection of the brain itself nor because he
did not attempt to classify mental processes
in terms of the ends which they served.
The system failed because neither the
craniological descriptions nor the psychological classification adopted were based upon biological science. Daubenton in 1764,
Peter Camper in 1770, and Blumenbach in
1790 had already begun to lay down the
biological laws of growth whose range of
variation determines the diversities to be met
with in the shape and proportions of the
human skull. Sir Charles Bell in 1799
had shown that different nerve impulses
travelled along different nerve tracks and
that special groups of nerves met special
organic needs.

It was not, however, till Retzius in 1842
had introduced the use of a cephalic index,
and Huxley had introduced indices to
measure the proportionate development of
the nasal passages and nasal sinuses, and
Paul Broca had introduced the orbital index
for the study of the mechanism needed for
forward stereoscopic vision, that the biological factors influencing the architectural
plan of the human skull, external to the
brain itself, could be considered. Our
understanding of human purposes and endeavours reaches a further stage when we
succeed in unravelling the mechanism by
which they are accomplished. The variations in the modification of the visual
mechanism which, by permitting downward
stereoscopic vision, brings the finer move34

ments of the hand under visual control,
need to be determined before we can judge
the range of aptitude or otherwise for special
handicraft; for, in handicrafts and other
special attainments, a study of the

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

machinery and the structural conditions
which accompany the achievement of purpose is a natural preliminary to the study
of the degree to which that purpose can be
achieved.

 

THE BIOLOGY OF DIFFERENTIAL GROWTH

_Dr. Mumford suggests that the variations
in relative proportions, which he has studied
in school children, are correlated with differences in skill and manual dexterity. This
possibility is of special interest. If the
inheritance of such differences could be
proved it would become a matter of primary
importance for eugenics.

The inheritance of this kind of variation
is inherently probable, though there is as
yet comparatively little direct evidence on
the subject. We are here concerned with
the inheritance of differential growth; that
is to say, with genetic factors controlling
rates of development. That such factors
exist is now known, but it is only in recent
years that they have been detected and
studied; for much of the modern genetic
work has been conducted on the higher
insects, in which growth and differentiation
practically cease on emergence from the
pupa. Professor Goldschmidt was, however,
driven to postulate factors controlling the
rate of production of sex-differentiating substances in the moth Lymantria dispar
(Goldschmidt, 1923), and of factors controlling the rate of pigment deposition in the
larva of the same species (Goldschmidt,
1927).

A number of such factors have been found
in the small crustacean Gammarus chevreuxt, which continues to grow and differen
tiate throughout life (Ford, 1928; Ford and
Huxley, 1927, and 1929 in press). ‘These
control such characters as the rate at which
pigment is deposited in the eye and its time
of onset. In addition a single recessive
factor controls the general body-growth,
slowing it down but not altering the size at
maturity. ‘The essential similarity of genetic phenomena throughout the animal kingdom leads us to suppose that in many other
cases growth rates are inherited in the same
simple way. Huxley (1924, 1927) has
pointed out that the hind limbs of adult
grasshoppers have a fixed relative size,
while the claws of mature male lobsters
have no such fixed size but increase relatively to the body ; in both cases the rate of
change is the essential character inherited.
The data presented by Davenport (1926)
show that the relatively greater sittingheight of women as compared to men is due
to the fact that the limbs are growing in
relative length during childhood at approximately the same speed, but that growth
ceases earlier in the female.

It thus appears likely the variations in

‘proportion studied by Dr. Mumford are

genetically controlled, and probably in quite
a simple way. We must therefore hope
that he will publish statistics demonstrating
his important conclusions at an early date.
E. B. Forp.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXI, No. 1.
