REVIEWS OF BOOKS

aspects of this handbook will be as an answer to
those biologists and doctors who are over
cautious in the large-scale use of oral contraceptives. At the same time Dr. Mears does not
overstate her case and is careful to underline
those areas where doubts remain. It is interesting
that in certain physiological fields knowledge of
the action of “‘the pill’’ has outstripped our basic
knowledge of the normal.

Under the clinical usage of oral contraceptives
the Handbook surveys their use, effectiveness,
possible side effects and their action on lactation
and the menopause. The least satisfactory part
of the book is a chapter of practical advice to
doctors which is clumsily set out as a series of
questions and answers.

Not all reviews of the Handbook have been as
eulogistic as the above. It has been described as
“‘hastily put together’? and over enthusiastic in
its advocacy of oral contraception, that socalled “‘violent incursion into the endocrine
physiology of the woman’’. For my part, I find
it a most valuable book on an exceedingly
important topic.

MALCOLM POTTS

SCIENCE AND RELIGION

Thorpe, W. H. Science, Man and Morals.
London, 1965. Methuen. Pp. 155. Price 25s.

THIS BOOK IS the outcome of a course of
endowed lectures delivered by Dr. Thorpe at
Balliol College in 1963. When it is known that
the purpose of the lectures is to discuss the
relation of science to Christianity with particular
reference to the “sympathetic explanation of
differences . . .” the general trend will be
apparent. Indeed, it would not be unfair—if
perhaps a little unkind—to say that it is an
heroic endeavour to get Paley’s watch going
again after its century-long retirement. But the
emphasis is shifted from the design of the actual
parts of the watch to the materials from which the
parts were fashioned—the shape and purpose of
the parts having been inherent in the materials
from Creation. Such a bald statement as this,
however, does less than justice to the full and
learned argument and Dr. Thorpe is clearly as
highly qualified in philosophical as he is in
scientific matters; moreover he is a_ noted

ER—H

authority on animal behaviour and many
original and fascinating examples are given,
accompanied by enlightened interpretations and
inferences.

Eugenics receives measured approval, more
particularly “when it comes to be based, as we
hope it will, on foundations of knowledge
incomparably greater than at present” (p. 123).
Several possible future techniques—such as AID
with preserved semen, or perfecting a method by
which, to implant “‘nuclei of somatic cells into
enucleated eggs, and then force them to develop
parthogenetically” (p. 123) are mentioned. But
some will demur at the author’s disagreement
with the example quoted (p. 123) of the laboratory rat becoming decadent in the absence of
natural selection; Dr. Thorpe argues that such
absence does not produce decadence because the
rat becomes admirably adapted to the protected
environment of the laboratory. But surely this is
to confuse the “decadence” within an environment where natural selection is operating and
““decadence’’ outside such a society. Carried to
the human parallel we have the words of the late
Sir Charles Darwin, while President of The
Eugenics Society: “The most efficient way for a
man to survive in Britain is to be almost halfwitted, completely irresponsible and spending a
lot of time in prison, where his health is far
better looked after than outside; on coming out
with restored health he is ready to beget many
further children quite promiscuously, and these
‘problem children’ are then beautifully cared
for ... until such time as they have grown old
enough to carry on the good work”’,* which well
describes an admirable adaptation to Welfare
State conditions yet still deserves the appellation
“decadent”’.

Differing interpretations by individual physicists of the physical (author’s italics) universe
receives attention and mention is made of the
fact that as more and more physical considerations are taken into account, fewer features of
the universe remain accidental (p. 134). But such
thoughts could only be written in the absence of
a valid definition of an accident itself. To a
Determinist the mention of the word “‘accident”’
can only bring a wan smile.

* The Next Million Years, p. 94.
105
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

As may be suspected, we are brought finally
towards “this view of love as the individual
expression of the unity of all things in God”
(p. 138) and the scientific ideal of “‘integrity’’. In
this aspect Teilhard de Chardin naturally
receives full recognition: “Convergent Integration” is the subject of the last eight pages of the
book and we are told “The Bible may still be
pregnant with unsuspected lessons’. Teilhard,
with his vision of the future of man, is restating
the theology of St. Paul. Continuing evolution is
the expression of God’s will.

Dr. Matthews, Dean of St. Paul’s, recently
wrote * “. . . the sceptics allege that, when
thought out, religious doctrines are not mysterious but nonsensical’? but whether this observation is to be considered apposite or irrelevant
must be left to the individual taste of the reader.

C. W. USHER

SEX

Schur, Edwin (Editor). The Family and the Sexual
Revolution. London, 1966. Allen and Unwin.
Pp. xv +427. Price 40s.

Fromme, Allan. The Ability to Love. London,
1966. Allan and Unwin. Pp. x+366. Price 30s.

THE SEXUAL REVOLUTION seems to be
proceeding well but usually any review of the
situation is written either strongly for or
strongly against its continued success—as if the
pundits could affect the result. However, a book
which is able to juxtapose, as two of its contributors, Bertrand Russell and Pius XI is rather
unusual.

The aim of the sociologist editor of The
Family and the Sexual Revolution is not to be
didactic but to present opposing views with an
emphasis on unconventional ones since, as he
rightly states, conventional views are fully
publicized already.

This book consists of twenty-nine extracts
from contemporary writers on three main

* Daily Telegraph, 26th March 1966.

106

subjects: Changing Sex Standards; The Woman
Problem (sic!); and Birth Control. It includes
within a comparatively small compass a representative cross-section of (Western) public
opinion and can be recommended to those who
still have an open mind on controversial subjects
of this sort and would like to have further
information on which to form an opinion.

There is no index but otherwise the book is
well presented.

The author of The Ability to Love is a psychologist and marriage counsellor and no doubt one
of his reasons for writing this book was a desire
to make help available for those who need it. It
is a pity that while his motives are of the highest
he has adopted rather a breathless approach to
the subject and unfortunately no definition of
love is given. Perhaps he feels that a definition
would literally define it. The preface consists of
thirty-one lines and the word “love’’, one of its
derivatives, or a pronoun referring to it occur no
less than fifteen times in contexts that make it
clear that Dr. Fromme does not limit its
meaning. A whole chapter is devoted to ‘““What
is love ?”’ without anywhere specifying what love
is, although it includes a long diversion about
the use of hypnosis. ,

However, one must not be too critical about
this since the author has drawn on his obviously
wide professional experience to describe the
various forms of love, to enable those who seek
advice to clarify their own feelings and requirements, and thus benefit from the advice offered.

These two books can usefully be read in
conjunction and can be recommended as
prescribing tolerance and understanding of
others—which one could suppose to be as useful
a basis of love as can be found.

Unfortunately again there is no index. The
absence of an index even in the presence of
copious references diminishes the value of a
book, and it is to be hoped that, as time goes on,
fewer books will be presented without one.

D. R.-R.
