GALTON’S OUTLOOK ON RELIGION *
By C. P. BLACKER, M.A., M.D., E.R.C.P.

RANCIS GALTON was born on Feb
E 17th, 1911. His eighty-nine years of
life spanned the last three-quarters of the
nineteenth century and the first decade of
the twentieth. It was a serene and fruitful
period wherein economic expansion and
scientific progress generated hopeful expectations about man’s future. These sentiments
were reflected in the contemporary philosophical outlook and were shared, sustained
and stimulated by Galton.t He was fortunate to die three years before the outbreak
of the first world war, which event will be
regarded by future historians as the beginning of the twentieth century’s period of disillusionment and disrupted ideals.

Galton’s book, Inquiries into the Human
Faculty, wherein for the first time the word
‘eugenics ’’ was used, was published in
1883—-sixty-three years ago. It was republished in 1907 in the Everyman Library,{ in
which form it is still available. From this
recent edition three of the original chapters
were omitted. Their titles are: Theocratic
Intervention, Objective Efficacy of Prayer,
arid Enthusiasm. Galton notes these excisions in his preface to the Everyman
edition, which he concludes with the words :
“ After all, the omission of these chapters,
in which I find nothing to recant, improves,
as I am told, the general balance of the
book.”

Yet these chapters give a valuable insight
into Galton’s outlook on religion, wherein the
belief in theocratic intervention and in the
objective efficacy of prayer found no place.
For it is clear that if the laws of planetary
motion, of gravity, of light, heat, sound, etc.,
were subject to arbitrary suspensions or

* A paper read before the Eugenics Society on
March igth, 1946. ‘

{ Few men have had better biographers than Galton.
Professor Karl Pearson’s four carefully compiled,
beautifully illustrated and faithfully indexed volumes

have been of inestimable help to me.
t J. M. Dent & Sons.

ruary 16th, 1822, and died on January

reversals through the intervention of divine
or demonic agencies, there could be no
science. The same may be said of the laws
of heredity. If, for example, it were proved
that the birth of intelligent and healthy
children to parents lacking these qualities
could be promoted by the exercise of prayer,
there would be no object in studying the

laws of heredity. Prayers would become a

substitute for careful breeding.

Galton’s paper ‘“! Statistical Inquiries into
the Efficacy of Prayer ’’ first appeared in the
Fortnightly Review of August 1872. His
arguments provoked a minor controversy
and shocked some of his contemporaries, who
spoke of him as a flippant free-thinker.
Galton’s thoughts about religion were certainly free, but they were not flippant ; for.
Galton was by nature a religious man and
there was a religious background to his views
about eugenics which we should try to
understand.

Galton believed that eugenics was a
science which called for the patient study of
natural processes; he also believed that it
was a practice which should guide social
policy; and he further believed that it

‘should be a factor in religion.

69

These three aspects of eugenics are con- sistent with each other and are derived from
Galton’s reactions to the evolution theory.
His essential views changed little throughout
his active life, for the same themes recur
throughout the works of his middle and old
age.*

I will begin by trying to summarize
Galton’s views in a few simple propositions,
which will then be elaborated. .

1. Tribal religion serves an evolutionary

* His views are given in Hereditary Genius (1869:
Galton 47 years of age); in Human Faculty (1883:
Galton 61); in an article published in the National
Review, August 1894, entitled “‘ The part of Religion in
Human Evolution’ (Galton 72); and in the last
decade of his life when Galton was much concerned
with eugenics. His Memories were written when he was

87.
70 ' THE EUGENICS REVIEW

or biological purpose in giving cohesiveness
to the tribe, thereby increasing its efficiency
and its chances of survival in inter-group
struggles. All tribal religions are closely
coricerned with the processes of birth,
marriage and death.

2. Within historical times, man has exerted
enormous effects on the surface of the planet
and on the distribution of human races
thereon. | |

3. Mental and moral qualities are inheritable as are physical, and like them are
malleable. A great power is here to hand.

4. Man’s faculties are increasingly unequal to the requirements of his civilization.

5. Very severe competition and struggle
may produce undesirable results and are not
therefore necessary either .for evolutionary
or for social progress.

6. Religion should be concerned with the
furtherance of human evolution.

7. Lastly I will say something about
Galton’s mysticism and about his outlook
during the last years of his life on Christianity and Prayer.

I. BIOLOGICAL VALUE OF TRIBAL RELIGIONS

The derivation of the word religion is
uncertain; it is thought by some to be
derived from the Latin Ligo, I tie together.
From the same root come such words as

ligature, ligament, etc. During Galton’s life:

there was much discussion of social anthropology ; Herbert: Spencer was engaged on
his monumental Principles of Sociology ; and
T. H. Huxley was writing about evolution
and ethics. Tylor’s Primitive Culture was
first published in 1871; Frazer’s Golden
Bough in 1890. Galton had, moreover,
gained first-hand experience of primitive
tribes in south-west Africa during his early
manhood.

The earliest function of religion, Galton
held, was to give cohesion and a common
social consciousness to the tribe.

Many influences that bind barbarians are
illusions, such as totems, tutelar deities, and
much else, but, for alk that, they supply sufficient
cohesive force to unite them into organized

bodies. Whenever a struggle arose between a
compact tribe and an equal number of separate

individuals, the former would win, however their
compactness may have grown into existence. Or
again, between two barbaric nations, the one
that was the most superstitious of the two would
generally be the more united, and therefore the
more powerful.*

The smaller the tribe and the greater the
danger of its being overrun, enslaved or
culturally absorbed, the greater the need of
a tribal religion which would knit together
its members and weld them into a singly
reacting whole. For biological reasons it is
necessary that the processes of birth,
marriage and death should be regulated by
custom and religion, and that they be
celebrated by impressive rites, often of a
sacramental character, which stress the
ulterior significance of these events and
bring home to us that their implications
reach beyond our limited selves.

2. INFLUENCE OF MAN UPON THE PEANET
AND UPON THE HUMAN RACE

The powers which man has displayed, not
by design but as a by-product of his day-today life, are immense. They are to be seen

on the surface of the globe, and in the distribution of plants and animals. He [man] has cleared
such vast regions of forest that his work that way
in North America alone, during the past halfcentury, would be visible to an observer as far
off as the moon. He has dug and drained ; he

. has exterminated plants and animals that were
mischievous to him ; he has domesticated those
that serve his purpose, and has transplanted them
great distances from their'native places.f

A chapter in Inquiries into the Human
Facultyt is devoted to the influence of man
upon race. The standpoint which, despite
Herbert Spencer and the anthropologists,
prevailed in the eighties is alluded to.

One of the most misleading words is that of
‘‘ aboriginees.”’ Its use dates from the time when
the cosmogony was thought to be young and life
to be of very recent appearance. Its usual
meaning seems to be derived from the supposition that nations disseminated themselves like
colonists from a cOmmon centre about four
thousand years, say 120 generations, ago, and
thenceforward occupied their lands undisturbed
until the very recent historical period with which

 

* The National Review, August 1894, P. 755.
t Human Faculty, p. 197.
¢ pp. 200-7.
GALTON’S OUTLOOK ON RELIGION 71

the narrator deals, when some invading host
drove out the “ aboriginees.”” This idyllic view
of the march of events is contradicted by ancient
sepulchral remains, by language, and by the
habits of those modern barbarians whose
history we know.

Galton goes on to point out what changes
of race and population have occurred within
historical times. He cites Spain, where,
among the early Iberians and Basques,
colonies were formed by Phoenicians and by
Greeks. Carthaginians, who later invaded
the country in the third century B.c., were
supplanted by Romans who ruled it for
700 years. Spain was invaded in the fifth
century A.D. by a succession of German
tribes, and was then overrun by Visigoths,
who ruled it for 200 years. Then came the
Moors, who were in their turn displaced.

The present population consists of the remnants of one or more tribes of ancient Iberians,
of the still more ancient Basques, and of relics
of all the invaders who have been named. There
is besides a notable proportion of Gypsies and
not a few Jews.

Galton mentions the remarkable migra-_

tions of Gypsies and describes how, in the
territories of Africa which he had explored,
negroes had been displaced by bushmen, who
were later supplanted by Bantus; these, at
the time he visited them, were being pushed
aside by the superior Namaquas, themselves
a mixed race.

Changes of race and population in Siberia, |

North and South America, the West Indian
Islands, in Australia and New Zealand are
then described. From all this Galton concludes that man has unconsciously exercised
an enormous influence, both quantitative and
qualitative, on himself. He writes :

The power in man of varying the human
stock vests a great responsibility in the hands of

each generation, which has not been recognized

at its just importance, nor deliberately employed.
It is foolish to fold the hands and to say that
nothing can be done, inasmuch as social forces
and self-irterest are too strong to be resisted.
They need not be resisted: they can be guided.

3. MENTAL AND MORAL QUALITIES ARE
INHERITABLE LIKE PHYSICAL, AND ARE
MALLEABLE

That mental and moral characteristics are
inherited is to-day so taken for granted that

we may scarcely realize how hesitatingly the
lessons of Darwin’s Origin of Species were
applied to man. The views on heredity,
current during Galton’s middle life, were
vague and contradictory. Galton wrote of

them: |

Speaking generally, most authors agreed that
all bodily and some mental qualities were
inherited by brutes, but they refused to believe the
same of man. Moreover, theologians made a
sharp distinction between the body and the
mind of man on purely dogmatic grounds. A few
passages may undoubtedly be found in the works
of eminent authors which are exceptions to this
broad generalization, for the subject of human
heredity had never been squarely faced, and
opinions were lax and contradictory. It seems
hardly credible now that even the word heredity
was then considered fanciful and unusual. I was
chaffed by a cultural friend for adopting it from
the French.* (My italics.)

That the author of the Origin of Species
shared the prevailing uncertainty is shown by
a letter to Galton wherein Charles Darwin
records his first reactions on reading Hereditary Genius. The letter contains the following
passage :

You have made a convert of an opponent in
one sense, for I] have always maintained that,
excepting fools, men did not differ much in
intellect, only in zeal and hard work; and I still
think this is an eminently important difference.f

It is remarkable that Darwin records
himself as doubting that men differed much
in intellect. The reading of Hereditary
Genius probably helped him to extend his
theory, for in The Descent of Man, first
published in 1871, Galton’s work, which was
unnoticed in the Origin, is several times
quoted.

Galton’s views on the hereditary nature of

mental qualities were first advanced in 1864

in two papers published in Macmillan’s
Magazine, entitled ‘‘ Hereditary Talent and
Character.”” Karl Pearson refers to the
argument there developed that psychical and
physical characters are equally inherited—as
the “‘ foundation stone of Galton’s anthropological work.”’ Large vistas were suddenly
disclosed. ‘‘ We cannot,” wrote Galton,

 

* Memories, p. 288.
+ A facsimile of this letter is given in Volume I,
opposite page 6, of Pearson’s Life.
72 | THE EUGENICS REVIEW

“ doubt the existence of a great power ready .

to hand and capable of being directed with
vast benefit as soon as we shall have learnt
to understand and to apply it.’’ *

4. MAN’s FACULTIES INCREASINGLY UNEQUAL TO THE NEEDS OF His CIVILIZATION .

What would Galton have thought of
modern socialism ? He mentioned the sub
ject little in his writings, which, as far as they

go, suggest that he would not have sympathized with the school of eugenists which
condemned socialism as “ anti-biological.”’
Galton seems to have thought that to be
successful socialism would require human
beings to be mentally and morally superior
to those then experimenting with the idea.
An article, written in 1894,t contains a
reference to socialism which Karl Pearson
says is the only one he can recall Galton to
have made. The article has an almost
uncanny bearing on recent events. Here are
some passages :

It has now become a serious necessity to better

the breed of the human race. The average citizen ©

. is too base for the every day work of modern
civilization. Civilized man has become possessed
of vaster powers than in old times for good or
ill, but has made no corresponding advance in
wits and goodness to enable him to direct his
conduct rightly.

Galton saw around him an increasing
scepticism of dogmatic religion, and ‘he
believed that a re-statement of religious
principles was needed. But he doubted
whether human beings had yet acquired the
intelligence and moral balance necessary to
tolerate the change. If traditional beliefs
were swept away before men were mature
enough to accept better alternatives, there
would be a period of feverish and unsuccessful experiments, socialist experiments among
them, which would end in failure.

Let us suppose a nation whose established
. religion, whatever it may be, has become dis
- credited by the majority of its people, including
most of those who were trusted as leaders of
opinion. Further let us suppose the nation to be
suffering in a still more acute form than our own,

 

| * Essays in Eugenics, 33.
t‘‘ The Part of Religion in Human Evolution,”

National Review, August 1894, pp. 755-65.

we revert to

from poverty, toil and an unduly large contingent of the weakly, the inefficient, and the born
criminal classes, and that the existing social
arrangements are acknowledged to be failures.
Further, again, I will make the reasonable
supposition that socialistic experiments on
various scales and in various ways had been
largely tried and confessedly found ineffective
owing to the moral and intellectual incompetence
of the average citizen. There would then be a
widely-felt sense of despair; there would be
ominous signs of approaching anarchy and of
ruin impending over the nation, while a bitter
cry would arise for light and leading ... In
the imagined event, preachers of all sorts of
nostrums would abound, mostly fanatics who
could see only one side of a question, and on that
account they would be all the more earnest in
their opinions and persuasive to the multitude.

Does not the last paragraph evoke before
our eyes the picture of pre-Nazi Germany ?
Throughout the whole passage runs the
thought that the present moral qualities of
civilized man are unequal to the task of
social organization which to-day confronts
him. Needed are more independence of
mind, more tolerance, more co-operativeness.
Strengthen these qualities, and the socialist
dream of a state sustained by voluntary co
operation rather than by intra-group com
petition comes nearer.
~ Weaken them, and we head for the servile
state, its citizens driven by the whip and
sustained by the cult of the God-like leader :
“the tyrannies under which
men have lived, whether under rude barbarian chiefs, or under the great despotisms
of half-civilized Oriental countries.’’.*
Here is another passage written in 1873:

Great nations, instead of being highly organized bodies, are little more than aggregations of
men severally intent on self-advancement, who
must be cemented into a mass by blind feelings of
gregariousness and reverence to mere rank, mere
authority, and mere tradition, or they will
assuredly fallasunder. ... But the case would
be very different in those higher forms of civilization, vainly tried as yet, of which the notion of
personal property is not the foundation but
which are, in honest truth, republican and cooperative, the good of the community being
literally a more vivid desire than that ot selfaggrandizement or any other motive whatever.

Professor Karl Pearson has shown how
Galton’s interest in anthropology and psycho* Human Faculty, p. 55.
GALTON’S OUTLOOK ON RELIGION 73

logy grew out of his experiences aS a geo- 
grapher. That these human interests, centring on the essential problem of freedom,
were present very early in life may be seen
from an: interesting quotation, topical in
other contexts to-day, from his book Tropical
South Africa, published in 1853 when Galton
was thirty-one. He is speaking of the
Damaras. .

These savages court slavery. You engage one
of them as a servant, and you find that he considers himself as your property, and that you
‘are, in fact, become the owner of a slave. They
have no independence about them, generally

speaking, but follow a master as a spaniel would. °

Their hero-worship is directed to people who
have wit and strength enough to ill-use them.
Revenge is a very transient passion in their
character ;
oppressor. The Damaras seem to me to love
nothing : the only strong feelings they possess,
which are not utterly gross and sensual, are those
of admiration and fear. They seem to be made
for slavery, and naturally fall into its ways.
Their usual phrase with reference to the missionaries is, ‘‘ Oh, they are wise but weak”; but
Jonker and the Hottentots are, I could almost
say, their delight. They wonder at their success.

All over Africa one hears of ‘‘ giving ’’ men
away: the custom is as follows. A negro has
chanced to live a certain time in another’s
employ ; he considers himself his property, and
has abandoned the trouble of thinking what he
is to do from day to day ; but leaves the ordering
of his future entirely to his employer. He
becomes too listless to exist without a master.
The weight of independence is heavier than he
likes, and he will not bear it. He feels unsupported and lost if alone in the world, and
absolutely requires someone to direct him. Now,
if the employer happens to have no further need
of the man, he “‘gives’’ him, that is to say, he
makes over his interest in the savage to a friend
or acquaintance ; the savage passively agrees to
the bargain, and changes his place without
regret ; for so long as he has a master at all, the
primary want of his being is satisfied. A man is
“ given ” either for a term or for ever; and it
was on this tenure that I held several of my men.
Swartboy gave me his henchman; Kahikene,
a cattle-watcher ; Mr. Hahn, a very useful man,
Kambanya. As a definition of the phrase
‘‘ giving a man,”’ I should say it meant, “‘ making
over tq another whatever influence one possesses
over a Savage; the individual who is given not
being compelled but being passive.”

One last quotation will show how Galton’s
opinions about slavish instincts and original

it gives way to admiration of the:

theory.

sin crystallize in the view that man’s
faculties are increasingly unequal to the
needs of his civilization :

I hold that the blind instincts evolved under
those long-continued conditions have been deeply
ingrained in our breed, and that they are a bar
to our enjoying the freedom which the forms of
modern civilization could otherwise give us. A
really intelligent nation might be held together
by far stronger forces than are derived from the
purely gregarious instincts. It would not be a
mob of slaves, clinging together, incapable of
self-government, and begging to be led; but it
would consist of vigorous, self-reliant men, knit
to one another by innumerable attractions, into
a strong, tense and elastic organization. Our
present natural dispositions make it simply
impossible for us to attain this ideal standard,
and therefore the slavishness of the mass of men,
in morals and intellect, must be an admitted fact
in all schemes of regenerative policy. The
hereditary taint due to the primeval barbarism
of our race, and maintained by later influences,

_ will have to be bred out of it before our descendants can rise to the position of free members
of a free and -intelligent society.* .

5. VERY SEVERE COMPETITION UNDER
HARSH CONDITIONS MAY RETARD
PROGRESS

In the last quarter of the nineteenth
century, there was much public discussion of
the social implications of the evolution
Nobody doubted that there was a
“ struggle for existence ’’ among wild animals
and plants, and that this struggle had been
a factor in evolutionary change. But how
far was a continuation of such struggle
necessary ‘for the further progress of man?
Civilization, culture, tradition, depend on the
social instincts of man. Literacy and even
speech itself are parts of our social inheritance. If we derive everything that makes
us human from social tradition and co-operation, how far, we may ask, is the continued
struggle between man and man necessary for
the development of humanity ?

Diverse answers were given by the controversialists of the period, and discussion
turned much on the effects of two kinds of
struggle—that inside social groups and that
between social groups, or, as they were called,

* “ Gregariousness in Cattle and Men,” Macmillan’s

Magazine, 1872, pp. 353-7.
4 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

intra-group and infer-group struggle. According to one school of thought whereof Benjamin Kidd, author of Socral Evolution, was a
leading exponent, intra-group struggle was
necessary for the evolutionary progress of
man. Both Galton and Pearson* opposed
Kidd’s thesis and disputed the conclusions he
drew from it.

The effects of a struggle for existence on
man depended, in Galton’s view, on what the
struggle was against. Some of the features
of civilization were injurious to the race,
and of these Galton regarded two as especially harmful—wealth and urbanism. After
discussing the adverse effects on fertility of
urbanism, Galton wrote:

Again, the ordinary struggle for existence
under the bad sanitary conditions of our towns,
seems to me to spoil and not to improve our
breed. It selects those who are able to withstand
zymotic diseases and impure and insufficient
food, but such are not necessarily foremost in the
qualities which make a nation great. On the
contrary, it is the classes of a coarser organization who seem to be, on the whole, most favoured
under this principle of selection, and who
survive to become the parents of the next
generation. ... So again, in every malarial
country, the traveller is pained by the sight of the

miserable individuals who inhabit it. These have.

the pre-eminent gift of being able to survive
fever and therefore . . . are apt to be deficient
in every quality less useful to the exceptional
circumstances of their life.

And in another context :

When the severity of the struggle for existence
is not too great for the powers of the race, its
action is healthy and conservative, otherwise it
is deadly, just as we may see exemplified in the
scanty, wretched vegetation that leads a pre
carious existence near the summer snow-line of
the Alps, and disappears altogether a little
higher up.{

Far from regarding intra-group struggle as
a necessary condition of human progress,
Galton strongly held that such struggle
‘should now be reduced to a minimum. Man’s
advancement can be brought about by the
simultaneous use of his intelligence and his
kindliness. Several passages could be quoted

* “Socialism and Natural Selection,’’
Pearson. Fortnightly Review, July 1894.

t ““ Hereditary Improvements,” Fraser’s Magazine,
1873, p. 116 ef seq.

} Hereditary Genius, p. 333.

by Karl

stancy.

to illustrate this standpoint. I will confine
myself to one. It is the penultimate paragraph of Galton’s Memories, and was therefore among the last things he wrote:

Man is gifted with pity and other kindly
feelings ; he has also the power of preventing
many kinds of suffering. I conceive it to fall
well within his province to replace Natural
Selection by other, processes that dare more
merciful and not less effective.

This is precisely the aim of eugenics.

6. RELIGION SHOULD BE CONCERNED WITH
THE FURTHERANCE OF Human EvotvuTION

“The creed of eugenics is founded upon
the idea of evolution,’ * wrote Galton in
1905. The picture of evolution-as Galton saw
it was awe-inspiring to the point of being
frightening. It is a “‘ spectacle of a vast eddy
of organic turmoil, originating we know not
how, and travelling we know not whither.
It forms a continuous whole from first to last,

reaching backward beyond our earliest

knowledge and stretching forward as far as
we think we can foresee . . . Its elements

_are in constant flux and change, though its

general form alters but slowly.’’ Both
Galton and T. H. Huxley illustrated by
similes this picture of change within conHuxley compared it to the static
waves, unmoving in positions and unchanging
in contours, at the foot of Niagara; Galton
to the “curious stream of cloud that sometimes seems attached to a mountain top
during the continuance of a strong breeze ;
its constituents are always changing, though
its shape as a whole hardly varies.’’ The two
similes convey exactly the same _ idea.

Evolution is ‘‘ a grand phantasmagoria.”’ f
Galton does not seem to have believed that
the phantasmagoria had a purpose in the
sense that the human mind is purposive. He
describes the process as “‘ mechanical”’; in
its wastefulness and ruthlessness, in its
blundering steps of trial and error and in the
immensity of its scale, it is inhuman and

* Essays in Eugenics, p. 68.

¢ Phantasmagoria: a medley of shifting series of
imaginary figures, illusive images of real appearances :
a shifting manifold assemblage of things seen.
GALTON’S OUTLOOK ON RELIGION 75

terrifying. But its culmination on this earth
is man.

On the one hand, we know that evolution has
proceeded during an enormous time on this
earth, under, so far as we can gather, a system of
rigorous causation, with no economy of time or
of instruments, and with no show of especial
ruth for those who, in pure ignorance, have
violated the condition of life.

On the other hand, while recognizing the awful
mystery of conscious existence and the inscrutable background of evolution, we find that, as
the foremost outcome of many and long birththroes, intelligent and kindly man finds himself
in being. He knows how petty he is, but he also

perceives that he stands here on this particular |

earth, at this particular time, as the heir of
untold ages and in the van of circumstance.*
Little of human comfort is to be found in
the grand panorama of evolution until we
come to man. Man “ may use his intelligence
to discover and expedite the changes that are
necessary to adapt circumstance to race and
race to circumstance, and his kindly sympathy will -urge him to effect them mercifully.’’ Man has “‘ already furthered evolution very considerably, half unconsciously
and for his own personal advantages, but he
has not yet risen to the conviction that it is
his religious duty to do so deliberately and
systematically.”’ The following is the concluding paragraph of Galton’s Inquiries into
the Human Faculty : |
The chief result of these inquiries has been to
elicit the religious significance of the doctrine
of evolution. It suggests an alteration in our
mental attitude, and imposes a new moral duty.
The new mental attitude is one of a greater sense
of moral freedom, responsibility, and opportunity ; the new duty which is supposed to be
- exercised concurrently with, and not in opposition to, the old ones upon which the social fabric
depends, is an endeavour to further evolution,
especially that of the human race.

47. GALTON’S Mysticism: His ATTITUDE TO
PRAYER

Galton had a sense of the one-ness of life
and of the visible universe. This “ sense ”’
might be called an emotion or a conviction ;
or it might be described as a mystical
intuition. Pearson describes it as ‘“‘ pantheistic.’’ Galton himself speaks of a ‘‘ pure

* Human Faculty, p. 218.

theism.’’ I will quote from Galton’s writings
in chronological order.

The following passage is taken from the
last page of Hereditary Genius published when
Galton was forty-seven : |

We may look upon each individual as something not wholly detached from its parent
source—as a wave that has been lifted and shaped
by normal conditions in an unknown, illimitable
ocean. There is decidedly a solidarity as well as

a separateness in all human, and probably in all

lives whatsoever ; and this consideration goes

far, as I think, to establish an opinion that the

_ constitution of the living Universe is a pure
theism, and that its form of activity is what may
be described as co-operative. It points to the
conclusion that all life is single in its essence, but
various, ever-varying, and inter-active in its
manifestations, and that men and all other
living animals are active workers and sharers
in a vastly more extended system of cosmic
action than any of ourselves, much less any of
them, can possibly comprehend. It also suggests
that they may contribute, more or less unconsciously, to the manifestation of a far higher
life than our own, somewhat as—I do not propose to push the metaphor too far—the individual cells of one of the more complex animals
contribute to the manifestation of its higher
order of personality.

In the year 1872, when he was fifty,
Galton published in the Forinightly Review
the paper whose omission from the Everyman :
edition of his Human Faculty has .already
been noted, “‘ Statistical Inquiries into the
Efficacy of Prayer.’’ Briefly the argument of
this paper is as follows.

We are encouraged to ask for blessings,
temporal as well as spiritual, in our prayers.
Dr. Hook, the then Dean of Chichester,
stated in his Church dictionary under
“Prayer ’’ that “the general providence of
God acts through what are called the laws
of nature. By this particular providence God
interferes with those laws, and he has
promised to interfere in behalf of those who
pray in the name of Jesus.”

Galton declares that the efficacy of this
kind of prayer is a legitimate subject for
scientific inquiry ; and he casts in various
directions for evidence, all of which is
negative. The kin of prayerful people do
not recover from illness more often or
more rapidly than the kin of unprayerful.
76 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Royalty, for whom long lives are much
prayed for in anthems and in churches, “ are
literally the shortest lived of all who have the
advantage of affluence ’’ (Galton cites eleven
comparable classes). Missionaries, who pray
much and are much prayed for, often die in
the alien climates of the peoples they set out
to convert before they have had time -to
master their language. There is no difference
in the infant mortality rates of prayerful and
non-praying classes.

Before issuing policies, Life Assurance
Companies do not include among their
confidential inquiries questions such as:
“ Does he habitually use family prayers and
private devotions? ”’ It was once thought
to be an act of mistrust in an overruling
providence to put lightning conductors on
churches ; but Arago’s collection of accidents
from lightning showed them to be sorely
needed. Many items of ancient faith are now
relegated to the domain of superstitions.
The sovereign no longer lays hands on the
sick ; witches are no longer burned ; ordeals
and duels are not now regarded as reasonable
solutions of complicated difficulties; and
the miraculous power of relics is now scouted.
The onus proband: that prayers for temporal
benefits are efficacious, Galton held, rests
with the other side. Such arguments shock
us less ‘to-day than they would have seventy
years ago.

But Galton, ‘while not believing in the
objective efficacy of prayer, believed in its
subjective efficacy. This is how he concludes
the article. Those who enjoy a sense of
communion with God can, he says,

dwell on the undoubted fact that there exists a
solidarity between themselves and what surrounds them, through the endless reaction of
physical laws among which the hereditary
influences are to be included. They know that
they are descended from an endless past, that
they have a brotherhood with all that is, and
have each his own share of responsibility in the
parentage of an endless future. The effort to
familiarize the imagination with this great idea
has much in common with the effort of communing with a God, and its reaction on the mind
of the thinker is in many important respects the
same. It may not equally rejoice the heart, but
it is quite as powerful in ennobling the resolves,
and it is found to give serenity during the trials
of life and in the shadow of approaching death.

Thus Galton concludes his attack on the
belief in theocratic intervention with an
affirmation of his mystical faith. The effort
to become aware of the solidarity of the self
with all life is akin to the effort to commune

_ with God.

In his Human Faculty, published in 1883,
when Galton was sixty-one, he wrote (page
196) :

It is difficult to withstand a suspicion that the
three dimensions of space and the fourth of time
may be four independent variables of a system
that is neither space nor time, but something
else wholly unconceived by us.

These words were written some forty years
before Einstein’s work was generally known.
Galton again writes :

Our part in the universe may possibly in some
distant way be analogous to the cells of an
organized body, and our personalities may be the
transient but essential elements of an immortal
and cosmic mind.

The following is a passage from Galton’s
Memories written when he was over eighty :

I will mention here a rather weird effect that
compiling these Memories has produced on me.
By much dwelling on them they became refurbished and so vivid as to appear as sharp and
definite as things of today. The consequence has
been an occasional obliteration of the sense of
Time, and to replace it by the idea of a permanent panorama, painted throughout with equal

. vividness, in which the point to which attention
is temporarily directed becomes for that time the
Present. The panorama seems to extend unseen |
behind a veil which hides the Future, but is
slowly rolling aside and disclosing it. That part
of the panorama which is veiled is supposed. to
exist as vividly coloured as the rest, though
latent. In short, this experience has given me an
occasional feeling that there are no realities
‘corresponding to Past, Present and Future, but
that the entire cosmos is one perpetual Now.
Philosophers have often held this creed intellectually, but I suspect that few have felt the
possible truth of it so vividly as it has occasionally appeared to my imagination fheongh
dwelling on these Memories.

The following are extracts from the
Recollections of Francis Galton,* written by
his niece, Mrs. Millicent Lethbridge, whose
religious views were more orthodox than
those of her uncle.

"__* Quoted by Karl Pearson: Life of Francis Galion,

Vol. III B., pp. 446-9.
GALTON’S OUTLOOK ON RELIGION

It would be hard, she wrote, to find anyone
with so high an ideal of duty as his, and I do not
hesitate to affirm that nothing—not self-interest,
praise, blame, or anything else, would have made
him swerve a hair’s breadth from what he
conceived to be right. To that which he believed
to be true, he felt bound to give utterance, even
though it caused him the disapprobation and
even the deep sorrow of some whose love and
sympathy he most valued. This was especially
the case when his work on Human Faculty came
out in 1883, with a chapter on prayer... . I
have heard him called hard names—‘‘ Atheist,”’
“ Unbeliever ’’ and so on. My own description
of his creed would be that of a Religious Agnostic. Faith was denied him, and, as he often told
me, all intuitive witness to the Divine. The
-question of the reality of this ‘‘ intuitive witness,’’ however, interested him deeply, and he
would have given much to convince himself that
it was real or imaginary, subjective or objective.
James’s Varieties of Religious Experience was a
book that occupied his thoughts a great deal....
He has told me that, at one time of his life (I
imagine when he was very young) the asceticism
of the Roman Church appealed to him very
strongly. His admiration for the uncompromis
' ing monotheism of Mohammedanism was recurrent. I imagine that he was latterly much
attracted by Spinoza. But early love and
sentiment were.all on the side of Quakerism. He
would sometimes ask where such or such a
parable or discourse of Our Lord was to be found
and he would read it aloud, saying, half to himself, as he shut the book, ‘‘ Perfect—very perfect.”’

He was scrupulously careful not to say anything
on religious topics that could possibly distress or
injure the faith of anyone—especially the
young—and I never knew him say anything that
was not absolutely reverent. . . . In spite of
his much abused chapter on Prayer in Human
Faculty, I know he used to pray himself ; indeed
in one of his letters to me he wrote (May 12th,
1907): “ Did I ever tell you that I have always
made it a habit to pray before writing anything

for publication, that there may be no self-seeking

in it, and perfect candour together with perfect
respect for the feelings of others?”’ ...
There were many beautiful traits in my
uncle’s character, upon which I cannot now
expatiate. His old-world courtesy, displayed
not only in society, but still more at home, to
those with whom he was in daily intercourse and
to his servants ... his almost exaggerated
dread of appropriating any laurels due to others,

which feeling led him to the opposite extreme of |

magnifying the achievements of others while
minimizing his own—his horror of self-advertisement. coupled though it was with a naive
delinght in unsought appreciation—all this is
familiar to those who had the privilege of knowing him,...

77

EUGENICS AS SCIENCE, RELIGION AND SOCIAL
POLICY

The subject of this lecture is ‘Galton’ s
outlook on religion. I remarked at the beginning that Galton conceived eugenics not only
as a component of religion but also as science
and social policy. The critic might demur.

“Science, politics and religion,” he might
argue, ‘‘ belong to such entirely different
spheres of human activity that they cannot
be confounded.’’ I believe that such a
criticism would be based on a misunderstanding of Galton’s position. Let me try to make
this point clearer by an analogy drawn from
the physiology of the central nervous system.

The spinal reflex has three components :
first we may consider the sensory, afferent
or centripetal component, wherein the impulse travels up the sensory pathways of the
peripheral nerves to the spinal cord. Next is
the central component within the spinal cord
itself; this structure is comparable to a
telephone exchange where complicated connections and intercommunications are made.
Thirdly we have the motor, efferent or centrifugal component of the reflex arc whereby
the impulse is carried outward to a group of
muscles which are caused to contract or relax.
William MacDougall has ingeniously compared these three components of the simple
reflex to analogous components of an instinct :
but here the nervous mechanisms are more
complicated because the brain is involved.
The sensory or centripetal element of the
spinal reflex he compared to the cognitive
phase of the instinct ; the central or telephone-exchange component of the reflex he
compared to the affective or emotional phase
of the instinct ; and the efferent, centrifugal
or motor component of the reflex he compared
to the conative phase of the instinct which
usually consists of some appropriate muscular action or movement of the animal in
relation to the outside world. |

We will be helped to an understanding of
Galton’s position by extending the analogy
still further than did MacDougall. We may
allow ourselves to apply it to social processes.
To effect a social change, three phases are
necessary. We must first collect necessary
information, by ascertaining and assembling
78 THE EUGENICS REVIEW.

relevant facts ; next we must interpret these
facts in such a way that the public will react
to them emotionally in the desired manner ;
and thirdly we must direct along appropriate
channels the social actions which are initiated
by the feelings we have aroused. These are
the three phases of eugenics as conceived by
Galton. Eugenics as science produces the
required information ; eugenics as religion

evokes in us the appropriate emotional.

responses to the facts; and eugenics as
social policy translates the emotions which
have been aroused into needed practical
measures.

Eugenics as religion therefore corresponds,
in our analogy, to the central or telephoneexchange phase of the reflex, and to the
affective or emotional phase of the instinct.
This is, in a sense, the most important
phase: in the sense, I mean that, in the
sequence facts : values : actions, values
hold the central place.

TO-DAY’S PERSPECTIVE

I conclude this lecture with a word about
what I have omitted. I have said nothing
about Galton’s numerous contributions to
science outside eugenics. I have said nothing
about how Galton conceived eugenics as
science or as social policy. His views as to the
former—eugenics as science—would require
several lectures to outline ; his views on the
latter—on eugenics as social policy—would,

 

PHYSIOLOGICAL ZOOLOGY

Articles appearing in forthcoming

FISSION AND DISINTEGRATION IN STYLARIA FOSSULARIS AT DIFFERENT TEMPERATURE.
By T. F. Tsur, J. Cuu and S. Pas, National University of Chekiang Meitan, Kweichow, Chin

THE EFFECT OF PEANUT OIL ON THE DESICCATION OF DIAPAUSE AND POST-DIAPAUSE
PUP OF THE MOTH, CAELOSAMIA PROMETHEA DRURY. By Daniel Ludwig, New York

Universi

ty.
THE INTERRELATIONS OF THYROID AND GONAD IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF SECONDARY
SEXUAL CHARACTERS IN BROWN LEGHORN ROOSTERS. By BEN B. Btrvaiss, University of

Chicago. 2
AN ANALYSIS OF THE FACTORS INFLUENCING THE GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT OF THE
MAMMALIAN REPRODUCTIVE TRACT. By Dorothy Price, University of Chicago.

Edited by W. C. ALLEE, Professor of Zoology, The University of Chicago. Published

Quarterly by the University of Chicago Press
English Agents: CAMBRIDGE

I believe, have changed if he had lived longer.
Much has happened in the world since
Galton’s death in 1911 to alter his outlook.
We have been convulsed by two planetary
wars; the birth-control movement has
arisen ;* the chromosome theory has been
propounded by Morgan and elaborated by a
host of other workers; the human bloodgroups have been discovered ; the slump of
our net reproduction rate below unity has
effected a change-over from an overpopulation to a depopulation scare ; socialism has
come ; and the world has become familiarized with how the principles of eugenics can
be perverted by dictators and totalitarian
governments. It is interesting to speculate on
what Galton would have thought of these
events.

I draw attention to these and other
omissions. Nevertheless, I hope you will
agree with me that Galton’s outlook on
religion enables us to understand why
eugenics meant so much to him and why, in
the last decade of his life, it was his main preoccupation and besetting thought.

His views on religion, morédver, give us an
insight into his character. Surely we, in this
Society, are fortunate in having as a founder
one whose character no less than whose
intellect we can so whole-heartedly respect.

*I do not know of a single reference in Galton’s

writings to birth control ; not does he ever refer to
sterilization.

   
 
 
 
    
  
 
 

Subscription: 57s. 6d. per year.
UNIVERSITY PRESS

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXX VIII, No. 2

 
