THE EUGENICS SOCIETY

HE Annual General Meeting was held

at 69 Eccleston Square, S.W.1, on
Tuesday, June 17th, 1941, at 4.30 p.m.

In the absence of the President, Mr. B. S.
Bramwell occupied the Chair. The Business
Secretary read the notice convening the

Meeting.

Minutes. The Minutes of the Annual
General Meeting held on Tuesday, May 28th,
1940, which were contained in the Annual
Report, and included in the April issue of the
EUGENICS REVIEW (copies of which were
distributed at the Meeting), were taken as
read and signed as correct.

ANNUAL REportT. The Chairman presented
the Annual Report, briefly outlining the
main activities of the Society during the past
year. The formal adoption was seconded by
Mr. Titmuss and was carried unanimously.

STATEMENT OF ACCOUNTS AND BALANCE
SHEET. The Honorary Treasurer presented
the Statement of Accounts and Balance
Sheet for the year ended December 31st,
1940. These were unanimously adopted.

APPOINTMENT OF HONORARY OFFICERS

AND COUNCIL FOR THE YEAR 1941-2. Following the procedure of 1940-1, it was agreed
that the Honorary Officers and Council
should remain as appointed at the Annual
General Meeting held on May 16th, 1939,
with the exception of Sir Charles ArdenClose, whose resignation had already been

_ reported and accepted, and that the Emer
gency Committee for the ensuing year
should consist of the following: The Lord
Horder, Mr. Cecil Binney, Mr. B. S. Bramwell, Mr. C. F. Chance, Miss E. Corry,
Hon. Mrs. Grant Duff, Mr. W. T. J. Gun,
Mrs. E. M. Hubback, Dr. A. J. Lewis, Mr.
R. Martin, Mr. R. M. Titmuss.

ELECTION OF AUDITORS FOR THE YEAR
1g4I-2. It was proposed by Mr. Gun,
seconded by Mr. Martin and carried unanimously, that Messrs. West and Drake be

' re-elected.

A vote of thanks, proposed by Mr. Martin
to Mrs. Grant Duff for her work in connection with the informal luncheons which she
was organizing, and congratulations upon the
success of the speakers whose services she
had been able to secure, was carried unanimously. |

. ANNUAL REPORT, 1941-2

In this Report the accounts relate to the
period December 31st, 1940, to December
31st, 1941. The rest of the Report covers the
period from March 31st, 1941, to March 31st,
1942.

The Report has deliberately been made as
brief as possible owing to the present difficult
conditions, but the work of the Soczety has
been carried on, and is épitomized as
follows :

Problems of Population.—During the
year 1940-1 Dr. R. R. Kuczynski continued
his work on Colonial Population problems.
The book, which is expected to run to about

39

one million words, is to be published soon—
probably in America.” The demographic
problems of the Colonies have never before
been studied, and Dr. Kuczynski’s work will
therefore be of great value and importance.
It will be recalled that this investigation has
been made possible by a grant from the
Carnegie Corporation of America.

Dr. Elsas, who has been investigating the
relationship between Population problems
and Housing, is shortly to have a book published (based on the first part of his work) by
Messrs. P. S. King. Publication has been
made possible by a guarantee from the
