THE EUGENIC HYPOTHESIS’

(11) Negative Eugenics

By FREDERICK OSBORN

EW trends are developing in the
United States which may greatly
affect the distribution of births. It is
not unlikely that the conditions which in the
recent past have effectively prevented parents
from exercising a free choice as to the number
of their children are now changing, and that
married couples may in the near future have
a much freer choice than at present, either to
restrict the size of their families or to have
three or fout or more children without
suffering too great an economic hardship.
Among people who have this freedom of
choice at present, and the larger number who
may be so circumstanced in the future, the
eugenic hypothesis may be stated as follows :
First it assumes that within every section
of such a population the parents who show
the more socially valuable traits and give the
best promise of providing a good environment
for the development of their children will,
because of their superior energy, courage and
affections, tend to have larger families than
those parents who show less socially valuable
traits and give less promise of providing a
good home environment for their children.
Second it assumes that within every racial,
social and economic group those parents who
show better than average socially valuable
traits and give the best promise of good

environment for their children’s development

will tend to pass on to their children a
better than average hereditary potential.

Finally the eugenic hypothesis assumes
that the trend towards a distribution of births
which will favour more children being born
in the most favourable home environments,
and the trend towards passing on to each new
generation an improved genetic potential,
will be accelerated by social and psychological pressures brought to bear on young
people and parents in a society where eugenic
requirements are properly understood.

* Reprinted from Exugenical News, March 1952. 87, 1.

There are no studies which tend to disprove
these assumptions. The studies which support them are insufficient for any certain
proof but do provide a lead for a broad
eugenic programme, based on present knowledge, and acceptable because it would in
any event increase the proportion of children
brought up in home environments most
favourable for development, an objective
which everyone agrees is desirable.

Such a programme has usually been considered from the point of view of positive
eugenics, that is, the increase in the proportion of above average genetic potentials from
one generation to the next. But if the second
assumption of the eugenic hypothesis is
correct, namely that parents above the
average of their group in socially valuable
traits will tend also to be above the average
in genetic potential, then the converse must
also be true, and couples below the average
of their group in socially valuable traits will
tend to be below the average in genetic
potential. We are not speaking now of
carriers of recessive genes for specific defect,

-who so far as is now known are widely

scattered through the population ; we have

in mind simply those who have on the

97

average poorer genetic potentials for
intelligence, for effective personality, for
vitality and energy, and for resistance to
many ofthe diseases which reduce human
efficiency.

The diminished genetic potentials listed
above are not all-or-none qualities but
matters of degree. It is now generally
recognized that given sufficiently severe
environmental pressures most people will
go to pieces emotionally or mentally at a
point which varies with each individual ;
respiratory troubles hinder the efficiency of
even the strongest and healthiest if conditions
are bad enough, again in proportion to
individual variations. Those who show a
98 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

good degree of resistance we consider normal,
and those who lose their efficiency in any
except the most favourable environment
we call sickly. They are not defective nor
carriers of genes for specific defect, but their
total genetic constitution is on the weaker
side.

Susceptibility to such lack of vigour,
whether mental or physical, is known to run
in family lines. There is considerable evidence
and a justifiable assumption that within
every social and economic group the
families which are below the average of their
group in intelligence, energy and other
socially valuable traits are also below the
average of their group in genetic potential
for these traits.

If under the practical operation of a
eugenic programme this group has less_ than
the average number of births, thus decreasing
in relative numbers, then the proportion of
people with less than average genetic
potential for mental, emotional and physical
vigour would be decreasing from one generation to another. The importance of this
assumption can be measured by the fact that
the very great majority. of births occur in
these large middle groups of people somewhat above or somewhat below the average
in socially valuable qualities. There is no
longer a eugenic trend in deaths in these
middle: groups, because so few people die
nowadays before the end of the reproductive
period. If there were a dysgenic trend in
births among this middle group, it would be
hard to offset it by even the most radical
change in the proportion of births at the
extremes, where relatively few births take
place. Given assurance of a trend towards
reducing the proportion of “ poor” genes
among the great majority of normal people,
the eugenist could proceed with more confidence to measures for reducing the incidence
of the genes for specific and dangerous
defects and malformations.

Dangerous defects, when they are caused
by so-called dominant genes, could be cut
down quite rapidly if the known laws of
genetics were fully respected. With a
sufficient advance in popular and medical
understanding of genetics and the practice

of restricting reproduction, it should be
possible to reduce the number of morbid
dominant genes to not many more than those
caused by new mutations in each generation.
Defects caused by recessive genes present a
more complicated problem.

Most carriers of recessive genes for defect
are entirely normal people. The defect will
not appear unless both members of a mating
are carriers, and then only when chance
decrees that the defective genes from each of
the pair meet im the newly fertilized cell.
Genes which have a low frequency of
incidence in the population will meet at such
rare intervals that it is hard to trace them in
family lines. In small-family groups, where
two carriers may mate and have so few
children that the defect does not chance to
appear, detecting carriers is a particularly
difficult matter.

If a child is born with a defect caused by
recessive genes, both parents are then known
to be carriers. Half the brothers and sisters
of the parents will on the average be carriers,
as will half the brothers and sisters of the
affected child. In the case of consanguineous
marriages (of double first cousins, single first
cousins, second cousins, etc.) in a family
carrying a recessive defect, there is a whole
hierarchy of probabilities differing according
to the degree of relationship.

The nature of the problem indicates the
kind of research and the kind of eugenic
programme which will have to be developed
to meet it. The promise of the greatest
rewards from research lies in locating the
carriers of recessive genes. Neal (American
Journal of Human Genetics, September 1949)
discusses the problem and lists several
morbid recessives with respect to which it is
now possible to identify the carriers. Linkage
between morbid genes and non-pathological
“‘ marker genes ”’ is not unknown. Intensive
biochemical, physiological and neurological
researches should make possible the identification of carriers for an increasing number
of defects.

The first step in the programme will be
the better training of doctors so that defects
of a genetic nature will be recognized for
what they are, and so that persons with
THE EUGENIC HYPOTHESIS 99

genetic problems will be referred to a
consultation service which is informed on
matters of heredity. There are only a few
such consultation centres in the country
now; they will have to be increased in
number and size.

With a better informed public opinion, and
readily available medical and consultation
services, married couples will be in a position
to decide on how much they will limit the
size of their families where there is evidence
of hereditary defect in the family line. The
extent to which they should limit the number
of their children will depend on the nature
of the defect involved, and the degree of
probability that one or both parents are
carriers, while at the same time taking into
account counteracting factors such as
evidence of unusual ability in the family.

Given full information, the decision in such
cases should be made by the parents on a
wholly voluntary basis. The atmosphere in
which the decision is made will always be a
factor. If the couple have been brought up
to discount the effects of heredity, and to
believe that the environment can be made
to cure constitutional ills, the decision may
not be wisely made. But ultimately the
public as a whole, when it is well advised,
may be trusted to come to a wise decision in
such matters far more certainly than anyone
clothed with arbitrary powers. The success
of such a programme of negative eugenics
will be measured by the extent to which
couples who are carriers of hereditary defect
have fewer children than the majority of the
population. Defects cannot be eliminated by
this process, but they can be reduced in
number with a saving in human suffering,
which will be cumulative from one generation
to another. |

It should be possible to develop such
strong social and psychological pressures
that in the great majority of cases known
carriers of serious defect would entirely
refrain from having children ; carriers of less
serious defect, after weighing the offsetting
possibilities of the inheritance of genes of
better quality, would have less than the
usual number of children. The pressures
necessary to bring about these results are in

the field of public health. They are particularly the responsibility of doctors, nurses
and social workers. Their application requires
more education, more research, more use of
family histories (properly reported), more
effective means of birth control than those in
use at present, so that the minimum of effort
will be required of those people who are at a
relatively low level of intelligence. Provision
will have to be made for voluntary sterilization on a country-wide basis, so as to assure
that there will be no children born to parents
who are definitely known to carry the more
dangerous kinds of defect. All these things
are in line with the thinking of experienced
people in these fields today. Few people, if
they gave the matter serious thought, would
maintain that couples who would transmit
hereditary diabetes to their children should
permit themselves unlimited reproduction
just because insulin will save their children’s
lives. When these ideas are generally and
widely accepted and the training of doctors
has kept pace with the necessary advances
in the field of human genetics, we may hope
that the most important possibilities of
negative eugenics will be taken care of on a
purely voluntary basis, without the necessity
of interference by the State. Such a practical
application of the eugenic hypothesis should
make for a substantial reduction in the
proportion of serious defect in the population
and in the number of carriers on the basis of
present knowledge, and a far greater reduction as knowledge increases.

There will remain the problem of those
carriers of defect who are themselves so
defective that they are unable to control
their own actions. These people do not fit

_into the framework of the eugenic hypothesis,

which calls for purely voluntary control of
births. It seems inevitable that in their case
the community will have to use some form
of compulsion. :

The grounds for interference by the State
in so personal a matter as reproduction seem
to be already quite clearly established. Any
person whose mental condition is such as to
justify permanent segregation in an institution seems to me by that very fact disqualified from passing upon the necessity for
I0o

his own sterilization. The community will
have to make the decision for him. That is
the practical basis on which most sterilizations without consent are carried out in a
majority of our states today.

If all individuals requiring permanent
custodial care could be segfegated in state
institutions, there would be no need for
sterilization. But neither the states nor the
federal government could stand such a heavy
expense. In many instances, custodial cases
can be released on parole if they are first
sterilized. Segregation has under the proper
circumstances the wholehearted approval of
the public. Sterilization, which in no way
changes a person except to prevent him
having offspring, should be equally acceptable
when the circumstances demand it.

The automatic reduction of births among
normal people with less than average genetic
capacity, the voluntary restriction or reduction of births by competent people who are

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

carriers or strongly suspected of being
carriers, the forced restriction of births by
incompetents who are subject to sterilization
or segregation—these would give the attack
on defect almost as broad a base as could be
devised. The success of the effort would
depend on the education of the public, the
medical profession and public health officers,
and the advance of research in human
genetics.

Our knowledge of genetics factors in defect
is far from complete ; we cannot at present
hope to approach the ultimate goal of
eliminating defect entirely. But there can
be a considerable reduction on the basis of
present knowledge, and by means which are
wholly acceptable to the public once the need
and the means are understood. Few forms of
human endeavour could save present and
future generations from so much suffering.
None could save so much money by so small
an expenditure.

Society for Constructive Birth Control
and RACIAL PROGRESS

* The First Birth Control Clinic in the World

THE MOTHERS’ CLINIC

There is also a
Reference Library
which may be consulted and Lending
Library for Members of the Society. Address :

Founded by DR. MARIE STOPES, March 17th, 1921.

From the beginning dealing with all aspects of birth control and Demonstrations to
marriage problems.

OPEN DAILY (not Sats.) 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. FREE
106/108, WHITFIELD STREET, LONDON, W.1

 

Special Lectures
Instructional

and

Members of the
Medical Profession
are regularly given.
Application by letter
necessary.

Eugenies Review, Vol. XLIV, No. 2
