THE GALTON LECTURE, 1946 39

Dickinson, R. L. (1938) Control of Conception.

— and Beam, L. (1932) A Thousand Marriages.

DOLLARD, J. (1935) Criteria for the Life History.

Ex.is, H. (1933) The Psychology of Sex.

EXNER, M. J. (1932) The Sexual Side of Marriage.

FLUGEL, J. C. (1934) Men and Theiy Motives.

— (1935) ‘“‘ Psychological Aspects of Marriage
and the Family,’ in Psychology and Modern
Problems.

. Fotsom, J. K. (1942) The Family and Democratic
Society.

Fromm, E. (1942) The Fear of Freedom.

HamILTon, G. V. (1929) A Research in Marriage.

HarDInG, E. (1933) The Way of All Women.

Horney, K. (1937) The Neurotic Personality of
Our Time.

Horst, P. et alia (1941) The Prediction of Personality Adjustment.

KIRKPATRICK, C. (1937) Am.J. Sociol., 43.

LAZARSFELD, S. (1940) Woman’s Experience of the
Male.

LONDON SCHOOL OF ECONomICcs (1935) New Survey
of London Life and Labour. .

LUNDBERG, G. A. (1942) Social Research.

Lynp, R. and S. (1929) Middletown. _

MANNHEIM, K. (1943) Diagnosis of Our Time.

MEAD, M. (1938) Coming of Age in Samoa.

Mowrer, H. (1935) Personality Adjustment and
Domestic Discord.

Myrpat, A. (1941) Nation and Family.

OsBorN, F. (1940) Preface to Eugenics.

POPENOE, P. (1938) J. Soc. Psych., 8.

PRATT, G. K. (1930) Am.]. Psychiat., 9.

STEKEL, W. (1926) Frigidity in Women.

TAWNEY, R. H. (1921) The Acquisitive Society.

TEeRMAN, L. M. (1938) Psychological Factors in
Martial Happiness.

— and BUTTENWIESER (1935) J. Soc. Psych., 6.

THURSTONE, L. and T. G. (1930) J. Soc. Psych., 1.

WALKER, K. (1935) Sex and a Changing Civilization.

WILLOUGHBY, R. R. (1934) J. Soc. Psych., 5 and 6.

 

THE GALTON LECTURE, 1946

Presentation of the Society’s Gold Medal

N February 14th, 1946, before a

large gathering of Fellows, Members

and guests at Manson House,
London, Lord Keynes, on behalf of the
Eugenics Society, presented the first Galton
Medal to Sir Alexander Carr-Saunders “ in
recognition of outstanding contributions to
the study of eugenics and unremitting service to the Society extending over thirtyfive years”’; and following this agreeable
ceremony Professor Godfrey Thomson delivered the Galton lecture under the title
“ The Trend of National Intelligence.”

Award of Galton Medal
Opening the proceedings, Lord Keynes
said :

It is a satisfaction to take part in the
presentation of the first Galton Gold Medal,
both in piety to the memory of the great

Galton and in recognition of a worthy and
appropriate recipient of a medal established
in his name.

‘I say ‘‘ appropriate,’ because the virtue
of Carr-Saunders as of Galton lies in his
belonging to, and overlapping, several
branches of relevant knowledge instead of
over-specializing in one, and having, in
particular, reached sociology anf eugenics,
not from the economic side, but from the
side of biology and Darwinianism.

It is, I think, suitable to preface the
presentation of this medal by a few words
of piety and remembrance to Francis Galton.
His various and peculiar genius—so different
from that of his kinsman Charles Darwin—.
lay, not in continuous concentration of mind,
but in continuous diffusion ; not following
a single inspired idea to its logical and
experimental conclusion, but striking out
sparks in every direction, many of which
40 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

never became a flame and of which the rest
had to be nursed and blown upon by the
hands and breaths of others. For my own
part, as I make no doubt was the case
with Carr-Saunders, it was very early in life
that I became fascinated and amused with
the work of Galton. I confess that I found
the very characteristic Statistical Enquiries
into the Efficacy of Prayer more fun than the
far more valuable work on Finger-prints.
I used to like that map of Bradshaw he
carried about ; and the little episode of the
lion and the donkey in what I still think
one of the most charming of all his works,
but now I suspect little read, The-Ari of
Travel. —

Galton’s eccentric, sceptical, observing,
flashing, Cavalry-leader type of mind led
him eventually to become the founder of
the most important, significant and, I would
add, genuine branch of sociology which
exists, namely eugenics.

Which leads me, by a natural transition,
from Galton to his worthy and distinguished
disciple Carr-Saunders, who is in common
estimation to-day the most distinguished
sociologist in the country. He and I were,
I believe, at school together not far short of
fifty years ago. But I was just that much
senior, which prevented my knowing him
then. Anyway Carr-Saunders was a slow
beginner. He did not know what he
wanted. Almost by chance, I gather, he
got started on zoology, so far as his head
was concerned, whilst his heart was set from
the beginning on social and political affairs ;
a combination which led, not by chance, but
inevitably, to precisely that mixed training
which is go essential for a mixed scientist.
Charles Darwin incidentally repaid a debt.
Whilst Darwin was first led to his theories
by reading Malthus, Carr-Saunders was led
to Malthus through Darwin. Problems of
population became his main concern, but
essentially approached through the biological background of man and his habits and
customs and not primarily through the
economic approach. Although it has all
ended up in Carr-Saunders becoming the
head of one of the leading economic faculties
in the country, it was through this “ other ”

approach that the peculiar value of his
various contributions has largely arisen. In
addition, in the true Galtonian spirit, he has
cast his net wide, and a book such as CarrSaunders’s on The Professions would, I am
sure, have appealed to his forerunner not
less than his signal contributions to the
problems of population and eugenics.

It is an honour and a pleasure to be the
instrument of handing the Galton Gold
Medal of the Eugenics Society to Sir Alexander Carr-Saunders.

The presentation was then made amid
general applause, and Sir Alexander CarrSaunders replied as follows :

I wish to thank the Eugenics Soctety most
warmly for the very great honour which
has been conferred upon me. Nothing has
ever given me more pleasure; from my
undergraduate days I have believed that in
the long run nothing matters more to the
human race than the possession of a sound
genetic endowment. In the midst of so
many immediate problems it is a great thing
that the Soczety should continue to press
this view. I hope that the Socrety will never
be deterred by disappointment because it
does not seem to be making headway. If.
it persists, and if human affairs are con
‘ducted in the light of knowledge, the day

will certainly come when the matter of
genetic endowment will be a major preoccupation of men.

It puzzles me to know why I have been
judged worthy of the honour. One service
indeed I have rendered to the Society; I
have paid my subscription regularly for
thirty-six years. As a member of the
Council of more than one society I know

_how valuable faithful supporters are—not

cantankerous enough to threaten resignation
when things do not please them, and not
shrewd enough to take out life subscriptions
when young. It was in Ig10, so far as I
can remember, that I joined the Soczety.
Sir Francis Galton, to whom we owe the
word “‘ eugenics,” was then alive ; indeed,
he died in 1911 at the advanced age of 8g.
Membership did, however, bring one into
contact with one man, so outstanding that
THE GALTON

I must mention him, Major Leonard Darwin.
He had true greatness of character; that
no one who knew him can doubt. He had
a sure insight.into men and things. It was
this insight which led him to give unwavering support to the Soczety at a time when
the ordering of its affairs was not easy, and
to conduct them with such success. It is
proper that the Eugenics Society should be
proud of its lineage, and what ancestry
could be better than that which traces itself
back to the cousin and to the son of Charles
Darwin ?

Those years round 1910 were difficult ;
the first enthusiasm had passed—generated
by the acceptance of Charles Darwin’s
explanation of the origin of species and leading to the simple programme that man
should take the guidance of his own. evolution into his own hands. Doubts had arisen ;
what after all did we know more than that
like tends to produce like—a vague generalization upon which to found a programme.
But since those days the mechanism of inheritance has been laid bare—due largely
to the work of T. H. Morgan and his pupils.
Those amazing discoveries give us sure
ground where all was insecure before. We
have no longer to meet the charge that no
more is known about one of our chief interests, namely inheritance, than was known
to herdsmen ever since the domestication of
animals began. It is quite true that the
identification of genes and the determination of their behaviour has hardly begun, so
far as the human species is concerned ; this
work is impeded in many obvious ways,
such as the impossibility of experiment, but
also in a manner not so obvious at first sight
but still more important, and that is by the
present small size of the human family.
But this does not mean that we do not know
how in general inheritance works in the
humanrace. Quite the contrary is the case ;
we do know, and this knowledge, and not
the detailed knowledge which still eludes us,
is what we need in order to understand the
biological importance of social change.

The latest advances in knowledge of
genetics are of profound interest to us. As
members of this Soczety, however, we are

LECTURE, 1946 41

more directly concerned with advances in
social investigation. Only when we have an
analysis of social structure and of the
changes occurring in it, is our knowledge of
genetics of use to us in relation to our broad
interests. In this matter thirty-five years
ago, as in the case of inheritance, all was
guess-work. We could do no more than
hazard the opinion that certain social groups
were distinguished by the possession of
particular inheritable characteristics, and
that these groups, relatively to the whole
population, were on the up or down grade.
In this sphere also a great change has taken
place. Though there has been no dramatic
unveiling of the secrets of nature, we have
witnessed the elaboration of methods of
measuring characteristics, of the application
of these methods on a large scale, and of
the assessment of changes in the proportion
which groups having measurable characteristics form of the whole population.

I have in mind especially the elaboration
of the technique of testing intelligence and
of its application to the problem of the relation between fertility and intelligence
which has always been foremost in our
thoughts. No one has contribwted more to
the solution of this problem than Professor
Godfrey Thomson, the Galton Lecturer this
year, holder of the chair of Education in
the University of Edinburgh, and Director
of Studies at the Edinburgh Training Centre
which under him has become famous as a
centre of research. Twenty-five years ago
he began to investigate the connection
between intelligence and fertility, when he
made a notable inquiry in Northumberland.
Though many other important problems
have also been engaging his attention, he
has continued to advance our knowledge in
this particular field, and he has inspired
pupils whom he has trained to follow up his
work. As members of this Society we are
greatly in his debt. We are well aware that
the conclusions reached by investigators in
this field are often distasteful, since they run
counter to the bias of the day. It is perhaps
only fair to say that some of the investigators
have not always been free from bias themselves ; at least they have tended at times
42 | THE EUGENICS REVIEW

to trail their coats. But this does not apply
to our lecturer. His manifest freedom from
bias, his obvious scientific integrity and his
clarity of exposition command attention and
respect wherever and whenever he speaks.
We look forward to his lecture on “ The
Trend of National Intelligence.”’

The Galton Lecture

The Galton Lecture, published in full
elsewhere in this issue, was generally
acclaimed as among the finest of a most
distinguished series. Notwithstanding the
difficulty of the subject-matter, Professor
Thomson kept the audience completely
absorbed, reducing the complex data to
simple and readily intelligible terms and
speaking throughout with rare spontaneity
and only a very occasional recourse to notes.
The prolonged applause at the end was a
tribute not less to the lecturer’s manner than
to his choice of theme. In moving a warmly
accorded vote of thanks, Dr. Fraser-Roberts
said : | |

The Galton Lecture is the most important
occasion of the year in our Society. In
previous years lecturers of great eminence
have given us magnificent addresses on a
variety of notable topics. It is a high
standard which has been set, and one of
which the Soczety is proud. It is, therefore,

a great compliment to say, and I am sure
that you agree with me, that the Galton
Lecture of to-day has never been sur-.
passed.

Differential fertility is far and away the
most important issue in practical eugenics.
And it is important not only in itself; its
study will provide, in my opinion, the most
useful clues in understanding and coping
with the whole problem of the future of our
population. Professor Godfrey Thomson
has presented the subject in a masterly
fashion ; I have never heard or seen a more
adequate or lucid exposition.

Professor Thomson as a psychologist, a
mathematician and an educationalist has
been one of the leading contributors of our
time to scientific progress. And during the
course of his work he has made a host of
friends. Those of you who are meeting him
for the first time to-day will, I am sure,
have realized something not only of his
scientific quality but of his human quality
also. It gives me great pleasure to propose,
on your behalf, a most sincere vote of thanks,
and I ask you to show your appreciation in
the usual way.

There was renewed applause when Professor Thomson made a brief reply, bringing
a memorable Galton anniversary to a close.
