C. D. DARLINGTON

M.A., D.Sc.,

F.R.S., Sherardian Professor of Botany, University of Oxford

WOODHULL LECTURE
The Control of Evolution in Man

Past and future
HEN DARWIN PUBLISHED his
\V\ Descent of Man in 1871 he was

concerned with showing that man had
arrived at his present state by long-continuing
hereditary changes or variations in the past.
He said as little as he could about these hereditary variations. He merely maintained that
people varied, that the variations were partly
inherited, and that in nature one was often
selected in preference to another.

In his uncertainty about the mechanism of
heredity and the causes of variation Darwin
thought it better to study what had happened
in the past, with results that could be seen,
rather than venture into discussing the future.
This task he left to a younger man, to Francis
Galton.

To-day we may consider the problem of the
future of man in three stages: the Galtonian, the
Mendelian and the present or genetic stage.
The points of view gained at these three stages
have long appeared to be in conflict. Let us
follow their sequence.

Galton’s contribution

Galton began with a point of view on human
evolution formed by his medical training, his
African travels and his study of Darwin’s
work.!»? On the basis of the cell theory he took
a view contrasted with Darwin’s, first, on the
inheritance of acquired characters, and secondly,
on the distinction between one-egg and two-egg
twins.? The use of this distinction led him to
estimate the part played by heredity and environ
* The Woodhull Lecture was given on March 21st, 1958
at the Weekly Evening Meeting of The Royal Institution,
W. E. Schall, B.Sc., F.Inst.P., Treasurer and VicePresident, in the Chair. It is here reproduced by kind
permission of Professor Darlington and of The Royal
Institution, having first been published in the Proceedings
of the Royal Institution, 1958, Volume 37, Number 165.
A shortened version appeared i in Nature on "July 5th, 1958.

ment, by nature and nurture, in the behaviour
of individuals and races of men.

Galton noticed that like mates with like in
man and thereby creates self-sustaining breeding
groups. Accordingly he pointed out the significance of a higher frequency of colour-blindness
in a particular group, the Quakers, and in doing
so he revealed the foundations of population
genetics. He also studied the genetic component
of fertility and intelligence and applied this
principle to the study of natural and sexual
selection in different social classes. His method
has been effectively developed to show that the
decline of governing classes is hastened by their
choice of wives of infertile heiresses.*:* Similarly
he inferred that the expulsion of the Huguenots
from France and of the Jews from Spain was an
enduring loss to those countries and an enduring
gain to other countries. In these arguments
Galton was assuming that men make manners
or culture before manners or culture can be said
to make men. Finally he concluded that “‘the
human race has a large control over its future
forms of activity .. . for it can gradually modify
its own nature’.

Galton thus foreshadowed a genetic interpretation of the structure and also of the history
of society. It is an interpretation whose validity
has often been questioned but those who
question it always neglect to refer to the words
of Galton himself.

To-day a number of practical and theoretical
advances may be traced to some aspect of
Galton’s work. One such advance is the use of
intelligence tests for the measurement of educability especially in children.* These tests have
indicated that the less intelligent individuals,
groups, and populations of men can now easily
propagate their like faster than the more intelligent.’-* This has not happened before in history
or, we may say, in evolution. Survival which
formerly depended on the abilities of individual

169

3—ER.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, October 1958, 50, 3.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

parents now depends on the policies of nations.
The present world crisis in population is thus
likely to be not only a quantitative but a qualitative one. And it is likely to have consequences
for our evolution.°®

A second advance we owe to Galton, both in
theory and technique, is in the demonstration in
Holland, the U.S.A., and recently in Tasmania
and in England’! that migration modifies the
intelligence of a community. The most active
farmers move on to the best land. They exercise
discrimination. They select their environment.
This is why in all countries, including our own,
the standards of farming vary from district to
district. Similarly the migration from country to
town and from town to town, and, as Galton
pointed out, from the provinces to the metropolis, is reflected in the activities of the parents,
and also in the educability of the children. It
should affect, but is not always allowed to affect,
the proportions of them who are thought worth
training in universities.

Later events have provided tests of Galton’s
views on the effects of selective migration. For
example, when a metropolis is cut off from a
nation which has helped to create it by selective
migration, we have often seen the “‘balkanization” that follows. With the present direction of
cultural development it is the rural rather than
the urban side which decays.

But perhaps the best test is through fertility.
On the one hand by selection for fertility
together with inbreeding the Hutterite community
have recently raised their average from 9-2 to
10:9 children per family? On the other hand

consider Ireland. In 1847 the population
reached over 8 million with a density equal to that
of England and Wales. It had multiplied six-fold
in under 140 years. Following aloss by emigration
inten years of 14 million the population of Ireland
has been almost stable for fifty years at half its
peak number. Selective migration has modified
the character of the people in many respects.
High fertility, it has been argued, would have
been differential in its effects. It might have
selectively lowered the fertility of the people who
remained and thus have led to the uniquely low
and stable birth rate in Ireland to-day. When we
have learnt more of the genetics of fertility we
shall be able to return to this question.

Classical genetics

To a student of genetics to-day Galton’s theories
seem to be well founded and well considered.
But at the time they were bound to appear as
resting on a basis of a mysterious or incalculable
heredity. In these circumstances the rediscovery
of Mendel in 1900 might have been expected to
strengthen the position of Galtonian as well as of
Darwinian theory. It did not do so.

For Bateson, to be sure, Mendelism at once
seemed to clarify certain primary issues.!* For
the first time it showed that hereditary variation
was largely invisible. A man might suffer from a
defect such as too little pigment in the skin or
too much pigment in the urine through heredity,
although no known ancestor had suffered from
it.4 For the first time heredity could be seen as
responsible not only for the likeness of brothers

TABLE 1

Number of Children Ever Born to Married Ethnic Hutterite Women 45 Years of Age and Over, 1950

NUMBER OF CHILDREN
6

Me16 Total dian

Age Group 0 1 2 3 3 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15

45-49 20 3 2 2 2 7 10 411 «10 9 13 67 6 0 94 109
50-54 111 2 2 5 3 8 9 5$ 411 9 3 2 3 3 #72 = 103
55-59 412 2 3 4 6 3 4 9 612 4 1 3 0 1 6 99
60-64 20101 2 1 1 6 6 8 3 1 2 2 2 0 38 = 103
65-69 0013 0 01 0 7 7 2 2 1 2 1 3 0 30 99
70-74 12 101 041 1 1 3 9 4 14 2 21 #1 #0 29 92
75-79 00 0 01 1 0 3 0 0 1 1 0 0 1 0 0 7...
80-85 0 0 0 10 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 =5

Total 10 4 9 10 10 14 20 25 31 42 40 42 29 16 18 15 4 340 10-4

170

(from Eaton & Mayer, 1954).
THE CONTROL OF EVOLUTION

but even more significantly for their unlikeness.
Or, to put the matter the other way round,
variation was largely concealed by heredity but
occasionally revealed, and revealed by known
processes. In disclosing these primary paradoxes
suddenly Mendelism had magnified the genetic
at the expense of the environmental component
in all variation. Not only the cards but also the
process of shuffling was a manifestation of
heredity, and a calculable manifestation.

Owing to the hot disputes between Bateson
and the followers of Galton, however, the
unexperimental aspects of the new advance were
pushed into the background. Since the Mendelian
design of experiment required gene mutations
of gross effect they were taken by Bateson and
later by Morgan as the units of natural variation.
Moreover the pure lines of Mendelian experiment were taken as the raw materials of natural
variation. The model systems that resulted were
easy to handle in theory but they gave an
unconvincing account of natural variation in
any organism, above all in man where so much
variation failed to fit into a Mendelian scheme.

It was in this period that environmentalist
explanations of human variation gained ground
in the social sciences. Mendelism, unhappily
using the word “‘character”’ instead of “‘variable”’
was too crude and naive to explain the subtleties
of human variation: they came to be left to the
operation of spontaneous causes subsumed
under the word culture. And it has been argued
by a strange perversity that because culture can
sometimes be socially transmitted it can never be
racially or individually or genetically created.

Mendelism has now, however, grown into
genetics. The changes that it has undergone have
given us a new idea of human society and human
evolution.

Genetic systems

Genetics has grown, in the last thirty years, by
spreading down into the cell, up into the population and out into the open air. This growth has
developed the paradoxes as well as the laws of
heredity. In the breeding experiment we see the
reaction of a definitive heredity with a definitive
environment. In the fixed natural population we
see what is there after the environment has
selected the heredity. In the mobile population

IN MAN

we see what is there after heredity has also, in its
turn, selected the environment. The opposed
agents are not independent: they interact in
sequence. And sequence usually begins with a
variable heredity.

In the laboratory breeding experiment each
individual which arises by the uncertainty of
recombination is important. In nature the whole
population which is almost exactly predictable
is what matters. This contradiction leads to a
shift of emphasis which affects our description
of variation in any organism. Again, to the
experimental breeder the unit of variation is the
gene mutation. To the cytologist it may be an
inversion or an interchange of a piece of chromosome. And to the naturalist it may appear as a
polymorphism, a floating “‘variety’’.1*

The bringing together of these three methods
of inquiry has now established that the bulk of
natural variation is due to the mutually adaptive
combining of mutations and structural changes;
that the mutations themselves are of different
orders of size; that in most of their activities
they are the individually undetectable parts of
multiple or polygenic systems; that genes expand
or contract according to the size of the breeding
group within which they are being exchanged.
Not only this but polygenic systems are adapted
to the range of variation of the breeding group
within which they subsist. Their evolution is
therefore itself subject to changes in the size and
character of the breeding group. Genes and
genotypes are therefore related to breeding
groups and breeding systems and have to be
considered together with them in examining the
evolution of any species.7-18

This transformation may be illustrated in the
most successful field of human genetics. For
fifty years the study of blood group antigens has
proceeded on Mendelian lines. In this form it
has led to the most detailed account of geographical variation known in any organism.’®
Gradually, however, the structural complexity
of some of the genes or super-genes concerned
has been predicted by Fisher, and demonstrated
by Race.?° Independently their physiological
complexity has been predicted by Ford” on the
analogy of the polymorphisms of other animals.
And this complexity has now been demonstrated
with remarkable selective and evolutionary

I7I
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

implications by statistical studies of their relations with susceptibility to disease.??

Lately the hemoglobin genes have gone
further in showing how malarial diseases have
forced whole races of men to modify the composition of their hemoglobin as a means of
avoiding extinction. In doing so they have
introduced an adaptive polymorphism more
drastic than that known in any other animal,» *4
comparable indeed only with that of hybrid
species of plants.

These relations, paradoxical or dialectical as
they may be, mean that we have to begin our
study of heredity in any organism much farther
back than we had thought necessary. In studying
the evolution of man we first have to examine
the history of his breeding groups. Fortunately,
however, the breeding groups are better understood than those of any other organism. Let us
see how they work.

Human breeding systems
For some thousands of generations until
recently, man has been a sparsely distributed
species gradually spreading over the earth as,
by his own evolution, larger areas became
profitably occupiable or habitable by him. He
still exists in simple societies whose breeding
habits, since they are found in all continents,
are assumed to correspond with those of his
common ancestors. Mating is limited not by his
immediate fertility but by self-imposed rules of
exogamy and endogamy, that is by a rejection
or prohibition at once of close inbreeding and of
wide outbreeding. 7°

The repugnance for outbreeding is of course
a common property of all animals. But it has
become a more variable and also a more discriminating repugnance in man. The repugnance
for inbreeding on the other hand is new. It has
demanded something more than discrimination.
It must have arisen either from the experience
(which is universally true) that unusual inbreeding yields an unusual proportion of defective
recessive types in the offspring; or from the
selection of races in which an instinctive reaction
took the place of such an intelligent inference.

The combination of exogamy and endogamy
must have always had, as it has to-day, a precise
effect on the mating groups in which man exists.

172

The effect is comparable only with what arises
from the incompatibility of plant systems. ** It
means that within these groups three special
properties will be favoured: maximum hybridity,
maximum recombination and maximum uniformity. We expect, and the evidence seems to
confirm our expectations, that wherever the
groups are small and stable these properties will
soon be established.

All of these properties are, it would seem,
selectively valuable for the immediate welfare of
the group. They have, however, one important
consequence for the future of the group: it is to
discourage any spontaneous genetic cleavage
within it so long as its members live within range
of one another. The group is homogeneous and
its homogeneity is preserved by the rules of
exogamy. Differentiation in social function, in
occupation, will arise between the sexes and
between young and old but it will not arise
spontaneously between genetic sections within
the mating group. It has even been suggested
that pairs of such primitive societies in Australia
may fuse and combine their marriage and incest
rules to allow of a new uniformity in the enlarged
breeding groups. ?’

In advanced societies we have close parallels
with the endogamy and exogamy rules of primitive societies. Neither, to be sure, is so rigorously
maintained. And the breeding groups established
can be shown—since we can follow their history
over thousands of years—to be of varying
stability. But their fundamental contrast with
those of primitive societies consists in their
differentiation. They are horizontally differentiated or stratified in groups or classes which meet
but do not mingle. These classes, which come to
work and think and speak*® differently, cooperate by virtue of genetic differences which
they preserve by not interbreeding.

To the rule that social classes cannot be
preserved if they freely inter-marry there is one
legendary exception, the Natchez Indian tribe
of the Mississippi valley. But the four classes
described could not in fact have maintained
themselves in numerical balance let alone in
genetical stratification if they had followed the
rules attributed to them.*® There is indeed no exception to the rule: social differentiation and breeding differentiation are mutually indispensable.
THE CONTROL OF EVOLUTION

The development of social classes, beginning
at the neolithic stage, has evidently been concerned with the development of all civilization.
But it has followed quite different lines in the
main areas of civilization. The great religious
systems of Hinduism, Judaism, Islam and
Christianity have diverged in their effects on the
breeding system. Most striking is the contrast
between India and the Middle East. In India a
unity of religion sanctions, and indeed prescribes,
the diversity of “breed” or ‘“‘caste’. In the
Middle East since the triumph of a tolerant
Islam a multiplicity of religions is the chief
guarantee for the permanence of a multiplicity
of professional breeding groups. Underneath
this contrast, however, the genetic principle is
entirely uniform. It is also, we may notice, quite

IN MAN

distinct from the automatic systems of genetic
caste distinction which are known in the
Hymenoptera.*° Inter-fertile classes which work
together without breeding together uniquely
distinguish advanced human societies from all
other forms of animal life. The system, it seems,
has made advanced societies possible.

If the breeding systems of primitive societies
always favour uniformity or homogeneity in
their genetic structure how has differentiation
or stratification come about in advanced
societies ? |

One source of differentiation is to be found
in the nomadic communities best known in
Arabia and Somaliland. Tribes where sheikhly
and slave castes are undeveloped, have become
different in their genetic character. Their

DIAGRAM REPRESENTING THE AUTHOR’S THEORY OF THE DEVELOPMENT OF CLASS STRUCTURE
(Not included in the original Woodhull Lecture)

NATION
‘

“”
m
a
a
<_<
=
0
By
°
Zz
°
|
i
<
=
%
©
Pits

DIFFERENTIATION OF
TRIBES AND RACES

P

 

TIME

A C E
173
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

differences are shown first in their mental and
emotional character, and by derivation in the
kind of work they do and the skill they acquire
in it. From this differentiation of tribes
their co-operation and commerce arise by
agreement.

Such a peaceful co-operation of racially differ
ent people has evidently been one of the bases of
class differentiation wherever craftsmen and
sailors, merchants and missionaries have
wandered and settled. But the foundations of
class structure have been laid as much by conflict as by friendship. Governing classes owe
their origins largely to conquest. Agriculture
owes its development largely to slavery and
slavery also largely arises from conquest or
piracy. “‘Bondmen” shall be ‘“‘heathen” and
“‘strangers”’ (Leviticus XXV, 44-46).
_ The evidence of history and of prehistory,
seen in the light of genetics, is unmistakable.
Differentiation within nations has always arisen,
so far as we can trace it, from a mixture of races.
In Greece and Italy, in Britain and Russia, no
less than in India and the Middle East the nuclei
of class structure, the foci of discontinuity, have
been established from the mingling, friendly or
forcible, of different races.

On this view, introduced genetic differences,
whether racial or tribal, have sown the seeds of
social differentiation and the co-operation of
dissimilar individuals out of which the richness
of human cultural development has arisen. How
have these seeds germinated? All stratified
societies that have survived (and there are some
to-day which may not survive) have permitted
a limited inter-breeding between the stratified
groups: slaves could be freed, freemen ennobled
and the Brahmin’s offspring might sink to a
lower social level. Roman Emperors and Indian
Kings have by legislation and by direct action
controlled these processes with the evident intention of controlling evolutionary change. The
development of class society has depended on the
slow and controlled mixture of the materials
brought together in this way, mixture subject to
the processes of mating, promotion and migration, all of them socially selective, and selecting
differently in different societies.

In India, after some mixture leading to the
formation of new hybrid castes, the inter-breed
174

ing has often ceased and, owing to incidental
religious developments, the new stratification
has hardened. This unique circumstance enables
us to see the genetic processes of a diversification
of society fossilised at a stage not far removed
from racial mixture. In other societies we see
other instructive situations. For example, in
Russia and America strictly racial classes can
exist together with a theory of classlessness. And
a dissolution of classes can exist side by side with
a crystallization under a new form of a class
structure which spontaneously and predictably
reconstitutes itself.

In all these changes we know how valuable
the mixture of groups must be in providing the
recombination which releases variability. Conversely, how important a restriction of mixture
must be, follows from the Mendelian principle
that one act of crossing can undo the work of a
hundred generations of faithful inbreeding. A
steady release of variability, therefore, demands
a restriction of crossing. If a small group like
the Greek merchants of Chios,®2 or the
Quakers in England, or the Hutterites in Alberta,
were to preserve their character they had to
inbreed. Thereby they reinforced the homogeneity of that character, their consciousness of
it, and often their desire to preserve it.

On this genetic view our advanced societies
are vastly more complicated than anything
envisaged by Galton. They are not races in a
simple, primitive or biological sense. They are
nations divided into differential classes. Their
differentiation may be appropriate or inappropriate to the needs of the time and in this we
may see the genetic component in the rise and
fall of empires. The differentiated classes may
begin by differing on the surface; but they end
by differing more under the surface like the
cryptic species of plants and animals. Their
ability to keep apart is seen as indispensable to
the maintenance of civilization but their ability
to mix is seen as no less indispensable to the
evolution of civilization. For it is from this
mixture that we have, on the one hand, the
hybridity and hybrid vigour that we ourselves
need and, on the other hand, the recombination,
the release of variability that our posterity need
if they are to do anything new or face a changed
world.
THE CONTROL OF EVOLUTION

How does this view affect our attitude to the
future of mankind?

Control of our evolution

It is now clear that man throughout his history
has been interfering with his evolution by most
of his political acts and most of his social habits.
What has been almost entirely unconscious is
bound now to become conscious. As we study
the consequences of our actions we shall
correct them. And as we introduce new actions
we shall already be aware of their consequences.

How much do we know? We know that
changes in our breeding system has the effect of
creating visible diversity of form. We know very
little of its effect on the relatively invisible
diversity which concerns intelligence and fertility,
viability and resistance to disease.

In the large outbreeding groups found in
advanced societies almost as much variability
should be released by a change towards closer
inbreeding as by a change towards wider crossing. I have, therefore, made a small study of the
frequency, distribution and effects of cousin
marriage in our own population. It suggests to
me that human stocks can be readily adapted
to inbreeding. The change from outbreeding to
inbreeding leads, as in other organisms, to
depression especially affecting the invisible
variables. But it provides the means of rapid
improvement, if we want improvement.

On the simpler Galtonian selective level the
development of medical science has, as we have
seen, upset the world’s population both in
quantity and in quality. And the qualitative
changes are very diverse. They affect race as
compared with race, class as compared with
class, and individual as compared with individual.
Medical treatment of every kind of genetic
disability, except lack of intelligence, enables
those who have been treated to survive and to
reproduce when they would not otherwise do so.
Often those who were saved as children return
to the same hospital with their children to be
saved. In consequence each generation of a
stable society will become more dependent on
medical treatment for its ability to survive and
reproduce.

This is a process by which our control is
changing the direction of evolution. We have to

IN MAN

weigh its advantages and its disadvantages.
Meanwhile let us note a larger principle: every
branch of government in its own field controls
the evolution of the people it administers. The
punishment of crime affects the reproduction of
the criminal class. Education affects or even
determines the mating group of those who pass
through the system. Taxation and subsidies
affect the relative numbers of children born in
the different social classes and can be adjusted
to vary the results over a wide range. All these
policies affecting health, crime, education and
economy are carried out in unconsciousness of
their evolutionary effects. ‘

The governments of Augusta and Claudius
(according to Suetonius) seem to have been
aware of what they were doing in these respects
by regulating the genetic diffusion between
classes. Modern authorities with their more
drastic actions are unaware of consequences.
They are unaware because, like Darwin, they
are not quite certain about heredity; and also
because the actions themselves are traditional
and are directed, not to breeding, but to the
present life of the individual and the present
economy of the state. New processes, however,
are now appearing which are directed to breeding. They are not traditional and they therefore
at once attract attention. Three of these are
worth considering: ionizing radiation, sterilization and artificial insemination.

The classical geneticist is much impressed by
the consequences of ionizing radiation in inducing mutations. When induced in the ripe sperm
of Drosophila, and followed by two generations
of brother-sister mating, these mutations lead to
dire results. On man, living and mating at large,
however, we do not yet know what the lasting
genetic effects of such radiation may be.** The
effects would be more likely to be deleterious
than beneficial if it were to be followed fifty
years later by cousin marriage among the grandchildren of the affected individuals. So far as we
can foresee, they would be like the effects of
cousin marriage in an unaffected population;
this is another reason for studying those effects
now.

The inverse of this problem is shown us by the
introduction of the practical measure of the
sterilization of genetically, usually mentally,

175
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

defective individuals. This kind of evolutionary
control has been used for sixty years in the
United States and for thirty years in Scandinavia.
Here is one way, a negative way, in which
governments are now assisting in the propagation
of intelligence.*5

TABLE 2

GENETIC-HYGIENIC COUNSELLING GIVEN TO PHYSICIANS
BY THE UNIVERSITY INSTITUTE FOR HUMAN GENETICS
IN COPENHAGEN 1939-1956.

Legal Genetic
Legal Legal steril. counselYear abort. steril. + abort. ling
1939 3 0 0 3
1940 25 1 0 4
1941 21 1 0 10
1942 101 8 0 26
1943 150 9 1 40
1944 158 25 15 50
1945 174 28 34 58
1946 293 36 37 50
1947 364 29 51 58
1948 432 37 48 75
1949 591 66 68 58
1950 702 37 87 55
1951 741 62 112 69
1952 969 63 110 79
1953 913 55 103 84
1954 983 71 133 80
1955 1,099 95 145 68
1956 870 92 196 92
Total 8,589 715 1,140 959

(from T. Kemp 1957).

A positive means of propagating intelligence
is provided by artificial insemination.** When
this technique was first introduced pedigree
cattle breeders foresaw great dangers to their
own interests, and their foresight has been
vindicated. The new method has undermined
the value of the old criteria in cattle breeding.
Now man, as we have seen, has a self-maintaining breeding system of a uniquely complex kind.
It cannot be reduced to the steady formule of a
cattle breeding system. Artificial insemination
from a donor (A.I.D.) is therefore likely to have
more diverse, but ultimately no less valuable,
consequences for man than for a domestic
animal.

What are these consequences? A third party
is introduced into the control of the breeding
process. If he is aware of its genetic consequences
he may, like the Russian landowner who bred
his serfs for beauty,*’ be able to render a service

176

to society. Moreover, since his activities are
likely to be limited to the remedying of sterile
marriages, we shall have time to judge their
results before any danger arises from them. But
there is one serious qualification: if his results
are secret there will never be any possibility of
assessing or correcting or improving them.

There is one respect in which assessment
would be useful. In the past the rigidity of human
breeding systems has been mitigated by illegitimacy. From William the Conqueror to Abraham
Lincoln illegitimate class-crosses, such as rarely
arise through marriage, have produced men out
of the common run. In advanced societies
illegitimacy is declining; but through artificial
insemination a means of escape from the laws of
legitimate, that is, assortative, mating might be
maintained with advantage to the community.
And the advantage might be of an evolutionary
decisive degree. For with the evidence of genetics
before us we do not need to be persuaded that
single individuals can alter the course of history
or of human evolution.

The future

The problem of man’s control of his own
evolution now no longer appears as it did to
Galton.

Two methods of control are continually
operating. The one is through the process of
selection which slightly or gravely changes the
character of the world’s popualtion in every
generation The other is through the processes of
inbreeding or outbreeding by which variability
is preserved or released for selection to act upon.
The first is obvious and easily understood; the
second is deeper and less easily understood. But
we now know we are interfering with both. It is
a question of how we ought to interfere so as to
do good and not do harm.

Most of the effects, good and bad, of any
genetic policy can be felt only after the lapse of a
generation. Moreover, the human breeding
system is unique in its class basis, its elaborate
discrimination, and its repugnance for outbreeding. Oppressed by closer fears modern governments take less care for posterity than did their
predecessors in antiquity. Governments which
provide us with education have forgotten that
only our parents can provide us with the ability
THE CONTROL OF EVOLUTION IN MAN

to profit by it. There is indeed much evidence of in this way from A.I.D. in one generation would
a genetic component in the survival of nations. be indispensable for those carrying out A.I.D.
The nation which takes most serious thought in the next generation.

for its own genetical future is, therefore, most

likely to have a future. REFERENCES

Galton, F. 1869, 1892. Hereditary Genius. London.

Galton, F. 1883. Inquiries into Human Faculty.
London.

Darlington, C. D. 1953. The Facts of Life. London.

Fisher, R. A. 1930. Genetical Theory of Natural
Selection. Oxford.

Last, Hugh. 1947. J. Roman Stud. 37, 152.

Burt, Cyril. 1957. Nature. 179, 1325-7.

Cox, P. R. 1955. Eugen. Rev. 47, 27.

Nisbet, J. D. 1958. Eugen. Rev. 49, 202.

Cook, R. C. 1951. Human Fertility. New York.

Scott, P. 1957. Geog. Rev. 47, 311-329.

APPENDIX *

ONE EXAMPLE MAY be given of how A.I.D. might
be used for obtaining information of value for the
control of evolution in man. The crucial evidence
of the effect of cousin marriage on the fertility
of the progeny is obtainable from double
marriages where a man has children by two
wives, one a cousin and the other an unrelated

woman. This is set forth in the table below. Beton i Weand Maree. Reroe un an. Canesiy

In these cases, unless the family has already to Reproduce. Glencoe, Illinois.

poveh femeh pee
NEOSCAMNIAwW PY NE

been inbred, the progeny of inbreeding have: 13. Bateson, W. 1902. Mendel’s Principles of Heredity.
fewer children and fewer grandchildren than the Cambridge.
Wer gre 14. Garrod, A. E. 1902. Lancet. (2) 1616-20.
progeny of outbreeding. With A.I.D. such tests 15. Childe, V. Gordon. 1958. The Prehistory of European
ociety. London.

could be made on 8 large scale as a matter of 16. Darlington, C. D. and Mather, K. 1949. Elements
routine and with even more informative results. of Genetics. London.
Provided only that records were kept and were 17. Mather, K. 1393. symp. ae Eee ad 7, ><

. * nti . * . Proc. roy. Soc. ' - .
available for scientific study. 18. Darlington, C. D. 1956. Proc. roy. Soc. (B) 145,

Indeed we may say that information derived 350-364.
TABLE 3

(i) JOHANN SEBASTIAN BACH (1685-1750)
Maria Barbara Bach (1684-1720) 2nd Cousin.
Anna Magdalena Wilcken (1701-1760) Unrelated.

   

* 28 g.g.g.c., 52 g.g.g.g.c.
(cit. Geiringer 1954, The Bach Family, London: Allen & Unwin).

(ii) ANTHONY 3RD BARON HENLEY (1825-1898)
1846 Julia Peel, Ist cousin (1826-1862)
1870 Clara Jekyll, unrelated (1836-1922)

Marriage

Ist Cousin
Unrelated

 

(cit. Darlington 1958, Triangle, Sandoz, Basel, in the press).
Abbreviations: c, children; g.c. grandchildren; t, total born; s, survived to maturity; m. married; w.i., with issue.

* Professor Darlington has sent us this amplification of the discussion of A.I.D. towards the end of his lecture,
with the accompanying table, and the diagram on p.173 which were not included in the Woodhull Lecture as originally
printed.
| EpDITor.

177
4—ER.
20. Race, R. R. and Sanger, R. 1958. Blood Groups in

THE EUGENICS REVIEW
19. Mourant, A. E. 1954. The Distribution of the 29. Hart, C. W. M. 1943. Amer. Anthrop. 45, 374-386.

Human Blood Groups. Oxford.
Man 3rd Ed. Oxford.

21 ct. Ford, E. B. 1957. Nature. 180, 1315-1319.

23.
24.

25.
26.

27.
28.

Roberts, J. Fraser, 1957. Brit. J. prev. Med. 11,

107-125.
Allison, A. C. 1954. Brit. med. J. 1, 290.
Lehmann, H. 1956. J. clin. Path. 9, 180.
» 1957. Acta Genet. 6, 413-429.

Darlington, “ D. 1943. Nature. 152, 315-319.
Brarington, &. . D. 1943. Ann. Eugen. Lond. 12,
Jolly, A. T. H. and Rose, F. G. G. 1943. Ann.

Eugen., Lond. 12, 45-87.
Darlington, C. D. 1947, Heredity. 1, 269-286.

30.

Darlington, C. D. 1958. Evolution of Genetic Systems (2nd Ed.). Edinburgh.

31.cf. Doughty, C. M. 1888, 1926. Travels in Arabia

32.

33.
34.

35.
36.
37.

38.

Deserta. London.
Argenti, P. P. 1955. Libro d’ Oro de la Noblesse de
Chio. Oxford.
Carter, C. O. 1956. Gt. Ormond St. Jour. 11, 65-68.
Darlington, C. D. 1952. Biological Hazards of
Atomic Energy. Oxford. 33-45.
Kemp. T. 1951. Genetics and Disease. Edinburgh.
Muller, H. J. 1936. Out of the Night. New York.

Polunin, V. 1957. Three Generations: 1845-1902.
London.
Darwin, C. 1887. Life and Letters Ill. 99, London.

INDIAN JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

Established in 1916

Volume XXXVIII

July 1957

No. 148

Editor: DR. OM PRAKASH
SPECIAL NUMBER ON INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC PROBLEMS

ARTICLES

SYMPTOMS OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
AN INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC POLICY
SOME REFLECTIONS ON THE CONCEPT OF ‘‘ DISGUISED UNEMPLOYMENT ”’
DEFECTS IN THE CONCEPT OF REGIONALISM TO SOLVE TRADING PROBLEMS
PARTIAL—VS. GENERAL—EQUILIBRIUM IN INTERNATIONAL TRADE

A MARSHALLIAN ANALYSIS

DISCRIMINATORY TARIFF REDUCTION:
FuTURE OF WORLD TRADE
OVERSEAS BORROWING: THE NEW MODEL

MONEY AND BANKING PROBLEMS IN THE BRITISH COLONIES
SoME ASPECTS OF FISCAL POLICY IN UNDERDEVELOPED ECONOMICS
THE PROBLEM OF FACTOR PROPORTIONS IN UNDERDEVELOPED ECONOMICS

REVEALED PREFERENCE FOR INDIAN JUTE
NOTES AND MEMORANDA

Activity ANALYSIS AND THE THEORY OF Economic EQUILIBRIUM
FINANCIAL ASPECTS OF THE CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN

A Nore on INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC RELATIONS

ECONOMIC LITERATURE

Annual Subscription (four issues) Rs.17, 26s. or $380.

Om Prakash

Jj. Tinbergen
Jacob Viner
Gottfried Haberler
G. P. Kindleberger
Harry G. Johnson
S. L. Parmar
H.W. Arndt

A. Rastb

B. K. Singh
A.D. Sharma
George K. Chako

J. K. Mehta
M.S. Bhatia
Mahesh Chand

This Special Number costs Rs.6°50, Ios.

or $1°50 up to December 31st, 1958; and Rs.8, 12s. 6d. or $1°80 thereafter.

Write to the Managing Editor,
ALLAHABAD-2 (India).

 

Indian Journal of Economics, University of Allahabad,
