J. M. THODAY

Professor of Genetics, University of Cambridge

Causes and Functions of

Genetic Variety

Introduction

ISCUSSION OF ANY eugenic programme
1) or policy must involve judgement of the

relative merit of differing individuals as
potential ancestors of future generations. Such
value judgements take us into deep philosophical
waters into which I have no intention of plunging as I do not believe the biologist is as biologist
any better qualified to make such value judgements than anyone else.

The biologist is however qualified to set out
the factual and theoretical biological framework
that must be taken into account when any such
value judgements are made and hence must at
least paddle a little at the edge of the philosophical sea when he wishes to expound knowledge he believes to be relevant. Further, the
biologist has I think a duty to express the views
that arise from his specialized knowledge concerning the biological origin and function of the
various characteristics that may or should be
considered in relation to any relevant policy.
Likewise the sociologist and psychologist should
have relevant considerations to put forward, so
that final judgement must be based on complex
integration: we should expect this, and beware of
any specialist who puts forward his own speciality as the only one permitting authority in
relation to any particular problem.

My purpose, therefore, is to consider certain
biological attributes, especially as they are
illuminated by the results of recent researches,
from the biological point of view, so as to bring
out something of their biological function.

* A paper read at a Members’ Meeting of the Eugenics
Society on May 23rd, 1962.

195

Now in most discussions of this kind, whether
at the individual or the population level, the
attributes under consideration are the attributes
of individuals. We may for instance consider
height, or the attribute or attributes that are
measured by IQ tests, about which there are two
questions the geneticist may be asked. The first
is: if for example individuals with higher IQs
breed more than those with lower (or vice versa),
will the IQ of the population change, and at what
rate? The second question is, if we were effectively to encourage such differential reproduction
in favour of IQ, what would be the consequent
changes in characteristics other than IQ? The
first of these questions is of course difficult
enough to answer, witness the problem of interpreting the‘facts concerning correlations of IQ
and family size. The second is at present impossible to answer for even if we were to suspect
negative correlations between other attributes
we deem desirable and IQ, establishment of the
facts concerning the degree to which the correlation had genetic causes would be a difficult task
indeed.

Difficult though they are, however, it is not
this kind of question that I am involved in. Iam
not concerned with individual attributes but with
an attribute which by its very nature the individual cannot possess. What I am concerned with
is the variety of individuals in the population,
particularly in as much as it arises from genetic
variety.

I think this a matter of proper concern in the
Eugenics Society, because it is generally to be
expected that natural or artificial selection of the
ordinary kind will tend to reduce the genetic
variety of a population, as also will inbreeding.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, January 1963, 54, 4.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

We therefore should be prepared to consider the
value we put on variety as an attribute of a
population as well as the value we put on the
average or on individual attributes.

Now when we come to the question of the
value we place on variety—particularly genetic
variety—we really do come to the shore of
stormy philosophical seas. But it is I think just
because of this that the specialist’s knowledge of
the facts of genetic variety and his views concerning the causes and functions of such variety may
be of importance, for they may help to limit the
field of philosophical discussion.

Genetic Variety

It is a fact that has become more and more
clearly and strikingly established in recent years
that in natural populations genetic variety is
ubiquitous. Much of the most striking evidence
comes from studies of flies, but there is quite
sufficient evidence from other organisms, including man, for us to generalize. Any natural
population of an outbreeding species contains an
enormous variety of genetically different individuals.

Much of this variety is fairly readily detected,
but much more is variety not readily discernible
as affecting the variety of observed characteristics
of contemporary individuals: it is what we call
cryptic, or concealed, genetic variety and its
demonstration depends on relatively sophisticated experiments, or techniques.

There was a time when it was generally
expected that a population would be relatively
uniform genetically, such variation as there was
being due to the usually accidental spread at low
frequencies of recently mutated genes. Certain
phenomena, however, classed under the heading
“polymorphism” (we should speak in_ this
context of “‘genetic’’ or “‘segregational” polymorphisms) stood out as exceptions to the rules
upon which this expectation was based. Work
aimed at elucidating the causes of genetic polymorphism notably in the hands of Ford’s school
at Oxford and of Dobzhansky in the United
States, together with demonstration of more
subtle classes of polymorphism by Dubinin, the
work on quantitative inheritance initiated by
Mather, and work on blood groups in man and
other mammals, have all converged as meaning

196

that the arguments upon which this expectation
of relative genetic uniformity was based were
erroneous. On the contrary, when we investigate
adequately two homologous chromosomes taken
from two individuals of a population of flies we
find that they are different, or if we make suitable
tests on humans by skingrafting we find that it is
only identical twins that are alike. Each individual appears to be genetically unique, and the
more we discover about the genetic architecture
of natural populations of outbreeding species the
more clear it becomes that polymorphisms are
not peculiar except as extreme examples of a
general phenomenon that does not usually force
itself upon our notice but is always there. We
begin to feel it is not too much to say that, apart
from identical twins, no two individual flies or
humans have ever been genetically exactly alike.

Now, though mutation must have provided
the variety of genes upon which this diversity
depends, it is very clear that recurrent mutation
pressure is responsible for the maintenance of
only a small part of it and much of that is
deleterious. The bulk of this normal genetic
diversity must be maintained in the population
through other causes, and hence it is clear that
diversity itself, albeit no doubt diversity of the
proper kind, fulfils an important function in the
economy of most natural populations, including
populations of humans. Investigation into and
discussion of the causes and functions of this
natural diversity of course go hand in hand;
understanding of the causes throws light on the
functions.

We know four explanations of this genetic
diversity, which I should stress are not alternative explanations, except in certain specific
cases, but involve four kinds of cause each of
which probably contributes or has contributed
to diversity in any particular population.

The four causes are, slow change of the
environment over long periods of time, heterogeneity of the environment in space and over
short periods of time, assortative mating, and
superior fitness of individuals heterozygous at a
particular locus when compared with either of
the corresponding homozygotes. I shall not
spend time on the last two of these, believing
them to be mainly a consequence of the first two.

The first of these explanations stems from the
CAUSES AND FUNCTIONS OF GENETIC VARIETY

penetrating discussions by Darlington (1932 and
1939) of the properties of genetic systems. It
invokes the fact that all contemporary species
have evolved in a slowly changing environment,
and that the changes the environment was to
undergo in the then future were in essence
unpredictable. In these circumstances natural
selection would always be tending to promote
adaptation to contemporary conditions, and in
so far as environmental change was slow, to
promote the maintenance of that adaptation.
Over long periods of time, however, environmental change would be considerable and to
meet it populations must retain adaptability.
Now the maintenance of adaptation depends
upon stability in heredity, but adaptability
depends upon the possibility of hereditary
variation. The two requirements, adaptation and
adaptability are therefore opposite, and the only
populations that will have survived long periods
of evolution are those which retained adaptability despite the selection for adaptation, those
which developed genetic systems permitting
compromise between the two needs. As Mather
(e.g. 1943) and I (e.g. 1953) among others have
discussed, the development of cryptic genetic
diversity such as we find so widespread in natural
populations provides a means of doing this
efficiently. On this view much of visible diversity
is the price we pay for an adaptable genetic
system. When the genetic diversity is cryptic that
price is reduced. But some price is inevitable for
genetic diversity is the prerequisite of genetic
adaptability and hence of survival in the novel
and unpredictable conditions of the future,
though many of the genetic variants will be ill
adapted in the present and some will never be of
use.

The second explanation has come to the fore
more recently as a result of some ideas put forward by Mather (1955), and relevant researches
I and my colleagues have carried out over the
last seven years. This explanation invokes the
fact that the environment to which a population
is exposed at any one time is not uniform. On the
contrary it would be truer to say that no two
individuals meet quite the same environments.
This being so, different groups of individuals will
be exposed to different selective forces, and
natural selection will continually be selecting

different parts of a population in slightly different
directions.

Selection and Genetic Variety

In these circumstances it would seem reasonable to expect that different genes or constellations of genes might be favoured in the different
parts of the population and hence that the
diversity of environment would actually give rise
to positive selection for diversity of genotype.
What remained was to find out by experiment
whether this can in fact be an effective factor
promoting genetic diversity in populations and,
if so, how effective. To this end (Thoday 1959,
etc.), I and my colleagues have taken a simple
quantitative character—hair number in Drosophila—and exposed populations to selection for
and against diversity in this character. It proves
that such selection is surprisingly effective.

Our earliest results are illustrated in Figure 1
which shows the variety of hair numbers in a

40 ORIGINAL

20

 

FUES

40

20

 

 

 

  

° 12 73 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
HAIRS

FIGURE 1.

The number of flies with each hair-number in samples
of 160 flies of the three experimental populations.

Original: the wild stock from which the other populations were derived. S: the stock bred by choosing average
flies only as parents for 39 generations. D: the stock bred
by choosing both extreme types of fly as parents for 48
generations.

197
ER—C
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

wild stock of flies, together with the variety in
two populations selected from that stock in
different ways. In one we selected always only
the average flies and the consequence is clearly
a reduction in the variety of hair numbers. In the
other we selected always both extreme kinds of
fly, eliminating those near the average and the
consequence was increase in the variety of hair
number.

Having demonstrated that these results occurred, we were led to ask whether in selecting for
and against diversity of hair number in our
populations we had in fact brought about change
in the adaptability of the populations. Figure 2
shows that we had, for it shows the line selected
for the diversity to be more, and that selected for
uniformity to be less adaptable than the original
wild stock.

D High

.. O High
S High

S Low

treeee O Low

Change of hair number

 

D Low

 

Generations

FIGURE 2.

The adaptability of the three populations.

From each population two selection lines were taken,
and one was selected for high the other for low hair
number. Their rate of divergence measures the adaptability of the population under test. It is clear that the D
population is more and the S population is less adaptable
than the original (O) wild stock.

We therefore see that such selection does affect
the ability of a population to adapt to new
conditions. Hence we may extrapolate and
reasonably conclude that the heterogeneity of
natural environments may preserve and promote
the genetic diversity of natural populations, and
hence that such diversity will function both as

198

adapting the population to the diversity of the
present environment and as preserving the
adaptability of the population against future
unpredictable environmental change.

Now it is of some interest in relation to
eugenics to consider what we have discovered of
the genetic means whereby one of our populations responded to selection for diversity. We
(Gibson and Thoday 1962) have made extensive
analysis of the genetic constitution of this
population, and have shown that part of the
diversity is maintained by the maintenance of
three alternative classes of chromosome. The
first has two low hair number genes a” b” upon
it, and is responsible when heterozygous with
either of the other two, for the flies with few
hairs. This chromosome has another property,
it is recessive lethal. The other two classes each
have one high and one low hair number gene
and are a™ b” and a” b*. These two classes are
indistinguishable except in as much that flies
heterozygous for the two, that is a“ b®/a™ b”
produce by recombination 10 per cent a” b”
chromosomes among their progeny. These
observations put us in a position to test the wild
population with which we started and show that
it also had both a“ b® and a®™ b” chromosomes.
The first point of interest is that we have here a
situation in which a population has adapted to
particular conditions by producing and exploiting a lethal chromosome, at the price of course of
producing some lethal offspring. Measures taken
to reduce the frequency of that “deleterious”
chromosome in the population would have been
undesirable unless accompanied by measures
taken to change the environment in such a way
that the “deleterious” chromosome was no
longer called for. A similar situation occurs with
the sickle cell gene in man which is deleterious,
yet in malarial areas advantageous unless the
malaria is controlled.

The second point of interest is our demonstration of the cryptic diversity in the wild
population. It is notable that the wild population
with which we started shows a degree of variety
that could be both increased and decreased by
selection. This strongly suggests, as we might
expect, that there is optimum diversity in any
population in any contemporary situation or set
of situations. Natural selection tends, as was
CAUSES AND FUNCTIONS OF GENETIC VARIETY

demonstrated long ago by Bumpus and by
Wheldon, to eliminate extreme variants of all
kinds thus stabilizing a population and keeping
its properties constant. At the same time, however, it does not eliminate all variants; a proper
balance is preserved. But underlying the natural
diversity we see in the existence of the two
chromosomes a™ b” and a” b®™ a very clear
example of the kind of reserve of variability that
Mather in 1943 argued should be there. These
two chromosomes differ little in their effects.
But their existence together in the population
endows it with the capacity of producing extreme
recombinants that may be useful as adaptations
in the unpredictable future: they endow it with
genetic versatility. A price again is paid, for the
population must regularly produce some of these
recombinants which are undesirable in the
present. But the price is reduced by the two
genes’ association in the same chromosome.

I have now said nearly enough about these
causes of variety. But there is one further important point. In our latest experiment (Thoday
and Gibson 1962) we selected a wild population
for variety under slightly but very significantly
different conditions. In this experiment we gave
the flies we had selected the opportunity to
choose their mates. Thus the more hairy females
could choose between equal numbers of more and
less hairy males and the less hairy females could
choose likewise.

The result of this was as Mather (1955) had
predicted. The population rapidly split into two,
but it did it with such rapidity that only
twelve generations of selection were needed,
after which nearly all the effective mating was
assortative.

The astonishing rapidity with which this
experiment worked raises two questions. The
first is: waS some assortative mating there
in the wild population with which we started?
This would suggest that assortative mating might
be assisting the wild population to maintain its
diversity. We do not know the answer to this for
certain yet but preliminary evidence suggests
there may be a rather strong tendency for the
more hairy flies to choose more hairy and the
less hairy to choose less hairy as mates in this
wild population.

The second question is more subtle. In the

experiment we took a wild population which in
the earlier parts of the experiment behaved as a
single population. Yet after only a few generations of selection for diversity it was behaving as
two separate populations between which hybrids
did not or did not often occur. Now this is the
sort of process that must be involved in the
formation of species, and we are forced to ask:
if, in at least this one case, it can be so easy to split
a population into two, and given the diversity of
natural environments, why is it that it does not
happen more often? Why is it for instance that
it seems easy to mate Drosophila melanogaster
populations from all over the world? This
suggests that there are compensating disadvantages, forces actually preventing species splitting
up in this way. I suggested something of the sort
before (Thoday 1953, 1958) and criticised Sir
Arthur Keith for assuming speciation to be an
essential end of progressive evolution, basing
my argument on the view that splitting a population into two produces two populations each
genetically less diverse than the original population, and, because less diverse, less genetically
versatile. Racial segregationists might take note
of this.

Genetic diversity then is produced by the
diversity of selective forces operating through
variation of the environment in space and in
time. It is itself an adaptation, not of the individual but of the species, an adaptation to the
unpredictability of the environment; it is respon-.
sible for the versatility of populations, their
capacity to survive new conditions and even
catastrophes such as the myxomatosis epidemic
which rabbits have survived. It is one of the
most important aspects in the adaptation of
populations and species to the conditions of life
in our ever changing and variable world.

Conclusion

Now we can be sure that all this applies to man
though the situation with respect to man is
complicated in a number of ways.

The first complication arises because human
populations not only have genetic versatility, but
are made up of individuals themselves versatile
in many ways. This individual versatility is of
course itself a product of the human genotype.
Individual versatility is also shown in various

199,
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

degrees by other organisms, but such individual
versatility, the adaptability of the individual to a
wide range of environmental conditions, is a
property more highly developed in man than any
other organism. This comes about of course
through the great flexibility of the human brain.

It has itself given rise to the remaining complications, for it has made possible the social
development of man through communicated
experience, and hence of social inheritance, social
evolution and very rapid change of the human
environment induced by human activity.

It is sometimes claimed that these factors
render unimportant genetic evolution in man,
and if this were so, they would render genetic
versatility unimportant. However, though I
would be the last to under-rate the importance of
social inheritance, this individual versatility does
not mean that genetic evolution is rendered
unimportant. After all, individual versatility
itself is a consequence of genetic endowment, and
every change social systems produce in human
environments necessarily produce consequent
genetic changes. Furthermore, no one would
pretend that we are in a position, for all our
culture, to predict the consequences of our
activities for the future. The environment changes
more rapidly than ever it did, largely thanks to
our own activities, and, though the future is
perhaps more predictable to us than it was to
our ancestors, this greater rate of change means
that the unpredictable aspects of the future will
require more rapid adaptation than they did in
the past. To say the least, we cannot be sure that
our individual versatility is sufficient. Consequently we need to be sure that we attach
sufficient importance not only to individual but
also to genetic diversity as well as to devising and
maintaining flexible social and political systems.

Now in conclusion I should remind you of an
important point I made in connection with my
experimental results, for the premium I have put
in this discussion on the value of genetic variety
may seem to suggest that any eugenic policy

200

designed to reduce the frequency of certain
genotypes regarded as undesirable at present,
might itself be undesirable as it would tend to
reduce genetic variety. This however would be
to go too far, for the point the experiment
showed was that selection could either increase
or decrease variety in the wild population with
which we started. The successful population
maintains variety, but the variety is limited, there
is a balance between too much and too little
variety. Uniform populations will be unsuccessful but so are the most extreme variant individuals. Nothing I have said need prevent us
from considering eugenic programmes, but we
should beware extreme suggestions such as those
involving excessive multiplication, by asexual
reproduction or artificial insemination, of genotypes now considered advantageous. We cannot
assess just how much genetic diversity is needed
in our complex, variable and ever changing
social systems, but we can be sure that it is a
good deal. There are always pressures toward
uniformity in human populations; to a large
extent they should be resisted.

REFERENCES

Darlington, C. D. 1932. Recent Advances in Cytology.
Churchill.

Darlington, C. D. 1939. The Evolution of Genetic Systems.
Cambridge University Press.

Gibson, J. B. and Thoday, J. M. 1962. Effects of disruptive selection. VI A second chromosome polymorphism. Heredity. 17, 1-26.

Mather, K. 1943. Polygenic inheritance and natural
selection. Biol. Rev. 18, 32-64.

Mather, K. 1955. Polymorphism as an outcome of disruptive selection. Evolution. 9, 52-61.

Millicent, E. and Thoday, J. M. 1961. Effects of disruptive selection. [V Gene flow and divergence. Heredity.
15, 119-217.

Thoday, J. M. 1957. Components of fitness. Symp. Soc.
exp. Biol 7, 96-113.

Thoday, J. M. 1958. Natural selection and biological
progress. A Century of Darwin, Heinemann.

Thoday, J. M. 1959. Effects of disruptive selection. I
Genetic flexibility. Heredity. 13, 187-204.

Thoday, J. M. and Boam, T. B. 1959. Effects of disruptive
selection. II Polymorphism and divergence without
isolation. Heredity. 13, 205-218.

Thoday, J. M. and Gibson, J. B. 1962. Isolation by disruptive selection. Nature, 193, 1164-1166.
