FOUNDATIONS OF NOTABLE
FAMILIES.

By T. W. J. Gun, F.R.HIST.S., F.GEN.S.

The origin of those family connections, whose members have won
distinction, is an interesting study. For this purpose 120 such connections in the British Isles and in the United States of America have
been selected and certain particulars relating to those will be found in
the six annexed tables.

The names on the left hand side are those of the founders of the
connection, i.e., those who are the common ancestors in each case of
the greatest number of notable descendants. The letters placed in
front of the names in certain instances denote the founder’s country
of domicile: S—Scotch, I=Irish, W—Welsh, A—American, EA=
English birth but subsequent settlement in America, F, G. and J.
represent French, German and Jewish origin respectively. All those
not so marked were English.

The second column in the table gives the status of the founder,
the third column the status of the founder’s father, where ascertainable. The fourth column gives the number of notable descendants
down to the 5th generation, limited to those of whom separate memoirs
appear in the Dictionary of National Biography or in Appleton’s
Eneyclopedia of American Biography. In the later tables some of
the final descendants are still living, in these cases account is taken of
those who will in all probability, appear in future biographical dictionaries. The fifth column gives a general classification of the
activities of the descendants, ‘public affairs’ includes polities generally, diplomacy and the Civil Service.

The tables themselves are arranged in general chronological
order, commencing at the beginning of the 16th century and finishing
at the end of the 18th. Connections of note originating in the 19th
century are not included, as in these cases 5 generations would not as
vet have elapsed. In each table, however, the order adopted is not
chronological, but is based on the number of notable descendants.
The exact date at which the founders flourished is not in itself of
ereat importance, but the broad distinction between centuries does
present features of interest.

The question of the status to be assigned to founders and their
fathers has presented some difficulty. Some have to be specially
described; for instance, in a few of the earlier cases the heading
‘citizen’ seems to be the best available, among Americans ‘planters’
for some of the Southerners, ‘colonist’ for some of the Northerners.
For ultimate purposes of classification however it will be sufficient to
consider three leading divisions, landed, professional, commercial.
The planters, colonists, veomen and farmers may be assigned to
FOUNDATIONS OF NOTABLE FAMILIES. 111

landed interests, the citizens to commercial, the rest either to professional or commercial. The status of the fathers of the founders
has been included in order to carry back the origin a step further, the
status of the fathers-in-law would also no doubt be of interest, as
obviously qualities may have been derived through the wife of the
founder, but the inclusion of these would tend to overload the tables.

It may no doubt be urged that from the point of view of eugenics
no special stress should be laid on the founder of a notable connection,
as many of the descendants, particularly those in the later generations,
may well have derived their qualities from other ancestors. This
is no doubt true for any one particular case, but in considering as
many as 120, the writer is of opinion that a great deal may be learned
from the founders taken as a whole, as they must necessarily represent
between them the tvpe of ancestors who have had the most eugenic
value.

With regard to the number of notable descendants in each case,
the test of reference in a biographical dictionary is certainly the best
available, though undoubtedly some of those so mentioned had little
real ability and appear only through fortuitous circumstances. This
apples chiefly however to the earlier tables, and in them to those
connections with the greatest number of names. On the other hand
men of marked ability have often failed to win biographical mention
owing to their having devoted themselves to purely commercial
activities. Many such had their reward in their lifetime, but their
names have not survived. There are, however, various eases of
notable commercial men among the descendants of the 120 founders
in the tables.

It must be remembered that the numbers of notable descendants
specified are in every case a minimum, as owing to the difficulty of
tracing through female lines, many must necessarily have been overlooked, particularly in the 4th and 5th generations.

With regard to the classification of descendants, two main groups
appear, the first those shewing more particularly qualities of leadership, the second more particularly qualities of intellect. In addition
to public affairs the first comprises generally, the Law, the Church, the
Army and the Navy, while the second may be divided into the three
main headings of Literature, Science and Art. While these distinctions are by no means absolute, qualities both of leadership and intellect sometimes appearing in the same individual, while family
connections may be themselves divided, still the great majority of
connections can be definitely assigned to one or other group. In the
final classification it has been found possible exactly to divide the
120 connections, assigning 60 to the leadership and 60 to the intellectual group.

The tabulation of these 120 connections has been prepared entirely
in accordance with the achievements of the descendants, without any
prior reference to the status of the founders. All these cases have been
included where 15 or more notable descendants of a common ancestor
have been traced, and the great majority of these where 10 or more
have been traced; the omissions between 10 and 15 being all ‘leader112 EUGENICS REVIEW.

ship’ cases, particularly those where extrinsic circumstances have
evidently played a considerable part. In those examples which shew
less than 10 notable descendants a very rigid selection has been made,
preference being given to connections where marked intellectual powers
have been evident, and where extrinsic circumstances have played
comparatively little part. A few very special instances of only 5
notable descendants have been included, this being the lowest figure
taken. The total number of cases between 5 and 10 is of course very
large, of these the writer has a note of at least 400.

As shewing the chances against any given individual attaining
biographical note, a quite specialised group may be cited, those who
entered Harrow School between 1845 and 1885. The youngest of
these is now well over 50 years of age, and on a rough estimate only
some 3%, have attained biographical distinction. Those sent to
Harrow would obviously have opportunities well over the average,
and having regard to such a percentage, it is quite clear that, apart
from heredity, the chances of the occurrence of several relatives of
note would be almost negligible.

It is not possible within the limits of an article to deal at all
fully with the notable descendants in the 4th column of the tables.
Where the distinction is in the male line, the surname of the founder
affords a clue, and it is proposed therefore to set out the names of only
some of the best known men and women who derive from the founders
through female lines. The list that follows is of course far from
exhaustive and it must be emphasised that all descending in a direct
male line are excluded. The 4th column in the tables combined with
this list will however furnish some idea of the considerable numbers
of relatives of distinction possessed by these individuals of the first
eminence.

TABLE 1.
Ancestors. Descendants .

Sir William Sidney ae .. 2nd Karl of Manchester.

Ist Duke of Schomberg.
Ist Earl of Halifax.

Roger North.
Ist Earl Stanhope.

Duke of Norfolk os .. -- Queen Elizabeth.
3rd Ear! of Sussex.
Sir Robert Dudley.
3rd Ear! of Essex.

Sir Edmund Denny oe .. Sir Francis Walsingham.
2nd Viscount Falkland.

Henry Hope 4% .. -.- Ist Lord Erskine.
Thomas Coutts .

Sir Anthony Cooke .- .. Francis Bacon.
ist Karl of Salisbury.

Sir William Fairfax .. .. Admiral Lord Hawke.

Sir Henry Cromwell! = .. John Hampden.
Lord Bolingbroke.
FOUNDATIONS OF NOTABLE FAMILIES. 113

Sir Thomas Wyatt ..

James Stanyhurst
Matthew Guild

Sir John More

Ancestors.
Sir George Villiers ..

Sir Richard Temple

Gavin Elliot 3
Sir James Dundas

Henry Sewall ..

Edmund Quincy

Sir John St. John ..

Robert Barclay

Samuel Bayard
Robert Walpole

Sir Bernard Granville

Michael Hill 
Peter Folger e- <m

John Dryden we ws
Ancestors.

William Randolph ~
ee

Sir Henry Vane.
2nd Viscount Falkland.

Archbishop Ussher.
The Gregory family.

John Donne.

TABLE 2.

Descendants’
Ist Duke of Marlborough.
Ist Karl] of Chatham.
Lord Harvey.
Lady Mary Wortley Montagu.
Henry Fielding.

The Grenville family.
William Pitt.
Chief Justice Cockburn.

Sir John Malcolm.
Archbishop Davidson.

H. W. Longfellow.
President Grover Cleveland.

President John Quincy Adams.
Oliver Wendall Holmes.
Charles Francis Adams.

Mrs. Hutchinson.

2nd Earl of Rochester.
4th Earl of Sandwich.
Charles Townshend.

Sir Francis Galton.
Mrs. Elizabeth Fry.

Chief Justice John Jay.
Lord Nelson.

Mrs. Delaney.
Granville Sharp.

Ist Duke of Wellington
2nd Marquis of Salisbury .
Ear! Balfour.

Benjamin Franklin.

Jonathan Swift.
Horace Walpole.

TABLE 3.

Descendants,
President Thomas Jefferson.
Chief Justice John Marshall.
Robert E. Lee.
114

EUGENICS REVIEW.

James Pierpont

Robert Carter

William Robertson

John Taylor

Ear] Cadogan

William Bird oe ee

Nevill Maskalyne

John Thornton

Sir John Pratt

Sir John Swinton

Thomas Thackeray.

Ancestors.
John Symonds

Thomas Wedgwood
Aulay Macaulay
Roger Kemble...

Sir Beaumont Hotham

Richard Ward

George Abercomby

Jonathan Edwards.
Timothy Dwight.
J. Pierpont Morgan.

President William H. Harrison.
President Benjamin Harrison.
Robert E. Lee.

Lord Brougham.
Robert Adam.
Patrick Henry.

Admiral Sir William Parry.
Lady Eastlake.
Lady Duff-Gordon.

Charles Fox.
Sir Charles Napier.
Sir William Napier.

William Wilberforce.
Bishop Samuel Wilberforce.
Bishop Charles Summer.
TIsahella Bird.

Lord Rosebery.

St. Loe Strachey.
Lytton Strachey.

William Wilberforce.
Bishop Samuel Wilberforce.

The Hardinge family.
Lord Randolph Churchill.
Winston Churchill.

Sir Walter Scott.
Archbishop Davidson.
Sir Douglas Hogg.

Sir Rennell Rodd.

TABLE 4.

Descendants.
Sir Rowland Hill.
Sir Morell Mackenzie.
Compton Mackenzie.
St. Loe Strachey.

Charles Darwin.
The Trevelyan family.
Mrs. Siddons.

Lord Avebury.
Charles Doughty.

Julia Ward Howe.
Marion Crawford.

Lord Haldane.
FOUNDATIONS OF NOTABLE FAMILIES. 115

—.Daunay ..

William Scott

John Gainsborough

Ancestors
Ear] Spencer.

Daniel Bell

James Stephen

Charles Doyle

William Ellery

Francis Turner

—. Hall

Benjamin Heath

Ancestors

John Bartlett Allen.

John Baring 
Oliver Everett

John Penrose

John Alsop

Erasmus Darwin

Thomas Calleott

George Richmond.
Sir William Richmond.

Sir John Burdon-Sandcrson.
Lord Haldane.

Kdmond William Lane.

TABLE 5.

Descendants.
2nd Earl Granville.
Alfred Lyttelton.

Lord Desborough.
Bishop Charles Gore.
Bishop William Temple.

Mrs. Elizabeth I'ry.
Kdward Gibbon Wakefield.
Bishop Charles Wordsworth.
W. Clark Russell.

Henry Hodson.

Ist Karl of Lytton.

Sir Bertram Windle.
Edith O’FE Somerville.
Plunket Greene.

William IKHery Channing.
Richard Henry Dana.

Sir Joseph Hooker.
William S. Palgrave.
Francis J. Palgrave.

Samuel F. B. Morse
Benjamin Rush.

Charles Merivale.

TABLE 6.

Descendants
The later Darwins.
The later Cecils.

Henry Labouchere.
Samuel Rawson Gardiner.

Edward Everett Hale.
Matthew Arnold.

Mrs. Humphrey Ward.
Julian Huxley.
Aldous Huxley.

John Alsop King.
Mary King Waddington.

Sir Francis Galton.

Sir Victor Horsley.
116 EKUGENICS REVIEW.

The names of descendants given include representatives of practically every form of activity, and the direct male lines would furnish
an almost equal number of individuals of note. It may be of interest
to add a few observations on the tables in general and certain connections in particular.

TABLE I,

It will be noted that the founders and their fathers sprang mainly
from landed families, and that the descendants as a whole belonged to
the ‘leadership’ groups, though almost every connection can show at
least one man of letters, and three scientists of the first note are included.
John Napier the mathematician, Hugh Myddleton the engineer and
Robert Boyle the chemist. Scotland is well represented, America
does not yet appear, except for a branch of the commercial family of
Saltonstall, who were distinguished in the New World at the later
part of last century. The Fletchers, the best known of whom was the
dramatist, are an interesting early instance of a purely literary family,
while the Mylnes shew a remarkable and almost unique instance of
long descent of specialised talent, 5 generations of master masons
being followed by 5 further generations of architects,

TABLE 2.

Here the landed interest, though still prominent, is much less so
than in the first table. Scotland is still to the fore, and several notable
American connections now make an appearance, all those except
the Livingstones of New York, first achieving distinction in New
England. The Bayards were of French origin and were perhaps the
most distinguished of all the Huguenot families who settled in AngloSaxon lands.

Among the English families, a peculiar interest attaches to the
St. John connection, as few shew so well the inheritance of definite
characteristics, considerable ability combined with much moral
obliquity. | Instances are Lord Rochester, Lord Sandwich, Charles
Townshend and the Duchess of Cleveland, the mistress of Charles IT.
Mrs. Hutchinson, on the other hand, was all that was excellent.

Worthy of special remark in this table is the joint relationship of
Dryden, Swift and Horace Walpole. Their common ancestor was an
obscure Northamptonshire squire, his wife, however, who was a
Cope had several relations of that name of some note in the 16th century.

TABLE 3.

The landed interest remains quite as prominent as in the previous
table, mainly owing to the four Virginian families, Randolph, Lee,
Carter and Marshall. These families intermarried to a considerable
extent and the Confederate general, Robert Lee, was descended from
all but the Marshalls. The relationship of Lee, Thomas Jefferson and
John Marshall, all descended from William Randolph, it is as remarkable in the sphere of public affairs as that of Dryden, Swift and Horace
Walpole in literature.
FOUNDATIONS OF NOTABLE FAMILIES. 117

Scotland shows a drop and the proportion of Scotch connections
of note originating in the 18th céntury is decidedly less than that
originating in the 17th.

Attention may be drawn to the fact that William Bird, a country
gentleman quite unknown to fame, was the common ancestor of no
less than eight bishops.

TABLE 4.

By the mid 18th century the landed interest has entirely ceased
to predominate.

The Schomberg family is the only one of Jewish origin included
in these tables. The writer has been unable to trace any other British
or American Jewish family with more than 3 or 4 members receiving
biographical mention. There can be little doubt that the prominence
of the Jewish race is habitually exaggerated.

The Twining family, the well-known tea merchants, are an interesting instance of a combination of commercial pursuits and other
very varied activities.

TABLE 5.

The Bosanquets are probably the most notable family of French
Huguenot origin who settled in this country, though others such as
the Romillys and the Laboucheres, have produced more striking
individual figures. It would appear, however, that the influence of the
French Huguenots, like that of the Jews, has been on the whole overestimated, and that families of German origin have been generally
speaking more distinguished. This certainly applies to the Barings
in Table 4 and to the Herschells in Table 6; the Wyons in this table
were of much less note, but furnish an interesting instance of a family
which for several generations specialised with much success, in their
case in the craft of seal engraving.

TABLES 5 AND 6.

Four families, those of Evans, Tuckerman, Pickering and Cunnigham are good examples of connections shewing a remarkable
variety of attainment, without any one member reaching world wide
fame.

The Evans family included 2 archaeologists, 2 mathematicians,
1 musical composer, 2 miscellaneous writers, 1 journalist.

The Cunninghams included a poet, a commentator, a critic, an
archaeologist, an Indian official, a surgeon and a botanist.

The Tuckermans included 4 authors, a divine, an artist, an architect, a musician and a botanist.

The Pickerings included 2 astronomers, a stateman, a philosoph ist, a physician, a poet and a lawyer.

It must be remembered that all the above achieved sufficient note
in their various vocations to warrant biographical mention.

There are various possible classifications to be made of the 120
founders and fathers, and it is proposed now to consider one or two of
the more striking.
118 EUGENICS REVIEW.

Taking the 120 founders as a whole, 48 can be assigned to the
professional classes, 43 to the landed interests (of whom 34 were
British landed proprietors, including 5 peers), and 28 to the commercial classes. (In one instance it has been found impossible to
ascertain the status of a founder. The individual in question was a
Mr. Hall, the common ancestor of two notable American families,
those of Morse and Rush, the first distinguished in science, the second
in polities and diplomacy. )

All three groups are thus well represented among the founders.
When we turn to the fathers the division is found to be as follows:
Land 54, Commercial 31, Professional 20, and 15 whosc status
cannot be ascertained. It will be observed that the Professional now
drops to the 8rd place, from which it is evident that the beginnings of
distinction were apt to occur when the sons of landed and commercial
men took to the professions.

With regard to the professions themselves, among the founders
the clerical Jeads with 22, the legal is a good second with 17. The
others are very few in numbers, the medical only shewing 3, a somewhat astonishing result, as long before the end of the 18th century,
the medical profession had produced many eminent men, but these
were not the progenitors of equally eminent families. Military and
naval men rarely founded connections of any note, the only one of
naval origin in the tables is that which commences with an American,
Christopher Perry.

Seeing that the limit of period of origin is the end of the 13th
century, it might be anticipated that the clerical would head the professions. The number of clergymen founders, 22, is not however so
very high out of a total of 120, though as will shortly be seen, the proportion is much higher in the strictly intellectual group. Of these
22, 12 were members of the Church of England, 2 only were Scotch
Presbyterian ministers, and though these founded two highly distinguished connections, the Robertson and the Macaulay, it would
certainly seem that the proverb as to the success of sons of the manse
does not hold quite equally with regard to remoter descendants.

Among the 28 commercial founders, 16 may be described as
having been in a large way of buisness, 9 in a small way, while 3 are
doubtful. Only 2 founders however, Robert Peel and John Baring
appear to have made very considerable fortunes. Great riches have
notoriously had an evil effect in smothering ability among those who
inherit them.

An interesting classification can be arrived at on the basis of the
division of descendents into the leadership and intellectual groups, to
which division reference has already been made. The ‘leadership’
group shews as might be expected a great preponderence of the landed
interests, among the founders and still more among the fathers.
Greater interest attaches to the origins of the ‘intellectual’ group
and this merits close analysis. Among the founders we find that
the professions lead easily with 33, as against 15 commercial and 11
landed. Of the 83 professional, 18 or more than half were clergymen,
and of these 12, or more than half, were parsons of the Church of
England.
FOUNDATIONS OF NOTABLE FAMILIES. 119

When we turn in this group from the founders to their fathers, we
find the same law applying to the part as has already been shown for
the whole, namely that the professional are less strongly represented
among the fathers than among the founders. As a result the division
into the three categories is remarkably even among these ultimate
ancestors of intellectual families. The division runs as_ follows:
Land 16, Commercial 16, Professional 14, and 14 status unascertained.
It is almost a dead heat.

There is thus a great deal of variety in the status of originators of
intellectual families and it is proposed accordingly to set these out in
detail. Where the posit:on of the father has not been ascertained,

that of his son the founder has been taken.

8 British landed proprietors.
2 Barristers of landed origin.
5 British yeomen.

2 American farmers .
Highland clansman.

Trish clansman.

el ed

~

7 Church of England clergymen.
2 other clergymen.

A steward who became a barrister.

A solicitor.

A Town Clerk.

2 American lawyers.
2 physicians.

A surgeon.

A shipowner.

A potter.

A tea merchant.

A fuller

A wool merchant.

A timber merchant.

A carpet manufacturer.
A West India merchant.
A matltster.

A builder.

An armourer.

A master mason.
An engraver.

A silversmith.
A weaver.

An actor. A gardener.
oo, . A carpenter.

2 ‘citizens.

3 ‘‘considerable merchants .”’

It will be seen that the intellectual families have emanated
from almost every stratum of society, but the upper middle classes
decidedly preponderate. Greatest interest perhaps attaches to the
third or commercial category. The first nine on this list seem to have
been men of standing, the next six to have been in a comparatively
small way 0” business Only the last seven belonged in any way to
what we should now call the artisan classes, but of these the first
four were almost certainly rather tradesmen than artisans. There
remain the final three, the fathers of the founders of the Coleridge,
Herschell and Linley connections. These were certainly artisans,
but there is some evidence that in the Coleridge and Herschell families,
remoter forebears occupied a somewhat superior position. Out of
the 120 examples collected only the musical family of the Linleys
appear to have sprung directly from a quite humble walk of life.

It seems indeed abundantly clear that families of distinction
had had no sudden rise from obscurity, behind the lines of note stretch
lines of competence. Brilliant individuals arise occasionally from
complete obscurity, sometimes a pair of brothers, but where ability
has persisted for several generations, a thoroughly solid foundation
seems to have been requisite.

While the origin of these intellectual families was thoroughly
aristocratic in the true meaning of the word, it was not often aristo120 EUGENICS REVIEW.

cratic in the conventional meaning. Long before the end of the
18th century ‘‘la carriere ouverte aux talents’’ prevailed to a great
extent in this country, still more of course in America. No doubt it
prevails now to an even greater extent, and it would be interesting by
a study of 19th century origins to see how far a change in the status of
founders is occurring, though the fact that only 2 or 3 generations
would have elapsed renders a comparison difficult. It is doubtful
whether the change even among intellectual families would be as great
as is sometimes thought, and there is probably little or no change at
all in the origin of families with the true gift for leadership. Their
evolution must undoubtedly be slow, if we are to attain the certainty
that it will also be sure.

Chances of leadership certainly come now to those whose origin in
the pa t would have afforded them scant opportunities in this direction,
but recent events give grave cause for doubt as to whether the capacity
in such cases equals the opportunity.

TABLE 1.
SIXTEENTH CENTURY.
Status. Status of Notable Classification of Descendants 
Father . Descent "
Sir William Sidney .. .. Landed Landed 42 Publicaffairs. Literature.
Thomas, 2nd Duke of Norfolk - > 35 43 ‘4 Naval.
Military
John, 15th Earl of Oxford .. s5 43 26 35 +3 Military.
Sir Edmund Denny .. .. Legal Citizen 22 ¢9 os
S Henry Hope oe .. Commercial Commercial 21 5% ” Law.
Sir Thomas Finch .. .. Landed Landed 19 ne 39 29
Sir Anthony Cooke .. .e 5 4 15 +s s3 Literature.
Sir William Fairfax +k 54 13 39 9 2»

Sir Henry Cromwell - 1 2 13 9 2
W Richard Myddelton oe 5 33 12 Seience, the Church.

Sir Thomas Wyatt .. wi 45 +> 11 Public affairs. Literature.
EA Sir Richard Saltonstall. ... Commercial Citizen 11 nt 2
Edward Lord North. . .. Legal <3 10 #9 43 Literature.
Roger Boyle aa .. Citizen a8 10 »> ¥9 Science.
I James Stanyhurst .- Legal “1 9 The Church. Public affairs.
S Matthew Guild .. .. Armourer 9 Science.
S Archibald Napier .. Landed Landed 9 Science. Public affairs.
Sir John More - .. Legal Steward 8 Literature, the Church.
Richard Fletcher... ..- Clerical 3 99
S John Mylne .. aa .- Mason 5 Art.
FOUNDATIONS OF NOTABLE FAMILIES.

TABLE 2.

121

LATE SIXTEENTH CENTURY AND SEVENTEENTH CENTURY.
Notable Classification of Descendants .

Sir George Villiers
Sir Richard Temple
SA Robert Livingston
S James Viscount Stair
S Gavin Elliot
EA Henry Sewall
EA Edmund Quincy
Sir John St. John
S Robert Barclay

EA Adam, Winthrop...
FA Samuel Bayard
Robert Walpole
Sir Bernard Grenville
S Sir James Dundas ..

ZI Dennis Sheridan’
John Wesley

I Michael Hill

EA Peter Folger

W Sir Edward Her ert
John Dryden

EA William Randolph

A James Pierpont

A Timothy Edwardes

A Robert Carter

A John Marshall
John Lord Hervey

S William Robertson ..
John Taylor .William Earl Cadogan

William Bird
A Richard Lee..
Nevill Maskalyne
FA Stephen De Lancey
John Thornton
Sir John Pratt...
® Sir John Swinton
Thomas Thackeray
William Wollaston
Charles Mayo. ..
Samuel Reynolds

Status. Status of
Father.
Landed Landed
Planter Clerical
Legal Landed
Landed 48
Colonist Commercial]
3 Yeoman
Landed Landed
> Military
Legal Commercial
Commercial Clerical
Landed Landed
Legal ¥
Clerical
Clerical Clerical
Landed Landed
Clerical Colonist
Landed Landed

39 39

TABLE 3.

Descend
ants.
AT

33
27
23
21

20
15
14
14

12
12
12
Il
11

11
10

10
9
7
5

EARLY EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

Status. Status of Notable
escendFather. ants.
Planter Land Steward 37
Clerical Colonist 29
Clerical Commercial 23
Planter Planter 23
ss ss 22
Landed Landed 22
Clerical 20
a Commercial 20
Landed, Mil- Legal 18
itary.

Landed Landed 18
Planter Planter 15
Landed Landed 15
Commercial Commercial — 14
%9 Clerical 13
Legal Citizen 12
Landed Legal 12
Clerical Yeoman 11
Landed Commercial 9
Citizen Citizen 9
Clerical Clerical 8

Publie affairs Literature.

Law.

a3 83 Literature.

99 29 993 99

2 29 99 29
Public affairs . Literature.
Commerce.
Science.
Science.

Naval.
Literature.
Law. The
Church.
Literature.
Religious activity. Music.
Public affairs. Military.
Science.
Naval.

39 $9
Literature.
Literature.

Classification of Desendants.

Public affairs.
L't rature.
Law.

29 99
33 99
2° >>

Law.

Public affairs. Literature.
> oof Art.

Literature, Science.

Public affairs. Military.

The Church.
33 »» Military.
ss science. Literature.

29 99

Commerce. The Church.
Public affairs. Military.
Literature. Art. Science.
Public affairs. Literature.

Science.
Seience. Literature.
Art. >
EUGENICS REVIEW.

TABLE 4.
MID EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

Status . Status of~ Notable Classification of Descendants .
Father . descendJohn Symonds Medical Medical 25 Literature, Science, Law,
Stage.
Thomas Wedgwood Commercial Commercial 20 Science, Literature, Art.
A Aaron Cleveland Clerical Farmer 18 Public affairs. Literature.
S Aulay Macaulay Clerical Clansman 15 o> % s
A Epes Sargent Commercial Commercial 15 Military. Science. Art.
Roger Kemble Actor 14 The Stage. Literature.
Sir Beaumont Hotham Landed Landed 1 Naval. Science.
A Richard Ward Colonial Commerical 14 Literature. Public affairs.
Governor.
A Roger Wolcott ss Farmer 14 ss >.
Isaac Taylor. . ingraver Commercial 12 Literature. Art.
S George Aborcomby Legal Legal 12. Military. Public affairs.
Science.
Daunay Clerical 11 Art.
Samuel Jebb.. Commercial 11 Science, Literature, S’ship.
William Scott » Yeoman 10 Law, Science.
Samuel Cockerell Architect. Medical 9 Art. Literature. Naval.
William Cartwright Landed Legal 8 Science. Art.
J Meyer Schomberg Medical Medical 8 Science. Naval.
John Gainsborough, . Commercial 8 Literature. Art.
G Isaac Herschell Musician Gardener 7 Science.
Daniel Twining Commercial Commercial 7 Literature. Scien e.

Status. Status of Notable Classif cation of De cendants .
Father. descenst
John, Ist. Karl Spencer Landed Landed 33 Public affairs. The Church.

Daniel Bell Commercial Commercial 18 s> ,». Lite ature.
S' James Stephen Legal Yeoman 16 Law. Literature.
I Charles Doyle Landed Landed 16 «Pub. aff. Mtary. Lit. Art.
A William Enery Commercial Commercial 15 Religious activity. Litera
ture.

Thomas Linley .. Musician Artisan 12 Music. Public affairs.

John Coleridge Clerical Commercial 12 Law. Literature.

A Richard Dana Legal 12 Literature. Law. Science.
F Samuel Bosanquet. Commercial Commercial 11 Literature. Public affairs.
Robert Peel .. +m Yeoman 10 > o>
A Edward Tuckerman 3 Commercial 10 Science. Art. Literature.

Francis Turner Clerical Town Clerk 10 Science. Literature.
Sir Thomas Trollope Landed Landed 9 Literature. Naval. .
A Isaac Roosevelt Commercial Commercial 9 Publicaffairs. Commerce.
A —. Hall 9 Seience.
G George Wyon Engraver Silversmith 9 Art.
John Wordsworth Legal Yeoman 8 The Church. Literature.
I James G.aves Clerical Citizen 8 Science. ‘5
Benjamin Heath Citizen Commercial Scholarship s>
iV Lewis Evans s Clerical Clerical Literature. Science. Art.

TABLE 5.

MID. EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.
FOUNDATIONS OF NOTABLE FAMILIES. 123

A John Lowell...
John Bartlett Allen
G John Baring .
Charles Ist Earl Grey

Weedon Butler

A Oliver Everett
John Penrose
Thomas Scott

S David Pollock

A John Alsop

A John Adams
George Tennyson

A Christopher Perry
Erasmus Darwin

S John Cunningham

A Joseph Potter
Thomas Callcott

Timothy Pickering ..

Lant Carpenter
S Robert Stevenson

TABLE 6.

Status.

Legal
Landed
Commercial
Landed Military
Clerical
Commercial
Legal
Landed
Naval
Medical
Land Agent
Farmer
Commercial
Legal
Clerical
Engineer

LATE KLIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

Status of Notable

Father. “scendClerical 15
Landed 15
Clerical 14
Landed 13
Legal 12
12

Clerical 11
Yeoman 11
Yeoman 11
Commercial 11
Farmer 10
Landed 10
Legal 10
Landed 9
Yeoman 8
9

7

Legal 7
Commercial 6
6

9°

Classification of descendants .

Lit. Science. Commerce.
Science. Public affairs.
Publie affairs. Commerce.

°° 99

Scholarship.
Public affairs. Literature.
Literature. Art. Science.
Art. Literature.
Law.
Public affairs.

23 3 Literature.
Literature
Naval.
Science.
Science. Literature.
The Church.
Art. Music. Science.

Science. Literature.

Science.

Literature.

9°
