ANIMAL AND HUMAN BREEDING

An Attempt to Study their Common Principles
By Professor F. A. E. CREW, M.D., D.Sc., F.R.S.E.

HERE are two entirely distinct

forms of science, though they are not

often recognized by the public when
it comes running to “‘ the scientists ’’ to
lay down the law or prophesy on some one
or other subject of importance.

The first of these forms consists merely
of the application of scientific knowledge and
methods to various practical problems, such
as the cause of ‘ knocking’ in a motor
engine or the standardizing of the breed of
pigs which make the most economical] liveweight gains. This form has a sub-section
which, for want of a better name, I have
christened the stamp-collectors’ section. It
consists in the amassing of a vast amount of
information about a subject of no importance
whatever—some such byway of knowledge
as the habits of the meadow-pipit—and only
differs from the main section of this form in
being unprompted by practical motives.
The men who pursue it are indeed actuated
by that same curious motive which makes
others collect postage stamps or hit a little
white ball with a long wooden stick.

The second main form of science differs
from these two sections as the art of a
Romney differs from the craft of the
domestic decorator. It is the pursuit not of
mere knowledge, but of wisdom, understanding, and, as wisdom must be, it is synthetic.
It seeks to grasp, not the facts of life and
matter, but the laws which govern them.
The fact that apples fall from trees was
probably too well known before Newton’s
day for his discovery to be of much assistance in furthering the craft of pomiculture.
The value of his contribution was the discovery of a unifying principle which linked
apples with the solar system. Similarly, the
vast amount of heterogeneous information
about the lives and habits of animals in The
Origin of Species would be of little interest
or value were they all not linked up by the

95

underlying law of evolution by natural
selection.

I have always wondered whether that
same deep insight, that quest after a unifying principle of life, was present in Mendel’s
mind. I suspect that it was not, or he
would never have allowed his theological
duties to distract him from a work so essentially religious. But certainly Bateson and
his followers, when they continued Mendel’s
work, were fired by the quest; and
between them and in conjunction with Darwinism we have hammered out to-day a
growing philosophy, which is based not on
theory but on fact, of the living thing.

Now, Mendel’s peas, like Newton’s apple,
would have been just curiosities of no greater
interest than the knick-knacks on the sidetable of a Victorian maiden lady, if similar
phenomena had not been noticed in other
organisms : they were one instance of the
laws of heredity, of genuine scientific value
only when they were synthesized with other
instances. One of the most curious things
about modern biology is that little or no
effort has been made, big branch of knowledge as it is, to provide an organization
for similar syntheses—perhaps it has been
due to the influence of the practical
‘ scientists’! Such synthetic work as has
been done has been sporadic, the occasional,
uncorrelated sparks from single men.

C. J. Bond’s extremely significant and
suggestive work on hemilateral asymmetry
strikes me as one of these sparks, for it
links up reproduction with growth and
suggests that the process of becoming an
individual is kin to the apparently separate
process of creating new individuals. Goldschmidt with Lymantria dispar, Huxley
and Ford with Gammarus chevreuxt, possibly Mumford with the growth of schoolboys, are doing most suggestive work on
the physiology of inheritance and hetero96

gonic growth. There are philosophical implications in their studies of the rate and
rhythm of life and growth. Rhythm ts
everywhere, in living as well as in not-living
matter; and this work indicates that the
differences between two organisms, two
human beings, are largely due to their inherent rhythms. The fertilized egg is not
a mere collection of chemicals: it is an
orchestral conductor, a maker of rhythms;
and the individual into which it grows is
their product. There is a rhythm of fleshmaking, a rhythm of bone-making, the
rhythm of the sexual cycle; and as they
weave and interweave, so is the final pattern
of the individual formed.

Allied to this, and perhaps also synthetic,
is some of the work now going on in my own
Department at Edinburgh, where we are
investigating the basic causes and differences of sex. Metabolism, rate of growth,
appears at the moment to be the significant
clue.

But, though there are these occasional individual attempts, there has so far been no
organization to synthesize the findings of all
the different branches of biology and to
discover their common principles. I am,
therefore, rather proud of the Imperial
Bureau of Animal Genetics which has just
been attached to my Department, and which
will, I hope, prove to be such an organization. It is one of eight bureaux which are
being set up to co-ordinate the various agricultural research stations throughout the
Empire ; and it is, therefore, strictly speaking, a tool for the use of the practical
‘scientists.’ But it has another function—
when you start to classify anything, you
must do so under several heads. A paper,
for instance, on milk-yield in cows would go

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

not merely under Milk and Cattle, but
would also be classified in the Physiological
file, the Endocrinological, the Genetical, and
so on.

Thus the truly scientific files, which.tell
of the phenomena common to different forms
of life, will automatically keep pace with the
files which tell the farmer the practical facts
about his stock. The thickness of the layer
of fat along the back of the bacon pig may
be made to illuminate the darker ways of
life as efficiently as it replenishes or depletes
the trouser-pockets of the farmer. I look
forward in a year or so to glancing down, for
example, the sex-linkage file and finding
there, causally related to one another, odd
suggestive facts about ‘ criss-cross ’ inheritance in poultry, endocrine factors in sheep,
hemophilia and colour-blindness in man.

I have been a long time coming to the
point; but it seems to us that our Bureau
will not truly cover its subject unless human
breeding is included as part and parcel of
our subject of animal genetics. So we are
making the same contact with eugenic research bodies as with biological institutes
and agricultural stations; and I do believe
that both human and animal breeding will
be enriched by the association and synthesis.

Regarded narrowly, eugenics ranks with
the practical ‘ sciences ’—though much the
most important of them all—since its immediate aim is simply to apply the wellfounded methods of science to the practical
task of preventing racial decay. But in the
wider view it is much, much more. It is an
attempt to synthesize the most marvellous
and complex of life’s manifestations with
the rest of the organic world, to discover
man’s place in nature, whence and how he
has come, and whither he may go.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXI, No. 2.
