D. R. BROTHWELL and R. G. HARVEY

British Museum (Natural History)

Facial Variation

Some Problems of Recording Shapes and Determining

the

Affinities of Human Populations by Means of Facial Differences, with Special Reference to the People of Tristan Da Cunha

THIS IS A first report of our investigations into
the methodology of facial variation in human
populations. The project was stimulated by the
fact that facial shape is one of the most variable
areas, morphologically, in man, and yet methods
of studying this region are dismally inadequate.
We feel that the basic anthropometric measurements generally employed in the field far from
“cover” facial variation. Indeed, many shape
differences of the head are now traditionally
recorded by non-metrical (anthroposcopic) tabulation. This visual and subjective appreciation
of much facial variation can be traced back to
the nineteenth century, and the various schemes
originally given by Paul Topinard22 (in 1885)
for classifying, for example, nasal bridge form
and nostril shape, still occur monotonously in
some recent publications. What Topinard and
others did for anthropology, Bertillon! (in 1896)
did for criminal identification, but the police
were lucky enough to be able to abandon all
(or nearly all) for the sake of fingerprints.

The present inquiry is part of a broader
critical study which is being undertaken on
various “‘non-metrical’’ polygenic variables of
the body surface, as a contribution to the International Biological Programme. New photographic data on the people of Tristan da Cunha
became available to us towards the beginning of
this inquiry and our first exercise has been to
compare these with a number of photographic
series already published in monographs. Unfortunately, there are very few publications
which reproduce series of standard photographs
of a sufficiently high quality to be used in our
comparative study.

As regards the head region of the Tristanians,
no less than three series of photographs have

been taken, accounting for the great majority of
the group. Only in one case, however, are the
head positions rigidly standardized, and these
have received our special attention. For further
references to this important island group, one
is referred to Munch,!5 Thomsen,2! Sognnaes!9
and Black, Thacker, Lewis and Thould.2 Our
work on the Tristanians has been to a large
extent a matter of two dimensional geometry
combined with a three dimensional appreciation
of the morphological differences. It may at first
sight appear to be very divorced from field work,
but in fact it hits hard at some of the basic
problems concerned with recording and studying
morphological variation in man. The complex
nature of shape differences in man make it
quite impossible to cope adequately with such
variation in the field and, even when time
permits a basic series of body measurements to
be taken, photogrammetric anthropometry
(Dupertuis and Tanner,? Gavan, Washburn and
Lewis,? Tanner and Weiner?) is the only hope
of recording much of the variation. But the use
of photographic methods produces its problems.
To refer back to the Tristan head photographs,
we have already mentioned that head positioning
was not satisfactory in two series. This is a
common and serious problem in field photographs, and the detailed study by Ehrhardt’ of
photographic distortions demonstrates clearly
the great difficulty in using such data. Also, in
none of this data was scaling of sufficient precision placed near the subjects, with the result
that indices and angles had to be defined as the
only alternative to absolute measurement. This
exercise in how to compare photographic data
where exact scaling is not known, has been very
useful however. Firstly, because nearly all earlier

167

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, December 1965, 57, 4.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

 

FIGURE 1

Measurements and angles considered in this study. In the lower of the three drawings, 1, 2 and 3 are measurements
utilized in the computation of our general facial size factor (together with the bizygomatic breadth).

168
FACIAL VARIATION

monographs which include series of photographs
fall into this category, and secondly because—
whatever recommendations we make—it is more
than likely that much future data will also be
similarly unscaled!

Although it would have been most useful and
pertinent to compare the Tristanians with
English, Italian and Southern African hybrid
groups, we have had to make the best of
Weninger’s5 excellent African Negro series and
North European standard head photographs
taken by Bryn and Schreiner.> To give a broader
view to the comparison, and in view of the fact
that individuals of mongoloid affinities may have
left their genetic mark on the island, we have
also included comparisons with the mongolian
series of Yokoh-Yasuo.26 Most aspects of facial
variation—such as facial height and bigonial
breadth—which are already dealt with by
standard antropometric methods are not included in our study, although recourse was made
to one or two of these as they were needed in
the calculation of certain indices. Only males
are included in this study.

We have considered, only to reject, any nonmetrical classification of facial shape as a whole.
The early scheme of Péch!6 in 1916 and the
more elaborate recent one of Watanabe?24 in
1960 both seem to us cumbersome, extremely
subjective and time-consuming. At the other
extreme, the work of Karl Pearson and colleagues on detailed facial contouring (McLearn,
Morant and Pearson!3) necessitates a spider’s
web of measurements which would reach astronomical proportions if other parts and planes
of the face were considered.* Our choice has
been to study a select number of variables which
seemed most likely to show the more major and
common features of facial variation and which
are usually considered non-metrically; also to
consider such variables separately as much as
possible. In their recent study of the hereditary
aspects of the craniofacial complex in triplets,
Kraus, Wise and Frei!! have emphasized the

* We are aware of the fact that the detailed analysis of
numerous facial contours is being reconsidered at present
by a number of researchers, but clearly such complex
comparisons will always demand very considerable computational assistance, which may well place such methods
outside the realms of most general investigations for
some years to come.

importance of studying parts of the face, rather
than attempting to analyze total facial patterns.

Variation within the Group

Before considering the position of the Tristanians in relation to certain other human populations, a few words are first needed on variation
within the group. It was noticed early on that
certain variants, which defied anything but nonmetrical scoring, possibly demonstrated characteristics of facial profile peculiar to certain
families. It was therefore of interest to know if
any family relationship could be demonstrated
from a study of inter- and intra-family variations
in the measurements we had made and which
had been expressed graphically. To answer this
question, a sample of adult males was taken
from three of the larger families: Green, Glass
and Rogers.

Confining our study to the nose and protrusion
of the ears, measurements of nasal height, nasal
index, nasal prominence and ear protrusion
index were plotted by families (for definitions
of measurements used see Figure 1 and the
Appendix). The results were disappointing for
in none of the diagrams was there any sign of
family clustering for these variables. However,
the samples were relatively small and, in the
absence of radiographic information it was not
possible to study both the skeletal and soft tissue
variations of the face—which might have been
more rewarding. Moreover, it was thought that
any “family likeness’ noted from purely visual
inspection of the photographs might be attributed to more subtle variations in nasal bridge
curvature, set and shape of the eyes and shape
of the lips which were outside the scope of our
present inquiry on more well defined facial
variants.

Nasal Measurements

Of the regions of the face showing marked
variation in man, the nose has perhaps received
the most detailed attention, though few measurements have ever been defined. Nasal shape,
moreover, depends upon a number of separate
factors: length of the nose and breadth of the
nasal wings, nasal prominence, shape of the

169
80
e
oo 0
°
70: ©
° ° @o
e ® °
NASAL ee «
ANGLE Xx x * ©
x @, em Xe °° ®
xX Xx oO ° @ 00 ®@ oe
° X @- e@ °

yx x e 8° °o @

x, x Xe xx x @ e.

. x x e exe
60 XX XX ° @oamo e
X * x 0 °
x x
xX ee @
x e
X x x
Xx

50 X
i
08 1-0 1-2 1-4 Lo

NASAL INDEX

NASAL
ANGLE

60:

50

 

08 L0 12
NASAL INDEX

FIGURE 2

Dispersion of the Tristan da Cunha and comparative series by means of the nasal angle (insert
drawing) and nasal index. Tristan da Cunha = @; Negro = X; European = ©; Mongolian =
Z. For ease of comparison two diagrams are given, each with the Tristan and two other series.
‘7 = uvljosuo-: °O = uvodoing ‘yxy = O10 '@ = vyUNy ep UvIsII] “XOpuUl YIPesIg |eseU pu sjsu [eSeU JO SUBOU Aq Solas INO} dy) JO UOISJOdSIGG

*SOLIOS JOYIO OM) PUL ULISLIT, 94) YUM YOR ‘UdAIZ o1e SUIVIZLIP OM} ‘UOSLIBGUWIOS JO ased 104

 

€ anol]
XSONI HLGVSyy IVSVN X3SGNI HLJIVSYS IWSVN
OT O.-tl O-Ol 0-6 O:8 O-Zl O-kt 0-01 0:6 os
x x
X ws x
x x x
xX
QO
X x x x x x
z
x x 7 ; x x
X a xX °
Zz x z
X x x z z 09 X *K xX o S9OF 09
X X X Xx X 0 °
xX
xX xX x z *« ¥
z z 2 z 22 x x °
6 @z z @o Po
x @x a 22 “x of @ ° @
x x e**: STONY x x e
z X 7@@e AVSYN X @@0M oo »
Zz
xX X e X X @ o
z z e *
z z Zz @ ,_ & °
@z eo
@@eze®@ o® @o Ro
eo e® OL eer”
e 7 (@ e ee @ o
ee °° ee ° a6
@ e
eo”? ® @ @
@ e
e . e
e

08

 

ER—N
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

nasal bridge, depth of the nasal root, flatness in
the region of the nasal bones, bulbous nature of
the tip and the inclination of the nasal septum
and wings. Plotting an index of the length and
breadth measurements with the nasal bridge
angle (which is a crude indicator of nasal prominence), it will be seen that there are well
defined scatter patterns in the populations considered (Figure 2). In the top diagram, there is
good overlap between the Tristanians and the
North Europeans, but possibly with slightly
more extension of the Tristanian scatter into
the Negro zone. In the lower diagram, the
mongoloid group are generally distinct in their
scatter pattern, the nasal angle and not the index
being of major discriminant value. It is worth
mentioning here that when the nasal angle is
plotted with the nasal breadth index (which is
computed from nasal breadth and a general
facial size factor which we have devised), the
scatter patterns are not the same as those given
by the length/breadth index (Figure 3). In the
diagram on the left it will be seen that there is a
slightly better separation of the Tristanians and
North Europeans by this means, the Negro group
remaining well separated. On the other hand,
the diagram on the right shows the mongoloids
not so well separated by this method. This
demonstrates quite nicely that such procedures
may prove to be useful discriminants for some
groups but not necessarily to the same degree
for all.

By considering the prominence of the nose
from the posterior margins of the nasal wings
to the most anterior point on the nasal tip, a
nasal wing subtence index could be defined,
using our general facial size factor again. The
results show this method to be of some discriminant value. In Figure 4, it will be seen that
in the horizontal dispersion, the Negro and
mongoloid groups occupy the same index zone.
The Northern Europeans show slight overlapping
with the latter groups, but mainly occupy an
index range above 5-5. The Tristanians, on the
other hand, show a considerable overlap with
the European group, but some of their values
extend into a higher index range than any of
the other groups considered. In general terms,
therefore, nasal prominence can be said to be a
noticeable feature of this series.

172

We have not in the present study attempted
to assess the depth of the nasal root. One reason
is that a consideration of this variant overlaps,
as it were, the study of upper nasal flatness,
which is dealt with separately. Secondly, nasal
root depth may be somewhat illusory, in that
much depends upon the nature of brow development. Thus, a proper appreciation of the nasal
root would demand radiographic information—
particularly of the frontal sinus system—data
which we do not have for the Tristanians. We
might emphasize here the importance of radiographic evidence to any detailed consideration
of facial shapes (see, for example, Bowker and
Meredith, Brown and Barrett4 and Sarnas!8)
and it is to be hoped that field workers will in
the future endeavour to take such valuable
records whenever circumstances permit.

The prominence or flatness of the nasal bridge
in the region of the nasal bones has been studied
by means of an index, derived from the measurement of nasal prominence from the outer margin
of the lower eyelid to the nasal bridge (as seen
laterally); this measure being made a proportion
of our general facial size measurement. It will
be seen (Figure 5) that the values obtained—
which are plotted horizontally—separated the
Negro and mongoloids from the Northern Europeans and Tristanians, but not these two pairs
from each other. There may, however, be a
slight tendency in the Tristan group for higher
values than the Europeans, a fact which is
compatible with other findings concerning nasal
prominence in this group. It may be noted in
regard to this nasal bridge measurement that
slight changes in head positioning could create
much error, and in the positioning of the lateral
contours of the face we have kept rigidly to the
same definitions of orientation.

Finally, regarding the nose, we have considered
two other variants, both of which have defied
anything but non-metrical scoring. Firstly, in a
number of the Tristan individuals—and it
would appear particularly in the Green family—
there is a tendency towards bulbous nasal tips,
that is, marked expansion in the region of the
lower nasal cartilage. Precise scoring is however
proving quite a problem, and we have so far
not been able to get satisfactory frequencies.

In the case of the nasal wings and septa,
FACIAL VARIATION

‘ : ‘7 = uelosuop] {O = uvedoing
*X = O1ZON '@ = eyunD ep uejsiy ‘xopul sououiwod jeseu pue XOpUT UOISNjOI1d Ivo 94} Jo suvOUT Aq SdtI9S INOj 94} Jo UOIsIOdsIC(

 

p andl]
X3SGNI 3INSANIWOSd TISYN
Og OL 09 OS
eg ys
X
X X
xyz xy
Oo X xX XxX
O° x XX x
Oo X Z Z
z
Oo XZ X X 2 ZZ
x x Zz ZZ 22
a e o @ ° X Z 2
xX X Z
® e @0 OX 2 xX
e @ 0 xX @ Z Xx Z
e e O z
e Ox Z z Set
e * oO x Z z XSQGNI
oO Zz NOISNY LOYd
@ @ © oO Z dv3
@00 °
e ° O OC!
00
oe e ° z
oO @ O
e O O O
e ce
O
*

173
'Z — uvyosuop °: > — uvadoing ‘y — o13aN
$@ = eyun, ep uelsiuy ‘xopul o8pliq yeseu pue xapuy'di] Buisn solJes JoYJO pue UIST oUf)'Jo UOIsIedsIq]

S$ munoLly
XJONI SOCdINd IWSVN
0:5 O-+ 0-€ OZ 04 O-c
——_—_ LL ______________. _ _ _--—<—»- —..  ——————————SXKXs <—vXxXvxXvxXvxwXOoweenee cO
© Zz
e e e @ ° °
. ° e Oo
Oo Oo Z
® o . Zz
; O % O z Z 2
@ Oo Zz £0
S ° e "8 O %
@ ZO Zz Zz
e ° Oo Z Z
Oo Zz ZZ 2Z
oO oO 6 oC 98 ow xe 77 > 2 “
e ‘ Z
Oo Z
Zz
° Oo
% x z
. 7 2 10
e X X
Xx x
x x x
@ x X X3IQNI
A x dit
x x x x
@
X
Zz oe)
X
x
x
x
X

90
FACIAL VARIATION

differences occur relative to the horizontal plane
cutting through the lower nasal point (that is,
subnasale). These differences are seen in Figure
6, and it is fairly obvious that the Tristan group
has frequencies for the wing/septum variants
most similar to the European sample, with more
divergent values from the Negro and mongoloid
series.

5 10 sg

%
*/0.
h +
Yo

% Tristan N. European
%
%

Wu

%
Y.

nN
%
°%o E. Asian W. African
%
~~

Wing/ Septum varieties

FIGURE 6

Tentative scoring of differences in nasal wing and septal
relationships. +/_ values indicate positions above or
below horizontal line (drawn through apex of nasolabial angle). °/, °/., /o values indicate that nasal
contour runs along the horizontal (one or both sides
of the angle apex).

Excluding the nose, the prominences and
recessions of the face—particularly as seen in
the medial plane—seem to us best considered
in four divisions: prominence or slope of the
frontal (frontal angle), upper facial prominence
(nasal base angle), upper lip prominence (upper
lip angle), and chin prominence or recession
(chin angle).

Frontal and Chin Angles

Considering first the upper and lower zones
of the face, the next figure gives the frontal and
chin angles. In the top diagram of Figure 7,
there is for the most part a separation of Negro
and Tristan values. The Northern Europeans

are well scattered, but it is interesting to note
that the Tristanians display more low frontal
angles than the Europeans. In the lower diagram
the Tristan group show generally lower frontal
angle values and greater chin angles. This is in
fact the reverse of what we had anticipated by
casual inspection, and clearly suggests that upper
and lower facial recession may be more characteristic of non-Negro and non-mongoloid populations.

In the middle face, marked human variation
can occur depending upon the degree of upper
facial flatness and the considerable differences
in upper alveolar prognathism. In the left scatter
diagram of Figure 8, the Negro scatter pattern
is well separated, with Tristan values showing
slightly more of an inclination towards the Negro
value than the Northern European group. In
the right diagram, the mongoloid group shows
some degree of separation—but by no means
complete—from the Tristan scatter. It will be
seen that some Tristan and mongoloid values
are negative for the nasal base angle, but owing
to more alveolar prognathism in the Asiatics,
they do not present any negative values for
upper lip angle, as in the Tristan people.

Alveolar prognathism, whether of the upper
or lower jaws is, of course, affected by incisor
positioning, malocclusion and tooth loss. We
have been well aware of this fact in our analyses
and, having access to some of Professor G. L.
Slack’s dental records on the Tristanians, have
been able to check on the males we have included
in this study. We have also noted the orthodontic
findings of Heffer and Lovius.10 As it happens,
all those showing considerable anterior tooth
loss were females. Although there was a range
of incisor bites, from fairly well-marked overbite
to some degree of underbite, none of these
incisor relationships was deemed so abnormal
as to demand exclusion from our present series.

Eyes and Eyelids

The morphology of the eyelids, that is, the
folds and grooves, vary considerably in some
world populations, particularly in Southern
African and mongoloid communities. The
systematization of these structures has been
attempted by various workers, and most recently

175
80

FRONTAL
ANGLE

60°

  

CHIN ANGLE
x

x x

x X x z

z x 80
z Zz X xX
e * X
e zX 2
, X z 2° XK
zz 2X 2 z X Xx FRONTAL
e = z 2 227 ¥Y 2 ANGLE

 

CHIN ANGLE

FIGURE 7

Dispersion of the four series by means of frontal angle and chin angle (inset drawing). Tristan
da Cunha = @; Negro = X; European = ©; Mongolian = Z. For ease of comparison,
two diagrams are given, each with the Tristan and two other series.
FACIAL VARIATION

by Tubaki.23 In the case of the Tristan people,
there is relatively little variation in eyelid
morphology, although there is some difference
in the fullness and height of the upper palpebral
lobe. Semi-epicanthic structures were noted in
two children, but as these can occur in Europeans—particularly in children—no particular
significance can be given to these cases.

The distances between outer and inner corners
of the eyes (Biocular and Inter-ocular diameters)
were compared in the Tristan, West African and
North European groups. Comparison with the
mongoloid group was restricted to biocular
diameter as presence of the epicanthic fold
(obscuring the inner margin of the lachrymal
caruncle) in some cases made precise measurement between inner corners of the eyes impossible. The range of variation in all groups
was considerable and although the West African
group showed a higher mean value for both
inter- and bi-ocular diameters the ranges in
three of the groups overlapped almost completely. Morevoer, although the Tristan mean
value for biocular distance was higher than that
of the North Europeans the situation was the
reverse when inter-ocular distance was considered.

Lip Variation

Lips show much variation in man, particularly
as regards height and degree of eversion.
Methods of recording such variation have
differed widely, physical anthropologists tending
to favour visual scoring of lip form. In orthodontic research, however, there is a growing
awareness of the need to study this region of
the face far more precisely than in the past, and
to consider external appearance in relation to
internal bone structure. For example the work
of Sarnés!8 on sixty-two Scandinavian families
may be noted, and it can be seen from his
thorough analysis, the metrical detail which
must be considered if this facial area is to be
seriously dealt with in civilized or in primitive
populations. In the absence of cranio-facial
radiographs of the Tristan people, we have in
this study to fall back on visual inspection and
the consideration of simple breadth and height
values. Surprisingly, although by visual scoring,

some of the Tristan people appeared to have
very full Negro-like lips, this does not show up
in the lip index (Figure 5). It will be seen that
in the vertical dispersion of this diagram, the
Negros occupy the upper index range, with the
other groups mainly showing lower values.
Perhaps a little significance can be attached to
the fact that of the Tristan/European index
values, the Tristan scatter shows more overlap
over the lower part of the Negro range.

The Shape of the Ear

Variations in the shape of the ear, although
numerous, are causing us much trouble. To
begin with, there are few published series of
ears available for study, and even where photographic data are at hand, differences in lighting
in some cases obscure important detail. The
definition of precise points is also by no means
easy, and it is some consolation to us that
members of the Pediatric Research Unit at
Guy’s Hospital—who are currently studying
facial variation in mongolism (Dawbarn and
Joseph‘), have run into similar trouble. In actual
fact, by defining a base line, at least twenty basic
measurements can be taken on the ear although
beyond an experimental study it would be too
laborious to consider such a number. But there
is a further problem. The majority of ear photographs which are available—and this includes
the Tristan series—are in the lateral head plane,
and such a view does not take into account the
degree of ear protrusion. Moreover, distortions
which result from such lateral photography are
likely to differ with the region of the ear. To
determine the extent of the differences between
lateral ear views and photographs taken at right
angles to the major plane of the ear (that is,
through meatus and outer 1im), we have studied
in detail some twenty measurements on a number
of subjects where both views are available. Some
of the differences found in just four of these
dimensions are seen in Figure 9. It is clear that
although most values taken on the 3/4 head
(that is ear plane) view are greater than those
for the lateral aspect, this is not always the case.

Thus, for the moment, the only ear dimension
which we considered to be sufficiently stable to
permit comparison and fuller mention here was

177
*SdlJaS JOYJO OM) PUL ULISIT], OY} YIM YORd “UDAIZ Oe SUILISEIP OM} ‘UOSTIVGUIOD JO 9S8¥9 JO] “Z = UeLIJOsuOPY ‘CO = uvodoing
‘X = OB aN '@ = eyuny ep uejsiy ‘(Surmedp yosul) ojsue diy Joddn puv o[3ue sseq Jeseu oY} BUIsN solJas sAIWeIEdWIOD puUe UL}SIT] 94} JO UOISIOdsIG

 
 

g aUNNOL
e
e 0 ©
ee
e e e e °
e
ee
e 08 e
JIONV 3SVE TVSWN @ 6 JIONV 3Svd WSWN e
ol @ ov. Oz Ol. @
°
z
e 2 e 8 e
X e e
Xx Xx Ol
X
X , x
xX : Fe X
Ze z
x e
x xX X : , ¥.02 x Xx 0Z
2 X 2 Z x
Xx z | X
z 2 Z z ‘
x X x z | X x
xX xX XX 2,08 x y xX —_y* 0€
x X
x X X x ONY X X ’ x x JIONW
X Xx di ri
x sad X * waddn
Nn x
x
X x OP x xX ov
X X X X X X
x X
x X
OS 0S
Xx 4

 

09
FACIAL VARIATION

ear protrusion. An index of the maximum lateral
extension of bi-ear and bi-zygomatic breadths is
given in Figure 4. The groups show quite marked
variation but not a great separation for this
character, with the mongoloids displaying the
greatest spread. The Negro sample shows a
tendency to slightly lower values, that is, less
ear protruberance than the others. In this case,
the Tristan distribution is similar to that for
the Northern Europeans.

<-f-»

   

x
2
40 a
Lateral 79S
view yo
,
‘po 4
‘on
Lf
1 =,
'o—_—+

%, Views (ear plane)
10 20 30 4o

FIGURE 9

Differences in ear proportions and measurements according to lateral head positioning or ear plane
orientation for ear photographs. Four selected
dimensions are plotted for a number of individuals
to show degree of differences.

Conclusions

This study of facial shape has been concerned
principally with variations previously recorded
non-metrically—with a view to their possible
analysis by more precise but not too numerous
metrical means. We have also been interested
in the potential value of unscaled field photographs, and indeed in the whole problem of
using photographic data to study variations in
facial shape. The methods used and indices and
angles defined were arrived at after a consideration of the time consuming nature of anthropometric procedures and must be regarded as

purely experimental ground-work. As a result of
this inquiry we do feel strongly that there is a
need for a reconsideration of previous anthropometric work on the face and a greater appreciation of the value of facial radiography in the
field. Even by using simple indices and angles
derived from standard unscaled head photographs, it has been possible to demonstrate considerable variation in four selected human
populations, including the Tristanians. In the
case of the latter group, it is encouraging to find
that although they are facially more similar to
the European than other series studied, there
are some differences, and in some respects they
may show some affinities to the Negro series.

Whatever choice of facial characteristics or
measurements may be preferred by a particular
researcher, the study serves to emphasize the
importance of standard head photographs
(especially facial and lateral) as valuable anthropological field records.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Our work on various methodological problems
related to living populations was initially supported
by a grant from the Eugenics Society (DRB), and
continued with a further grant from the Medical
Research Council (RGH). Grateful thanks are extended to these institutions. We should also like to
thank Dr. Harold Lewis, Professor J. S. Weiner and
Professor G. L. Slack for providing the unprocessed
photographic data. Miss Theya Molleson and Miss
Shirley Jarman were also of great help during some
parts of this investigation, and Mrs. I. Copeland
continued to give her best in secretarial assistance.
Last, but not least, Mr. J. H. Musgrave kindly
provided the metrical data on ear distortion related
to photographic positioning.

APPENDIX
Definitions of measurements and points of reference

SOURCE OF DATA

Enlarged drawings of the facial photographs of
the Tristan da Cunha people were made by projecting the image of colour transparencies on to
squared paper by means of a photographic enlarger
(a similar method employing a projection apparatus
was used for photographs of the other groups). As
no attempt had been made rigidly to align the
head when the photographs had been taken, it was
necessary to decide upon a standard method of
correcting orientation for the enlargements.

179
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Lateral (Profile) View

In the absence of radiographic information, it was
found, by experiment, that a line drawn at 10° to the
horizontal passing, respectively, through the upper
margin of the external auditory meatus and the
outer corner of the eye orientated the head in a
position closely corresponding to the natural carrying position.

Full Face View

The head was orientated horizontally about the
outer corners of the eyes.

General Facial Size

The General Facial Size factor in terms of which,
in the absence of reliable scaling, many of the
measurements were expressed as indices, was computed from a sum of the following measurements:

1. The distance between top of ear-hole and outer
corner of eye.

2. Lower Facial Height: the distance between
nasion and the point on the fleshy tissue of the chin
corresponding to gnathion.

3. The maximum measurement from the top of
the ear-hule to the most prominent point of the
chin.

4. Bizygomatic Diameter.

L1.2.3.4.(Above)

General Facial Size Factor = 700

MEASUREMENTS
Nose

Nasal Height. Vertical distance from nasion to
base of nasal septum (subnasale).

Nasal Breadth. Distance across the nostrils at their
widest point.

Nasal Index. Nasal Hergit

Nasal Breadth

Nasal Prominence. Horizontal distance between
most posterior margins of nasal wings and most
anterior point of the nasal tip.

Nasal Angle. Angle subtended by line connecting
most anterior point on nasal tip and nasion and the
horizontal.

Nasal Base Angle. Angle subtended by line connecting nasion and subnasale and the vertical.

Nasal Bridge Index. Horizontal distance between
outer margin of lower eyelid and nasal bridge, expressed as a proportion of General Facial Size.

Lips, Chin and Forehead Angles

Upper Lip Angle. Angle subtended by line connecting subnasale with upper margin of upper lip
and the vertical. (Scored +/_ for ant./post.)

Chin Angle. Angle subtended by line between subnasale and the most prominant point of the chin
and vertical. (Scored +/_ for ant./post.)

180

Frontal Recession Angle. At a point on the upper
margin of the external auditory meatus, lines at 11°
to 25° to Ref. Line 1. are drawn to intersect the
frontal region (or a projection of it if the hair line
is low). The angle of frontal recession is that angle
subtended by a line between the two points of
frontal intersection and the horizontal.

Full Face

Bizygomatic Diameter. The maximum horizontal
breadth of the face between the most laterally projecting bones of the cheek.

Ear Protrusion, or Maximum Biaural Breadth. The
maximum horizontal breadth between the most
lateral margins of the ears.

Ear Protrusion Index. Bizygomatic Diam./Max.
Biaural Br.

Inter-Ocular Diameter. Distance between inner
corners of the eyes.

Biocular Diameter. Distance between outer corners
of the eyes.

Lip Height. Vertical distance between the highest
point of the upper lip and bottom of the lower when
lips are in the resting position together.

Lip Breadth. Maximum distance between corners
of the lips (when facial expression is ‘at rest’).

REFERENCES

1. Bertillon, A. 1896. Signaletic Instructions. Including
the Theory and Practice of Anthropological Identification. London, Paul, Trench and Triibner.

2. Black, J. A., Thacker, C. K. M., Lewis, H. A., and
Thould, A. K. 1963. Tristan da Cunha: General
medical investigations. Brit. Med. J. ii. 1018-1024.

3. Bowker, W. D., and Meredith, H. V. 1959. A metric
analysis of the facial profile. Angle Orthodontist. 29,
149-160.

4. Brown, T., and Barrett, M. J. 1964. A roentgenographic study of facial morphology in a tribe of
Central Australian Aborigines. Amer. J. phys.
Anthrop. 22, 33-42.

5. Bryn, H., and Schreiner, K. E. 1924. Die Somatologie
der Norwegen. Oslo, Dybwad.

6. Dawbarn, C., and Joseph, M. C. 1964. A method of
analysis of the facies in children. Guy’s Hosp.
Reports, 113, nos. 3-4, 314-326.

7. Dupertuis, C. W., and Tanner, J. M. 1950. The pose
of the subject for photogrammetric anthropometry,
with special reference to somatotyping. Amer. J. phys.
Anthrop. 8, 27-48.

8. Ehrhardt, S. 1956. Zur Frage der Richtigen Beurteilung Morphologischer Merkmale am Lichtbild
von Kopf und Gesicht. Acta Genet. Med. Gemell. 5,
104-112.

9. Gavan, J. A., Washburn, S. L., and Lewis, P. H.
1952. Photography: an anthropometric tool. Amer.
J. phys. Anthrop. 10, 331-353.

10. Heffer, P. T., and Lovius, B. B. J. 1963. An orthodontic survey of the Islanders of Tristan da Cunha.
Dental Practitioner. 14, 129-138.

11. Kraus, B. S., Wise, W. J., and Frei, R. H. 1959.
Heredity and the craniofacial complex. Am. J.
Orthodont. 45, 172-217.
12.
13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.
19.

FACIAL VARIATION

Martin, R., and Saller, K. 1964. Lehrbuch der Anthropologie. Vols. 3 and 9. Fischer, Stuttgart.

McLearn, I., Morant, G. M., Pearson, K. 1928. On
the importance of the type silhouette for racial
characterisation in anthropology. Biometrika 20b,
389-400.

Moorrees, C. F. A., and Kean, M. R. 1958. Natural
head position. A basic consideration in the interpretation of cephalometric radiographs. Amer. J. phys.
Anthrop. 16, 213-234.

Munch, P. A. 1947. Sociology of Tristan da Cunha.
Results of the Norwegian Scientific Expedition to
Tristan da Cunha, 1937-38. Oslo, Norske Videnskaps-Academi.

Péch, R. 1916. Beitrage zur Anthropologie der
Ukrainischen Wolhynier. Mitt. Anthrop. Ges. Wien,
55, 289: 56, 16.

Santos, Junior. 1951. Précisions apportées a l'appréciation de quelques caractéres descriptifs en Anthropologie. Trabalho Da Misséo Antropologica e Etnologica de Mozambique.

Sarnas, K. V. 1959. Inter and intra-family variations
in the facial profile. Odontologisk Revy. 10, Suppl. 4.
Sognnaes, R. F. 1954. Oral Health Survey of Tristan

20.

21.

22.
23.

24.

25.

26.

da Cunha. Results of the Norwegian Scientific Expedition to Tristan da Cunha 1937-38. No. 24.

Tanner, J. M., and Weiner, J. S., 1949. The reliability
of the photogrammetric method of anthropometry,
with a description of a miniature camera technique.
Amer. J. phys. Anthrop. 7, 145-186.

Thomsen, S. O. 1952. Missing teeth with special
reference to the population of Tristan da Cunha.
Amer. J. phys. Anthrop. 10, 155-168.

Topinard, P. 1885. Eléments d’ Anthropologie Générale.
Paris

Tubaki, K. 1956. On the morphology of the eyelid
in Japanese. Part 1. A trial systematization of folds
and grooves. Quart. J. Anthrop. 3, 305-319.
Watanabe, J. 1960. Facial form of Japanese people,
a pal of classification. Zinruigaku Zassai. 68, No.
726.

Weninger, J. 1927. Eine morphologisch-anthropologische Studie. Durchgefiihrt an 100 westafrikanischen
Negern, als Beitrag zur Anthropologie von Afrika.
Vienna. Anthropogischen Gesellschaft in Wien.
Yokoh-Yasuo. 1943. Beitrdége zur Anthropologie der
Mongol. Tokyo. Anatomischen Institut der Tokyo
Kaiserlichen Universitat.

181
