PRACTICAL EUGENICS

Aims and Methods of the American Eugenics Society*

1. General Philosophy

HE ideal of democracy requires freedom for normal parents to decide how

many children the mother will attempt
to bear and both will accept responsibility for
rearing. The conditions of society as a whole
may greatly affect the freedom of decision
of parents as to the size of their family.
Eugenists therefore believe that the good
social order must provide such conditions
and motivations that parents of sound heredity will of their own volition have more
children than at present, whereas parents
of inferior heredity will have fewer.

The American Eugenics Society holds that
good heredity is indicated by the personal
qualities of the individual and of his home
far more than by the class of society in which
he is found. Desirable qualities are evidenced
by the character of the home environment
which parents provide for their children,
by the personal interests and attainments
of the parents, by their services to the community and by their capacity for living
happily. These criteria provide an approximate measure of an individual’s hereditary
endowment when, and only when, they are
used in comparing individuals who have
enjoyed essentially the same environmental
opportunities. For the present, while biologists and psychologists are discovering more
exact methods of measurement, such criteria
constitute a practical means of comparing
the eugenic value of different individuals.
They form a much needed supplement to the
imperfect biological methods thus far available. They have the added advantage that
changes in the distribution of births, if made
in accordance with these criteria, would
make for larger families in the homes which
provide the best environment for the nurture
of children in every class of society and in
every racial and regional group.

* Published by the American Eugenics Society, 50

West 50th Street, New York, N.Y., as a pamphlet,
price 10 cents per copy.

In the light of such criteria of human
qualities, the present social order seems
seriously deficient so far as the distribution
of births is concerned. Indeed, some people
believe that a eugenic social order is impossible
under our present economic system. Others
believe that economic systems differing as
widely as communism and capitalism may
be either dysgenic or eugenic, according
to their attitude toward family life and
children. The programme here set forth has
been formulated with reference to the
present economic and social conditions in
the United States. It deals with modifications of these conditions to promote eugenic
aims in harmony with democratic ideals.

2. Implementing Eugenic Ideals through

Existing Soctal Activities

The major purpose of the American
Eugenics Society is to develop to their utmost all those influences which may help to
bring about a more eugenic distribution of
births. Existing social institutions provide
the principal means of accomplishing this
purpose. Along with their other purposes,
social institutions must be shaped to
strengthen those ideals of family life which
make for larger families among persons of
high quality and smaller families among less
promising parents. The American Eugenics
Society therefore seeks to develop the
eugenic implications of every kind of social
effort. It seeks co-operation with leaders in
education, medicine, including public health
and hygiene, religion, recreation, housing,
rural life, social work, and other fields of
social activity. In the present publication
special consideration will be given to education, because of its relation to all other fields.
The others will be considered in later publications.

The eugenic implications of every kind of
social effort must be fully developed in order
to establish physical and social conditions
under which a fair proportion of superior

187
188

people in each generation will not only desire
to have larger families, but will be able to
have them without undue sacrifice.

3. The Modification of the Small Family
System |
Among people with moderate incomes in

our cities, families no larger than one, two,

or three children are the almost universal
rule. The proportion of parents with such
small families is increasing rapidly, and
the decline in the proportion of large families is now reaching groups and regions
where large families have hitherto been the
rule. There are many reasons outside of
eugenics which might make a further reduction in births desirable in some parts of the

United States. For example, the high birth
rates which still prevail in some of our rural

sections make for difficult problems of migration and social readjustment. At the same
time, sound eugenic policy requires an equal
availability of contraception to all portions
of the population. To offset the reduction
in births which will result from the further
spread of birth-control, and in order to develop a eugenic structure of society, the
economic conditions which now make for
smaller families must be modified by giving
to normal parents everywhere increased freedom to have larger families if they so desire.

Under a sound eugenic regime every community would show wide variations in size
of family. The present tendency toward
establishing the family of one to three
children as the only type is incompatible
with eugenics. The essence of eugenics is that
better-than-average stocks should be on the
increase. Couples who have only one or two
children are not replacing themselves under
present conditions of mortality, sterility, and
celibacy. Those who have three children
are barely holding their own. Only those
with four or more children are really increasing their stock. Since many persons
must for one reason or another have few
children, or none, a substantial proportion
of families with four or five, or more children
among the superior stocks is essential if
eugenic advance is to take place. Hence,
wherever the small family is found to be the

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

usual one, it will be the purpose of eugenics
to so encourage child-bearing so as to introduce a substantial proportion of large families. It will not be easy to do this. When a
certain customary way of life has become
established in any community it is difficult
for individuals to depart from it. It is hard
to rear five or six children when housing and
other facilities are not readily available for
such large families, and when, as among city
people to-day, the expense of so many
children forces a reduction in the level of
living of the whole family. To increase the
proportion of large families will require an
attack on many fronts, including such
diverse aspects as economic security on the
one hand and early emotional conditioning
to high family ideals on the other hand.

In rural districts, or other communities
where the small family ideal is not generally
accepted, eugenic emphasis will be along
different lines. It is important to distinguish between rural districts, where the proportion of large families remains high, and
urbanised communities where the small
family is almost universal. Since more than
half of our people live in cities now, measures
relating to the urban group call for especial
emphasis in the programme of eugenics.

The prospect of modifying the small
family practice is greatly improved because
the eugenic motive is reinforced by other
considerations. The women of child-bearing
age in the United States are to-day not having enough girl babies to replace themselves,
and their rate of reproduction seems to be
still rapidly declining. When this shortage
of births is brought home to the American
people by an actual decline in numbers, there
is likely to be a reaction against the small
family system such-as is now occurring in
England, Belgium, Germany, and Sweden.
The public may demand large families indiscriminately in order to stem the decline
in population. Before this stage is reached
public opinion must be educated to demand
that the large families be born to couples with
a desirable biological inheritance. Fortunately there will be an intervening period
during which sound eugenic policies can be
developed and the public can be educated.
PRACTICAL EUGENICS

4. The Development of Public Opinion

The education of leaders of public opinion
is the first step toward the practical realisation of eugenic aims. The leaders must be
drawn from many fields, such as medicine,
nursing, education, religion, the different
branches of the social sciences, psychology,
business, industry, and public affairs. Education as to the ways in which their own work
may lead to a more eugenic distribution of
births will enlarge their view as to the
value of the other objectives they are already
striving for. At the same time, contact with
such leaders will give eugenics new insight
into the practical application of a eugenic
philosophy.

The American Eugenics Society will therefore devote special attention to the education
of leaders of public opinion and social activities, at the same time attempting to learn
from them how eugenics can best be reconciled with other social needs. This part of
the Society’s programme calls for a continuing series of conferences in many fields, and
with many groups. It calls for discovery and
publication of new facts bearing upon the
science and practice of eugenics through
periodicals and newspapers. It should aim
to develop eugenic applications, and at
the same time to create a public opinion
sufficiently discriminating to approve of
large families of good quality and discourage
large families of low quality, in whatever
class of society either may be found.

5. Eugenics Education

Eugenics education may be thought of as
having two main objectives : (1) the development of an understanding of the principles
of heredity to be followed by more specific
studies of the theoretical and practical aspects
of eugenics, and (2) the intellectual, emotional, and physical development of individuals for the fulfilment of their roles as
participants in family life, and especially
as parents. To attain these objectives would
require a reorientation of the whole educational process with reference to eugenic
values.

The simpler aspects of biology and genetics
may be so effectively presented in elementary

189

schools as to lead to a sound biological viewpoint. Successful demonstrations along this
line have already been carried out through
the introduction of appropriate nature study
courses in the third and fourth grades. At
later levels, more mature material may be
introduced leading not only toward more
adequate understanding of biological and
social processes, but also toward an appreciation of the complementary roles of heredity
and environment in the development of
human traits and capacities. The interest
of high school students in the social implications of population study indicates the desirability of further use of materials from this ©
field during the impressionable adolescent
years.

It may be fairly insisted that any programme of education on the college level can
not be considered properly balanced that
does not include serious work in the biological
and social sciences. On this level, the presentation of eugenics should be made through
the co-operation of the biological and social
science faculties, 1f possible. Where this is
not possible, it is important that the instructors responsible for developing such
courses be themselves properly grounded and
in touch with current developments in these
fields. The eagerness with which college
courses on marriage and the family are
chosen in the few institutions where they are
now offered indicates the growing desire of
American youth for more adequate knowledge of the conditions of harmonious married life and healthy parenthood.

Physical and mental preparation for
parenthood is even more important than formal eugenic education. This too must be
effected in many ways and at many different
levels. Parents as well as teachers must constantly bear in mind the value of emotional
experience in developing permanent attitudes. In this sense, sound, indirect eugenic
education begins in the home, while children
are still very young. As they grow older, the
same indirect methods will unconsciously
give to young people a deep realization of
the value and responsibilities of parenthood.
Recent attempts to include in college
courses materials relating to personality
190

development and family life may well be
encouraged because of their indirect eugenic
significance.

It is also important that the subject of
genetics and eugenics be continued in many
of the professional schools. They should
there be developed in relation to the special
problems that must be met by doctors,
engineers, teachers, social workers, and
other professional groups. Moreover, the
work of the schools should be supplemented
by a continuous campaign of education to
keep the public informed as to population
trends, advances in the science of genetics,
understanding of the roles of heredity and
environment, and advancement of eugenic
measures. Much of this education need not
carry any explicit reference to eugenics ;
but it is also desirable that a constructive
appreciation of the eugenic ideal as such
be cultivated in the public mind. It is also
possible that the parent education movement, somewhat re-oriented in relation to
population trends and other current social
situations, may play an increasingly large
role in the field of adult education.

The American Eugenics Society does not
at the present time have facilities for extensive educational undertakings on its own
account. Much might be accomplished
through more extensive, sound educational
work directly concerned with eugenics, if
facilities permitted. Even so, the most
important phase of the work of the Society
in this connection would still be that of
working with leaders in various lines of
education in orienting their efforts so as to
produce the maximum eugenic effect. Much
can be done and is already being done along
this line at the present time.

6. Economic Measures

The programme thus far outlined is concerned chiefly with changes in individual
motivation and social ideals. Such changes,
however, will probably not have much permanent effect unless the rearing of children
can be made less burdensome to parents.
If we are to provide real freedom for all
normal parents to have more children if they

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

desire them, means must be found for
diminishing the present heavy expense of
large families. At the same time an extension
of knowledge of safe and _ trustworthy
methods of voluntary control of the reproductive process will give all parents freedom
to restrict the size of their families if they
want to. Such twofold freedom is necessary,
if eugenic ideals are to become permanently
effective.

Measures for redistributing the expense of
rearing children depend partly upon individual initiative, and partly upon co-operative
effort or governmental action. Individual
initiative can find many ways to diminish
the economic burden of young married
couples, once the need is recognized. The
tradition that young people should fend for
themselves, without help from their parent,
is eugenically suicidal, because it tends to
delay childbearing among many of the most
competent couples. It would perhaps be
better to follow the tradition of older countries, where parents expect to help their
children through the early years of marriage.
Insurance can be used to provide for future
children and the expense of their education.
The time-honoured virtue of thrift finds
special application in preparation for parenthood. Most important of all, perhaps, is the
help that should be given by family groups ;
not only by grandparents, but even by
uncles, aunts, and other relatives who are
not themselves burdened by children. Gifts
of this sort, within moderate limits, should
be exempt from taxation. Such exemption
would itself help to focus attention upon a
new ideal of responsibility for the life of the
family.

Society itself, especially in the cities, is
already beginning to take a larger share in
the cost of educating and rearing children.
This is being done either by the State or by
co-operative effort, andin many ways. Some
of these ways are eugenic; others, such as
bonuses for babies, are probably dysgenic
as now administered. Every means of increasing freedom of parenthood must be carefully considered by eugenists. The following
methods are among those which at present
appear theoretically most promising :
PRACTICAL EUGENICS

Community efforts, such as co-operative
nurseries, providing frequent relief and
relaxation for mothers : co-operative medical services for families; reduction of
medical costs for middle income groups.

Greater assurance of scholarships for
intelligent children in large families; a
changed basis of scholarships for graduate
students and others now often restricted
as to marriage.

Tax reduction favouring parents of large
families, especially income tax changes
whereby exemptions are more closely related to the actual cost of rearing children.

Provision of adequate maternity leave,
with salary, for teachers and others employed in public and institutional service.

Family allowances, proportional to level
of living and number of children.

Space prevents discussion of these matters
in any detail. The interesting experiments
wherein European governments are giving
subsidies to parents indicate the extent to
which political interest is aroused when the
decline in births becomes evident. Recent
population measures in Europe are concerned with checking the decline, chiefly
for political, military or industrial reasons.
But eugenists will watch the operation of the
measures with keen interest. In Sweden, the
extensive report of the Government’s Population Commission sought to frame measures
which would improve the quality of the
population, as well as ultimately check the
decline. They recommended the extension
of contraceptive services, (instead of their
restriction as in Germany,) and payments to
parents in kind rather than in cash. Thus
Sweden applies its housing subsidies to the
equalization of rents for couples with large
families, is establishing a country-wide
system of day nurseries, and supplies a free
noonday meal to children at school. In the
United States the family wage scales in effect
for years among foreign missionary institutions have produced quite satisfactory results.
The extension of the system to the clergy
and to the staffs of schools and colleges in
the United States has been seriously discussed. In France and Belgium a system of

I9l

family wage scales, at first inaugurated by
private initiative, has now been made the
subject of legislation and appears to be
raising the standards of child-care in those
countries.

7. Contraception

Voluntary control of reproduction in marriage is the most widely used method of
family limitation. It is often decried as the
cause of the small family, but it is a method,
not a primary cause. Control of reproduction gives parents freedom to decide how
many children they will have. If the necessary information is expensive or difficult
to obtain, some parents are denied freedom
of choice. Eugenics, therefore, requires a
method by which all potential parents, and
especially the less adequate, may learn to
limit the size of their families.

Quite apart from eugenics, means of
limiting the growth of population are essential to the continuation of an advanced
civilization. If our people doubled in number
every twenty-five years, as in the eighteenth
century, the population would number about
700,000,000 by 2000 A.D. Our standard of
living might drop toward that of China.
Contraception violates our existing mores less
than any other form of population control.
Abortion, asceticism, infanticide, have in
the past supplemented the effects of famine,
disease, or war. Aside from eugenics, the
avoidance of these evils furnishes urgent
social reasons for the extension of the knowledge of methods of contraception. Outside
of eugenics there are also reasons for diminishing the economic burdens of parenthood.
For a long time to come social change is more
likely to occur in response to immediate needs
than in obedience to the far-reaching considerations implied by eugenics. Nevertheless, good sense would dictate that current
social changes be developed in a form compatible with eugenic advance. |

The American Eugenics Society therefore
urges the extension of contraceptive services
to married couples everywhere in all income
groups. It is important that further attention given to developing safe and inexpensive means of contraception.
192

As the economic handicaps of large families are reduced, and as knowledge and use
of contraceptive methods become increasingly available, parents will be more nearly
free to have families of whatever size they
choose. With such freedom it will be far
more possible than now for persons with fine
qualities to have large families, and easier
than now for those less well equipped with
vigour, character, and intelligence to have
small families. In fostering freedom of choice
in parenthood, the American Eugenics
Society is attempting to prepare for a wider
and more permanent application of eugenic
ideals than is possible when freedom of parenthood is denied to many persons.

8. The Elimination of Hereditary Defects :

Sterilization

Certain types of physical abnormality
that make people’s lives unhappy and many
types of mental deficiency that are a menace
to society are undoubtedly hereditary. The
only way to eliminate these defects is through
voluntary refusal to have children, or else
through the prevention of reproduction by
means of either sterilization or the segregation of the sexes. Two great difficulties confront all of these methods. First, it is difficult, and in many cases still impossible, to
determine positively whether a given defect
is hereditary or due to an unfavourable
environment. Second, the inheritance of a
defect is often recessive, so that apparently
normal people may carry defective genes and
transmit them to their offspring, although
they themselves show no sign of a defect.
Hence even the most drastic programme of
sterilization, segregation, and voluntary selfcontrol cannot eliminate hereditary feeblemindedness and other hereditary defects in a
single generation, or even in many generations. Nevertheless, the prevention of births
among certain types of people would substantially reduce the proportion of defectives
from generation to generation. The cost of
such an effort would be far more than offset
by saving in public expenses for the care of
defectives.

Among people who are afflicted with defects
that are a menace to society, the great major
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

ity cannot be trusted to refrain voluntarily
from having children. For such people the
only choice is between segregation and
sterilization. The American Eugenics Society
believes that in the great majority of cases
sterilization is much to be preferred. There
are two chief reasons for this. One is that
its cost, on an average, is far less than one
per cent. of the expense of segregating the
same people during the period when reproduction is possible. The second is that a
sterilized defective is much more free than is
one who is segregated. He or she can live a
normal, useful, self-supporting life to a degree
that is impossible under segregation. Nevertheless, the Society also believes that sterilization should not be imposed upon people
who oppose it on religious or ethical grounds,
provided the friends or co-religionist of such
people furnish the means of effective segregation at their own expense and not at that
of the general public. Such a measure leaves
no logical ground for opposition to sterilization laws.

Sterilization has progressed so far that
29 States now have laws permitting the
sterilization of mental defectives and of
certain mentally diseased wards of the State.
Under these laws, more than 25,000 persons
had been sterilized up to 1937, and the
number per year is steadily increasing.

In accordance with this trend, the American Eugenics Society seeks to promote wiser
legislation and wider application of sterilization in accordance with constructive eugenic
principles.

Sterilization is being applied more and
more on social rather than specifically eugenic
grounds. This is desirable because mentally
deficient or defective parents cannot provide
a home environment suitable for rearing
children, even in cases where there is no
certainty that the traits of the parents will be
passed on to their children through their
heredity. Another tendency, which for the
present at least seems wise, is to make
sterilization purely voluntary, or else dependent upon the consent of legal guardians in
the case of persons incompetent to judge for
themselves.

Nebraska and South Dakota provide for
PRACTICAL EUGENICS

State registers of the feeble-minded and prohibit issuance of a marriage licence to any
registered defective except on proof of previous sterilization. Similar provision is needed
everywhere, but to be effective eugenically
it must be accompanied by adequate provision for sterilizing the defectives involved.

Recent laws tend to permit sterilization
of any mentally defective or mentally diseased
person in the entire State. This is in striking
contrast to earlier laws, most of which applied
only to the small number of handicapped
persons who are legally committed to State
institutions for the insane or feeble-minded.
It is obvious that such a restriction is eugenically unsound, and that anyone in the State
whose condition requires sterilization should
have the privilege of having this operation
performed upon them which prevents parenthood without changing the individual’s life
in any other way.

The spread of voluntary sterilization, even
in States with no sterilization laws, has been
rapid. This is a natural consequence of the
fact that sterilization is not a punishment
but a protection. Therefore, in the case of
many handicapped persons it is eagerly
sought by themselves or by their relatives.
They know, better than anyone else, the
undesirability of childbearing—or of further
childbearing—in their own cases. Many of
them could not or should not be committed
to State institutions as insane or feebleminded. Moreover, such State institutions
are not properly organized to serve as
surgical clinics. At present the most important step toward making sterilization more
widely available and more truly eugenic is
probably to provide facilities for sterilization
of voluntary patients at public expense under
proper safeguards. To this end, every State
should adopt the necessary legislation, authorizing hospitals supported by the taxpayers to
accept patients who request to be sterilized.
If this is done under proper restrictions, it
seems probable that during the next generation sterilization of this type will increase
rapidly. Wider knowledge will not only make
the public realize that the operation does not
in any way unsex the patient, but also that
it is a highly valuable protection for people

Cc

193

who for any reason ought not to have
children.

The American Eugenics Society feels that
the ultimate responsibility for the development and application of a sound eugenic
system of sterilization must lie with the
medical profession, especially with psychiatrists. Under the pressure of recent superb
developments in medicine and psychology
the field of heredity has been relatively
neglected. Little attention is paid to human
genetics even in the best medical schools.
Naturally, then, the medical profession can
hardly be expected to discharge its full responsibility in this important matter until hereditary relationships are fully studied by all
physicians. Hence the American Eugenics
Society believes that one of its most important duties is to co-operate with far-sighted
medical men in making both physicians and
laymen aware of the great responsibility
which the medical profession must ultimately
assume in eliminating inherited mental as
well as physical defects.

g. Choice of Mates and Marriage

The eugenic ideal demands a social attitude such that in choosing their mates young
people will be guided not only by obvious
personal qualities, but by the probable value
of their mates as fathers and mothers. One
of the chief reasons for unhappy and dysgenic
marriages, and for the failure of fine people
to marry, is lack of opportunities to become
sufficiently acquainted with eligible partners.
The American Eugenics Society therefore encourages activities and recreations which
enable young people to become acquainted
with one another. It especially stresses the
importance of contacts which reveal everyday conduct and the quality of homes and
immediate relatives.

The American Eugenics Society also believes that the quality of our children will be
improved by changes in our attitude toward
marriage itself. Very early marriages are
frequently followed by large families, and are
especially common among people who give
their children the poorest heredity and training. Hence marriages below the age of 16
should be discouraged by both law and custom.
194

On the other hand, the postponement of
marriage until after the period of greatest fertility should also be discouraged. The greater
the hereditary endowments of a couple, the
more advisable it is that they should have children while they are still young and vigorous.
The American Eugenics Society strives to
create social and economic conditions which
promote early marriages and early childbearing among desirable types of young
people, and hinder such marriages among less
desirable types.

Advance notice of marriage, now required
in a majority of the States, should be obligatory in all. Publication of intention to wed
gives social opinion a chance to form and
public authority time to act. Medical examination before marriage, such as is now required in many States, is primarily for health
protective purposes, but has eugenic value
in so far as diseased persons tend to lack
intelligence, self-control, and altruism.

The main changes necessary are earlier
marriages among the best educated part of
the population ; more stable marriages and
fewer broken homes; better matrimonial
opportunities for educated women. While
the marriage rate of such women, particularly college graduates, has been increasing
during recent years, it is still undesirably
low. The failure of many college women
to marry and have children is due in part to
exaggerated ideals of what mates would be
desirable, in part to long postponement of
marriage, and in part to their entrance into
occupations where contacts that lead to
marriage are not easily made. Correction of
these conditions obviously requires changes
in the education of men as well as women.
Young women of the finer types must not
merely be prepared for marriage and parenthood as well as for careers, but must enjoy
greatly increased opportunities for normal
acquaintance with young men who are
equally well prepared.

10. Eugenics and Rural Life

The 1930 Census showed that on farms
there were 60 per cent. more children than
were needed to replace their parents, whereas
in cities the number was substantially below

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the replacement level. Although the birthrate of the farm population provides some
increase of population in prosperous areas
where farm work is highly mechanized, it
reaches far the highest level in areas of very
limited opportunity. It seems probable that
the difference between the rural and urban
rates will be narrowed during the next few
decades, and the same may be expected of
the present differentials between the more
prosperous and the poorest rural areas.
Nevertheless, for a long time to come, the
farm population will remain one of the chief
sources for the replacement of urban population. Thus the quality of the farm population
and of the migrants from the farm is of immense importance. The city cannot afford to
neglect the standards of education, training,
and health which prevail on the farm, nor to
ignore the benefit to be expected if the rural
districts from which it receives recruits were
able to maintain high standards in these
respects. Only at its peril can the United
States as a whole neglect the eugenic implications of the high rural birth-rate.

If the best individual stocks have a tendency to migrate from the rural areas of high
birth-rates to the cities where the birth-rate
is low, as appears to be the case in some areas
at least, there will be an inevitable decline
in the quality of our people. If at the same
time isolated groups composed of highly
deficient stocks with high birth-rates are
allowed to persist in certain rural areas,
problems of hereditary inadequacy will
greatly increase. Thus the eugenic problems
of rural areas are distinct from those of
urbanized communities, even though the
two are intimately interlocked.

Although the problem of selection in ruralurban migration has not yet been adequately
studied, it is attracting serious attention,
and more decisive information will doubtless
soon be available. The most reasonable
hypothesis seems to be that when people
migrate from areas of low opportunity,
especially during periods of diminishing returns for agriculture, there is likely to be a
kind of self-selection such that those who go
away are more intelligent and energetic than
those who stay at home. On the contrary,
PRACTICAL EUGENICS

such selection may be absent or reversed in
the case of promising agricultural areas.
There is some evidence to this effect from
studies already available.

The American Eugenics Society plans to
take an active part in furthering movements
designed to raise the social and economic
level of farm living, to improve rural education, and to encourage the redistribution of
certain parts of the farm population so that
they may live in regions of greater opportunity.

The extension of contraceptive facilities in
rural areas is both desirable and inevitable.
It is important, however, that such services
be made equally available to all elements in
the community. This is a matter in which
the co-operation of rural health agencies is
of prime importance.

Scattered groups of defective families in
rural areas present a special and difficult
problem. Such groups are often characterized by very rapid natural increase, and
constitute “‘ pockets ’’ for the multiplication
and spread of deficient stocks. The co-operation of State and local agencies must be
sought in meeting the immediate needs of
deficient families in such communities, and in
restricting their reproduction. Sterilization is
especially important in this connection.

11. Immigration

Immigration laws must be framed from
many points of view, such as the effect of
cheap labour on standards of living and the
rate at which persons from different cultural
and political backgrounds can be assimilated.
The American Eugenics Society, however,
maintains that in every case the eugenic
requirements should be met. The main requirement is that the United States should
not admit immigrants whose hereditary
capacities are below our own present average.
From the eugenic point of view the policy
should be to make country of origin secondary to the quality of the individual. The
political advantage of such a policy is obvious
for it involves no discrimination against any
nationals as such. The practical difficulties
are not as great as may appear and could be
worked out with experience.

195

Immigration restrictions should be extended to all territory outside continental
United States and Alaska.

12. War

War is a threat to the hope for orderly
eugenic advance. Although public opinion
will be swayed largely by other than eugenic
motives, the American Eugenics Society
will continue to emphasize the dysgenic
aspects of war, and the drastic measures
which might be necessary to preserve the
qualities of our people during a prolonged
and devastating conflict. Eugenists will cooperate in every possible way with existing
agencies to develop means of preventing war.

13. Research

The American Eugenics Society is concerned with scientific investigation in two
respects. First, it endeavours to foster research by other agencies on all problems of
eugenic significance. Second, it has a special
responsibility for the study of practical measures which may effect eugenic results.

There is great need of research by psychologists and others on the reasons why families differ in size, and on the effect of physical
and cultural environments on sex, marriage,
children and family life. There is also need
for greatly extended study of the interaction
of heredity and environment in the development of human traits. Studies of the origin of
groups which at present display outstanding
characteristics may become important if
critically developed.

The new field of population study has
developed important data on differential rates
of birth and mortality among groups classified by occupational status, socio-economic
class, or regional location. It is essential
that such studies be extended to groups
classified by socially desirable qualities, such
as health, intelligence, and valuable personality traits.

Further research in genetics is immensely
important to eugenics. There should be an
organized, co-ordinated study of the inheritance of mental deficiency, crippling abnormalities, and pre-disposition to various
physical and mental diseases. Of equal, if not
196

more, importance is the study of the inhentance of specific factors favourable to the
development of socially valuable qualities.
At present, the genetic quality of many
persons can be judged only by empirical
standards based on personal qualities, as
described in a preceding section. These
standards are sufficient to indicate many
changes by which the future genetic capacities of our people could be improved. Equally
empirical standards have been employed
successfully in the improvement of plants and
animals, but more rapid progress was made
when the science of plant and animal
genetics was highly developed. It is reasonable to suppose that human improvement
will follow a similar course.

14. Practical Applications: Aims and Methods

The preceding pages make it clear that the
objectives of the American Eugenics Society
may be grouped under three main heads.

The first is the creation of a public attitude
appreciative of eugenics and inclined to put
it into practical application. This means
education in the broadest sense. It includes
a new orientation of leaders in many fields,
a widespread change in public opinion, more
accurate knowledge of the scientific basis
of genetics and heredity, and especially
the training of a young generation which
will be the first to put eugenic principles into
practical use on a large scale.

The second major aim of the American
Eugenics Society is to foster well-directed
practical attempts toward modifying social
and economic practices in such ways as to
influence the birth-rate eugenically. This
involves a careful study of plans for such
purposes, and the dissemination of information as to how various types of plans are
working and how they can be improved.

To attain these aims, it 1s necessary to
develop a broader and deeper scientific
knowledge, not merely of genetics but of the
sociological and psychological principles that
control the processes of population renewal.
Therefore, the third major objective of the
American Eugenics Society is to encourage
scientific research along every line that may
have bearing on size of family and the kinds

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of families in which children are born. Such
encouragement necessitates efforts to procure
funds and opportunities for persons and
organizations that are competent to carry
on research. Moreover, the real significance
of scientific discoveries must be so publicized
as to create a public opinion that will look
with favour upon large expenditures for such
purposes.

The chief methods by which these three
great aims may be turned into realities by
the American Eugenics Society are as
follows :

i. A strong central office. This should
be manned by experts in eugenics, publicity, and the arts of writing and lecturing.
Our present central office is already under
pressure in carrying out the routine work
of keeping up the membership, answering
letters and supervising the physical side
of conferences and publications. Little
or no time is left for the purposes listed
below.

2. The building up of a large membership including a great many small givers
and a considerable number of large givers.
During the past two years the paid-up
membership of the Society has more than
doubled, but it is still extremely small in
proportion to the importance of the
subject.

3. The provision to members and others
of publications, both periodical and occasional, dealing with special topics and with
matters of general interest in either
popular or semi-technical style. The unpaid services of the directors and members
have been invaluable in this respect, but
cannot obviate the need for the services
of paid experts. Especially at the present
time, the Society should be in a position
to publish monographs and pamphlets on
such topics as the practical relations of
eugenics to recreation, housing, co-operatives, nurseries, and many other subjects,

4. Conferences with leaders in many
fields of social activity. Such conferences
during the past two years have proved
highly stimulating and fruitful.

5. Lectures and organizers who can
PRACTICAL EUGENICS

make contacts with local leaders, stir up
local interest, increase the membership
and funds of the Society, and help to
organize local groups. Thus far, scarcity
of funds has prevented work of this kind
except very sporadically by volunteers.

6. Agencies with proper financial backing, which will co-operate with other
organizations in putting the eugenic ideal
into practical effect along lines such as are
suggested by the preceding sections on
education, economic measures, contraception, sterilization, marriage, rural life,
immigration, war, and research. Interest
in the eugenic aspects of all sorts of social
and economic activities is now so great
that very strong committees would voluntarily devote much time to these matters,
if paid executive secretaries were available for the purpose.

197

The programme outlined in these pages
cannot be followed arbitrarily, for the
American Eugenics Society must take into
account its own limitations in funds and
personnel. Moreover, a sound eugenic movement will be characterized not only by consistency of purpose, but by responsiveness to
new scientific advances and to changes in
social trends.

To-day the road to eugenic advance is
more clearly marked than ever before. Those
agencies which are at present concerned with
improving the conditions of human life have

shown every desire to co-operate in the

eugenic effort. We must have faith that
difficulties can be resolved, and that both
quantity and quality of births can be turned
to the improvement of the race, which is the
goal of all.

 

Price 5/THE SOCIETY OF GENEALOGISTS

Catalogue of Parish Register Transcripts

In print, Manuscript and Typescript in possession of the Society
of Genealogists. Eighty pages interleaved, covering over three

thousand parishes.

Second edition, revised and enlarged, com
prising: Parish registers of England, Wales, Scotland, Ireland and
the British Commonwealth; Roman Catholic and Nonconformist
registers; Marriage Licences; Incomplete extracts of registers

from other publications, etc.

Telephone: Euston 3330.

DPODOD OOD

From The Secretary,
The Society of Genealogists,
Chaucer House, Malet Place,
London, W.C.1

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXX, No. 3.
