INCENTIVES TO PARENTHOOD

Some Data from the Pioneer Health Centre, Peckham
By MARY GOWING

IR WILLIAM BEVERIDGE defines
Se limitations of his scheme more
-\_J clearly than his severest critics. In his
Galton Lecture* to the Eugenics Society on
February 16th, and in an article in the
Observer on April 11th, he himself explains
that his scheme is supplementary and
secondary. In so doing he has possibly
proved himself a greater man than the man
who has been acclaimed for planning the
Beveridge Report. If the Beveridge scheme
touches the greatest social problem of our
time, it only touches it obliquely. As he
says, ‘‘ Nobody is going to have children in
these days as a profit-making business,” and
again, ‘‘ People will not have children for
pay.”
In the Observer Sir William gave some of
the reasons why we must not deceive ourselves into thinking that the RegistrarGeneral’s latest figures are any indication
that the tendency towards a dwindling birth
rate has been reversed. He also pointed out
that the recent rise in the marriage rate
cannot be maintained, and in this connection
he used one sentence of particular significance.
Women, he said, ‘‘ have had more than the
usual opportunity for marrying, through the
filling of Britain with armed forces and
through the war boom in employment.”
War, then, provides our people with opportunities for meeting and mating which are
denied to them in peace-time. This statement, which is simple and unchallengeable,
Should serve to swing attention from
secondary to primary causes, for no one can
deny that those who do not meet and mate,
do not bring children into the world.
.A way must. be found to supply them with
such meeting-places, for giving our men and

women an opportunity, not only to find a

ee Eugenic Aspects of Children’s Allowances,”’
t ‘‘The Problem of the Birth Rate.”’

mate, but to find a suitable mate. For today it is only out of good marriage relationships that larger families can be expected to
issue. In our generation only the happily
married couple will have the vitality,
courage, stability and faith that are necessary to sustain them through the adventure
of rearing three, four or more children. Such
people, and only such people, can hope to
arrive at true values; for only they will
know that there is deeper and more basic
happiness to be found in the mutual interest
and enjoyment of rearing a family, even at
the cost of sacrifice, than in acquiring wireless
sets and motor-cars and furniture that makes
them seem richer than the people whovlive
next door. It is useless to attack people for
their selfishness. Selfishness brings its own
punishment as surely as unselfishness brings
its own reward, but the punishments come
too late to teach their lesson, and when they’
come they hit not only at the happiness of
the individuals who make a nation, but at
the purpose, prestige and power for good of
the nation itself.

Sir William, echoing and appreciating the
Prime Minister, has said that a great nation
needs a large population to safeguard the
peace, not only of its own people, but the
peace of all the smaller peoples. Though this
statement is true, it is not a good argument
with which to persuade either a man or a
woman to build a bigger family. For a
woman in particular, it is in fact.a very bad
argument, for she thinks, and very rightly,
of immediate matters, and in terms not of
nations, but of her own family circle. Out
of her family and all the other families the
nation is born, and so it follows that if the
family is at rights with itself, the nation will

_ be at rights with itself too.

39

The problem, then, is to provide not ‘$0
much a peace-time equivalent of the oppor40°. . _ THE EUGENICS REVIEW

tunities for meeting and marrying, which are
now occurring under the shadow of war, as
-to provide an environment in which natural
selectivity can operate wholesomely.

Those who look at the matter basically,
unsentimentally and objectively, will admit
that the process of courtship and mating is
still the natural process of hunting a quarry,
where the quarry is willing to be hunted, and
does in fact display herself discreetly to that
end. What qualities should the young woman
—honestly recognising that marriage is
desirable, and sensing it not as an end but as
a beginning—display, if she frankly wishes
to attract, not a mate, but the mate? She
can display nothing that is not innate, for
pretence of any kind can only lead to disaster.
A marriage based on the fact that a man has
been temporarily attracted by artifice cannot produce that slowly and satisfactorily
integrating relationship which creates the
unity that is parenthood. So the truly
marriageable woman will intuitively display
her true nature, aware that it will not attract
all men, confident that it will attract one
man, and profoundly concerned that he shall
be the right man, the man a scientist might
call her specific mate.

The qualities of her true nature, in which
she is so right to have faith, may not shine
out in any of the meeting-places which were
open to her before the war. For what and
where were those places ? Some local dancehall, a tennis club, a cocktail party, a publichouse, or day in day out in an office; and
in any case, was the circle wide enough, were
the interests sufficiently diverse, or was the
society suitably integrated for real selectivity?

The subject, of course, is not a new one, but
it is rather a young one in terms of social
research. Psychopathologists have looked at
it. Co-educationalists are aware of it. The
youth movements, no doubt, have had it in
mind. In one social experiment, the Peckham Experiment, it was the central theme.

Here there were conditions in which the
marriage rate could rise. Here, young people
of both sexes had a natural opportunity to
display any or all of their various qualities.
Here the quality of marriage relationships
was deepening, and this change brought with

it a desire for children where hitherto there
had been none. Those who had married on
the tacit understanding that there should be
no children, began to have babies. Those
who had openly said “‘ Never again,” after
the birth of one child, were now as frankly
planning a larger family. Second children
had been born, third children were on the
way. Within this experiment the tendency
towards a falling birth rate had been reversed when war came and caused the
“Centre ’”’ to be suspended.

When war was declared, the second stage
of the Experiment, the large-scale Pioneer
Health Centre at Peckham, was four and a
half years old. Figures of conceptions which
took place within Centre membership cannot
therefore be regarded as statistics though
they are evidence of an unmistakable trend :

“ Fifty-nine out of ninety-one babies born
within Centre membership were conceived
after their parents had joined. Of these
fifty-nine conceptions :

6 were actively resented ;
23 were accidental but more or less
readily accepted ;
30 were deliberate.

Of these thirty “‘ wished for ”’ babies :

Io were born of parents who had previously determined to have no, or no
more, children, or not to have children.
until after some looked-for but uncertain improvement in their financial
position ;

3 were born of parents whose marriages
at the time they joined had not been
consummated ; :

6 were born of parents who were previously infertile and who responded
to treatment. |

The birth of nineteen children can therefore
be said to be directly attributable to the
Centre. Of these nineteen, one was a fourth
child, one a third, and two, second children,
the rest being first children.’’* |

In considering these figures it must be
appreciated that the environmental influence
of a Centre; which provides an integrated:

* Pearse, Innes, and Crocker, Lucy. The Peckham
Experiment. Allen & Unwin.
INCENTIVES TO PARENTHOOD | — . 41,

society for babies, little children, schoolchildren, adolescents, courting and engaged
couples and young marrieds, would take at
least a generation to mature.

The process of vitalization which took
place at Peckham, not through propaganda,
not through the treatment of sickness, not
through the prevention of disease, but by
the promotion of health in every one of its
meanings, was very largely due to this pro
vision of a new kind of environment. This.
was one experiment, there may be others.
It is by studying such experiments, where
new social factors have been introduced and
certain results have been achieved, that we
can begin to look for the solution of the
problem which is exercising all the seriousminded people who believe that the future of.
this country must influence the future of the
world. ne

CBC.
CONSTRUCTIVE BIRTH CONTROL

SOCIETY AND CLINIC FOUNDED BY Dr. Martz STOPES IN 1921
The oldest Birth Control Clinic, the first to establish Birth Control

Case Sheets and collect scientific data; C.B.C. Clinics are still the

only free clinics: the only birth control clinics dealing from the first
with all aspects of birth control, i.e. prevention of detrimental births,

spacing of healthy births and inducing potentially desirable pregnancy —

in sterile women, and general marital help.
THE PIONEERS OF THE CLINIC MOVEMENT
Library, Museum and Clinics open daily, 10-6 (except Sats.)
Books and Racial supplies may be obtained direct.

TECHNICAL DEMONSTRATIONS for MEMBERS of the MEDICAL PROFESSION |

First Thursday each month :

Applications to The Hon. Secretary, Headquarters Clinic,
106 Whitfield Street, W.1

SOCIETY

“ For the promotion of knowledge of the course of legislation in different countries, more particularly in the
several parts of His Majesty’s Dominions, and in the United States.”
President : The Rt. Hon. S. M. BRUCE, C.H., M.C.
Chairman of the Executive Committee: The Rt. Hon. Lord MACMILLAN, G.C.V.0. —
Honorary Secretaries: C. E. A. BEDWELL, Esq.
Professor H. C. GUTTERIDGE, K.C.
Annual Subscription - - . - - One Guinea

Address: 28 Essex Street, London, W.C.2

 

OF COMPARATIVE LEGISLATION

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXXV, No. 2:
