POPULATION PROBLEMS AND FAMILY
POLICY IN FRANCE*

By GERTRUDE WILLOUGHBY, M.A., D. Univ. Paris

RANCE today is directing a larger share
of her national income to aiding the
family than any other country, nearly
half of her total expenditure on social services

(£375,000,000) is paid out in direct money
allowances to families.1_ This policy. which
runs contrary to the family policy of this
country is, I think, only intelligible when
certain demographic, social and economic
factors peculiar to France are given due
weight. I propose, therefore, to deal briefly
with the demographic problems of France
(I am no demographer) and then go on to
consider the manner in which France has set
out to solve her population problem. In a
final section I shall try to give some estimate
of the demographic and social effects of the
policy which has been adopted.

_ France, of course, is not unique in having
a falling birth-rate ; all European countries
have been, or actually are, in the same
situation. The acute population problem in
France today arises from the fact that her
birth-rate started to fall about one hundred
years before that of other countries in
Western Europe. A comparison may be
made with Great Britain. A slight fall in the
birth-rate is observable towards the end of
the eighteen-seventies but during the first
half of the nineteenth century our population
had doubled owing to the fact that the birthrate was fairly well sustained and mortality
rates were falling. In France the fall in the
birth-rate became evident in the seventeenseventies and the rate fell almost continuously up to 1935. There had been a marked
fall in mortality rates towards the end of the
nineteenth century but even so by 1935
France had an excess of deaths over births.?
In 1938 for each thousand inhabitants,
deaths exceeded births by 0-8; in this

country births exceeded deaths by 3-7.

*A paper read at a Members’ Meeting of the Eugenics
Society on March 25th, 1953.

Monsieur Alfred Sauvy, the Director of the
Institut National d’Etudes Démographiques,
has estimated that for several years prior
to the war France lacked each year 100,000
births merely to ensure the replacement of
her population.

Background to the Present Demographic
Situation

I propose briefly to examine some of the
causes responsible for this situation. Many
are common to other countries with a falling
birth-rate as, for example, the rising standard
of living in recent years and the changed
position of women in society. But it is
possible to discern causes which have had a
particular influence in France.* In an interesting article by Monsieur Bourgeois-Pichat,
published in the review Population, the
author shows the influence of the French

Revolution of 1789 on demographic trends.

93

The political result of the Revolution was
greatly to advance the prestige and power
of the bourgeoisie, and this was the social
class in which the birth-rate was the lowest.
The Revolution had swept away ancient
barriers to social mobility and the free and
equal citizens, therefore, who wished to
advance in social status adopted the family
pattern of the social class which had already
arrived. Advancement, then and up to
recent years in France, depended on restricting one’s family and saving; saving to provide
for one’s own retirement at the earliest
opportunity and saving to advance one’s
children in society and to leave them a
competence. Nice calculations of this order
clearly do not result in the creation of large
families.

It is important also to take into account
the effect of the law on inheritance laid down
during the Revolution and embodied in the
Napoleonic Code. This law has had a profound influence on the birth-rate, since it
94 , THE EUGENICS REVIEW

enacts that all children share equally in
their father’s estate. The peasant proprietor,

in particular, has limited his family so as to |

prevent as far as possible the division of his
land. 
Effect. of Falling Birth-rate

To whatever causes or combination of
causes one attributes the failure of French
families before the war to provide for the
next generation, the effects on every aspect
of French life have been disastrous. France
between the wars had to call on Poles, Belgians and Italians amongst others to come
and take over deserted farmland and provide the workers in heavy industries, particularly in coal mining ; industrial and social
investment were far below the requirements
of the country. For there is a close relationship between economic and social development and population. Of course the plight
of France in the inter-war years cannot be
attributed solely to her demographic situation. Many other factors must be given due
weight. The enormous losses in men sustained during the 1914-18 war, for example,
exercised not only a direct influence on the
birth-rate but an indirect psychological
influence which it is difficult to exaggerate.

Nevertheless, in the nineteen-thirties the
demographic situation came to be regarded
as the fundamental cause of France’s decline.
Or perhaps it would be more correct to say
that the recovery of France came to be
linked with a reversal of the demographic
trends of over one hundred and fifty years.
Obviously, to effect such a change necessitated a policy which would influence every
aspect of family life and the Code de la
Famille,* which became law in 1939 sets out
to achieve this end. The Code deals with
education, with the factors influencing the
moral and physical life of the family, with
criminal abortion. It also co-ordinates and
extends the system of family allowances and
it is with this aspect of French policy that
the remainder of my paper is concerned.

Financial Aid to the Family: Maternity
Grant and Family Allowances
French financial aid to the family is
directed towards achieving two ends: firstly,

a measure of social justice by redistributing
the national income in favour of the family
and, secondly, by the adjustment of certain
allowances, to the encouragement of the
birth-rate and the discouragement of abortion. Five separate allowances® are being
paid today, a maternity allowance, family
allowances, a special allowance paid to the
family in which there is only one income
earner, allowances paid during the period of
pregnancy and a housing allowance. Specific
conditions are attached to each of these
allowances, conditions which are related to
the end which it is desired to achieve.

The primary aim of the legislator immediately after the war was to encourage the
birth-rate, and to this end the maternity
grant was directed. The birth of every child
of French nationality gives the right to a
grant. of 36,000 francs for the first child and
24,000 francs for subsequent births provided
that the following conditions are fulfilled :

The wife must be under twenty-five when
the child is born or the first child must be
born within the first two years of marriage,
and the second child within the first five
years of marriage. After the fourth child
there are no conditions. The aim of the
legislator in paying these very considerable
grants is to encourage early marriage and
families of more than three children. The
rise of the birth-rate in postwar France is
considered by some to be related, in part, to
this financial reward ; others question the
value of a maternity grant payable under
these conditions. .

The report of the Government Commission®
appointed in 1951 to review the whole
family allowance policy, under the chairmanship of Monsieur Prigent, voted unanimously
against the retention of the maternity grant
in its present form. It was suggested that
the birth of every child, irrespective of any
conditions, should give rise to a grant
towards the extra expense. which the birth
of a child entails. It was proposed that the
amount of the maternity grant itself should
be reduced and the family allowances
increased. Up to the moment, the views of
the Commission have not brought about any
change in policy so that these very considerPOPULATION PROBLEMS AND FAMILY POLICY IN FRANCE 95

able sums are still being paid. It may be that
the Government is unwilling to dispense with
an allowance which is judged by some to
encourage the birth-rate. |

The family allowances proper claim the
largest share of the total sums expended and
benefit the greatest number of families. All
French families are eligible for these allowances provided that the head of the family
is gainfully employed or can prove that
through ill health or unemployment he cannot satisfy this condition. It is not necessary
to be employed under a contract of service,
peasant proprietors, members of the liberal
professions, employers and shopkeepers all
have their own schemes. I propose to describe the scheme which covers the largest
number of families, namely that which is
applicable to the workers in commerce and
industry.

The payment of family allowances in
France dates back to 1918 when a number
of employers in heavy industry started to
pay allowances over and above wages to
those of their employés who were the fathers
of large families. By 1932 some two million
families were benefiting from these allowances. The employers financed this voluntary scheme by payment of a percentage of
their wages bill into Caisses de Compensation, Funds created by the employers themselves on a geographical or industrial basis.
These Funds collected contributions and
paid out allowances, for it was soon realized
that had the payment been left to individual
firms, fathers of families far from benefiting
from allowances might have found it difficult
to obtain employment. This manner of
financing family allowances was retained
when the payments were made a legal obligation in 1932 ; the present scheme is financed
in the same way, employers pay 16-75 per
cent of an adjusted wages bill into the
Family Allowance Fund in their area. Previous to the war, the Funds were administered solely by employers but since the war
fathers of families who are also trade unionists are allotted half the seats on the administrative councils. One quarter of the seats
are allotted to employers and the remaining

quarter are held by representatives of interested organizations.

Family allowances in France provide a far
higher proportion of the family income than
the allowances paid in this country. Indeed,
under certain conditions the budget of the
lowest paid workers may well be doubled by
the addition of allowances. For France has
realized that if family allowances are to be
effective in reducing the difference in standard of living which exists between those
members of the community who have
families and those who have not, the allowances must be considerable. And further
that the allowances must be related to the
cost of living and therefore to wages. All
family allowance payments are assessed as
percentages of a basic wage which, in theory,
should vary with the wages actually being
paid. At the present time this basic wage is
17,225 francs a month.* The legal minimum
wage is 20,000 francs a month and the
powerful family associations are constantly
agitating for a rise in the basis of assessment
so as to bring it more in line with actual
wages.

Allowances are paid, as in this country,
for the second child to whom is attributed
20 per cent of the basic wage, the third child
claims 30 per cent of the basic wage. Therefore, the father of three children receives
each month in family allowances the sum of
8,625 francs. For every additional child
5,075 francs a month will be added. It should
be noted that these are the allowances paid
in the Paris area, the allowances are smaller
in other parts of France.

The One Wage-earner Allowance

I come now to the one wage-earner allowance, salaire unique, attributed to the family
in which the mother devotes the greater part
of her time to the family. This allowance is
almost as important to the budget as the
family allowances themselves ; the allowance
is paid if the father stays at home and the
mother works. If there are two children in
the family this allowance will amount to
20 per cent of the basic wage and for three
children or more 50 per cent of the basic
-*t,000 francs equal f1.t—~CS
96 | THE EUGENICS REVIEW

wage will be forthcoming. Thus a family
with three children benefiting from this
allowance and from family allowances will
in fact have the right to 17,225 francs a
month. In fact, the amount will be nearly

20,000 francs a month since 1,600 francs will
be added in respect of an income tax rebate.
If the father is employed in one of the lower
paid industries, textiles or transport for
example, family allowances plus the one
wage-earner allowance may go some way
to doubling the family income. Since the
allowances do not vary with income they
obviously form a smaller proportion of the
total income in the higher income groups.

* Rather over go per cent of the total sum
(about £375,000,000) paid out in allowances
is absorbed by the one worker allowance and
the family allowances.? Obviously the two
allowances.complement each other and both
promote the well-being of the family. But
whilst the payment of family allowances
calls forth little criticism today the one
earner allowance is unacceptable to many
in’ its present form. The Rapport Prigent
already referred to brings out clearly the
difference of opinion amongst the members
of the Commission. The explanation of this
difference is to be sought in the underlying

rinciples governing the two allowances.

amily allowances conform to a generally

accepted idea of social justice. Quite apart |

from any population policy the necessity
of helping the family in a period of rising
costs of living is regarded as essentiad. To
a certain extent, the allowances in the
immediate postwar period provided a substitute for our food subsidies, rationing and
price control. And it may be that the proportion of family allowances to wages might
diminish in the future if equilibrium between
wages and cost of living were established.

.. The principles underlying the one earner

allowance are of a different order, they are.

based on the catholic belief, often stressed by
the Pope, that the place of the mother is in
the home looking after her children. The
one wage-earner allowance then has as its
prime object the keeping of the mother in
the home, her proper place. Or rather the
allowance is designed to make it possible for

the mother to choose whether she will profit
from the allowance and stay at home or go
out to seek paid employment. Obviously an
allowance which makes it possible for a
mother to stay at home may result in a
higher birth-rate and will almost certainly
result in a better kept home. Nevertheless,
the trade unionists and the parties on the
left see in this allowance an expression of
conservative and catholic opinion which is
to them unacceptable. They would prefer
to see the allowance abolished and the money
paid out in larger family allowances.

This one wage-earner allowance is also
criticized on other grounds. In the first
place, it is extremely difficult to control. It
has been alleged that 50 per cent of women
drawing the allowance are, in fact, employed
outside their homes. This figure is certainly
grossly exaggerated, but in a large town it
is Impossible to exercise any control. And
secondly, the allowance is criticized on the
grounds that it is unjust. The middle-class
husband drawing an adequate income from
his employment gains from the one wageearner allowance since his wife, if she has
children, would not in any event be working
outside the home. On the other hand, the
wage of a husband in the poorly paid industries might be so low as to oblige the wife to
go out to work since she can earn more than
the allowance provides. However, in spite of
these criticisms the allowance continues to
be paid and it is highly unlikely that there
will be any change in the near future.

Pre-Natal Allowances

I have dealt with three of the allowances.
There is a fourth allowance which is paid
before the child is actually born. The number of pregnancies terminated by abortion
has caused grave concern in France for some
years. An interesting article published in
Population Studies’. gives details of the
extremely severe legal measures which the
Government has enacted in an attempt to
deal with the problem. The conditions
attached to the granting of pre-natal allowances are definitely designed to discourage
abortion. Pregnancy must be declared by
the end of the third month and three medical
POPULATION PROBLEMS AND FAMILY POLICY IN FRANCE 97

‘examinations must be undergone in order.

to qualify for the total of nine months’ family
allowance. The allowance is paid in three
separate sums after the medical examinations. This method of payment is primarily
designed to discourage abortion, but of
course it also ensures medical care for the
mother and child and in so doing may well
diminish the infant mortality rate. To complete this account of allowances I should
merition that fathers are given three days’
paid leave on the birth of a child.

Housing Allowance

Finally, a housing allowance is forthcoming if it is considered that the family is
paying out an unduly large proportion of
total income on rent; up to the present the
number of beneficiaries is small. The accommodation occupied by the family must
reach a certain minimum standard before
the allowance is paid and even though the
standard required is extremely modest
relatively few families qualify for the
allowance. The housing in France is deplorable, owing in part to the fact that so little
building was carried out between the wars.
The housing allowance is designed to encourage the building of flats and houses to let
since new accommodation is not subject to
rent restriction. Therefore, if a family is

fortunate enough to find a new home or

flat at a high rent the housing allowance
facilitates the movement from old unsuitable
premises to the new accommodation.

Social Insurance Benefits

The concern of the French legislator for
the family is exhibited not only in the comprehensive family policy which I have just
described, but also in certain aspects of the
social insurance benefits. Social insurance,
except for old age pensions, covers only
people employed under a contract of service.
The wife of an insured worker is paid the

medical costs incidental to the birth of a
child up to a certain agreed sum. But to
claim benefit certain formalities have to
be observed. Regular pre-natal and postnatal medical examinations must be under
gone and the baby must be brought regularly for medical examination. ®

Again, the worker drawing sickness or
accident benefit is paid about half his normal
wage. But should there be three children in
the family the benefit is increased to twothirds of the wage after one month. Even
the old age pension is increased by one tenth
if three children have been reared, on the
assumption that the cost of providing for
the family has prevented the accumulation
of savings.

The Assessment of this Policy

I come now to some assessment of the
result of this family policy, an assessment
which it is extremely difficult to make. The
outstanding fact is, of course, the increase
in the French birth-rate since the war. The
present birth-rate in France is about onethird higher than before the war and though
there was a 5 per cent drop in 1951 the rate
was almost maintained at the 1951 figure in
1952.19 This may be compared with a drop of
some 25 per cent in the English rate since
1947, the year of the highest postwar birthrate. To what extent have the family allowances contributed to this extremely favourable situation from the French point of
view? Opinion in France itself is divided and
clearly where so many factors have to be
taken into account the weight to be attached.
to one factor as against another cannot be
measured with accuracy. The official view
is that considerable weight should be given
to the effect of the allowances and in spite
of criticism those allowances such as the
maternity grant. which definitely express a
population policy have been retained. The
official view was summed up by the Minister
of Labour and Social Security in 1951 when
he addressed an international gathering in
Paris. Explaining the motives underlying
the French legislation, he said: ‘ Certainly
social justice is the chief characteristic of
our family policy, but in addition, this
policy has been an important element in our
demographic improvement, and France has
given a proof of what can be accomplished |
by such an effort in righting a critical situation.’’ Many other official pronouncements
98 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

expressing the same opinion could be quoted.
On the same occasion the demographer,
Monsieur Daric of the Institut National
d’Etudes Démographiques, expressed himself
with much more reserve: “ It is extremely
difficult, if not impossible, to isolate the
specific action of one factor amongst the
numerous and very different factors which
are at the base of this renewed increase in the
birth-rate. These factors are economic,
psychological, sociological and cultural, some
temporary, some permanent... .’’ And later
Monsieur Daric added, ‘ Let us note only
that the influence of the family allowances
on the renewed increase in the birth-rate
appears evident whilst it is not possible to
adduce formal proof.’’!!

The Family Associations, which are largely’

Catholic bodies, would claim that there has
been a reawakening in France to the value of
family life and that the increase in the birthrate is fundamentally an expression of this
belief. Family allowances by redistributing
income as between those with and those
without children, have made it possible for
parents to increase their families as they
would wish to do without suffering an unduly
large fall in their standard of living.

However, there is general agreement that
this family policy has had some effect in
reducing abortion and the infant mortality
rate. It is obviously extremely difficult to
assess the effect on abortion of the payment
of family allowances from the time that
pregnancy is established. But the demographers tend to the view that the allowance
has had some effect in reducing the number
of abortions.

The infant mortality rate in France has
been reduced by 30 per cent in comparison
with 1936 to 1938 and there is no doubt
that the provisions outlined above have been
instrumental in bringing about this result.
Nevertheless, the rate remains high in France
compared with that of other countries. The
English infant mortality rate in 1952 was
twenty-eight per thousand births whilst the
French rate, in spite of a sensible improvement, remains about forty-two.!2

Contrary to what might have been
expected French family policy has not had

the effect of increasing the number of large
families. Since 1940 there has been an increase in the number of families having at
least one child and families of two and three
children have also increased. The number of
families with more than three children has
remained fairly constant. A recent Government report brings this point out clearly.18
Approximately 70 per cent of the families to
whom allowances are being paid consist of
one or two children. Approximately 12 per
cent only of families have four or more
children.

It might also have been expected that
French family policy would have had the
effect of increasing the birth-rate in the
lower income groups since family allowances
do not vary with the income of the recipient.
Far from this being the position there is
some evidence to suggest that the difference
in the size of families in social classes is less
marked, and indeed that the size of the
middle-class family may be increasing. For
example, the 1946 census gives figures to
show that the largest families are to be
faund in the peasant proprietor group but
that the difference between the size of
families in the administrative and liberal
professions and the families of the unskilled
worker is small. The latter group has an
average of 1-89 children per family and the
former I-70.

I am indebted to M. Jean Daric of the
Institut National d’Etudes Démographiques
for the analysis set out in the following
table :

AVERAGE NUMBER OF SURVIVING CHILDREN PER FAMILY
IN THE MAIN INCOME GROUPS

Farmers, peasant proprietors . 1 2°53
Unskilled labourers and skilled workers . 1°89
Office workers 1-62
Shop assistants I*39
Small employers and independent workers 1-81
Shopkeepers . . . 1°65
Administrative and professional I-70

The Middle-class Birth-rate
This apparent change in the family pattern

of the middle classes is due to factors not

necessarily connected with the family allowance policy, though the middle-class man
who is employed will be paid these allowances free of income tax. Moreover, the
POPULATION PROBLEMS AND FAMILY POLICY IN FRANCE 99

family allowances will be continued up to
the age of twenty if the boy or girl is following a full-time course of study. But the
member of the liberal professions who is selfemployed will receive smaller allowances
than the amounts that I have quoted. The
middle-class family is aided more particularly by the French system of direct taxation.
The family income is divided by the number
of children and adults in the family and each
section is assessed separately for tax. There
is no limit to the size of the incomes thus
treated. A man earning the equivalent of
£800 a year whose family consists of a wife
and three children will pay no tax at all
under this system, though it should be noted
that only about 30 per cent of tax revenue
is raised from direct taxation.

French writers suggest that the catastrophic inflation to which France has been
subject since 1914 has influenced the family
pattern of the middle classes. Taking prices
in 1938 as represented by 100, the price level
in Paris in 1952 has to be represented by
2,464. In other words the value of money is
twenty-five times less today than it was in
1938.14 In Britain during the same period the
value of money has been about halved.
Middle-class savings in France have disappeared and since there is nothing to leave
to one’s children the need to limit one’s
family so that the inheritance. may pass
intact has also disappeared. The fall in the
value of money has affected the family in
another way. Previously, the middle-class
girl on marriage took with her a substantial
dowry. The young doctor acquired a wife
and the wherewithal to set himself up in
practice at the same time. The diminished
resources of the middle classes have necessitated a change in this social custom. The
father of two girls in the past might well
hesitate before the appalling prospect of a
third girl and the necessity of finding three
dowries if the girls were to marry suitably in
their own class. Today the prospect is less
grim.

Economic and Social Problems

The redistribution of the national income
which is effected through the family policy

I have been discussing has an important
reaction on current economic and _ social
problems. I propose to complete my paper
by briefly discussing two of these, firstly, the
effect on wages of this policy and secondly,
the serious difficulties which arise when the
sums paid to families in allowances are misused.

I have already stated that the family
allowances in commerce and industry are
financed by the payment of 16-75 per cent
of an adjusted wages bill. This sum represents an addition to labour costs and French
economists agree that it is either added to
selling price or deducted from wages. That
is to say that the wages which are distributed
might be higher or prices might be lower
were family allowances not being paid.
Obviously, whether the charge falls on
wages or prices will depend on the industry,
but in general it is agreed that wages are
bearing this cost. This argument is supported by a study of the distribution of the
national income. Wages plus family allowances take about the same share of the
national income in 1952 as in 1938. Families
are better off but it is doubtful whether the
real income of the single person or the
married couple without children is as high
as in 1938. This fact may well be at the root
of much labour unrest in France. Moreover,
there is a disadvantage from the economic
point of view in thus divorcing economic
effort from family income. If the amount
added to the wage or salary by allowances is
a small proportion of the total the effect is
negligible. But if, as may well happen, the
family allowance almost equals wages, the
economic effects may, in the long run, be
serious. |

I pass now to a quite different problem,
that of the misuse by a minority of families
of the substantial sums paid in allowances.
The French method of helping the family
reflects the legal and social position of the
family in society and in particular the prestige accorded to the father, the undisputed
head of the family. The legislator has been
concerned to maintain this prestige and not
to diminish the family’s responsibility for tts
members. The family allowances are there‘LOO

fore paid with no conditions attached as to
their use. The sums form part of the total
family budget and in law it is the father who
directs how the money should be spent. A
serious situation arises when the allowances
are misused. The lot of the children may
indeed be made worse if the father is an
alcoholic. There is some provision in French
law for a kind of guardianship (Tutelle)
whereby the family allowances are paid to a
third person who is responsible for laying
out the money in a suitable way.!5 But the
law is not clear and is difficult to invoke.
The guardian can only be appointed as a
result of a court order and this is not at all
easy to obtain. Moreover, there is some
difficulty in finding people to take over an
unpleasant and often unrewarding task. In

the meantime, the conduct of this small ©

minority of families, many corresponding to
our problem families, affords ground for
criticism to those who are ill-disposed towards
the present family policy.

Nevertheless, so long as France needs
babies a family policy on the lines I have
described will remain in being. The importance attributed to this policy by the politicians was emphasized a few months ago when

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Monsieur Pinay’s government fell. In the
last resort it was a difference over family
allowance policy which analy brought his
government down.

REFERENCES

1. Cour des Comptes. La Sécurité Soctale.
p. 187.

2. Debré et Sauvy. Des Francais pour la France.
Paris, 1946. p. 19.

3. Bourgeois+Pichat. ‘‘ Evolution Générale de la
Population Francaise depuis le XVIIIe siécle.”
Population. 1951. 4, 635.

4. Le Code de la Famille. Décret-Loi du Juillet, 1939.

5. La Sécurité Sociale en France. Texte de la Direction
Générale de la Sécurité Sociale au Ministére du
Travail. Documentation Frangaise. 1951.

6. Rapport Prigent. 1951. p. 14.

7. Ministére du Travail et de la Sécurité Sociale.
Rapport sur l’application de la Legislation de
Sécurité Sociale. Paris, 1952. p. 20.

8. Watson. “ Birth Control and Abortion in France
since 1939.’ Population Studies. 1952. 5, 261.

9. La Sécurité Sociale en France. p. 25.

10. Henry. “ La Situation Démographique.
tion. 1952. 4, 722.

11. Journées I nternationales d'Etudes sur les Prestations
Familiales. Paris. 1951. p. 16.

“La Situation Démographique.”’

1950-51.

” Popula
12. Henry. Population. 1952. 4, 722. .

13. Ministére du Travail et de la Sécurité Sociale.
Rapport. p. 20.

14. Institut National de la Statistique et des Etudes
Economiques. Bulletin mensuel de Statistique.
1953. I, 19.

15. ‘‘ Le Contréle de l’Emploi des Prestations Familiales.”” Population. 1947. 1

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLV, No. 2
