L. F. GREGORY

Parson Malthus’s Great-Grandtather

DANIEL MALTHUS, ROYAL APOTHECARY

HAT DOES A man owe to his great
\ \ | grandfather? It is not easy to say
precisely, but perhaps traces of face or

fortune; possibly of talent or temperament; or
conceivably elements of each, with more besides.

Parson Malthus—as Cobbett called him, with
every mark of calculated disrespect—certainly
owed something to his paternal great-grandfather, Daniel Malthus, who himself had a
notable career. He was probably the chief architect of the family fortunes, which enabled Parson
Malthus to enjoy all the advantages of being a son
of an independent country gentleman, with ample
leisure to pursue his studies; perhaps, too,
Parson Malthus inherited from his great-grandfather the mental aptitudes which helped him
to become our first systematic and widely
acknowledged (if also much disputed) writer on
population, expounding doctrines which, Cobbett
thought, outraged the humane principles that
should guide a clergyman.

For Daniel Malthus was an apothecary, a man
eminent in his calling. As a result, he gained the
friendship of some of the most distinguished
medical men of his day and the coveted appointment as apothecary to two sovereigns. Daniel
Malthus was born in 1651, a son of the Reverend
Robert Malthus who was educated at Oxford and
was for some years vicar of Northolt in Middlesex—a nonconforming clergyman who in the
troubles of the times was involved in conflicts
with his parishioners. His wife was the daughter
of a medical practitioner at Kingston-on-Thames
which may have influenced Daniel in his choice
of career as an apothecary.

Daniel was made free of the Society of
Apothecaries of London in 1678, when he was
twenty-seven years old. The term apothecary at
this period was capable of more than one meaning. Dr. Johnson, in his Dictionary, defines an

91

apothecary as ‘“‘“A man whose employment is to
keep medicines for sale.” In this instance, however, Johnson unaccountably wrote with less
than his usual knowledge of the world around
him. For a century, broadly speaking, before he
compiled his dictionary many apothecaries had
exceeded the limit set by his definition; they acted,
in effect, as general medical practitioners, prescribing as well as selling and dispensing drugs.
At the time of the Great Plague, when Malthus
was a boy of fourteen, the apothecaries provided
almost the only attention available to the poor,
since the qualified physicians had either fallen
victims to the plague or had sought refuge with
their wealthier patients outside the danger zone.

Moreover, the system was tacitly accepted by
some of the foremost medical men of the time.
Such dominant figures as the irascible Dr.
Radcliffe and the courtly Dr. Mead regularly
attended at their favourite coffee-house, where
the apothecaries waited upon them and discussed their more difficult cases. The physicians
gave their opinions without seeing the patients,
charging half a guinea for doing so. The
apothecaries’ freedom to treat their patients was
in fact upheld by the courts at the beginning of
the eighteenth century. All this was symptomatic
of the medical world of those days: at the lower
levels quackery was rampant; at the higher there
was a groping towards a scientific approach.

Where did Daniel Malthus stand in this confused scene? We know nothing of his early life
as an apothecary, but as a comparatively young
man his status was evident and the main lines of
his activities were clear. By this time he was conducting himself within the bounds of Dr.
Johnson’s definition. He was concerned essentially with dispensing and selling medicines.

He had established a close connection, which
was later to ripen into warm friendship, with the

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, July 1961, 53, 2.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW.

renowned Thomas Sydenham, then in the first
rank of practising physicians and now famous in
the annals of medicine; he was, too, a man of
great force of character. Dr. Sydenham stood no
nonsense from anybody and he was not likely to
be tolerant towards an apothecary who trespassed upon his preserves. Apart from this,
Daniel Malthus described himself in formal
documents in terms which left little room for
doubt as to his specialized sphere of activity.

Dr. Sydenham, at the height of his career,
lived in Pall Mall and Malthus lived next door,
his sign being the traditional Pestle and Mortar.
Sydenham, however, died in 1689, his last years
tormented by gout, and Daniel Malthus, then
thirty-eight, faced a turning point in his career.
Henceforward he stood alone, with his own way
to make. That he did so to good purpose is
manifest. By the beginning of the new century
life was opening out to him in very attractive
directions; he was moving in the broad sunshine
of a career that was rewarding in money and
prestige alike.

He had apparently been appointed apothecary
to King William IJ. In 1702 he bought the
Manor of Hadstock in Essex from the Earl of
Suffolk for £5,500—a substantial investment in
the money values of those days. A year or two
later he was elected Master of the Society of
Apothecaries, but was compelled to decline the
honour because of the pressure of business. Then,
having become apothecary to Queen Anne, he
entered upon a period of constant service to the
Queen, which lasted till her death.

His surviving letters indicate that he was often
in attendance on the Queen at Windsor, keeping
the Royal physicians informed about her health.
Thus in 1708 he reports to Sir Hans Sloane that
“Her Hs. took the purge to-day, but I have not
yet directions to pursue the rest of the course.”’
In 1713 hewritesagaintosaythat “Dr. Arbuthnott
desired me to acquaint the phisicians that Her
Majesty is very well,”’ though there was to be a
meeting of the “‘phisicians’’ the next day. Daniel
Malthus has the distinction of being quoted by
Sir Winston Churchill in his life of Marlborough.

92

Malthus was with Queen Anne in her last hours.
He writes that on July 30th, 1714 (as Sir Winston
quotes him) “Her Majesty... had two very
violent convulsions,” lasting till 11 o'clock.
From near noon, he goes on, “Her Majesty had
her understanding perfect, but from time to time
answered nothing but aye or no.” Then “At the
coming out of the fit the Duchess of Somerset
desired from the Lords of the Council that they
might propose something to her of great moment” and for a minute she transacted official
business, afterwards sinking into a coma. She
breathed her last on August Ist, 1714. If, from
all this, Daniel Malthus seems to have been, for
an apothecary, very close to the centre of affairs,
the explanation may be largely sought in exceptional personal qualities that merited such trust.

When the Queen died she owed her apothecary
over £300 for fees, medicines, etc. (including
“Spaw Water bought by her Majesty’s particular
order’). It appears that his annual fee was
£320 5s. He was, however, a very patient
creditor, for though he himself lived three years
longer, it fell to his executors to collect the
debt.

We have no means of knowing the extent of
Malthus’s estate, but it can scarcely be doubted
that it was very considerable. Dr. Radcliffe’s
principal apothecary is said to have accumulated £50,000—an enormous sum in the money
values of the time; and other fortunes of like
magnitude were known. Daniel Malthus was
well placed to match them. His will is one of the
simplest documents imaginable. Describing himself as “apothecary”, he indicates that he had
already made provision for his son and daughter,
so all is left to his wife. He died in 1717 at the age
of sixty-six, and was buried in Hammersmith
churchyard, but there is now no sign of his tomb.

His son Sydenham, engaged in law and finance,
achieved no public distinction, though he is said
to have further improved the family fortunes.
Sydenham’s second son Daniel is best remembered as a landscape gardening enthusiast, as a
friend of Rousseau and as the father of the great
economist, Thomas Robert Malthus.
