PAUL BLOOMFIELD

Number

thinks we have heard the last of the 14th

Earl and the 14th Mr. Wilson, it must be
explained at once that although the “Fourteen”
in the title alludes to him (Sir Alec DouglasHome) it is in another context. Some listeners
to Sir Charles Harman, the new Lord Mayor
of London speaking at the Guildhall Banquet
wondered whether he had hit on this other
fourteen. Sir Charles said that as the Blackpool drama began to unfold anyone might
have guessed who the new Prime Minister was
going to be. However, he followed up with—
*‘when the English are divided among themselves
the blue bonnets come over the Border’. A
good crack; but he did not say (what I had half
expected)—that it seemed inevitable that yet
another, a fourteenth, descendant of Sir George
Villiers of Brooksby, Leicestershire, should head
a British Government.

This is the number fourteen meant here: and
of this more presently.

The first party-political exchanges on Sir
Alec’s appointment to succeed Mr. Macmillan (including the “‘fourteenth Mr. Wilson”
rejoinder) must have been instructive to an
immense number of people. The mass media
impose a strain but can be turned to some
good uses—not only, where politics are concerned, to “projecting” this or that “image”.
What they have seen on television and heard on
radio in the autumn of 1963 could almost have
persuaded our jacobins that aristocrats, with or
without titles, are not all of them transmitters of
foolish faces or “‘plain’’ men the only ones “‘with
the future in their bones”. It may have helped
when that able Labour peer Lord Longford—
not indeed a fourteenth but a seventh Earl—
alluded humorously to his predicament during
one of his discussions with Mr. Anthony Nutting
and Mr. Mark Bonham-Carter.

The “future in their bones” quotation is from

Gini the Prime Minister has said he

Fourteen

Sir Charles Snow’s controversial “Two Cultures’”” Rede Lecture of 1959. Sir Charles claimed
that the people with the future in their bones are
the scientists. He added: “‘this is as true of the
conservatives, J. J. Thomson and Lindemann as
of the radicals Einstein or Blackett; as true of
the Christian A. H. Compton as of the materialist Bernal: of the aristocrats Broglie or Russell
as of the proletarian Faraday; of those born
rich, like Thomas Merton or Victor Rothschild,
as of Rutherford, who was the son of an odd-job
handyman.” Men being born unequal, this is a
useful illustration of one of the ways in which
they are born unequal. The nature-nurture
problem is so complex that the right questions
about it have not yet all been asked.

A great set-back to clear thinking about both
hereditary ability and “equality” was Thomas
Jefferson’s ‘“‘proposition”, written into the
American Declaration of Independence, that
“all men are created equal’’. He did not believe
anything of the kind. “‘There is,” he assured
John Adams, ‘‘a natural aristocracy among
men. The grounds of this are virtue and talents.”
He had a very modern plan for selecting
“grammar school graduates” for higher education and co-option into the ruling class.
Although he, an American revolutionist, was
against hereditary titles, he had nothing against
hereditary ability. In one of his letters to John
Adams he actually said: “The selecting of the
best male for a Harem of well chosen females...
which Theognis seems to recommend from the
example of our sheep and asses, would doubtless
improve the human, as it does the brute animal,
and produce a race of veritable aristoi. For
experience proves that the moral and physical
qualities of man, whether good or evil, are
transmissible in a certain degree from father to
son. But I suspect that the equal rights of men
will rise up against this privileged Solomon and
his Harem, and oblige us... to content

203

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, January 1964, 55, 4.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

ourselves with the accidental aristoi produced by
the fortuitous concourse of breeders.”

Jefferson himself belonged to that interrelated
Virginian social élite to which the new nation’s
debt was so obviously great. He and John
Marshall, Chief Justice of the Supreme Court,
and Edmund Randolph, first Attorney General
of the U.S.A. were cousins, all three descended
from William Randolph, butler to Edward,
Lord Zouche in the reign of Elizabeth I. It
could hardly have been hidden from these
people that the sort of endogamous group or
class of which they were members combined the
advantages of good nature and good nurture.
Then why did Jefferson proclaim that men “are
created equal?’ “‘His task,”’ says the American
historian Nathaniel Weyl, “‘was to wage psychological warfare, an area in which veracity
notoriously plays a subordinate part’. Just so.

Jefferson was still alive at a ripe age in 1822,
when Galton and Mendel were born. The year
before, in the March number of the London
Magazine, there appeared an article by Hazlitt
with the title “‘On Personal Character”. This is
one of his most spiendid, deep, imaginative and
eloquent essays. Hazlitt was a radical of perfect
intellectual honesty whose love for mankind
never blinded him to the faults of his fellow
creatures—or made him persuade himself (or
try to persuade others) that men were “created
equal’’. It seems to me that the virile poetry of
his prose offers, besides much else, intimations
of some of the subtler questions which would
arise if one were seriously trying to decide how
much Sir Alec Douglas-Home, fourteenth
Prime Minister in line of descent from Sir
George Villiers, owed respectively to nature and
to nurture. (In the last resort two computers
might find themselves in violent disagreement
over the figures.)

“No one ever changes his character,”’ Hazlitt
begins, “‘from the time he is two years old; nay,
I might say, from the time he is two hours
old . . . but the internal, original bias remains
always the same, true to itself to the very last.”
A little further: “The accession of knowledge,
the pressure of circumstances, favourable or
unfavourable, does little more than minister
occasion to the first predisposing bias—than
assist, like the dews of heaven, or retard, like

204

the nipping north, the growth of the seed
originally sown in our constitution—than give
a more or less decided expression to that
personal character, the outlines of which
nothing can alter”. And again: “We often distinctly notice the same features, the same bodily
peculiarities, the same look and gestures, in
different persons of the same family: and find
this resemblance extending to collateral branches
and through several generations, showing how
strongly nature must have been warped and
biased in that particular direction at first’’.

One more quotation, but meanwhile it seems
worth recalling in parenthesis a cartoon of the
Blackpool crisis by the left-wing artist Vicky.
In the foreground Mr. Butler and Lord Hailsham; in the background, coronet on head,
standing upright with arms on hips, Lord Home
—and Vicky, not for the moment concerned to
guy him, was inspired to give us a portrait
amazingly like a Dighton of Sir Alec’s ancestor
Lord Grey of the Reform Bill. Lord Grey was
not in the Villiers connection, but his daughter
Louisa married Lord Durham, who was, and
from whom Sir Alec is descended. Grey himself
stemmed from Edmund Dudley, one of Henry
VII’s notorious—and efficient—hammers of the
old baronage. That ghostly, impressive figure in
the Vicky cartoon put it into my head that a
composite portrait in the Galton style of our
Prime Ministers since Walpole, including of
course the thirteen there had been till the other
day in the Villiers connection, would give us
not at all a bad likeness of the fourteenth.

As Hazlitt expressed it: ““Where the pictures
of the heirs and successors to a title or estate
have been preserved . . . the prevailing outline
and character does not wear out, but may be
traced through its numerous inflections and
descents, like the winding of a river through an
expanse of country, for centuries. The ancestor
of many a noble house has sat for the portraits
of his youthful descendants; and still ‘the soul of
Fairfax and the starry Vere’ consecrated in
Marvel’s verse, may be seen mantling in the
suffused features of some young court beauty of
the present day.” (Hazlitt is not suggesting that
the only function of the women of those houses
is to be beautiful.)

To turn to the statesmen of the Villiers
NUMBER FOURTEEN

connection again. “The true blood-royal of
England” Keynes said of the line, and Sir
Winston Churchill, himself the twelfth of their
‘Prime Ministers, has alluded to their numbering
among them “some of the greatest and wickedest men in our history.” In point of character
and abilities the fourteen had not all got a
family likeness. Their stars have been Chatham
—who claimed what Churchill was spared the
need to say for himself, that he was the man to
save England—his son, the Younger Pitt...
and Churchill. The witty, trimming Melbourne
was one of them (through being an illegitimate
son of Lord Egremont), so were the overbearing
Stanley (Disraeli’s Derby), the mild Aberdeen,
Salisbury who believed in “splendid isolation”
and his more philosophical nephew Balfour.
Bertrand Russell’s grandfather, the honest Lord
John Russell, a shy man, was all the same one of
the most forceful of them. Grafton, Portland,
Rosebery and Lord Avon complete the tale.
The fact that it would be rash to make any
confident predictions about Sir Alec’s future
career, on the basis of his kinsmen’s performance in the past, does not take away from the
significance of either the traditions and ethos
that go with “class’’, or of class considered as a
natural mechanism of social progress through its
being an expression of the rise, and assimilation
with the Establishment, of endogamous groups.
According to popular wisdom it is better to
marry “across the midden than across the
moor’. But before railways the inbreeding thus
prescribed was the rural population’s almost
inevitable lot. Before, roughly, A.p. 1500, the
ruling class was near-incestuous for reasons that
it would be anachronistic to call snobbish. After
that—from the Tudor Revolution onwards—
the marriage of “new” men and women with
aristocrats whom natural selection had carried
safely through the dangers of repeated cousin
marriage, must have been genetically very
salutary. England’s wonderful Elizabethan renaissance was to a considerable extent an effect
of those processes. Later again the emergence
of new endogamous groups contributed to the
nation’s strength: such people as the Quakers,
the immigrant Huguenots and in the early
nineteenth century the remarkable families associated with the humanitarian “Clapham Sect’’.

Sir Alec Home’s ancestor the first Earl was
raised to the peerage in 1604. The Homes were
therefore well placed in the Establishment about
two hundred years before the Younger Pitt
diluted the House of Lords with the blood of
nabobs, bankers, lawyers, etc., in a big way.
The usual intermarriages of what Disraeli liked
to call “race” with practical talents broadened
the base of the top endogamous group. At the
same time a certain élite on the whole kept
itself to itself.

At the end of the lately published memoirs of
Lady Ottoline Morrell (born Bentinck) is a
record of an interesting dialogue between the
writer as a young woman and her friend Bertrand
Russell on the steps of Bolsover Castle. Lady
Ottoline makes out a case for its being more
than a material advantage to come of “‘a long
line of men and women who .. . have sunned
themselves in the sunshine of art and culture
and who, too, have taken part in weaving the
tangle of history, have become conscious of
what civilization and subtlety of thought and
quickness of action mean . . .”” Russell begins by
saying that those traditions of hers would just
have cramped her freedom and spontaneity;
but then he goes on: “Yes, I suppose coming
from a good stock gives one a certain standard
and balance, an unconscious assurance and courage. ... I have certainly inherited the instinct
of responsibility to my country, and it is undoubtedly an advantage to have had a first class
education. But show me what all these privileged
people do now with their inherited sensibility
and culture.”

Still, the philistinism with which Russell goes
on to indict the Edwardian aristocracy was not
anything that affected the stirp.

The times are not propitious for defending a
sense of piety for the past—a word often on
the lips of the ex-fourteenth Earl is “modernization”. It would not be very judicious to say
much in public just now about tempo of change,
unless speeding up was meant, and people are
too busy to praise famous men and the fathers
which begat us; it would be a disservice to the
Prime Minister to harp much on his thirteen
predecessors in the Villiers connection. Remains
the stirp: a fine ugly word. With its help it may
become possible to put across that to play down

205
THE BUGENICS REVIEW

heredity is to proclaim oneself out of date.
“‘Wherever material environment improves,
hereditary differences become more and more
important. Better education and more efficient
health services, by eliminating wastage, are

206

already beginning to underline inequalities in
genetic endowment.”

These words from the blurb of Dr. Cedric
Carter’s admirable Pelican Book, Human
Heredity, would do very well for our text.
