STERILIZATION IN THE EMPIRE
An Account of the Working of the Alberta Act
By HILDA F. POCOCK

the only place in the British Empire

where voluntary sterilization of aments
(mental defectives) is the law of the land. |
had the pleasure last year of meeting the
Minister of Agriculture and Health, the
Hon. George Hoadley, at his headquarters
in Edmonton, and of hearing from him the
history of the passing of the Bill.

He is himself a farmer, and was struck,
in the course of his business, with the
importance of the laws of inheritance as
applied to stock raising. Taking that
application further to the human being, he
came to the conclusion that in a new
country, with a population of moderate size
in healthy surroundings, some definite step
should be taken to prevent the weakening
of the race by the production of sub-normal
individuals. Just at this time (1925), the
Royal Commission on Mental Hygiene was
sitting in British Columbia, and the findings of their report impressed him so much
that he came to the conclusion that their
recommendation for the sterilization of certain aments was one to be followed up. After
a fairly stiff fight the Sexual Sterilization
Act* was passed by the Parliament in
Edmonton and ratified by the LieutenantGovernor in Council. It has now been in
force for the past four years, and some of its
fiercest opponents are giving it their support
because of the care with which it is being
administered. So far Io0o cases have been
found suitable to undergo sterilization.

Supplementing this Act, an amendment
to the Mental Diseases Act was passed, in
which, by proclamation, the Ministry of
Health can make a ward in any hospital a
‘* psychopathic ward ”’ within the meaning

' ‘HE Canadian province of Alberta is

 

* The essential clauses of this were given on
pp. 107-8 of the EUGENICS REVIEW, Vol. XX, No. 2,
July 1928. |

of the Act, and so enable sterilization
patients to have treatment in the General
Hospitals, all operations being done from
these psychopathic wards. Operations are
performed in two cities, Edmonton for the
northern part of the province, and Calgary
for the southern. The Committee that
administers this Act is composed of a doctor
of science, the head of the State University
at Edmonton, two doctors of medicine, and
a lady who represents the Farmers’ Wives’
Association—a particularly able and active
woman.

THE ACT IN OPERATION

When an individual is recommended as a
suitable candidate for sterilization by the
head of a Mental Defective Training School,
a social worker investigates the family
history and home conditions and makes her
report. An independent doctor, who is not
a Government official, is then called in; he
sees the patient alone and considers both
reports. If he is in agreement, the patient
(or the person responsible for him or her)
asks for the operation in writing, the request
being signed before witnesses. This is sent
with the three reports to the Board for consideration, and forwarded to the Minister of
Health, who consults the State legal
authority ; the patient is then sent to the
nearest hospital and operated upon free of
charge. After operation, patients are sent
either to their homes, or to situations where
they are under observation. If, however,
they are young people whose parents or
guardians ask for the operation but do not
wish them to go to the training schools,
special arrangements can be made. ‘The
Board ascertains that the training and home
conditions are satisfactory, and after
thorough investigation the patient is sent
direct to the General Hospital and the opera
127
128

tion is done from the psychopathic ward.
Dr. Malcolm R. Bow, Deputy Medical
Officer of Health, kindly supplied the following analysis of the cases which have been
approved and operated on up to date.

It is interesting to note that the report on
seventeen cases is that there is an improvement physical and mental, with satisfactory
adjustment. All sterilized cases are returned
to the community under guardianship.

I also met Dr. O’Callahan, who does all
the operations on cases sent to him in Calgary. He told me that he uses the same
operative technique as that employed in
California.

Mr. Hoadley, in a recent letter to me,
expresses the following opinion :

I hope that the new Health Ministry
[English] will again give some consideration to an Act such as was introduced. and
defeated last summer. Every day and
every week and every month should force
on a people considering their financial
present and their future the question of the
increase of pauper and mentally defective
population (the two are so closely associated) as a matter of national importance.

EXPERIENCE IN MICHIGAN

On my return journey I stayed in
Northern Michigan, which is one of the
twenty-four of the United States operating

Lapeer, Mich.,
Act dates from 1923, by far the greater

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

a Sterilization Act,* close to the State Farm
for Epileptics, and was able to get into
direct communication with the authorities
administering the Public Act 1929, No. 281,
which was passed in 1923, but not put into
active operation until its amendment in
1929. This Act defines the State policy as
follows :

(Section I) It is hereby declared to be the
policy of the State to prevent the procreation and increase in number of feebleminded, insane and epileptic persons, idiots,
imbeciles, moral degenerates, and sexual
perverts, likely to become a menace to
society or wards of the State. ‘The provisions of this Act are to be liberally construed to accomplish this purpose.

Dr. Dixon, Medical Superintendent of
the Michigan Home and Training School,
writes that although the

majority of the operations have been done
in the last three years, as it took some time
to educate the public in this matter. All
the operations are performed in the Home
and Training School, Lapeer, by a surgeon,
Dr. Randall, appointed by the Court. He
is not a local doctor, nor an official of the
Training School.

* According to Social Aspects of Mental Hygiene,

published by the American Academy of Political
and Social Science, May 1930, p. 29.

ALBERTA STERILIZATIONS

Male. Female. Total.

Number of cases presented to the Board . 23 83 106
*Number of cases approved by the Board . 22 79 IOI
Number of operations . bes . 14 66 80
Follow-up reports on file 5 27 32
These reports are divided as follows :
Reports received when patient is under institutional care 3 3
Report received when patient in gaol I Tl,
Report received when patient in Salvation Army Home 2 2{3
Report received when patient in own home or with relatives... 5 21 26
Results with respect to operations are :
Improved physically, mentally, and with satisfactory adjustment 2 15 17
Physically well, but with no mental change ... bes we 3 Io 13} 32
Fair physically, fair mentally ; ve wee bee 2 2

* Including twenty-one cases approved, but not yet completed.
STERILIZATION IN THE EMPIRE

Dr. Dixon tells me the total number of
cases operated on up to September 1931
is 606. The greatest per cent. of the cases
sterilized are high-grade feeble-minded who

have the opportunity of living outside the.

institution.

The idiots and lower-grade imbeciles are
looked upon as custodial cases and segregated within the institution, but occasionally the parents of such patients desire to
have them home from time to time, and
they are sterilized as a matter of protection.

‘There are also several cases which are
not in the feeble-minded group, according
to the test, but there has been a definite
reason for each of them.

1. A sexual pervert, a man who has
served time in a reformatory for rape.

2. An epileptic girl.

3. A post-encephalitis case.

4. A sex delinquent whose family is
defective, and who had had one feebleminded child.

5. The daughter (born in the institution)
of a feeble-minded woman who had had
several illegitimate children.

6. A girl of 14 who was a serious problem
in the community. She was extremely
promiscuous, and was sent with a court
order for sterilization and return to the
community upon recovery.

The following table summarizes the
reports on these 606 cases after extended
trial periods away from the institution, but
under supervision :

 

Male. Female. Total.
‘Discharged vee . 33 «8 214
On parole bee . §=638 85 123
Still in the institution ... 66 184 250
Eloped_.... wee w. 4 15 19
141 465 606

NON-EUGENIC ADVANTAGES

Dr. Dixon also writes:

We have no specific basis for selection
when dealing with the definitely feebleminded group, and now sterilize practically
all who leave here, whether discharged or
for vacations and parole. We look at it not
wholly as a eugenic measure, but as an aid
to the individual adjustment. We have had

129

a number of girls who have married and,
with no children to interfere with the
economic efficiency or complicate their
lives, they have been able to come up to a
fair standard of living. The problem of
illegitimacy is of course a prominent factor.

We use all the legal methods of approach,
though by far the greater majority of our
cases are sterilized on the order of the Court.
We discuss the situation with the parents
and encourage them to initiate proceedings.
We have had very little active or persistent
opposition, though some of our parents are
reluctant to take the step because of their
church affiliations.

The operation used in the simple sterilization of female patients in this institution is
salpingectomy. Dr. Randall removes a
section of the Fallopian tube a little over an
inch long just at its point of entrance into
the uterus. The other end is ligated and
embedded in the broad ligament.

THE USE OF CASTRATION

In Michigan certain other cases can also
be treated by order of the Court. ‘The
Probate Judge can order an operation on
certain people with criminal tendencies—
castration, instead of sterilization, in some
cases. A young man, for instance, who was
found lying in wait for a school-mistress was
ordered by the Court to be castrated in a
State Hospital. After the operation he went
home, and now works quietly and happily on
the farm with his mother. Before the operation this young man was quite unmanageable. Approximately twenty such cases have
been dealt with since 1925.

Dr. Dixon’s analysis of his cases raises
the important issue of the dangers of
promiscuity and the spread of venereal
disease by sterilized persons when discharged. I glean from his paragraphs a
corroboration of the practical experience of
other States—that sterilized persons, contrary to the anticipations of the theoretical
sociologist, prove to be markedly less
promiscuous than they were before the
operation. Since sterilization leaves the
physiological functions unimpaired, we
must conclude that this is due to the psychological effect of the operation. This is
130

equally patent in the Report of the Royal
Commission of British Columbia (p.CC.27),
where Dr. Butler (Sonoma State Home for
the Feeble-minded, California) states:
‘There have been no ill-effects of any
nature from the operation, but in fact just
the reverse; better physical and mental

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

condition, especially with the insane.’’
Answering from his experience one of the
theoretical objections against sterilization,
that it might increase prostitution and
venereal disease, Dr. Butler says: ‘‘ From
observation at all our institutions we are
decidedly of the opinion that it does not.’’

—————— SS

NOTES AND MEMORANDA

Eugenics in South Africa

THE Race Welfare Society opened a
Women’s Welfare Centre in Johannesburg
on February 2nd, 1932. ‘This is the first
institution of its kind in South Africa. Its
aim is race improvement, and it caters for
the less prosperous mothers who need
information on spacing children wisely and
on the restriction of child-bearing where

disease or poverty render further pregnan
cies undesirable. It thus functions as a
birth-control clinic and, at the same time,
serves as a clearing-house to general hospitals for women with gynecological
troubles needing surgical or medical intervention, which they would otherwise be
unable to obtain. The sympathy of the
medical profession has been enlisted and a
panel of qualified medical men and women
attend two afternoons weekly. Every
woman is seen privately by a doctor, and
a trained nurse is in constant attendance.
No charge is made for advice and instruction, and appliances are supplied at cost
price to those who can pay, and are given
free to really needy deserving cases.

During the first three months of its
existence, 100 women have availed themselves of the facilities of the Centre, a
result which shows the need of such an
institution and is considered satisfactory.

The Centre also serves for training
doctors and nurses, with a view to extending the work to rural areas, where need for
knowledge of birth control is great.

Public interest has been stimulated by a

series of free public lectures on eugenics
and its practical applications, given by
members of the Race Welfare Society
during the last two years.

H. B. Fantuam, Chairman.

Elections to the Society

THE following have been elected Fellows
(starred) and Members of the Eugenics
Society during the past quarter :

Miss M. Ashdown. Mrs. Rideal.
Prof. Dr. L. Benedek. Miss Ly. Roe.
*Sir Basil Blackett, *The Rt. Hon. Sir Leslie
K.C.B. (Life Fellow.) Scott, K.C.M.G., K.C.
Mrs. Douglas Cockerell. *Lady Simson,
Dr. Gladys M. Cox. Mrs. Skinner.
Mrs. Fuller. *A. H. Snell, Esq.
*J. D. Garrett, Esq. *K. Gerald Stanley, Esq.
*F. Golla, Esq. J. Patric L. Stevenson,
*The Rev. J. C. Hard- Esq.
R. J. Whitwell, Esq.

wick.
EH. F. Warren Hastings, Miss Dorothy Wol
Esq. (re-elected).

Miss EB. H. Hawes.
Miss M. Jackson.
*J. F. Peart, Esq.

A Gift to the Library

THe Hon. Librarian wishes to express
her grateful thanks to the Hon. Mrs. Grant
Duff, who has presented to the Society the
following volumes from the library of her
deceased uncle, St. George Lane Fox-Pitt :

Sharpey-Schafer,E. The Endocrine Organs,
2 vols., 1926—Part I, The thyroid, the
parathyroids and the suprarenal capsules ;
Part II, The pituitary, the pineal, the
alimentary, the pancreas and the sex
glands. (London, 1926. Longmans, Green
and Co.)

*The Rev. Dr. J. F.
Worsley-Boden.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIV, No. 2.
