EUGENICS AND THE SUPERMAN :
A RACIAL SCIENCE, AND A RACIAL RELIGION

By MAXIMILIAN A. MUGGE

Many of Nietzsche’s adherents oppose the idea that their master
conceived of the ‘“‘ Superman” as ‘‘a new Darwinian species ”’ ;
rather with Frau Foerster-Nietzsche, his sister, they regard his
ideal as ‘‘ the possibility of a renewed Graeco-Roman mode of
valuations, refined, and deepened by two thousand years
discipline of Christianity—a possibility attainable by present
humanity.” I think it best to avoid discussing that wearisome
question, and the few extracts from Nietzsche appended to this
paper will, Iam sure, help the reader to arrive at a conclusion of
his own.

Many hate the hybrid word ‘‘ Superman” and would prefer the
term “Overman.” What’sina name? We might call the race
of supermen the Hyperteroi, ‘‘yevej iréprepor,” higher by birth,
nobler; for only through a selective birth-rate does the perfecting
of the race become possible. One of the lasting merits of the
poet-philosopher Nietzsche is the fact that he has founded a
Eugenic Religion, a valuable ally of the Eugenic Science.
The task I have set myself in this paper is to explain the meaning
of the term Eugenic Religion, and allot to it a place.

The ideal of such a religion would be the Superman. What
now did Nietzsche understand by the Superman? To give aclear
and precise definition is difficult, if not impossible. It is doubtful
whether Nietzsche himself would have been able to condense into
a crisp formula his conception of the Superman who is the Jedtmotiv of Thus Spake Zarathustra, that dream-fugue par excellence.
Nietzsche’s conception of the Superman underwent many
changes. Nevertheless I will endeavour to extract the kernel
EUGENICS AND THE SUPERMAN 185

from the super-abundant masses of material offered. The
Superman is a hero and genius, uniting in himself all the
partial excellences of former heroes, combining in himself all
the scattered units of that archetype that has ever been vaguely
discerned in the different objects of man’s hero-worship. He is
the accumulated, condensed virtue of all ages and nations: an
eclectic essence of the boundless love and charity of the Buddhist
—pure in body and brave in self-conquest; of the strict sternness
and endurance of the Spartan—sound in body and steady in
character; of the ethereal zstheticism and loftiness of the
Athenian—able in body and acute in intellect; of the rigid rule
and citizenship of the Roman—robust in body and regal in will ;
of the true loyalty and independence of our Teutonic ancestors,
—grand in body and tender in heart! The Superman is a goal,
a far-away goal of terrestrial life. Translated into the realm of
Eugenics, this concept, a veritable gem from the treasure-trove
of Nietzsche’s philosophy, is a poetic-philosophical concept of
Positive Eugenics.

Both Eugenics and the Superman are products of our times,
originating at about the same period. Galton published his
Human Faculty in 1883, and Nietzsche the first part of Thus
Spake Zarathustra in the same year. Galton indeed had already
used the word Eugenics during the Sixties, and traces of the
Superman may be discovered in Nietzsche’s early writings. But
in 1883 the two men crystallised their ideas. A parallel between
Eugenics and the Superman is, therefore, perhaps justified
from the mere extraneous point of view suggested by a fortuitous
concurrence of date.

Eugenics and the Superman are only new formule for old
ideas. Shaw’s Devil is right that ‘“‘ the Superman is as old as
Prometheus,” and the very word Superman was used by Goethe.
Yet, before Galton and Nietzsche, no such tangible formule
were at man’s disposal. Now, for the first time through their
agency, tremendous vistas and perspectives of practical possibility
are opening to mankind.

Both ideas aim at an ideal. I define an ideal as the object
of an attempt on the part of a human idea to realise the idea in
sensu Platonico, or as an evaluation of an intellectual, esthetic or
186 . M. A. Miigge:

ethical nature which has a conscious or sub-conscious directive
influence on volition. Eugenic Science will have a more
conscious, the ideal of the Superman a more sub-conscious
directive influence. And ideals have their place in evolution.
To nature they are whips wherewith to drive man towards a
goal known only to herself. To us they are agreeable narcotics
whereby we conceal from ourselves the sternness of Truth and
grey Reality. For, from acosmological point of view, destruction
and star-dust are the ultimate end of man’scareer. To him ideals
are dreams. Nature inspires him, and then he _ proudly
** devises ’’ them. |

All the ideals man has devised are relative and limited.
Firstly, I say, all are relative. If we pursue one ideal to its
conclusion we nearly always do so to the detriment of another.
Tennyson counselled the “wise indifference of the wise,’ and
Horace recommended “ mil admirart.” If we turn our left cheek
to him who has smitten us on the other, we find ourselves in
conflict with the ideal of justice. If we are good patriots, our
narrow, national ideals often harm those which tend towards a
terrestrial commonweal. And certainly, although at present the
division into separate nations is necessary in order that each
nation may work out her own salvation, yet such a commonweal
is undoubtedly a far loftier ideal. Thus nearly all ideals clash
with others, those of youth with those of age, of classes with
masses, of nations with mankind; intellectual ideals collide with
ethical, individual with racial. No human being can decide
which of these ideals approaches most closely the absolute, if
there be one. In face of this dilemma, however, it is reasonable
to assume that that ideal is nearest to the absolute, which is the
most comprehensive, which touches the greatest possible number
of individuals, which in the long run ensures the greatest
happiness of all concerned. That undoubtedly is the racial
ideal, the ideal of Eugenics and the Superman.

Secondly, I say, all ideals have their limitations. Setting
aside certain ethical and metaphysical conceptions, I think that
most practical ideals are in the end attainable. In Hyde Park
we have realised the ideal of freedom of speech, and in Finland
“‘ votes for women ’”’ is no longer the rallying cry of those engaged
EUGENICS AND THE SUPERMAN 187

in struggle. When an ideal has once been realised, it dies as
such, and be its results as far-reaching as they may it becomes
itself part of life’s ordinary routine. Thus one ideal follows
another. All practical ideals reach a stage of completion. But
there seems to man’s imagination practically no absolute end to
the possible perfecting of the race. The ideal of Eugenics and
the Superman is the least relative and the least limited, the best,
the most comprehensive, and the most lasting of all ideals.

Man now realises more and more the importance of the
body. And that is a good sign of our time. No doubt the
Eugenic ideal, the dream of a Superman, was ever present with
men. Yet within the civilised nations the racial instinct has
been counteracted, the dream has become dim. During the
periods preceding ours, when, in the combat against animalism,
the process called civilisation—spiritualisation and intellectualisation of the animal—brought about a quite natural over-estimation
of Spirit and Intellect, during those periods the Eugenic Instinct
reached its low-water mark. The “ Salvation of the Soul” was
considered much more important than that of the ‘‘ vile’ body ;
‘exercise profiteth little,” ‘“‘for what is a man profited, if he
shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul ? ”

In the history of evolution from animal to man a biological
stage of transition was inevitable. The Total-milieu compelled
the animal homo to adapt himself, to seek new weapons in the
struggle for .existence. Nature invented and established Spirit
and Intellect—perhaps by way of a mutation or by way of a
merciless selection. These two new weapons had to be perfected.
The Spiritualisation and Intellectualisation of men set in. And
since Nature is prodigal with her means and tools, a host of
forces arose which combated animalism. Hence the low-water
mark of the Eugenic Instinct.

Yet as I said, the racial ideal, the dream of a Superman,
was ever before man’s eyes. Not asa perfect ideal, for it was
based upon an instinct, the racial, the Eugenic instinct, which is
a basic intuition. And this instinct found a twofold expression :
in marriage customs aiming at a physically superior race and in
man’s hero-worship. The Eugenic instinct underlies all heroworship, for in all ages man dreamt of something greater than
188 M. A. Miigge:

he himself was, and vaguely discerned the scattered units of a
grand archetype in the Heroes he worshipped.

The history of marriage customs, too, proves that the
Eugenic instinct always did exist, though more or less impaired.
Certain customs show that the natural instinct has always had
an interest to ensure a physically superior race by allowing only
the best to marry. Howard tells us that there existed among
the Kalmucks a custom like this. A girl is first mounted. She
rides off at full speed. Her lover pursues, and if he overtakes
her, she becomes his wife. Among the inhabitants of
Kamschatka the future spouse must violently and publicly
triumph over the resistance of his betrothed, guarded and
defended by the women of her “yourt.” In Wales a similar
custom formerly prevailed, and the Nibelungen-Lied has a
parallel in Brunhilde’s defeat in her bed-chamber. In Rome
was the domum deductio; the bride was dragged forcibly away
by the bridegroom from her home to his. The modern German
words Brautlauf, Brautjagd, the medizval German expression
“‘ dey briute binden,” the English proverb ‘“‘ None but the brave
deserve the fair,’’ all tend to prove—primarily the necessity
of the male’s physical excellence—but also secondarily the
permanent existence of the racial ideal.

The grandeur of the racial ideal has been extolled by poets
and philosophers of all times. All were sure of ‘‘ Fortuna non
mutat genus”? and entreated the goddess Eileithyia. From
Theognis, Plutarch and Plato down to Goethe, Jordan, Nietzsche
and Whitman they all dreamt the dream of the Superman.
Whitman sings:

‘‘ Lead the present with friendly hand towards the future—Bravos to all
impulses sending sane children to the next age!

‘“‘But damn that which spends itself with no thought of the stain, pain,
dismay, feebleness it is bequeathing !”’

And in Jordan’s “ Nibelunge,” the grand Iliad and Odyssey
of Teutons, occurs the following Eugenic passage :

** We give life in all honour to heirs of Hereafter,
The measure of manhood, our mutual love
Shall exalt and ennoble; before our descendants,
Astounded and humbled, earth’s highest shall bow.
When perish the gods still as princes they’ll rule,
With increasing sublimity, splendour and grace.”
EUGENICS AND THE SUPERMAN 189

Also the writers of Utopias, especially those of the last
decades, point out how urgent is the need to stem the tide of
Spiritualisation and Intellectualisation. Mankind in the Making,
by H. G. Wells, is one of the last of such attempts.

Thus we see that man has ever realised the importance of
the body, and recognises it now with even greater intensity. It
is Nature’s own work, this attitude of man. She preserved the
racial instinct under the disguise of hero-worship and of many
odd customs, to some of which I have alluded. Now in our
time, she allows that instinct to break through again, full,
victorious and transfigured. The extreme tendencies of the
processes of spiritualisation and intellectualisation disappear.
The stage of transition having now come to an end and man
having been at last evolved from the animal, the dream of the
Superman assumes an incarnation in Nietzsche’s Eugenic
Religion; the vague essays of marriage customs become now a
grand Eugenic Science.

The Eugenic Instinct appears now, after its re-incarnation,
to be more than a mere instinct. Reason has permeated it; the
racial instinct is bound to become a science and a religion, or, if
the latter term is to be avoided, an art. Neither the science nor
the art is at present a clear enough light to be a guide. The
religious factor, the conception of the Superman, 7s cloudy and
indistinct, and Eugenic Science has at present only reached the
stage which Chemistry had attained a hundred years ago. Our
science, however, will in time attain to all the precision of
an exact science and even contain ‘‘epitomised formule for
manipular convenience.”” Nietzsche’s dream-fugue will become
an evangel.

‘‘ Have patience,” I replied, ‘‘ ourselves are full
Of social wrong; and maybe wildest dreams
Are but the needful preludes of the truth:
For me, the genial day, the happy crowd,

The sport half-science, fill me with a faith.
This fine old world of ours is but a child

Yet in the go-cart. Patience! Give it time
To learnits limbs. . . .”’—(THE PRINCESS.)

Man has recognised at last that most political and economical
4
Igo M. A. Miigge:

reforms are mere tinkering, only environmental ameliorations
with practically no phylogenetic value. Does the breeder of
horses study only the bricks of his stables and the leather of the
harness and pay no heed to the quality of his stock? Civilisation has almost eradicated natural selection. For this Man will
substitute a deliberate purposive birth-rate. We shall no longer,
in choosing our mates, blindly yield to sexual attractions under
the plea of ‘“ romantic love,” thus selfishly ignoring the welfare
of the race. Much will change. The young will be trained in
the laws of heredity. And finally, as Dr. Wood points out in
his able paper, ‘‘ Some controlling ideals of the Family Life of
the Future’’: ‘‘ In the mating of men and women, money, social
position, worldly expediency, the conventional and _ fictitious
values, so influential in these days, will count for much less,
while organic health and efficiency, character, unselfish devotion
to high ideals, to the great world-interests, will count for far
more.”’

But all that will not come about alone and solely by
anthropometric measurements, statistical observations, human
experiments upon Mendel’s Law and biological legislation.
Knowledge alone does not sufficiently direct man’s will and
action. Eugenic Science will need the co-operation of a sentimental artistic factor, a Eugenic Religion; however much
Eugenic Science may develop, it will need a Sesame to the
human Will. There must be an appeal to the unknown depths
of man’s mind; for those ideals which have a more sub-conscious
directive influence on volition are stronger than all the others.
The Superman is such an ideal. It will be more powerful than
all the scientific laws, to which the wise Limanorans furnish
many indications. The great thing is the creation of a popular
sentiment, a right public opinion. And if this is to become a
permanent sentiment, if it is to create a feeling of responsibility
towards the race, a religious atmosphere is needed to preserve
that sentiment. The ideal of the Superman will supply this.

The Superman will be a symbol, an object for the spiritual
need of future mankind; its hope and its wished-for goal of
existence. It would be foolish to say that the long and intensive
processes of Spiritualisation and Intellectualisation have left no
EUGENICS AND THE SUPERMAN IQt

inherent desires for Spirit and Intellect. Our body with its
refined animalism may find its ideal in Grecian beauty;
Eugenic Science will be the path-finder here. Our intellect
may quench its thirst in the ever-increasing waters of knowledge.
Our Spirit, although unknown to us as a “ thing in itself,” has
its claims too. In every human being are cravings, longings of
a spiritual kind. Our feeling protests against the hopeless
outlook of a “star-dust’’ destiny; infinite Hope clings to the
belief that there is no end. Like an endless asymptote man’s
spiritual hope follows the never-nearing parabola of Reality.
Eugenic Science is limited; even the racial ideal is not
absolute where its boundaries are human formule and logical
arrangements ; we shall follow Plato’s Ex 7év dpisrwv, but man’s
scientific interference has its limitations. The racial ideal in
its religious crystallisation is absolute; because the Superman
lies upon the borderland between the realm of the practical and
attainable and that of the spiritual and absolute—and its subliminal directive influence on volition is born outside our knowledge,
and has its home and heaven outside human ken.

The Superman means Hope. For that reason Nietzsche
appealed so powerfully to Europe. His systemless system
swayed man through its mysticism and its hope. His book
Thus Spake Zarathustra, is written in a grand biblical language.
Nietzsche’s style differs from Spencer’s like that of a mystic
from that of a mathematician. It conveys one lesson: ‘‘ Hope
we have as the anchor of the soul ! ”

To Sir Francis Galton belongs the honour of founding the
Science of Eugenics. To Friedrich Nietzsche belongs the honour
of founding the Religion of Eugenics. They will be differently
judged but equally esteemed. Both desire that man should be
better, that the earth should be ruled and possessed by the best.
Both are aristocrats. Bothaim at a Superman, not a Napoleonic
individual, but an ideal of a race of supermen, as superior to the
present mankind—many of whom, alas! have not even completed the stage of transition from animal to man—as man is
superior to the worm.

There is Hope. And Love, too, the great consoler, will not
forsake man. It will be a higher and healthier love than ours
192 M. A. Miigge:

now-a-days, equally distant from that of Don Juan and that of
Werther. De-sentimentalisation is out of the question. Once
there was marriage by rape; Love was almost unknown.
Marriage by purchase followed and conjugal affection was rare.
Marriage by contract we have yet, and Love is still a fickle bird.
One day marriage by selection, a Eugenic bond will come
about. Then Love will be permanent. Then man may realise a
threefold ideal: That physical beauty which the grand sculptors
of Greece have shown us in their statues, that enthusiasm of the
mind which the great scholars of the Renascence possessed, that
spiritual love and hope which inspired the Vita Nuova. Man
will unite within himself these partial excellences, these scattered
units of that archetype—the Superman.

‘‘True philosophers are rulers and law-givers. They determine man’s
Whither and Why. They grasp the future with a moulding hand, and
everything serves them as a means, an instrument, a weapon. The philosophers, being men of to-morrow and the day after to-morrow, are necessarily
in contradiction to their epoch. By putting the vivisecting knife to the
virtues of the age, they have revealed to mankind new and unexplored paths
to aggrandisement.

“I teach you the man that is to be, the Superman! Man is something
that is to be surpassed. What have ye done to surpass him? All beings
hitherto have created somethirg higher than themselves; and ye desire to
be the ebb of that great tide, and would rather relapse into the beast than
surpass Man? Ye have made your way from worm to man, and much of
the worm is still in you. Once ye were apes; and even yet man is more of
an ape than any ape. The Superman is the meaning of the earth. I conjure
you, my brethren, remain true to the earth,and do not believe those who
speak unto you of hopes beyond this earth. And you must also learn to
despise yourselves.

‘*Man is a rope stretched between the animal and the Superman—a
rope over an abyss. What is great in man is that he is a bridge and not a
goal. What can be loved in man is that he is a transition and a destruction.
I love those who know not how to live except in perishing. I love him who
longeth for perception in order that some day the Superman may live. I
love him who worketh and planneth to make ready earth, animal, and plant
for the Superman. It is time for Man to fix his goal!

‘“‘A new will do I teach: to long for the path which Man hath hitherto
followed blindly, and to call it good, and no longer to slink aside from it as
do the sickly and the dying. More honestly and purely speaketh the healthy
body, the perfect and rectangular, it speaketh of the significance of the
earth. There is more reason in thy body than in thy best wisdom. I do not go
your way, ye despisers of the body! Ye are no bridges towards the Man
that is to be—the Superman.

‘$Man hath been only an attempt. We fight step by step with the
giant, Chance. There are a thousand paths which have never yet been
trodden. Arise, ye lonesome ones! one day shall ye bea people. Out of
you a chosen people shall arise, and out of it the Superman.

‘“‘ Be silent concerning all gods! Could yecreate aGod? But yecould
well create the man that is to be, the Superman. Ye could be fathers and
forefathers of the Superman, and let this be your best creating! The beauty
of the Superman came unto me as a shadow. I walk amongst men as
EUGENICS AND THE SUPERMAN 193

amongst the fragments of the future, the future which I foresee. And all
my wish and striving is to compose and gather into a whole that which is
but fragment and riddle and dismal accident.

“We must fight against everything which stands in the way of the
creation of great men. O my brethren, I consecrate you to be the new
nobility! Let it not be your honour whence ye came, but whither ye go.
Ye shall love the land of your children, the undiscovered land in the most
distant seas.

‘‘ One cannot think highly enough of women! The perfect woman is a
higher and rarer type of humanity than the perfect man. Let the beam of
a star shine in your love. Let your hope say: ‘May I bear the Superman!’ Marriage, so call I the wtll of twain to create the one that is more than
those who created it—and their reverence for each other. But that which the
far-too-many call marriage is one long stupidity. Even your best love is
but a torch to guide you into loftier paths. Love marriages, so called, have
Error as their father, and Need as their mother. Your concluding of
marriages—see that it be not an ill concluding! Rather say: Give us a set
term and a small marriage, that we may see whether we are fit for the great
marriage! Thus do I advise all honest souls. Not only shall ye propagate
yourselves onward, but upward. For this, O my brethren, let the garden of
marriage help you.

‘‘T greet all the signs announcing that a more virile and more warlike
era is beginning, which will again hold bravery in the highest honour. That
era has to prepare the way for a still higher one, and has to accumulate the
energy which will one day be needed by it—the era which will carry heroism
into perception, and will wage war for the sake of thoughts and their
consequences.”’—(NIETZSCHE.)
