EUGENICS AND SOCIETY*
By JULIAN S. HUXLEY, ™A., Dse.

The Future of Eugenics

UGENICS, Dean Inge writes in one of
his essays, is capable of becoming the
most sacred ideal of the human race,

asarace; one of the supreme religious duties.
In this I entirely agree with him. Once the
full implications of evolutionary biology are
grasped, eugenics will inevitably become part
of the religion of the future, or of whatever
complex of sentiments may in the future take
the place of organized religion. It is not
merely a sane outlet for human altruism, but
is of all outlets for altruism that which is most
comprehensive and of longest range.

However, in addition to holding out these
emotional possibilities, the eugenic movement
must obey practical necessities. If it is to
grow into a soul-compelling ideal, it must
first achieve precision and efficiency as a
branch of applied science.

At the moment, it is idle to pretend that it
has advanced very far in either direction.
True that to a limited number of men and
women, it is already an inspiring ideal: but
for the bulk of people, if not a subject for a
jest, it remains either mistrusted or wholly
neglected. True that, thanks to the genius of
Darwin and his cousin Galton, the notion of
evolutionary improvement through selection
has provided a firm scientific base for
eugenics, and that in recent years distinct
progress has been made in applying the
triumphal discoveries of modern genetics to
the human species: yet for the bulk of
scientists, eugenics is still hardly reckoned
as a science. |

It may be that, as a scientist myself, I overrate the importance of the scientific side. At
any rate, it is my conviction that eugenics
cannot gain power as an ideal and a motive
until it has improved its position as a body
of knowledge and a potential instrument of
control: and in this lecture I shall en
* The Galton Lecture, delivered before the Eugenics
Society on February 17th, 1936.

II

deavour to point out what, in my opinion, is
the next step towards the graduation of
eugenics into the dignity of an established
science. It will be an inquiry into the
methodology of our subject.

Social Science and Natural Science

Eugenics falls within the province of the
Social Sciences, not of the Natural Sciences.
It shares with the rest of them a suspicion,
often very frankly expressed by the pundits
of more respectable branches of study, such
as physics or pure biology, of being not quite
scientifically respectable. Some indeed, go
as far as to assert that the social sciences can
never be truly scientific, and imply that they
have illegitimately used the word sctence in
their title in order to exploit the prestige
attaching to it in this scientific age.

Personally, I do not think that this
criticism is justified. All young sciences are
attacked by their elders on the ground of
irregularity in their canons of scientific
behaviour: but they cannot expect to
establish rigorous canons until they are no
longer young, any more than an untried
adolescent can be expected to possess the
assurance and practical skill of a man in the
prime of life, In addition, young sciences are
not merely young like young human beings
owing to the accident of the date of their
birth. The date of their birth is no accident :
they are young because they are more complex and more difficult. Physics is an older
science than biology because in physics it is
easier to isolate phenomena and to discover
simple but fundamental laws. The social
sciences are younger than the natural
sciences because of the appalling complexity
of variables which make up their subjectmatter.

This, however, is not all. The social
sciences in certain respects differ radically
from the natural sciences; they cannot
expect to achieve success by applying the
same simple methods as served their elder
12 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

sisters, but must work out new methods of
theirown. In the natural sciences, we isolate
phenomena in order to analyse them. If
possible we isolate them in the form of a
controlled experiment, as in physics or
genetics; if this cannot be achieved, we
isolate them in thought, make deductions,
and test our conclusions by empirical observations, as in astronomy or stratigraphical
geology. By refinements of technique, we can
eliminate for practical purposes all irrelevant
variables ; the geneticist wanting to understand some new type which has appeared in
his cultures can eliminate, say, the variable
of environment, then the variable of singlegene mutations, then the variable of addition
or subtraction of whole chromosomes, and
finally pin responsibility for the phenomenon
on, for example, the inversion of a particular
chromosome section.

But the social scientist cannot do this
sort of thing: he can at the best find a correlation between several variables. In terms of
causation, the natural scientist can sometimes
find a single definite cause for a phenomenon ;
the social scientist must always be content
with several partial causes. He has to work
out a system based on the idea of multiple
causation. The attractive simplicity of simple
and single causation is for him a false simplicity: he needs a different intellectual
technique. Anyone who asserts that so-andso is the cause of a social phenomenon is
bound to be wrong : it can at best be a cause.
Let us as eugenists therefore beware of making such assertions as that the celibacy of the
clergy was the cause of the decadence of
Spain, or that the differential birth-rate is the
cause of the increase of feeble-mindedness :
for by so doing we are being scientifically
disreputable.

And, of course, the inevitable obverse of
the principle of multiple cause is the principle of multiple effect. I need not labour the
point, save to stress the need for the working
out of suitable methods, of partial correlation
and the like, to deal with this multiple
complexity.

Another peculiarity of the social sciences,
closely linked with the first, is that we cannot
make rigorous and repeatable experiments,

because we cannot isolate our material or
control all its variables. Again a different
technique from that of the natural sciences
has to be worked out—here a different practical] technique. Properly planned regional
experiments are an example.

But perhaps the most fundamental difference between natural and social science
is that the social scientist is himself part of
his own material, and that the criteria for
judging the outcome of an experiment are
partially subjective. Thus the social scientist
cannot escape bias, and he cannot hope to
check his work against objective criteria that
will be accepted by all normal men.

As regards bias, we may compare this with
experimental error in natural science. Just
as it is possible to reduce experimental error,
but never entirely to eliminate it, so it is
clearly possible to a large extent to discount
and reduce bias. Discovering the technique
of reducing bias will be as important in social
science as has been in natural science the
long and often tiresome process of discovering
the technique of reducing experimental error.

The difficulty of finding an objective criterion of truth in social science cuts deeper.
But it is based upon an intellectualist philosophy which hankers after abstract truth. It
largely disappears if we take the more robust
view that science is control as well as knowledge, and that these two aspects cannot be
separated. There can be some measure of
general agreement on the practical results
of social experiments, especially if these are
properly planned. Thus in social science,
experiment is not the remote preliminary to
action that it is in natural science, but is itself
partly action—both pure and applied science
simultaneously. Solvitur operando should be
the working principle of the social sciences.
It implies that progress in social science and
its applications will be slower and more
sprinkled with practical mistakes than progress in natural science ; but it does not mean
that we should deny the possibility of

progress.

Eugenics as a Social Science

These general considerations have many
particular applications to our subject.
EUGENICS AND SOCIETY 13

Eugenics is not, as some ot its devotees have
perhaps unconsciously assumed, a special
branch of natural science: it is a branch of
social science. It is not merely human
genetics. True that it aims at the improvement of the human race by means of the
improvement of its genetic qualities. But
any improvement of the sort can only be
realized in a certain kind of social environment, so that eugenics is inevitably a particular aspect of the study of man in
society.

Up to the present, eugenics has concerned
itself primarily with a study of the hereditary
constitution, and with deductive reasoning
on the effects of selection. It was rightly
shocked at the intellectual excesses of the
perfectionists and sentimental environmentalists, who adhered to the crudest form of
Lamarckism and believed that improvements
in education and social conditions would be
incorporated in an easy automatic way into
human nature itself and so lead to continuous and unlimited evolutionary progress.
As a result, it converted the distinction
between nature and nurture into a hard
antithesis, and deliberately or perhaps subconsciously belittled or neglected the effects
of the environment and the efforts of the
social reformers—except in so far as their
real or alleged dysgenic effects might be
used to point a moral or provide a horrid
warning.

This was natural, and perhaps necessary ;
but it was neither scientific nor sufficient. It
was an example of the error to which I have
already referred, the error of assuming that
the methods of the natural sciences will serve
for the social sciences. The pure natural
science of genetics was able, at least during
its early career, to neglect consideration of
the environment. It could do this because
in its experiments it can and does control the
environment in order to deal solely with
constitutional factors. By this means it has
succeeded (and by no other means could it
have succeeded) in making those spectacular
discoveries about chromosomes and their
doubling and halving, about the existence,
number and localization of the genes or hereditary units, their mutation and its effects,

which in a brief quarter-century have raised
it to the position of being that branch of
biology which in its method and its progress
most nearly conforms to the standard set by
physics.

But in eugenics this is not possible. The
purpose of eugenics is on the one hand to
study the presence of different inherited
types and traits in a population, and the fact
that these can be increased or diminished in
the course of generations as the result of
selection, unconscious or deliberate, natural
or artificial, and on the other, eventually to
use the results of this study for control.
Eugenics studies the selective implications of
human genetic differences.

However, these implications may and
often indeed must differ in different environments. Since the social environment is
now by far the most important part of the
environment of man; and since the social
environment differs from one nation to
another, one period to another, one class to
another, and its differences are outside the
control of the eugenist, he must not neglect
it. Its uncontrolled variables bring the
eugenist face to face with the principle of
multiple causation, at work here as in all the
social sciences.

Need for a Study of Environment

The study of the environment is necessary
for the eugenist on a number of counts.
First, because he cannot equalize it experimentally, he must learn to discount its effects
if he is not to mistake their pinchbeck glitter
(as he would be apt to think it) for the true
gold of genetic influence. If, for instance, the
observed lower stature of the so-called lower
classes should prove to be due to an inadequate diet, it is eugenically of no significance.
Secondly, because by the limited control of
social conditions which is open to us already,
it is often possible to alter the effect of a
genetic factor. Inherited eye-defeets, once a
grave handicap in almost every walk of life,
are now, in most cases, thanks to the progress of the science of optics and the art of
spectacle-making, no more than a minor
inconvenience.
14 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Thirdly, the environment itself exercises a
selective influence. This fundamental truth,
long axiomatic in evolutionary biology, has
not been properly recognized in human
biology so far as the social environment is
concerned. A young pioneer civilization, for
instance, will both initially attract and later
encourage different types from those attracted and encouraged by a civilization that is
old and settled.

Fourthly, in planning a eugenic programme, the eugenist must take account of
the social system in which he hopes or expects
his improved race to live. Cattle-breeders
will set about their work quite differently
according to whether they are building up a
stock for use in a rich pasture country where
winter feed is provided, or one for an undeveloped and semi-arid land, like parts of
Africa. Similarly the eugenist must adopt
different aims according as to whether he
envisages a world of nationalism and war or
one of peace and cultural progress. This is
already patent in the crude eugenic efforts of
to-day—in the encouragement of high fecundity in Fascist Italy and Nazi Germany,
together with the persecution of so-called
“non-Aryans ”’ and the glorification of the
Nordics in the latter.

Finally, there is the question of bias. It is
probably inevitable that most men who come
fresh to a problem in social science, however
scientifically-minded they may be by nature
and training, will have some bias due to their
own social environment. This bias in social
outlook which besets the pioneers in the
social sciences is comparable to the bias in
favour of common sense and accepted modes
of thought which equally inevitably beset the
pioneers in the early stages of the natural
sciences. And just as in the natural sciences
men had to develop the technique of controlled experiment and verified prophecy and
to be willing to follow their findings wherever
they might lead, far away from the beaten
track of common sense if need be, so in the
social sciences a means must be found to
detect and discount bias in the observer
himself, even though this lead him far from
the comfortable road of his preconceived
notions.

Environment and the Expression of Genetic
Tratts |

Let me develop these points a little more
fully, one by one. In the first place, one and
the same genetic outfit will give different
effects in different environments. This is so
elementary and fundamental a fact that it
has often been neglected, by the geneticist as
well as the eugenist. In the early literature of
modern genetics, you will often find references to the inheritance of such and such
characters. But characters are not and cannot be inherited, in the sense in which inheritance is used by the geneticist. What are
inherited are genes, factors, genetic outfit.
Any character whatsoever can only be a
resultant between genes and environment.
A given character expresses the interaction
between a particular set of genes and a particular set of environmental conditions. Thus
at the outset we see that the old question,
whether nature or nurture is the more
important, is meaningless. It is like the
question ‘‘ When did you stop beating your
wife ? ’’ in conveying implications which do
not correspond with reality. In general,
neither nature nor nurture can be more
important, because they are both essential.

You will note that I say “ in general.” In
particular cases, one or the other may be
more important. Do not let us forget that all
genetics depends on a study of differences.
We take two individuals and strains, and
ask what is the cause of the difference
between them. By adjusting the conditions
of our experiment, we find that this is due
either to a difference in their environment or
to a difference in their inherited constitution
(or, often, to a difference in both). We then
proceed further and find out, say, that the
genetic difference is due primarily to a difference in a single gene. Let us suppose that
the difference was one between red and white
flowers in a plant. Then we say, if the whiteflowered variety is the aberrant one, that we
have discovered “‘a gene for white flowercolour.”” But this is a shorthand notation.
Scientifically, we have discovered that the
main cause of the difference in flower-colour
is a difference in the nature of one unit-section
of the chromosome outfit. That is why certain
EUGENICS AND SOCIETY 15

authors tried at one time to substitute the
term differential for gene.

This rather tedious argument has two
corollaries of immediate eugenic importance.
The first is this. The more similar are the
environments of two human samples, the
more likely are the observable differences
between the samples to be inheritable. The
opposite is also true in theory, that the
more similar are their genetic constitutions,
the more likely are any differences to be
environmental and non-inheritable ; but in
view of our ignorance of the precise genetic
constitution of human populations, this has
little applicability save in special cases like
that of identical twins.

When on the other hand there are obvious
differences in environment between two
groups, there is a strong presumption that
many of the differences between them will
turn out to be mere modifications, which
would disappear if the environmental conditions were equalized. This is not, of course,
to say that the groups will not differ genetically also: merely that the observed differences in characters are not likely to be wholly
inherited.

Genetics can provide interesting examples
in which certain conditions of environment
may wholly mask the effect of a gene. The
classical case is that of Primula sinensis. In
this plant there is a white-flowered variety
and a red-flowered variety, which differ in
regard to a single mendelian gene. The white
remains white at all temperatures ; but the
red variety when raised at a high temperature produces white flowers. A hot-house
will thus entirely mask the perfectly real
genetic difference between the two.

Even more significant for our purpose is
the case of the mutant of the fruit-fly Drosophila known as abnormal abdomen, which
depends on a single recessive gene. Flies
characteristic of this strain show a bloated
and rather abnormal-looking abdomen, with
an extremely poor and irregular development
of the normal pattern of black bands. However, all gradations from this to normal
appearance are found. Analysis has shown
that in moist conditions the character manifests itself fully, while in very dry conditions

it does not show at all, and the flies resemble
the normal wild type. Environment may
thus wholly mask the effect of a pathological
gene.

These cases introduce us to the further
principle, somewhat paradoxical at first
sight, that equalizing the environment may
either increase or decrease the amount of
visible variation in a group. In a universe
containing both dry and moist conditions, a
mixture of wild-type and abnormal-abdomen
strains of fruit-fly would show a certain

range of variation. Equalize the environ
ment by making the universe wholly dry, and
the population becomes uniform : but equalize it by making the universe wholly moist,
and the variability is increased. Hogben has
drawn attention to the importance of this
point.*

In various biometric studies, it has been
shown that unfavourable conditions tend to
increase the degree of observed variation.
But the attempt to erect this into a general
principle cannot be correct, since the opposite may in other cases hold good. This is so,
for instance, in our fruit-fly example—moist
conditions, being associated with abundance
and availability of food, are favourable ; yet
they here increase variability. A human
example of the same sort, also cited by
Hogben,{ concerns education. ‘ The effect
of extending to all classes of society the
educational opportunities available to a
small section of it would presumably be that
of increasing variability with respect to
educational attainment. The effect of depriving the more favoured of their special advantage would be to diminish variability in
educational attainments.’’ Either policy
would result in an equalization of environment ; but equalizing it by making it more
favourable would bring out genetic differences more fully, while the reverse process
would mask them.

However, whether equalizing the environment will in this or that case increase or
decrease variability, what differences then
remain must be genetic in their origin. Thus
without either equalizing or discounting the

* Hogben, 1933, p. 115. t Op. cit., p. 115.
16 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

effect of environment, we cannot be sure
what differences between groups are due to
inheritance.

Eugenic Bearings of Environmental Influence

This point is of extreme importance
in eugenics. For instance, it is well known
that members of different social classes
differ in their average of stature, physique
and intelligence—all of them characters of
the greatest evolutionary importance. I take
one or two examples from Carr-Saunders.*
In a sample of fourteen-year-old Liverpool
schoolboys, the boys from a secondary school
were on the average no less than 63 inches
(over Io per cent.) taller than those from
a council school in a poor neighbourhood ; and differences in weight were equally
marked. In a similar investigation in London, the ‘‘ mental age”’ (as determined by
intelligence tests) of boys from a superior
school was far above that of boys from a
school in a poor neighbourhood. Twelveyear-olds from the superior school had a
mental age nearly a year above their real
age, while those from the poor school were a
whole year behind their real age—a difference
of 15 per cent.

Such differences are usually cited by
eugenists as proof of a real and considerable
difference in genetic qualities. For instance,
Professor Carr-Saunders, after quoting these
facts, concludes that ‘‘ so far as persons in
this country are concerned, the mental differences which we observe, after stripping off
the obvious acquirements in the form of
knowledge of facts, habits, customs, manners,
are due only in very small part to differences
in the physical environment, and in a varying
though never to a large degree to differences
in the social environment, and for the greater
part to inherited differences.’? And he draws
the same general conclusion with regard to
the physical differences. Yet in the few years
since Professor Carr-Saunders’ book was
written, this conclusion has become extremely unlikely. For recent work has shown
that vitamins and other accessory foodfactors have physical and mental effects far

* Carr-Saunders, 1926, pp. 126, 97, 105.

transcending what we originally thought
possible.

In the early years of vitamin research,
attention was concentrated upon the definitely pathological states resulting from
total or almost total deprivation. During the
last ten years, it has been shown that
moderate insufficiency of these accessory
food-factors will result in retardation of
growth, stunting, lack of physical and mental
energy, and reduced resistance to infectious
disease. Even boys who by all ordinary
canons were regarded as in fine health and
well above the average in physique were
shown to benefit both in growth and in
energy from the addition of extra milk to
their diet. Sir John Orr has shown that the
diet actually consumed by the poorer classes
in Aberdeen, when given in unlimited quantities to rats, results in poor physique, small
litters, low expectation of life, and proneness to numerous diseases, while the same
diet with the addition of various vitamins
and mineral salts kept the animals in tip-top
condition.*

In the face of such facts, it is no longer
legitimate to attribute the observed differences in physique and intelligence between
social classes mainly to genetic factors.
Genetic differences may of course exist ; but
the strong probability is that most of the
differences are dependent on differences in
nutrition. Further, the defective nutrition of
the poorer classes is in part due to ignorance,
but in a large measure to mere poverty.
Until we equalize nutrition, or at least
nutritional opportunity, we have no scientific
or other right to assert the constitutional
inferiority of any groups or classes because
they are inferior in visible characters.

The extreme importance of applying
accurate methods to the problem is shown by
the results of recent investigations on twins.
As is well known, twins may be identical or
monozygotic, always of the same sex and
both derived from the same fertilized egg; or
they may be fraternal or dizygotic, either of
like or unlike sex, and derived from two
separate eggs. The former will have identical

* Cited in Orr, 1936.
EUGENICS AND SOCIETY 17

hereditary outfits, the latter will have hereditary outfits as different as those of members
of the same family born at different times.

Yet it is true that in regard to intelligence

tests, fraternal twins of like sex, though as
we would expect they show considerably less
resemblance than identical twins, are more
alike than pairs of brothers or pairs of sisters
born at different times. The additional
similarity of their environment, due to their
developing pre-natally and post-natally in
more similar conditions, has assimilated
them.

Writing of these results, Hogben* says that
“ the ambiguity of the concept of causation ”’
inherent in classical biometrical method has
“completely obscured the basic relativity
of nature and nurture.’’ The difficulties
inherent in multiple causation are here
pithily summed up, and attention also drawn
to the practical impossibility of comparing
results obtained on material from different
environments, and drawing genetic conclusions on their face value.

The Race-Concept and the Social Environment

The same is true of racial differences. It
seems clear that the very idea of race as
applied to man is a misnomer under present
conditions. Professor Gates has indeed recently asserted} that the major races (colour
varieties) of man should be regarded as true
species. This appears to me to be a grave
error, arising from a failure to recognize the
biological peculiarities of the human species,
as a species. These are due to man’s mobility
and his tradition, and result in a unique
degree of variability combined with a failure
of the usual tendencies to speciation: the
incipient species are brought together again
by migration and mingled by inter-crossing
before any mutual infertility has been
established.

While, however, modern genetics has
shown that the term vace only has meaning
as a description of somewhat hypothetical
past entities or as a goal for even more hypothetical future ideals,{ yet it is of course clear
that different ethnic groups (to use the most

* Op. cit., p. 95. ¢ Gates, 1934.
3 Huxley and Haddon, 1935, especially Chapter IV.

B

general and non-committal phrase) differ in
genetic characters. Ethnic groups obviously
differ in regard to the mean values, and also
the range and type of variability, of physical
characters such as stature, skin-colour, headand nose-form,.etc. ; and these differences are
obviously in the main genetic. There is every
reason to believe that they will also be proved
to differ genetically in intellectual and emotional characters, both quantitatively and
qualitatively. But—and this cannot be too
strongly emphasized—we at present have on
this point no evidence whatever which can
claim to be called scientific. Different ethnic
groups have different languages and cultures;
and the effects of the cultural environment
are so powerful as to override and mask any
genetic effects.

Most so-called racial traits are in point of
fact national traits ; and being so, they have
no genetic or eugenic significance. In illustration we may think of those chief contributors to our own ancestry, the ancient
Britons and the even less civilized Picts and
Scots, of the Roman Imperial period. They
were truly described by the Romans as barbarians. It is obvious that the difference
between their then barbaric state and our
present level of relative civilization is due
entirely or almost entirely to changes in
tradition and culture, material and other.
The genetic basis on which this progress has
been erected was doubtless a good one; but
the only way to see whether other ethnic
groups now in the barbaric stage of culture,
such as the Bantu, differ in their genetical
quality is to give them a similar opportunity.
To assert, as is often done, that the present
barbarism of, say, the Bantu is proof of their
genetic inferiority is a gross error of scientific
method.

The dangers of pseudo-science in these
matters are being illustrated on a large scale,
and with the accompaniment of much individual suffering and political danger, in presentday Germany. The Nazi racial theory is a
mere rationalization of Germanic nationalism
on the one hand and anti-Semitism on the
other. The German nation consists of mendelian recombinations of every sort between
Alpine, Nordic, and Mediterranean types.
18 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

The theory of Nordic supremacy and initiative is not true even for their own population :* it is a myth like any other myth, on
which they are basing a pseudo-religion of
nationalism. |

When we come to the distinction between
Aryan and non-Aryan, the scientific error is
magnified ; for the very term Aryan denotes
the speakers of a particular type of language,
and can by definition have no genetic significance. As Max Miiller himself wrote in a
belated recantation :{ “‘ To mean ethnologist
who speaks of Aryan race, Aryan blood,
Aryan eyes and hair, is as great a sinner as a
linguist who speaks of a dolichocephalic dictionary or a brachycephalic grammar.”’

And when it comes to anti-Semitic measures, we must remember the elementary fact
that the Jews are primarily a pseudo-national
group, with a cultural and religious basis, not
primarily an ethnic group with a genetic
basis. Laws that lay down the amount of
Jewish “ blood ”’ permissible in an “‘ Aryan ”’
have no quantitative basis and no real
biological meaning.

The alleged inferiority of half-castes between whites and black or browns is another
case in point. If the inferiority really exists,
it is much more likely to be the product of the
unfavourable social atmosphere in which
they grow up than to any effect (which would
be biologically very unusual) of their mixed
heredity.

The results of intelligence tests applied to
different ethnic stocks are for the same reason
devoid of much value. Intelligence tests are
now very efficient when. applied to groups
with similar social environment ; they become progressively less significant as the
difference in social environment increases.
Again, we must equalize environment upwards—here mainly by providing better
educational opportunity—before we can
evaluate genetic difference.

To sum up, in the practical handling of
every so-called racial problem, the error
seems invariably to have been made of confusing genetic with cultural factors. The
former alone could legitimately be called

* Huxley and Haddon, op. cit., Chapters III, VI,
VII, IX. t Miller, M., 1888, p. 245.

racial: but indeed the very term race disintegrates when subjected to modern genetic
analysis. The net results are, firstly that it
would be best to drop the term race from our
vocabulary, both scientific and popular, as
applied to man; and secondly, and more
importantly for our present purpose, that
until we equalize environmental opportunity,
by making it more favourable for those now
less favoured, we cannot make any pronouncements worthy to be called :scientific
as to genetic differences in mental characters
between different ethnic stocks.

In point of fact, so-called racial problems
on analysis invariably turn out to be problems of culture-contact. A dominant civilization or class desires to continue its dominance
over a civilization or class of different colour
or ethnic type, or is afraid that its values will
be impaired if it tries to assimilate those of
the other group. These are very real problems: but let us tackle them as such,
sociologically, not on the basis of a false
appeal to genetic science.

Genetic Differences Between Races and Classes

My hearers must not imagine that I underrate the extent of the genetic differences
between human groups, be they classes or socalled races. Man as an animal organism is
unique in several respects: and one of them
is his abnormal range of genetic variability.
A reminder of the basic nature of this variability is given by the recent work of Blakeslee on taste and smell.* He finds that a
number of substances which have a strong
taste to some people, are not tasted at all
by others. Thus the perceptive worlds inhabited by different human beings may be
different on account of differences in genetic
make-up. What far greater differences in
conceptual worlds must be due to genetic
differences in intelligence and emotion!

It would be most unlikely that this variability should be evenly distributed between
different social and ethnic groups. As regards
the latter, indeed, the existence of marked
genetic differences in physical characters
(as between yellow, black, white and brown)
make it prima facie likely that differences in

* Blakeslee and Fox, 1932.
EUGENICS AND SOCIETY 19

‘intelligence and temperament exist also. For

instance, I regard it as wholly probable that
true negroes have a somewhat lower average
intelligence than the whites or yellows. But
neither this nor any other eugenically significant point of racial difference has yet been
scientifically established.

Further, even were the probability to be
established that some “races’’ and some
classes are genetically inferior to others as a
fact, it seems certain, on the basis of our
present knowledge, that the differences would
be small differences in average level, and that
the ranges would overlap over most of their
extent—in other words that a considerable
proportion of the “‘ inferior ’”’ group would be
actually superior to the lower half of the
‘‘superior’’ group. Thus no really rapid
eugenic progress would come of encouraging
the reproduction of one class or race against
another: striking and rapid eugenic results
can be achieved only by a virtual elimination
of the few lowest and truly degenerate types
and a high multiplication-rate of the few
highest and truly gifted types.

Do not let us forget that the over-believers
in genetics are not the only ones in error.
While the view that the observed differences
in achievement and behaviour between class
and class, nation and nation, are primarily
genetic, is untrue and unscientific, the opposite view that opportunity is all, and that we
need only work at reforming the social environment, is precisely as unscientific and
untrue, For instance, up to the present, the
theoretical foundations of Communism have
prevented the Russians, in spite of their great
achievements in pure genetics, from paying
proper attention to eugenics. It now appears,
however, that they are being confronted with
problems, such as the rarity of qualities
making for leadership and the inherent
difference between a born leader and an
ordinary man, which are bound to bring
them face to face with eugenics. Here we see
a social bias operating in the first place, to
be checked later by the realities emerging
from the social situation.

The Selective Action of the Environment
But while the enormous differences in

social environment between nation and
nation, class and class, normally mask any
genetic differences that may exist, and, so
far as visible and effective characters are
concerned, largely override constitutional
influences, it is clear that the social environment itself often exercises a selective influence which may be of great importance.

This selective influence is of two distinct
kinds, which we may call pre-selective and
post-selective. In simplest terms, pre-selective influences are those which attract certain
types into an environment and discourage
others. Post-selective influences are those
which act on the population subjected to the
environment, favouring certain evolutionary
trends within it at the expense of others.

As a biological example, think of the
assemblage of animals found living in caves.
They are characterized broadly by poor eyesight and reliance on touch; the extreme
types are eyeless, and pale or even colourless.
It seems clear that both pre- and postselective processes must have here been at
work. Animals with somewhat poorly developed eyes, which shun the light and normally live in dark corners, will more frequently
find themselves in caves, and will be likely to
survive there better than more active and
more ‘normal’ types. But once a cavepopulation is established, selection will be at
work to encourage the development of tactile
and other organs for use in the dark ; it will
also cease to operate strongly or at all on the
genes responsible for keeping up full pigmentation or perfect eyes, so that these will
in many cases degenerate.

A striking example is that concerning the
selective influence of the environment provided by fields of cultivated cereals. As
Vavilov has shown,* this favoured certain
other plants, which could then flourish as
what the farmer calls weeds, in association
with the crop. Among these weeds were wild
grasses related to the cultivated cereal ; and
in certain climatic conditions, these weeds
flourished relative to the crop, became the
dominant species, and were then used by
man as the basis for a new crop-plant.

* Vavilov, 1926.
20 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Just as cultivation of one crop-plant here
provided the basis for the later development
of another, so the social environment
appropriate to one stage of human culture
gives opportunities for the expression of
human traits which may be destined to
become dominant at a later stage. The
eliciting effect of environment is in both cases
essential.

The United States furnishes a classical
human example. Pre-selection was at work
on the pioneers. The human cargo of the
May flower was certainly not arandom sample
of the English population. Religious zeal,
independence of character, perhaps a tendency to fanaticism, together with courage,
must have been above the average among the
ledders, and probably in the whole band. The
early settlers in Virginia and Carolina were
pre-selected on other lines, though some of
the characters involved were the same. After
the first settlements were made, further
immigrants until near the end of the nineteenth century were pre-selected for restlessness, initiative, adventurousness, and the
qualities making up the pioneer spirit. The
easily contented, the unadventurous and the
timid, were pre-selected to remain behind.
So, too, on the average, must have been those
with artistic, philosophic, literary, or mathematical gifts. Even if the mean differences
between those who went and those who
stayed were not large, they must have been
significant.

Once the immigrants were established in
the country, selection continued. This postselection, so long as there was an open
physical frontier to the west, and an open
economic frontier in the more settled regions,
must on the whole have encouraged and discouraged the same qualities favoured by
pre-selection : in addition, assertiveness and
ambition were encouraged in the acute
phase of “rugged individualism,” while
artistic and literary endowment still were at
a discount. Of course the direct moulding
effect of the social environment must have
acted in the same sense as its selective effect ;
so that here again genetic differences would
be masked. Yet on deductive grounds we can
be certain that the selective effect would be

at work, and would produce genetic differences: the only question is the extent of
those differences. )

Whenever there are mass-movements of
population, we are sure to find similar selective effects. The difference between the
Southern Irish in America and in Ireland
strikes every observer : we can hardly doubt
that it is due in part (though doubtless not
entirely) to a sifting of more from less adventurous types. And the same holds true
of the obvious differences between rural
and urban population in a country like our
own. Whatever be the effect of country life
and labour on a man’s temperament, we can
be sure that those who stayed behind were
not as a group genetically identical with
those who ventured away into the new life
of the towns.

One of the profoundest selective influences
ever brought to bear on the human population of the globe must have been that exerted
by the invention and spread of agriculture,
as has been well stressed by Ellsworth
Huntington.*

A settled agricultural civilization demands
qualities in its members very different from
those demanded by a nomadic or a hunting
existence. Agriculture demands constant
application ; the pastoral life is freer, and
hunting demands rather occasional outbursts
of maximum energy. Agriculture demands
foresight and the sacrificing of present comfort to future benefit ; in the more primitive
modes of life, activity springs more immediately from events. Agriculture demands
steady routine in one spot ; the nomad and
the hunter can profitably indulge the spirit
of restlessness.

Inevitably, it would seem, where early
agricultural civilizations were growing up,
there must have been a considerable drift of
the more restless types out of them into the
nomad and hunting cultures on their borders;
and quite possibly there occurred also a converse movement inwards of more calculating
and less restless types.

Further, once the agricultural civilizations
were well established, a dominant class

* Huntington, 1928, Chapter XIV.
EUGENICS AND SOCIETY 21

always appeared whose interests were bound
up with the success of the group. The members of this class therefore were bound to
encourage submissiveness and industry in
the cultivators of the soil: and although
much was in fact accomplished by purely
environmental means, such as religion and
law, there must again have been a selective
effect, so that the level of inherent docility
would tend to rise in the peasant class. Thus
in the long run, agriculture must have
markedly increased the selective value of
tendencies making for the humdrum hardworking human virtues, and in its secondary
effects, as in the birth of the merchant class
and in other ways, have encouraged foresight and calculation.

Class differences in environment may also
be selective. It seems to be established that
the inhabitants of our industrial towns are
on the average smaller and darker than those
of the rural and small-town population.* It
may well be that there is a selection against
tall and therefore rapidly-growing types on
account of the unfavourable diet and living
conditions of the slum dweller, since slow
growth makes less demands upon a low
supply of vitamins: and that tall stature is
on the whole correlated with fair complexion.
But whatever the cause, the fact remains,
and can only be due to selection of some
sort.

A recent report of the Industrial Health
Research Boardf points out that in the
early part of the industrial era, the demand in
factories was for men of good physique irrespective of build, while appearance or presence counted for more in shops and offices.
This may have laid the basis for the observed
fact that manual workers average shorter
than blackcoated workers, but are stronger.
It is quite likely that with the recent introduction of more automatic machinery, which
does not demand strength, the type of selection will alter, and the factory workers come
to lose their better physique.

The same report mentions that a fairly
large sample of unemployed, contrasted with

* Carr-Saunders, 1926, pp. 195-6.
t+ Ind. Health Res. Bd. Rept., 1935.

a large sample of employed men, were
slightly less tall and distinctly less strong.
These were mainly men who would be the
first to be turned off and the last to be taken
on, so that selection seems definitely to have
been at work here.

This brings up the large and important
question of the selective effect of the class
system as a whole in an industrial capitalist
society. As many writers have pointed out,
in so far as there is any ladder of opportunity by which men may rise or sink in the
social scale, there must be some selective
action. With the passage of time, more
failures will accumulate in the lower strata,
while the upper strata will collect a higher
percentage of successful types.

This would be good eugenically speaking
af success were synonymous with ultimate
biological and human values, or even partially correlated with them; and if the upper
strata were reproducing faster than the lower.
However, we know that reproduction shows
the reverse trend, and it is by no means
certain that the equation of success with
desirable qualities is anything more than a
naive rationalization.

Before, however, we discuss this further,
let us look at some other effects of our pattern
of class-system. Once we begin to reflect, we
see that certain qualities are more favoured,
often much more favoured, in some classes
than in others. For instance, initiative and
independence have less opportunity among
unskilled labourers than elsewhere. Inclinations to art, science, or mathematics will be
more favoured in the upper and upper-middle
classes than elsewhere. The result may be
truly selective, for instance by encouraging
types genetically above the average in submissiveness among the proletariat. For the
most part, however, it is likely merely to
mask genetic differences. The fact that an
undue proportion of artists, writers and
scientists spring from the upper strata of
society would then not mean that these strata
were proportionately well endowed by heredity—merely that in the rest of society the
Darwins and the Einsteins, like the Miltons,
were mute and inglorious.

Two interesting recent studies by Gray and
22 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Moshinsky* confirm and extend this conclusion. They show, on the basis of intelligence
tests, and without discounting any of the
superior performance of upper-class children
as partly due to their superior environment,
that our present educational system leaves
vast reservoirs of innate intelligence untrained in the children from lower social
strata. Contrary to usual belief, only about a
third of the children whose performance is
in the top thousandth, ‘come from the higher
social and the professional classes, while
wage-earners contribute 50 per cent. of these
children of “‘ exceptional intelligence.’’ Thus
our society is not utilizing the innate
intelligence of its members as it might, nor
does the system give adequate opportunity
for intelligence to rise.

Again, highly-strung types are less likely
to achieve success in the lower economic
strata, more likely to become neurotic or
insane. People from the lower-middle and
working classes who are apparently mentally
deficient or abnormal have often reached their
unfortunate condition because they have not
had either the care or the opportunities for
self-expression which would have been available in a more generous social environment.

Let us also remember that society as a
whole can have a similar effect. Those same
types which in Siberian tribes would achieve
prestige and power as shamans and medicinemen, or in the medieval world would have
become candidates for sainthood, would here
and to-day often find their way into asylums.

Artificial Selection in Relation to Different
Environments

This brings us on to a biological point
whose importance has not always been
realized. It is that selection is theoretically
meaningless and practically without value
except in relation to a particular environment. The practical implications are both
the easiest to grasp and the more important
for our purpose. In breeding domestic
animals, as Hammond of Cambridge has so
well stressed,} selection and breeding will not
produce the desired results so quickly, and

* Gray and Moshinsky, 1935, @ and B.
+ Hammond, 1932 (pp. 251-2), 1935.

may not produce them at all, if they are conducted in the unreal environment of an
academic breeding station where optimum
conditions are provided. They should be
conducted in an environment similar to that
in which the animals are destined to be used.
An extreme illustration of this is provided
by cattle. In various parts of tropical Africa,
the semi-arid bush country provides but
scanty nutriment, and erosion has led to
various mineral deficiencies. The native
cattle are scrubby little beasts, no bigger than
ponies, yielding not more than two gallons of
milk a day, and growing so slowly that they
do not breed until four to five years old.
Contrasted with cows of a good modern
British milking breed, which. are double the
size, give up to nine gallons of milk daily, and
breed at two to three years of age, they are,
you would say, very inefficient bits of biological machinery. Yet if we try to introduce
European breeds into such areas, they are a
complete failure. They make demands which >
are greater than can be met by the environment. And it is they which suffer; they become stunted, rickety or otherwise diseased,
and cannot hold their own in competition
with the native breeds. The native stock will
stand a little genetic grading up in present
conditions ; but the only chance for radical
improvement is to begin with improvement
of the environment—the provision of mineral
fertilizers, salt-licks, watering facilities, and
so on—and then practice genetic selection to
keep pace with the environmental change.
Another example is that of Stapledon’s
remarkable work on moorland grazings.* By
his methods, rough hill grazings can be converted into real pastures, capable of carrying
many more sheep, and carrying them all the
year round instead of only in the summer.
But this can only be done by the simultaneous transformation of the environment and
of the herbage stocks: The environmental
transformation consists in breaking up the
soil, followed by the application of certain
mineral fertilizers. The genetic transformation consists first in the destruction of the
original plant covering, brought about by

* Stapledon, 1935.
EUGENICS AND SOCIETY 23

the breaking-up of the soil, followed by the
- sowing of more nutritious pasture grasses
and clovers. Furthermore, the new plants
must be of special strains, previously bred
and selected to resist the climatic conditions
of the higher altitudes ; the ordinary strains
that give good lowland pastures will not
maintain themselves.

Eugenic Selection in Relation to Different
Social Environments

Precisely the same considerations apply to
the improvement of man. Our schemes for
improving the genetic qualities of the nation
or the species are meaningless except in
relation to some particular environment,
present or future. Our eugenic ideals will be
different according as we relate them to a
slave order or a feudal order of things,
a primitive industrial or a leisure order,
a this-worldly or an other-worldly order, a
capitalist or a socialist order, a militarist or a
peaceful internationalist order. Even if we
imagine we are working to absolute genetic
standards, we are in reality thinking of them,
albeit unconsciously, in relation to some ideal
environment of the future, or to the needs
and realities of the present social environment, or, very frequently, to our bias and a
priori views about this present environment
and how in our opinion it ought to be
changed. If we were really treating of absolute genetic standards, we should have
deserted reality for a metaphysical vacuum,
and our reasoning and deductions would
have even less value than a discussion of,
say, eugenics in heaven. (Even in this latter
case, be it noted, the discussion would
inevitably be related to the environment
which we supposed was awaiting us in the
next world!)

‘Now all such unconscious thinking is
inevitably irrational or at best non-rational :
if it had been submitted to the light of reason,
it would no longer be unconscious. So that a
prime task before eugenists is the reasoned
formulation of their views on the environment to which their schemes of genetic
betterment are to be related.

There are, it seems to me, three possible

courses to be pursued. Either we may accept
aS given our present type of social environment, and adjust our eugenic programme to
it. In practice we shall of course be forced to
take a dynamic instead of a purely static
point of view, and consider the trends of
change within that environment, while
assuming that the social system will not be
fundamentally altered. Or, going to the
opposite extreme, we may assume an ideal
social environment—more scientifically, one
which is the optimum we can imagine—and
plan our eugenic measures in relation to that,
piously hoping that in the long run social
change will adjust itself to our ideal. or to
whatever measure of genetic change we may
have brought about. Or finally we may
envisage, aS in Stapledon’s grassland work, a
joint attack upon environment and germplasm. Assuming that we have some measure.
of control over the social environment, we
shall adjust our genetic programme to that
‘programme of environmental change which
represents, both in direction and tempo, a
happy mean between the ideal and the
immediately practical, between what we
should like and what we are likely to get.

Let us look at these three alternatives and
their implications. First, however, it should
be pointed out that they are not wholly
alternative to each other. Even if we take the
environment for granted, we must face the
fact of social change and attempt to meet it
eugenically ; and in so doing we shall find it
difficult to avoid giving some play to our
wishes, fears, and hopes. Even if we assume
an optimum environment, our ideal must be
based on our conscious or unconscious estimate of what developments are inherently
possible to the present system. We shall, in
effect, be attempting to forecast social
improvement, and we shall prove, we can be
sure, aS widely out in our forecasts as if we
were attempting to prophesy the future of
scientific discovery. And the third method,
of necessity, must take into account both the
hard fact of the present and the ideal of
wishes and hopes for the future.

None the less, there are real differences
between the three; and we must consider
these more in detail.
24 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Eugenics in Relation to the Actual and the
Ideal

To accept the continuance of the present
type of social environment as essentially
given (whether given in reality or in our
hopes and fears will make no difference to
our eugenic plans) means, I take it, two main
things. It means that. we must plan for a
capitalist class-system, and for a nationalist
system. We accept the division of society
into economic strata, with large differences in
standard of living, outlook, and opportunity
between the different classes ; and we accept
all the implications of the principle that the
earning of a return on capital is the primary
aim and duty of business and _ finance,
whatever minor modifications and regulations
may be found desirable or opportune. We
accept individualist competition, however
much toned down in practice, as essential.
Further, we accept the division of the world
into nationalist states, which, however their
sovereignty and independence of action may
be modified or curtailed by international
agreements, will be competing as well as
co-operating with each other, and must in
certain eventualities be prepared to resort to
war.

Coming down to results, we accept the
economic and spiritual frustrations of the
system also—that is to say, we accept the
necessity of some degree of unemployment,
for without that there can be no approach to
a free market for labour ; we accept the continuance of trade cycles of boom and slump,
even though they may be toned down in
amplitude. We accept the need for restriction of output whenever surplus interferes
with profit. We accept the existence of a
cheap supply of unskilled and semi-skilled
workers ; we accept the need for man-power
in case of war.

If so, then we must plan our eugenic policy
along some such lines as the following :

First comes the prevention of dysgenic
effects. The upper economic classes are
presumably slightly better endowed with
ability—at least with ability to succeed in
our social system—yet are not reproducing
fast enough to replace themselves, either
absolutely or as a percentage of the total

population. We must therefore try to
remedy this state of affairs, by pious exhortation and appeals to patriotism, or by the
more tangible methods of family allowances,
cheaper education, or income-tax rebates for
children. The lowest strata, allegedly less
well-endowed genetically, are reproducing
relatively too fast. Therefore birth-control
methods must be taught them; they must
not have too easy access to relief or hospital
treatment lest the removal of the last check
on natural selection should make it too easy
for children to be produced or to survive ;
long unemployment should be a ground for
sterilization, or at least relief should be contingent upon no further children being
brought into the world ; and soon. That is
to say, much of our eugenic programme will
be curative and remedial merely, instead of
preventive and constructive.

Then, in systems like the present, manpower is important, and for man-power,
quantity of population above a certain
minimum qualitative standard is as essential as raising quality; and if the two
conflict, quantity supply must not be interfered with. For qualitative change, a dual
standard is indicated—docility and industrious submissiveness in the lower majority ;
intelligence, leadership and strength of
character in the upper few. Since a high
degree of intellect and imagination, of
scientific and artistic ability and other
qualities, cannot be adequately expressed or
utilized, under any system resembling the
present, in the great majority of the lower
strata, it is useless to plan for their genetic
increase in these strata. Indeed, it is more
than useless, it is dangerous; for the frustration of inherent capacity leads to discontent
and revolution in some men, to neurosis and
inefficiency in others. The case is strictly
analogous to that of cattle in Africa; in an
unfavourable environment, too drastic genetic improvement is worse than none.

Next we come to planning for an ideal or
optimum environment. An obvious difficulty
here is that the various optima conceived by
different minds, or groups of minds, will be
so different as to be irreconcilable. Putting
this on one side, however, it is I think
EUGENICS AND SOCIETY 25

possible to state the sort of optimum which
would commend itself to the mass of what
we may call “ men of goodwill.”” It would,
I take it, be a social environment which gave
the opportunity, first of work which was not
excessive, which was felt to be useful, and
whose rewards would provide not only the
necessities but a reasonable supply of the
comforts and amenities of life: secondly, of
a reasonable amount of leisure: thirdly, the
opportunity to everyone of expressing whatever gifts of body and mind they might
possess, in athletics or sport ; in art, science
or literature, passive or actively enjoyed ; in
travel or politics, in individual hobbies or in
social service.

If so, then we should plan a eugenic programme with a single and very high standard.
We should aim at a high level of inherent
physical fitness, endurance and_ general
intelligence ; and we should encourage the
breeding of special talent of any and every
sort, for mathematical as much as for business success, artistic as much as administrative. We should realize that, if we succeeded,
our genetic results would over a great range
of the population be out of harmony with
their social surroundings, and would either
be wasted or lead to friction and discontent,
or might express themselves in characters
such as neurosis or a sense of maladjustment
which would represent a lower level than that
from which we started. For ultimate success
we should rely on creating a demand for
changing the environment towards our optimum. The supply of genetic types which
could only reach proper expression in such
an environment would help to create the
demand ; the friction and discontent would
add themselves to the forces of change.

Simultaneous Control of Heredity and
Environment

It will, however, by now have become
clear that neither of these approaches is so
satisfactory as the third. Indeed, neither
is methodologically sound. If the aim of
eugenics be to control the evolution of the
human species and guide it in a desirable
direction, and if the genetic selection should

x

always be practised in relation to an appropriate environment, then it is an unscientific
and wasteful procedure not to attempt to
control environment at the same time as
genetic quality. Science is simultaneously
both theory and practice, both knowledge
and control. For the applied science of
eugenics to neglect the environment is a
source both of confusion and of practical
weakness. I would go farther: I would say
that we cannot succeed in achieving anything in the nature of adequate positive
eugenics unless we attempt the control of the
social environment simultaneously with the
control of the human germ-plasm, any more
than Stapledon could have improved his
fough mountain grazings save by a similar
double attack.

Let us then look more in detail into this
third or dual method of approach. It has
two facets, theoretical and practical. On the
theoretical side, we shall only progress in our
attempt to disentangle the effects of nature
from those of nurture in so far as we follow
the footsteps of the geneticist and equalize
environment. We shall never be able to do
this in the same radical way as the pure
scientist, by testing out a whole range of
controlled and equalized environments on
selected stocks. We must therefore concentrate on producing a single equalized environment; and this clearly should be one as
favourable as possible to the expression of
the genetic qualities that we think desirable.
Equally clearly, this should include the
following items. A marked raising of the
standard of diet for the great majority of
the population, until all should be provided
both with adequate calories and adequate
accessory factors; provision of facilities
for healthy exercise and recreation; and
upward equalization of educational opportunity. The further we move in this direction, the more readily shall we be able to
distinguish inherent physical and mental
defects from environmental stunting and
frustration ; the higher we raise the average,
the more certain shall we be that physical or
mental performance above the average is
dependent upon genetic endowment and
therefore provides the raw material for
26 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

positive ‘eugenics. Not only this, but we
know from various sources that raising the
standard of life among the poorest classes
almost invariably results in a lowering of
their fertility. In so far, therefore, as differential class-fertility exists, raising the
environmental level will reduce any dysgenic
effects which it may now have.

Returning, however, to the more important
aspect of the eugenic knowledge to be gained
by levelling up the social environment, I
anticipate that at the bottom, the social
problem group, though shrinking in size, will
be left, clearly marked out by its inadequate
performance in the new and favourable conditions, as a well-defined target for measures
of negative eugenics such as segregation and
sterilization ; and that minor targets of the
same nature will emerge out of the present
fog, in the shape of nests of defective germplasm inspissated by assortative mating and
inbreeding, such as have been imaginatively
glimpsed by Lidbetter and others. I further
anticipate that the professional classes will
reveal themselves as a reservoir of superior
germ-plasm, of high average level notably
in regard to intelligence, and therefore will
serve as a foundation-stone for experiments
in positive eugenics. And I anticipate that
society will tap large resources of high ability
that are at present unutilized, thus facilitating the social promotion of at least certain
fitter elements ; and without social promotion we cannot proceed to reproductive
encouragement. This is the scientific ideal
at which we should aim. Like many other
ideals, we shall not achieve it; but any
approach to it will help us towards a more
certain knowledge.

Science, however, is control as well as
knowledge ; and new practice may advance
theory as much as new theory lay the basis
for practice. This is especially true for
the social sciences, where, aS we have
seen, rigorously controlled experiment, on
the pattern of pure physics or physiology,
is impossible, and problems must frequently be solved ambulando. We make
a partial experiment which is simultaneously
pure and applied science. The experiment is
both an attempt to gain knowledge and an

effort to realize a wish, a desired control. It
is planned, like more crucial experiments in
the natural sciences, to verify deductions
from known facts. In so far as the desired
end is attained, the deductions are verified and knowledge is increased: and
even if the control is not attained, knowledge is increased, though not to the same
extent.

This more empirical mode of attack must
also be used in eugenics. We must attempt
to control the change of social environment
and at the same time to control the change of
human germ-plasm, along lines which appear
likely to yield tangible and desirable results.
It is the results which interest us. Admirable
germ-plasm unable to realize itself owing to
unfavourable conditions does not interest us :
nor do the most alluring social conditions,
if they permit or encourage the deterioration
of the germ-plasm. Thus the two attacks
must be planned in relation to each other,
and also in relation to practicability.

The Dysgentc Character of our Present Social
System

When we think along these lines, we shall
find, I believe, that a system such as ours, a
competitive and individualist system based
on private capitalism and public nationalism,
is of its nature and essence dysgenic. It
is dysgenic both in the immediate respect
of failing to utilize existing reservoirs of
valuable genes, and also in the long-range
tasks of failing to increase them, failing to
trap and encourage favourable mutations,
and failing to eliminate harmful mutations.

Under our social system, the full stature or
physique of the very large majority of the
people is not allowed to express itself ;
neither are the full genetic potentialities of
health permitted to appear except in a small
fraction of the whole, with a consequent
social waste of energy and time, not to mention a waste of individual happiness which is
formidable in extent; and finally, innate
high ability is encouraged or utilized only
with extreme inadequacy. For the first two
wastes, ignorance is partly responsible,
but in the lower economic strata, poverty
EUGENICS AND SOCIETY 27

is the chief cause. For the latter, our
inadequate educational system is chiefly
responsible. |

. Then R. A. Fisher has brilliantly and
devastatingly shown* the relentless way in
which such a system as ours promotes both
infertility and certain types of talent, and in
so doing ties together the genetic factors
responsible. In the course of the generations
genes making for small families become increasingly bound up with those making for
social and economic success ; and conversely
those making for social and economic failure
become bound up with those making for high
reproduction rates. Eugenically speaking
our system is characterized by the social
promotion of infertility and the excess
fertility of social failure.

If this be true, then so long as we cling to
a system of this type, the most we can hope
to do is to palliate its effects as best we may,
by extending birth-control facilities downwards, instituting graded systems of family
allowances, providing for sterilization here
and financial relief for children there. But
even if we thus reduce the distortion we cannot hope to change its sign.

Then, in so far as our system remains
nationalist, the demand for man-power and
quantity will continue to interfere with the
higher aim of quality. Furthermore, modern
war itself is dysgenic. This has often been
pointed out as regard its direct effects. It
appears, however, also to hold for its indirect
effects ; many among the more imaginative
and sensitive types are to-day restricting
their families, sometimes to zero, because
they feel that they cannot bear to bring
children into a world exposed to such a risk
of war and chaos.

As eugenists we must therefore aim at
transforming the social system. There may
of course be those amongst our ranks who
prefer the not disagreeable réle of a Jeremiah
darkly prophesying gloom to settling down at
the more prosaic job of constructive work.
But as a body, we shall wish, I take it, to see
at least the possibility of our dreams coming
true. |

* Fisher, 1930, Chapter XI.

The Eugemc Approach to Control of the
Social Environment
What sort of practical changes, then,

Should we as eugenicists try to encourage in

the social and economic system ? In the first
place—what we have already noted as desirable on theoretical grounds—the equalizing
of environment in an upward direction. For
this, by permitting of more definite knowledge as to the genetic constitution of different classes and types, will at once give us
more certainty in any eugenic selection,
negative or positive, upon which we may
embark ; and secondly, we must aim at the
abandonment of the idea of national sovereign
states, and the subordination of national
disputes to international organization and
supernational power.

But we need something more radical than
this—we must try to find a pattern of economic and communal life which will not be
inherently dysgenic ; and we must also try
to find a pattern of family and reproductive
life which will permit of more rapid and constructive eugenics.

On the first point, it seems clear that the
individualist scramble for social and financial promotion should be dethroned from its
present position as main incentive in life,
and that we must try to raise the power
of group incentives. Group incentives are
powerful in tribal existence, and have been
powerful in many historical civilizations,
such as the old Japanese. What interests us
chiefly, however, is to find that they have
been to a large extent effective in replacing
individualist money incentives, or at least
diminishing their relative social importance,
in several modern States, notably Germany
and the U.S.S.R.

It is not for a biologist to discuss the
purely social merits of different political
philosophies: but he may be allowed to
point out that not all group-incentives are
equally valuable from the eugenic standpoint. Those of Nazi Germany, for instance,
presuppose an intensification of nationalist
feeling and activity instead of their diminution: and this, we have concluded, is
actually anti-eugenic. It may of course be
urged that it is in its immediate effect
28 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

eugenic ; and there will be many to uphold
the value of the eugenic measures recently
adopted in Germany under the stimulus of
National-Socialist ideas and emotions, even
if some of them be crude and unscientific.
But if in the long run it leads to overpopulation and war, it is essentially dysgenic,
and in matters of evolution we must, I
think, take the long view.

Further, if the social environment is such
as to give satisfaction to the possessors of
social traits such as altruism, readiness to
co-operate, sensitiveness, sympathetic enthusiasm, and so forth, instead of, as now, putting a premium on many antisocial traits such
as egoism, low cunning, insensitiveness, and
ruthless concentration, we could begin to
frame eugenic measures for encouraging the
spread of genes for such social virtues. At
the moment this is hardly possible, for the
expression of such genes is so often inhibited
or masked by the effects of the environment.
This is a human illustration of Hammond’s
general principle, that breeding and selection for a given type can only be efficiently
carried out in an environment favouring the
fullest development of the type.

There is no doubt that genetic differences
of temperament, including tendencies to
social or antisocial action, to co-operation or
individualism, do exist, nor that they could
be bred for in man as man has bred for
tameness in and other temperamental traits
in many domestic animals, and it is extremely
important to doso. If we do not, society
will be continuously in danger from the antisocial tendencies of its members.

Just as the basic structure of our present
social system is essentially dysgenic, so we
may say that the genetic composition of our
present population is largely and perhaps
essentially antisocial. Thus both environmentally and genetically the present state of
mankind is unstable, at war with itself.

Another important point to remember,
especially in these days when the worship of
the State is imposing a mass-production ideal
of human nature, is the fact and the significance of human variability. The variability of man, due to recombination between
divergent types that have failed to become

separated as species, is greater than that of
any wild animal. And the extreme variants
thrown up by the constant operation of this
genetic kaleidoscope have proved to be of the
utmost importance for the material and
spiritual progress of civilization. Whatever
bias or prejudice may beset the individual
eugenist, eugenics as a whole must certainly
make the encouragement of diversity one of
its main principles. But here again the
environment comes in. If extreme types are
to be produced, especially gifted for art,
science, contemplation, exploration, they
must not be wasted. The social system must
provide niches for them.

As a special and important special case of
providing for variability, there are the needs
of the educational profession. At the moment, this social category seems definitely
selective in that it attracts and encourages
men and women of an intellectualist and
academic type. This is partly because there
are not sufficient outlets provided elsewhere
in our social system for such types, partly
because the educational profession as at
present constituted does not provide sufficient attraction for contrasted types. This
restriction of type among those responsible
for the upbringing of the next generation
cannot be satisfactory, and an altered status
for the educational profession so that its
genetic basis is broadened is an important
task for social biology, and, since it involves
genetics, legitimately part of the eugenic
movement.

Eugenics and Reproductive Morality and
Practice

Still more important for the comparatively
immediate future is the relation of the
dominant group-incentive to reproductive
morality, law, and practice. We all know
that certain schools of Christian thought
to-day are opposed on grounds of religious
principle to birth-control, that indispensable
tool of eugenics as well as of rational control
of population, and even to the very notion
of eugenics itself. But even if this opposition
could be overcome, there would remain in
this field grave obstacles, both to the spread
of the eugenic idea and to the rate of its
EUGENICS AND SOCIETY 29

progress in practice. These are the prevailing
individualist attitude to marriage, and the
conception, based on this and on the long
religious tradition of the West, of the subordination of personal love to procreation. The
two- influences together prevent us collectively from grasping the implications of the
recent advances in science and technique
which now make it possible to separate the
individual from the social side of sex and
reproduction. Yet it is precisely and solely
this separation that would make real eugenics
practicable, by allowing a rate of progress
yielding tangible encouragement in a reasonable time, generation by generation.

The recent invention of efficient methods
on the one hand of birth-control and on the
other of artificial insemination have brought
man to a stage at which the separation of
sexual and reproductive functions could be
used for eugenic purposes. But it is of real
interest to note that these inventions represent merely the last steps in an evolutionary
process which started long before man ever
existed.

In lower mammals, the existence of limited
breeding seasons, and, during these, the
restriction of mating to the cestrous phase in
the female’s reproductive cycle, do in fact
link sexual behaviour firmly with reproduction. But in the great primate stock to which
we belong, a new trend early becomes
apparent. Breeding seasons are less definite,
and mating may occur at any time during the
female cycle, so that most acts of union are
in fact and of necessity infertile, without
reproductive consequences. This trend becomes more marked as we ascend the evolutionary scale, and culminates in man. In
civilized man, the faint traces of a breeding
season apparent in certain primitive ethnic
stocks have wholly disappeared, and there
is no greater readiness to mate during the
short period when alone conception is possible
than at most other times of the female cycle.*

This has already led in point of fact to the
widespread separation of the personal function of sexual union from its racial consequences, of love from reproduction. It is true

ee ree a eee ee aca aE aan a me ec ne ee es eee He et

 

* Zuckerman, 1932, p. 73 f.

that some persons and bodies on theological
or metaphysical grounds either ostrich-like
deny the existence of this separation, or assert
that it ought not to be practised ; but this
does not alter the fact.

The perfection of birth-control technique
has made the separation more effective ; and
the still more recent technique of artificial
insemination has opened up new horizons, by
making it possible to provide different objects
for the two functions. It is now open to man
and woman to consummate the sexual function with those they love, but to fulfil the
reproductive function with those whom on
perhaps quite other grounds they admire.

This consequence is the opportunity of
eugenics. But the opportunity cannot yet be
grasped. It is first necessary to overcome the
bitter opposition to it on dogmatic theological and moral grounds, and the widespread
popular shrinking from it, based on vague but
powerful feelings, on the ground that it is
unnatural.

We need a new attitude to these problems,
an attitude which for want of another term
we may still call religious. We need to
replace the present attitude fostered by
established religions by a new but equally
potent attitude.

As regards the sense of salvation, we need
to substitute social salvation for individual
salvation ; and as regards the need of some
escape-mechanism from the pressure of
present difficulty, we need to substitute the
real possibility of evolutionary progress for
other-worldly phantasies. Once this possibility of true human progress, both social and
genetic, is generally apprehended, and the
social system remodelled so that individual
success does not conflict with communal welfare, and self-expression and personal satisfaction can be largely achieved in serving
society, then sex and reproduction can take
their due places as individual and social
functions respectively. Gone will be many
of the conflicts inherent in present-day
matriage: any sacrifice involved in parenthood will be made on the altar of the race,
and in the knowledge that it will be acceptable. Those who wish to pursue further the
possibilities of such a step should consult
30 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Mr. Brewer's recent article on Eutelegenesis*
and Professor Muller’s book Out of the Night.t
Here it must suffice to point out that
unless we alter the social framework of
law and ideas so as to make possible the
divorce between sex and reproduction, or if
you prefer it between the individual and the
social sides of our sexual functions, our efforts
at evolutionary improvement will remain
mere tinkering, no more deserving the proud
title of eugenics than does the mending of
saucepans deserve to be called engineering.

That consummation, you will perhaps say,
is impossibly remote from our imperfect
present, hardly to be affected by any of our
little strivings to-day. That may beso: but
I am not so sure. Let us remember that
modern science is a mere three centuries old :
yet it has already achieved changes in outlook that are of comparable magnitude. Biological science is only now attaining its
maturity, and the social sciences are mere
infants. Looked at in the long perspective of
evolution, the present phase of human
activity is one of transition between that of
acceptance and that of control of destiny,
between magic and science, between unconsciously-nurtured phantasy and _ consciously-faced reason. It is, in the sense of
the word used in physics, a critical phase :
and being so it cannot be either stable or
long-enduring.

It is to my mind not only permissible but
highly desirable to look far ahead. Otherwise
we are in danger of mistaking for our
eugenic ideal a mere glorification of our
prejudices and our subjective wish-fulfilments. It is not eugenics but left-wing
politics if we merely talk of favouring the
survival and reproduction of the proletariat
at the expense of the bourgeoisie. It is not

eugenics but right-wing politics if we merely

talk of favouring the breeding of the upper
classes of our present social system at the
expense of the lower. It is not eugenics but
nationalist and imperialist politics if we speak
in such terms as subject races or miscegenation. Our conclusions in any particular case
may be on balance eugenically correct

* Brewer, H., 1935. ¢ Muller, H. J., 1935.

(though the correlation between broad social
or ethnic divisions and genetic values can
never be high), yet they will not be based
primarily upon eugenic considerations, but
upon social or national bias. The publicschool ideal, or that of the working-class
movement, or that of colonial imperialism,
may be good ideals; but they are not
eugenic ideals.

The Danger of Man's Genetic Degeneration :
Conclusion |

Before concluding, I should like to draw
attention to one eugenically important consequence of recent progress in pure genetics.
In all organisms so far investigated, deleterious mutations far outnumber useful ones.
There is an inherent tendency for the hereditary constitution to degrade itself. That
man shares this tendency we can be sure, not
only from analogy but on the all-too-obvious
evidence provided by the high incidence in
“ civilized ’’ populations of defects, both
mental and physical, of genetic origin.

In wild animals and plants, this tendency
is either reversed or at least held in check by
the operation of natural selection, which
here again proves itself to be, in R. A.
Fisher’s words, a mechanism capable of
generating high degrees of improbability.
In domestic animals and plants, the same
result is achieved by our artificial selection.
But in civilized human communities of
our present type, the elimination of defect
by natural selection is largely (though of
course by no means wholly) rendered inoperative by medicine, charity, and the
social services ; while, as we have seen, there
is no selection encouraging favourable variations. The net result is that many deleterious
mutations can and do survive, and the
tendency to degradation of the germ-plasm
can manifest itself.

To-day, thanks to the last fifteen years’
work in pure science, we can be sure of this
alarming fact, whereas previously it was
only a vague surmise.* Humanity will gradually destroy itself from within, will decay in
its very core and essence, if this slow but

* Muller, H. J., 1935.
EUGENICS AND SOCIETY ' 31

relentless process is not checked. Here again,
dealing with defectives in the present system
can be at best a palliative. We must be able
to pick out the genetically inferior stocks with
more certainty, and we must set in motion
counter-forces making for faster reproduction
of superior stocks, if we are to reverse or even
arrest the trend. And neither of these, as we
have seen, is possible without an alteration
of social system.

Whether or not I have been asking you to
accompany me too far into the visionary
future, I will end this lecture with a very
concrete suggestion for the present, backed
by a warning from the immediate past.

Twenty-five years ago, when I had just
taken my degree, the field of heredity was
still a battle-field. The Mendelians and the
Biometricians were disputing for its possession, and in the heat of the struggle little
mercy was shown by either side to the other.
In the last dozen years or so, however, the
apparent conflict of principle has been shown
not to exist, and now, thanks to the work of
such men as R. A. Fisher and J. B. S. Haldane, we realize that the two methods of
approach are complementary, and that certain important problems can only be solved
by their simultaneous employment.

The present position of Eugenists appears
to me to be closely parallel with the position
of the Mendelians a quarter of a century
ago. They find themselves in apparent
conflict with the environmentalists and the
protagonists of social reform. Speaking
broadly, the field of human improvement is a
battle-field between Eugenists and Sociologists, and the battle is often as violent as that
between the Mendelians and Biometricians—
or between Swift’s Big-endians and Littleendians. In my opinion, it is also as unreal
and useless. We eugenists must no longer
think of the social environment only in its
possible dysgenic or non-eugenic effects, but

must study it as an indispensable ally.
Changes in social environment are needed
both for the adequate expression of eugenic
progress, and as a means for its realization.

The next step for eugenics is, as I urged
at the beginning of this address, a methodological one. We eugenists must familiarize
ourselves with the outlook and the concepts
of sociology, with the technique and practice
of social reform ; for they are an indispensable part of the machinery we need to
realize our aims.

REFERENCES

Blakeslee, A. F., and Fox, A. L. 1932. ‘‘ Our different
taste worlds.” J. Heved., 23.

Brewer, Herbert. 1935. ‘“‘ Eutelegenesis,’’ EUGENICS
REVIEW, xXvii, 121.

Carr-Saunders, A. M. 1926. Eugenics. Home
University Library. Williams and Norgate. London.

Fisher, R. A. 1930. The Genetical Basis of Natural
Selection. Clarendon Press. Oxford.

Gates, R. R. 1934. ‘‘ Racial and Social Problems in
the Light of Heredity,’’ Population, r (2).

Gray, J. L., and Moshinsky, P. 1935 (a) ‘‘Ability and
Opportunity in English Education.” Soctological Review,
XXvii, 2, 1935. (b) ‘Ability and Educational Opportunity
in Relation to Parental Occupation.’’ Sociological
Review, xxvii, 3, 1935.

Hammond, J. 1932. Growth and Development of
Mutton Qualities in the Sheep. Oliver and Boyd.
Edinburgh.

Hammond, J. 1935. ‘‘ Inheritance of Productivity
in Farm Livestock. I. Meat,’’ Empive Jour. Exper.
Agric., 3, I.

Hogben, L. T. 1933. Nature and Nurture. Williams
and Norgate. London.

Huxley, J. S., and Haddon, A. C. 1935. We Europeans. Cape. London.

Huntington, E. 1928. The Human Habitat. Chapman & Hall. London.

Industrial Health Research Board, Fifteenth Annual
Report, 1935. H.M. Stationery Office. London.

Muller, H. J. 1935. Out of the Night. Vanguard
Press. New York.

Miiller, Max. 1888. Bstographies of Words and the
Home of the Aryas. Longmans. London.

Orr, Sir J. B. 1936. Food, Health and Income.
Macmillan. London.

Stapledon, R. G. 1935. The Land Now and Tomorrow. Faber & Faber. London.

Vavilov, N. I. 1926. Bull. Appl. Bot., Leningrad,
16, 139.

Zuckerman, S. 1932. The Social Life of Monkeys and
Apes. Kegan Paul. London.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVIII, No. 1.
