RACIAL POISONS
I. VENEREAL DISEASE

By J. ERNest Lang, F.R.C.S., Surgeon and Lecturer in
Surgery, St. Mary’s Hospital, Senior Surgeon, London
Lock Hospttal.

ACCORDING to the Registrar General the number of deaths
in England and Wales of children under twelve months
from prenatal Syphilis, was, in the year 1907, 123 per 100,000
children surviving their first twelve months, the deaths of the
males compared with the deaths of the females being in the
proportion of 138 to 109. Under the most favourable circumstances these syphilitic children, even if they had not died so
early, must have been puny and liable to succumb to minor
ailments ; they must have been weak both mentally and physically, and unfit to take part in the battle of life. The parental
poison inherited by them would not have been limited to their
infancy, it might have lain dormant for years, and if they married
it might have been transmitted in a modified form to the second
and even the third generation.

Although I have quoted the Registrar General’s figures too
much reliance must not be placed upon them, for in many
instances, out of deference to the feelings of the relations, the
exact nature of the disease, when venereal, is seldom disclosed in
the death certificate. With a view of surmounting this source
of fallacy it has been suggested that the cause of death should
be altogether omitted from the certificate given to the relations,
but that a confidential report should be transmitted by the
practitioner to the Registrar General. By this means the value
of the records of the national mortality would be materially
enhanced.

Whether the figures quoted do, or do not, give the true
RACIAL POISONS 255

position of affairs, I have the satisfaction of being able to state
that all the statistics at my disposal show a steady and almost
uninterrupted decline in the prevalence of venereal diseases for
more than twenty years. This diminution is due partly to recent
advances in treatment, partly to a recognition by our legislators
of the necessity for improved hygienic surroundings for the
poorer classes, by the enactment of measures for better housing—
for the avoidance of overcrowding (a fruitful cause of immorality)
—for ensuring the better education of children—and by the
provision of open-air spaces, and increased facilities for healthy
recreation. But though there has been great improvement in
the health of the community as regards these diseases, there is
ample recom for more, and if there is one branch of race-betterment that merits more than another the serious attention of
Eugenists, this appears to me to be pre-eminently that one.

The consequences of Syphilis are well summed up by
Prof. Fournier in his address to the first Brussels Congress on
the Prophylaxis of Venereal Diseases. Syphilis constitutes
a social danger: (1) By the individual damage it inflicts on
the patient. (2) By the collective damage it inflicts on the
family. (3) By the hereditary consequences it carries with it,
especially the terrible mortality amongst infants. (4) By the
race deterioration and depopulation which it entails.

Deplorable ignorance is responsible for the indifference with
which any suggestions or measures, having for their object some
mitigation of Syphilis, are received, and until the public awakes
from its apathy and realises the magnitude and importance of
the subject, so long will this terrible scourge remain in our
midst. Were there a sudden outbreak of small-pox or of
typhoid-fever, the public would at once take alarm, and would
pour out the vials of its wrath on some department or individuals
which it held responsible, and The Times would bristle with
letters on the subject. But we appear to be resigned to the
existence and prevalence of these preventable=maladies, and
allow them to pursue the even tenour of their way, though the
mortality they cause is far in excess of that due to any epidemic
since the plague of London, or even to the ravages of cholera in
the middle of the last century. These last two diseases were
256 : J. E. Lane:

acute and so worthy of notice; Syphilis is chronic, is ever
amongst us, and is consequently disregarded.

Probably if we were to canvass the members of the medical
profession in this country, the majority of whom have not given
any special study to the subject, as to what measures should be
adopted with the object of mitigating the prevalence of Venereal
Disease, their recommendation would be a return to the Contagious Diseases Acts. These Acts, which resemble the repression measures which are carried out. in various Continental
nations, enforce the registration and periodical examination of
any woman known to be earning her livelihood by prostitution,
and, if she be found diseased, her compulsory detention in
hospital until certified to be free from contagion.

The Contagious Diseases Acts were first enforced here in
1864, in certain garrison towns, and were finally repealed in
1886, and notwithstanding their repeal there has been, as stated
above, a steady decrease since that time in the amount of
Venereal Disease, as far as can be ascertained from statistics. To
give one instance, whereas the admissions to hospital of soldiers
in the Home Army for the disease in question were in 1886, 267
per 1,000, the figures had decreased to 68 per 1,000 last year.
Still the number of admissions into hospital during the past year
was formidable enough, being 7,348 out of a strength of 107,392.
The regulations carried out on the Continent have yielded results
so far short of what was expected of them that at the last
International Congress for the Prophylaxis of Venereal Diseases
the abolition of the system of regulation was voted by a majority
of 55 to 39.

It may be objected that the figures for our Army compare
unfavourably with those of other nations, but this may be
possibly explained by the fact that our statistics are not worked
on exactly the same lines as are those abroad. For instance,
many of the cases are those of the same men admitted several
times over in the course of the year for recrudescences of the
same disease. In the words of Major McCulloch, the head of
the statistical department of the Home Army, “ It often occurs
that a man may have more than one admission in the same year
for the same attack of disease. It follows that the actual number
RACIAL POISONS 257

of men contracting venereal disease is always less than the
number of admissions shown in the statistical tables. These
facts, without doubt, account for part of our relatively high rate
of venereal prevalence, and they should be remembered in
making comparisons with the statistics of other armies.”

It may be asked why a system which would appear to strike
at the root of the evil should have been abandoned in this
country and should have met with disparagement on the Continent. The answer is that not only are these repressive
measures unjust, but they are inadequate and of very questionable utility. They are unjust because they are only brought to
bear upon the female delinquent and not upon the male; they
prevent the woman from disseminating the disease, but they
place no such restriction on the man. Now, an infected man is
just as great a source of danger as an infected woman, and why
should he not be treated in the same manner? Compulsory
legislation is also inadequate and futile, because it only deals
with a small proportion of those women by whom the disease is
propagated. Further, the women whose names are on the
register of prostitutes do not by any means represent the total of
those gaining their living by prostitution, for these repressive
measures do not touch a larger and more dangerous class, v7z.,
those who practice prostitution clandestinely. Again, such
legislation is inadequate from the medical point of view ; for the
examination of each individual must of necessity be somewhat
brief and cursory, and in a large number of cases it is impossible
to state off-hand that such and such a woman is incapable of
transmitting contagion. There are certain conditions of disease,
upon which I would defy anyone to pronounce with certainty,
and for which a prolonged microscopical and _ bacteriological
research would be necessary before any definite conclusion could
be arrived at. The tendency of Regulation is rather to promote
immorality than to suppress it, by creating the false impression
that by its means vice is rendered free from any dangers of
contagion. But that sense of security is quite illusory for the
medical reasons I have just mentioned, and also because it is
quite possible for the prostitute to develop some fresh disease or
some recurrence of previous disease in the intervals between two
258 J. E. Lane:

examinations, and so to convey contagion freely to unsuspecting
victims.

Again, even if it were possible to segregate all the diseased
women, if no restraint is put upon those of the male sex, who
are similarly infected, these are left at perfect liberty to convey
their contagion to a fresh series of women hitherto uncontaminated. I have dwelt on this point at some length, because I
think we must look to other methods than Regulation in our
endeavours to mitigate the venereal evil.

It is, perhaps, too much to expect that Parliament should
occupy itself with a subject like this, and since 1886 no substitute
for the repealed Contagious Diseases Acts has been suggested
in either House. The Committee on Physical Degeneration,
appointed in 1894, recommended the appointment of a Commission of Inquiry into the prevalence and effects of Syphilis,
“having special regard to the possibility of making the disease
notifiable, and to the adequacy of hospital accommodation for
its treatment.” As regards notification, I suggested some years
ago, that the medical practitioner should notify to the sanitary
authorities every case of venereal disease which presented itself
for treatment, giving all important details as to the nature of the
case but of course concealing the identity of the individual.
Such a system of notification would only be of service in so far
as it might give us a more exact idea as to the existing amount
of disease, and would be of value from the point of view of
statistics, but against the suggestion it may be objected that it
might frighten away the patient, that it might lead to concealment of disease, and might drive the sufferer into the clutches of
some quack who would promise strict secrecy. These diseases,
like certain esculent roots, grow and flourish in darkness—in that
darkness of ignorance to which prejudice and prudery have
relegated them during long years.

Having now attempted to convey some idea of the nature
and scope of these diseases, of their prevalence and their influence
on the well-being of the community, I proceed to the consideration of the most important part of my subject, viz., What
measures can be adopted with the view of preventing them or of
mitigating their ill effects? The system of Regulation has
RACIAL POISONS 259

had a fair trial in this country and has been found wanting, and
so great is the prejudice against repressive legislation when
directed against one sex, or one class, that we are bound to look
elsewhere for our remedies and alleviations.

Many of these have been suggested from time to time: I
will here limit myself to two, viz., (1) Systematic instruction ;
(2) Efficient treatment.

I. Instruction as to the existence and as to the possible
consequences of these diseases should be imparted to the
youth of both sexes, to all parents and guardians, to those
who are commencing their career at the Universities, to the
medical student, who in many instances is absolutely free from
any moral control, to our soldiers and sailors, to those engaged
in large business houses, in short, to every institution where
young men or women are gathered together in considerable
numbers. Of far greater importance is the instruction which
must be given to every patient who has contracted disease, for
he is a possible focus for its dissemination. He should be made
fully aware of the fact that he is a source of danger to others,
and if with this knowledge he wilfully transmits disease he ought
to be treated as a criminal and subjected to the most condign
punishment. For the instruction to be of practical utility, it
should not be delayed till too late in life, but should be imparted
in the case of boys before leaving school, and in the case of girls
before their introduction into society, or before they go out into
the world with a view of earning their living.

For the most part, the adolescents of both sexes leave school
in utter ignorance of the laws of sexual physiology, and moral
hygiene, and their education on these subjects should no longer
be neglected. In the case of boys, instruction might be given by
their teachers, by the clergy, or by their fathers. The nature of
the temptations to which they may be exposed should be fully
explained, and the dangers to health and life which may be
entailed by their yielding to temptations of the flesh should be
particularly impressed upon them, so that a wholesome fear of
the consequences may have some deterrent effect. Special
stress should be laid upon the close association between alcoholic
excess and venereal disease, for in a large number of cases the
260 J. E. Lane:

first lapse from morality occurs while the individual, whether
male or female, is under the unaccustomed influence of alcohol,
and a large proportion of cases occurring in early life are to be
ascribed to this cause. It is further necessary to instruct every
young man that a life of chastity is the ideally healthy one, for
there appears to be a sort of tradition of youth that abstinence
from sexual indulgence is prejudicial to their health. Shoulda
young man be unfortunate enough to contract disease, the
necessity of at once confiding his condition to his parent or to
‘some medical man should be forcibly impressed upon him, for
the fact that he is diseased is bound to come out sooner or later,
and the consequences of his attempting to conceal his state,
must by allowing the disease to remain untreated, ultimately be
attended by disastrous consequences.

In the case of girls, the question is a more difficult one, and
the task of instruction must in most cases devolve upon the
mother; for her own sake and for the sake of her children,
every married woman ought to be fully enlightened on the
subject, and when the time arrives, she ought to impart the
necessary knowledge to her daughters. When the hand of her
daughter is sought for in marriage, some inquiries should be
instituted as to the physical fitness of him who seeks it, any
pecuniary advantages being put in the background, and made
subservient to a clean bill of health. Where a large number of
girls are congregated together, as in large business establishments, some responsible person should be appointed to instruct
them as to the possible dangers that beset them in their evening
hours of leisure, and it should be the duty of large employers of
female labour to pay as much attention to the moral as to the
physical welfare of their employees. At the Universities and in
the Medical Schools, which are now a part of our Universities,
one of the introductory lectures to their studies should be
devoted to this subject at the opening of every session. In the
Army and Navy the necessity for instruction is fully realised, and
that task is entrusted for the most part to the medical officers of
those services. On this point I may quote the words of Colonel
Melville of the R.A.M.C., “‘ the first part of a rational system of
instruction is to teach the young soldier that continence is
RACIAL POISONS 261

possible, and helpful, and that it may be best attained by leading
an active, temperate, clean-thinking, clean-talking life, and to
teach him the dangers of incontinence and the possibilities of
ill-health that may result from a single false step. If in spite of
all encouragement, assistance, advice and warning, the soldier
persists in a- course of life that renders him from time to time
incapable of performing his duties, the powers of discipline may
fairly be called in to punish him for so doing, as in the case of
the analogous vice of drunkenness.”’

Of equal importance are the instructions which must be
given to all patients who are suffering from any form of this
disease. They should be informed fully as to the nature of their
ailment, as to its possible consequences to themselves and to
others, and as to the means by which it may be transmitted.
To impart this instruction is the bounden duty of every medical
man, whether to his private clientéle or to the patients seen at a
hospital or dispensary. This duty is, I fear, often omitted, either
from pressure of work, neglect, or ignorance of its importance.
Verbal instructions are insufficient, owing to the fact that most
patients, when suddenly told that they are the victims of a
loathsome disease, experience such a shock that they are not ina
mental condition to appreciate what is said to them. Accordingly, it is incumbent on the surgeon to give to all his patients a
printed form of instruction as to the disease and its consequences,
and this should be just as much a matter of routine as giving the
necessary prescriptions for treatment. They must be enjoined
to continue their treatment until they are informed that it is
no longer necessary, and must not consider themselves cured
because no symptoms are any longer obvious to their untutored
eyes. They should be particularly warned against marriage
until they are pronounced physically fit to take upon themselves
that responsibility, and they should be cautioned as to the
possible results to wife and child, should they take that step
without the sanction and authorisation of their medical man.
Recent methods of investigation of the blood of syphilitic
patients, or of those who have suffered from that disease, enable
us now to say with comparative certainty whether or not the
patient is free from it, and though this process of investiga262 J. E. Lane:

tion is a laborious one, and can only be carried out by the few
who have made a special study of it, yet every hospital should
have someone on its staff capable of giving an authoritative
pronouncement on this point. Equally in the case of private
patients, should there be any question as to the presence of
the virus of syphilis, recourse should be had to this method of
investigation. In the case of gonorrhoea, the most careful
microscopical and bacteriological investigation is necessary,
before it is possible to say with certainty that a patient is no
longer in a position to transmit that disease.

II. Every facility should be given to enable the sufferers
from these diseases to obtain efficient treatment, which must
also be absolutely gratuitous, and which should entail as little
loss of time as possible. The means at the disposal of the public
are the general hospitals, and one special one, the Lock Hospital.
At the general hospitals the out-patient departments are held in
the afternoon, and owing to the number of patients presenting
themselves, it may be hours before the patient is able to see the
surgeon and obtain his medicine. This may entail the loss of
an afternoon’s work, and so acts as a deterrent agent, and
prevents a certain number of patients from attending. At the
Lock Hospital the necessity for treating patients when their
day’s work is done is fully recognised, and the Out-Patient
Department is open on certain days of the week in the evenings,
from 8 to 10 o’clock, and a large number of persons avail themselves of the treatment offered by this Institution. The number
of attendances last year in the out-patient department was
34,649. Such, however, is the callous indifference and the
ignorance of the public, that it is impossible to obtain the
necessary funds to render this institution a gratuitous one;
consequently the patients are asked to pay a small sum for
attendance and medicine. These contributions are not compulsory, but the mere knowledge that they are expected is
sufficient to deter many from resorting to the hospital who
otherwise would do so, and to cause others to cease their
attendance long before they are really cured. The contributions by patients amounted last year to £1,926, and this, with
payments by parishes for cases sent from the workhouse infirRACIAL POISONS 263

maries, is the only means of subsistence the Lock Hospital has,
with the exception of a beggarly subscription list of £42 from
the charitable public.

Our present system then is faulty in the extreme, since it
does not in any way facilitate the treatment of Venereal Diseases,
but rather puts unnecessary obstacles in the way. If the treatment of these cases is to be carried out in General Hospitals, a
special department should be created, and the patients should
be allowed to attend after the completion of their day’s work; if
special institutions, such as the ‘‘ Lock,” are considered preferable to general hospitals, some assistance from the State will
have to be forthcoming, or the treatment cannot be carried out
gratuitously.

In order to ensure efficient treatment, it is necessary to
provide adequate education both to the student and to the
practitioner. At general hospitals very little attention is given
to the subject by the clinical teachers, and no special course of
instruction is ever carried out. In the ‘“‘ Lock,” owing to want of
accommodation, there is no possibility of using the valuable
clinical material for educational purposes. Further, the patients
attend in such large numbers that it is very difficult to find time
to properly cope with them, and so the attendance of students
and visitors is not encouraged. In the majority of hospitals
devoted to special subjects, post-graduate classes are formed for
the benefit and instruction of the practitioner, but in the case of
the Lock Hospital this is rendered impossible by the limited size
of its premises.

It will be seen, then, that the opportunities for making a.
special study of the subject in this country are practically
non-existent. To remedy this defect, I would suggest the
institution of a special department for Venereal Diseases in every
general hospital, while the special hospital should be placed in
such a position that the clinical material at its disposal should
be utilised for educational purposes, and not utterly wasted as at
present.

The question of how to deal with prostitution is so complex
and difficult that lack of space prevents me from discussing it
here. No satisfactory means have ever been suggested of dealing
264 J. E. Lane:

with this evil, and I fear we must resign ourselves to the
‘conclusion that it will always exist, and that no social or sanitary
measures can ever stamp it out. But though we may not be
able to cope with the evil of prostitution, we must do our best to
provide satisfactory treatment for the prostitute who is the victim
of Venereal Disease, and use our utmost endeavours to prevent
her from transmitting her disease to others. As compulsory
segregation of the prostitute has been abandoned, we must rely
upon voluntary treatment, and strive to make this as efficient as
possible. At the Female Lock Hospital, though the women are
perfectly at liberty to leave whenever they choose, the majority
of them remain until all their symptoms have disappeared, and
after their departure from the hospital continue their treatment
as out-patients. Whilst they are in hospital, every effort is
made to induce them to enter the Rescue Home attached to the
Institution, and so to reclaim them from their life of shame, and
give them a chance of earning an honest livelihood.

It is a lamentable fact that the career of prostitution is
embarked upon for the most part at a very early age, in fact, it
is estimated by one of the surgeons at the St. Lazare Hospital,
that in Paris 75 per cent. have entered on this vocation before
the age of 21, and that of these 50 per cent. are affected with
some form of venereal disease. Some salutary measures should
be taken to restrain the youthful prostitute, who is equally
irresponsible and ignorant, from leading such a life until she
‘shall have arrived at what may be considered years of discretion,
presumably at the age of 21. In many instances, this youthful |
prostitution must be attributed to the neglect and even to the
encouragement of the parents, and is often conduced to by their
miserable home surroundings. If a young girl be discovered to
be earning her living by the prostitution of her body, and he
found to be out of parental control, legislative measures should
be enacted to restrain her from this mode of life, at any rate
until she arrives at the age of 21, by placing her in some
reformatory institution, by endeavouring to bring some good
influence to bear upon her, and by teaching her some form of
useful and domestic employment to which she may have recourse
when released from her temporary restraint.
