THE PECKHAM EXPERIMENT*
By INNES H. PEARSE, M.D.

HE Peckham experiment began as
far back as 1925. At that time, the
interest of the eugenist was focused
on the genetic factor in inheritance. Those
responsible for the inauguration of the
Peckham experiment, aware that it was not
possible to apply to human society such
knowledge of inheritance as the study of
genetics had so far presented us with, and
sensible of the potent effect of environment
upon the new individual from the moment
of conception, determined to explore the
environmental factor in inheritance. This
implied a comprehensive experiment in the
field of social biology in which there could be
brought under observation the intimate and
subtle, as well as the more remote and wide
effects of changes in the environment upon
the individual. Such an experiment necessitated not merely a study of the earliest
(maternal) environment of the embryo, but
investigation of the factors involved in
natural selection as evidenced in the processes of falling in love and courtship which
set the stage for the début of the new
individual.

If, then, we were going to deal with the
effect of environment upon the child, the
first requirement was to know the state of
the parents to whom that child was to be
born. Nowhere had any work been done on
the uncomplaining or so-called “ healthy ”’
man-in-the-street or woman-in-the-home. As
scientists, how were we to come into easy
and natural contact with such people ?

First Experiment, 1926-9

In 1926 my colleague, Dr. Scott Williamson, and I, supported by a small group of
interested laymen, decided to open a small
“‘ family club ’’ in South London. The district was chosen with some care for the fact
that it housed a populace mainly of good
artisan type, but including as wide an

* Being the substance of an Address to the Eugenics
Society on October 17th, 1943.

admixture of cultural types as it is possible
to find within any small area in the metropolis. It was a populace not afflicted by any
continuous unemployment, and did not
include any “‘ social problem ”’ group.

The Club consisted of a small house
containing no more than a consulting room,
changing room with hot bath, a very small
room for social purposes, and a rough garden
hut used for an afternoon nursery for
children of the member-families. The induce
‘ment for any family to join was the oppor
48

tunity of having a periodic health overhaul.
We believed that there were parents with
the good sense to jump at such an opportunity, provided that the circumstances in
which it was offered were convenient to
them, and did not cut across other responsibilities that they had previously assumed.

This small club was run for three years,
and yielded certain findings of importance :

(1) Examination of the man-in-the-street
‘by modern scientific methods disclosed
disorders of a pathological nature not
anticipated by us nor by the families
themselves.

(2) Such disorders, when discovered at
this early stage, were easier to treat
and adjust than in a more advanced or
chronic stager

(3) If individuals after their “cure”
remained in the environment in which
they had been living, those disorders
were prone to recur.

This last was a very serious finding. It
meant clearly that periodic overhaul accompanied by early treatment of disorder was of
little use tf unaccompanied by measures to
modify the environment in which the disorders
had arisen. This impelled us to shut down the .
first experiment while determining what
could be done to change and modify the
environment in which the families were
living.
THE PECKHAM EXPERIMENT | : 49

Second Experiment, 1935-9

- Five years elapsed, during which time
the problems were reviewed, plans laid, and
funds collected for further experiment. The
second experiment took the form of a
specially designed club to cater for the
leisure of 2,000 families living in the same
district and within walking distance of the
building.

The Club was equipped with all those
things which experience had shown that
keen and active individuals like to make use
of in their leisure—a swimming bath, a
gymnasium, space for games (e.g. billiards,
whist, badminton, table tennis), a theatre
for drama, music and cinema, a library, a
cafeteria, nurseries, workrooms, etc. Thus,
the Club was provided with equipment for
the use of every member of any family from
infancy to old age.

Our object in putting up this building
was to put in the path of families a diversity
of opportunity for social action and to
observe the effect of the changed environment upon those families. It was necessary,
therefore, that there should be free circulation throughout the building so that the
families should be able to see what was
going on. It was also necessary that the
observers should be able to note the effect
of the new environment upon family action.
Hence the building was planned for visibility
and free circulation throughout. Its construction was simple: three concrete platforms supported on pillars, thereby eliminating the necessity for any obstructing walls.
In the middle of the building was a full-size
swimming bath surrounded by a band of
plate-glass window separating the bath
chamber from the cafeteria on one side and
the main social hall on the other. From the
main hall on the first floor, one could also
look down into the gymnasium and into the
theatre, both rising from the ground floor ;
and, as one passed the gymnasium to go to
the playground, one could look into the
babies’ swimming bath adjacent to the
nurseries.

Everything was visible. One object of
this provision was to test the hypothesis
we had laid down, namely that the sight of

action was a natural stimulus to action—
one which is perforce inoperative in the
increasingly disintegrated state of contem
porary society.

Constitution of the Club
A word must be said about the constitu
tion of this Family Club. It was planned,

built and equipped throughout for selfservice. This gave freedom to its memberfamilies to act without the restraint that
service inevitably imposes. Apart from the
individual conditions of membership, to which
I will come shortly, there were no rules and
no “‘organizers’’ or leaders in the Club.
That the absence of rules caused difficulties
in the beginning cannot be denied. And
where everyone is a stranger and the
majority are too shy, too diffident, too-inept
to begin to take hold of the opportunities
before them, there is nothing more difficult
than to stay one’s desire to “ get things
going.”’ In those early months the children,
largely hysterical from too little outlet in
school or home, contributed greatly to the
chaos which continued until one activity
after another began to organize ttself around
one or other keen individual or group of
individuals exercising their skill and developing an interest in some form of activity.
So, gradually, out of chaos order grew—not
unlike the way a patterned order appears
in the chromatic elements in the cell as,
emerging from the skein stage, it takes on a
new orientation. Suffice it to say, as evidence
of growth of such an order in the Club, that
by the fourth year of the experiment, on
any afternoon in the week between 4 and
6 p.m. there could be seen some 200 to 250
children moving at will to their chosen
activities amidst the general and adult
society of the Club of which they were an
integral part, their only point of reference
being the biologist-observer and her student
also at all times moving freely throughout
the building. An intrinsic equilibrium had
established itself within this society, making
the enforcement of an extrinsic discipline
redundant.

As well as no rules, and no organizers to
see that members “‘ got together’ or used
50°C _ THE EUGENICS REVIEW '

the equipment, there were no teachers to
teach how to use each instrument. What
would people do, and how would they act,
given such a new environment ? were the
questions asked of the equipment. There
were people of every degree and many
varieties of skill among the members. It
was but natural that the skilled should turn
to teaching those of their friends who were
less skilled—and often in doing so they
discovered in themselves a quite unsuspected
gift for teaching. There were no professionals to set a standard. This does not mean
that there were none who were expert—
there were. But also there were individuals
in every stage of competence with growing
courage to attempt what they had never
attempted before. So, in three or four years,
instead of a small group of experts performing to a majority of spectators among the
membership, we had nothing but “ doers ”’
in the Centre—some continuously appreciating and so learning from the expert ; and
others gaining the necessary courage to try
from the person even less competent than
themselves.

Conditions of Membership

The conditions of membership were two
only : (1) payment of a weekly subscription
per family, and (2) periodic health’ overhaul
for every individual of each member family.

(x) Family membership as distinct from
the usual individual membership of a club
means that there are automatically gathered
together people of all ages and both sexes.
There is thus assembled a society in which

every stage of maturity is represented, each .

exerting its natural biological influence upon
other members of the group.

Peckham was chosen because of the
cultural diversity of the families living
there, so that, as well as a diversity of skills
and of ages, there was a considerable degree
of cultural diversity as well. The incomes of
our members: ranged from {2 Ios. a week
to £1,000 a year or more, the majority
being between £3 15s. and £5 15s. a week;
and in occupation the members ranged from
the unskilled labourer to the lawyer, the
clergyman and the doctor.

(2) The second condition of membership
was periodic overhaul for every individual
of each member-family. The Centre was
open from 2 to 10 p.m. daily, and all overhauls were done by appointment, so that all
could choose a time that suited their convenience. The first appointment was for
a laboratory overhaul, when specimens were
collected from each individual. Then followed a personal overhaul of each individual,
where the women and children were examined
by a woman, and the men and older boys by
aman. The third and last appointment was
for a ‘‘ Family Consultation,’’ at which the
whole family assembled to meet the two
““ doctors ’’ who had examined the members
of the family.

The family consultation presented us with
a peculiar situation. We were not “ doctors ”
facing “‘ patients ’’ suffering from symptoms
who had come asking for advice. We had
had an opportunity of examining the
ordinary man-in-the-street and woman-inthe-home, who were not aware that they
needed advice of any sort. To give advice in.
these circumstances would have been an
unwarranted intrusion, as well as likely to
arouse resentment. Would whatever information we had gained prove of use to the
family itself, and could it be translated into
lay terms? If so, should we see them take
responsible action as a result of knowledge
not hitherto available to them ?

Thus a new technique of health consultation was evolved. At the family consulta-.
tion we dealt first with the baby or youngest:
child. ‘‘ This and this has been found, and:
as far as we know, it means so and so.”’
The baby is then taken out. The parents,
somewhat taken aback, for they are little
used to a situation where they are treated
by those .with knowledge as sensible and
responsible human beings, are nevertheless
interested.

Then comes the turn of the next child.
When the last child has left, much of the
strangeness has worh off, and a discussion
follows, during which all sorts of other facts
concerning the children, the family circumstances and relationships tumble out. Then
the findings of the husband’s overhaul are
THE PECKHAM EXPERIMENT . 51

detailed by the man “doctor”’ in the
presence of his wife, and the findings of the
wife’s overhaul by the woman ‘“ doctor ”’
in the presence of her husband. This, too,
is inevitably followed by a still more lively
and intimate discussion.

It must be recalled that it was not a
medical overhaul, but a health overhaul that
had been undertaken. In medical overhaul
search is made for what is wrong. In health
overhaul the search is for what is vxght, Thus
in the family consultation the emphasis
falls always on what is found that is right,
that which is not right arising as incidental
to the general account of what has been
found. No issue, however, is shirked in the
final discussion between biologists and
parents.

It will be convenient here to make some
mention of the findings of such overhauls
as were made in the four and three-quarter
years preceding the outbreak of war.

Of the 3,911 individuals of both sexes and
all ages examined, it was found that 90 per
cent had pathological disorders which could
be diagnosed by any clinician working with
a modern laboratory and equipment and
making a comprehensive personal overhaul
of each individual. When further analysing
the 10 per cent without disorder into males
and females, there were found to be 16 per
cent of males but only 4 per cent of females
without disorders. Moreover, of these
females with nothing wrong, a relatively high
proportion were under fifteen years of age,
thus disclosing that there were practically
no women in the child-bearing period free
from disorder.

This is a serious comment on the probable
state of the populace, in view of the fact that
it is derived from a specimen chosen as
representing that section of the populace
which is not embarrassed by poverty or
other social problems. I do not, however,
propose to enlarge on these findings here*
apart from referring to the response of the
families to disclosure of their defects and
disorders at the family consultation.

Once the technique of giving information

* See Biologists in Search of Material, Faber & Faber,
4938, Section ITI, pp. 52-91.

without giving advice had been acquired,
there was scarcely a family among the
thousand or more examined who did not
themselves take the hecessary steps to put
right what was wrong. Often after talking
it over together at home, they would come
back a few days after the consultation to
ask where and how they could best get the
necessary treatment. Thus, placing information at the parents’ disposal led to voluntary adjustment on the part of the family
itself of any disorders that had been found.
This resulted in a growing sense of responsibility and a growing courage and capacity
for action on the part of the family and of
all its members.

To come back to the family consultation.
If the families were young and likely to have
children or more children, a brief outline
was then given of what is known of the
significance of parenthood—not only for
their children, but as the means by which
parents themselves might reach full maturity.
Contraception, which in this setting falls
into its place as a means of family welfare,
was discussed, and it was made known that
advice was available for this purpose at the
Centre by appointment if required. Biological knowledge of the processes that
underlie courtship and mating in the animal
world were translated into general terms
and afforded a means of illustrating the
subtlety of the biological processes of growth
and development of a family and all its
integral members.

Thus parents began to grasp, perhaps for
the first time, that health is not merely a
state of physical fitness, but rather one of
progressive unfolding of their potentialities
for development—which could not take
place at all without continuous contact with
the outside world, and with the society in
which they as a family are embedded. All
these things were of intense interest to the
parents, both husband and wife frequently
making remarks and comments, ‘showing
that they had been dimly and intuitively
aware of the deep significance that underlies.
their parenthood.

So, the family consultation over, they
would go down and have a cup of coffee or
52.

a glass of beer in the cafeteria by the swimming bath, and there would meet someone
they knew. Inevitably the main lines of
what had gone on in the family consultation
—if not the more intimate personal details
—would sooner or later be discussed. And
perhaps the friend, an older member of the
Centre, would talk about it in terms he had
already made his own.

So a growing understanding of the processes of growth and development—and of
the nurture of children—began to be translated by the members themselves into the
vernacular. Here was, in fact, the basis for
a tradition of knowledge in society. And,
later, as they came with their children to
the Centre, watched them at play, and
began, like us, to be observers of what their
children were doing, there was daily opportunity for such knowledge to gather and to
grow.

By experiment we had arrived at a method
whereby the democratization of biological
knowledge had begun to take place through
the idiom of the people, and in a situation
which offered the opportunity for such
knowledge to be acted upon by each in his
own fashion. For this to occur naturally,
a continuity of association between staff
and members was necessary. Sixteen stairs
down from the examination department,
and the biologist could meet the family on
the social floor of the Club and see them in
action. When the overhaul recurred a year
or eighteen months later, at the second
family consultation, there was more to
add : observations on the patterns of action
of the members as they had moved about
the Club.

So striking was the nature of these actionpatterns displayed by individuals and by
families that within four years the social
biologist (who was not a doctor), working
day by day on the floor of the Centre, found
that new families as they moved about the
Centre fell according to their action-pattern
into three categories closely coinciding with
what was later to be found on examination
—those with nothing wrong with them,
those with disorders of which they were
unaware, and those who had something

_ THE EUGENICS REVIEW

wrong with them of which they were
aware. 2. 7

This subject is obviously one which
demands not months but years of observation. I mention it here merely as an indication of the nature and interest of the studies
which an experiment of this order opens up
for future research.

Pregnancy in the Family

With such close and intimate contact with
each family, and deeply interested in any
change in their circumstances, it became
natural as time went on for all sorts of
matters of any importance to the family to
be talked over with the biologist. It was
thus natural, when quite casually we met
downstairs, to be told that they had bought
a new house, had decided to send John to a
new school, or were in trouble with the landlord or the insurance company.

This was extremely valuable, for it meant
that when anything important like a
probable conception occurred, it was reported to us at the earliest possible moment
—and that was equally the case with a
wanted or an- unwanted conception. At
such a time another overhaul would immediately be made, followed by a “ parental
consultation ’’ with the man and wife and
the man and woman biologists. Here was
a further and appropriate opportunity to
deal with the subject of pregnancy in the
family and to engage the interest of both
parents in its significance for their own.
development. (It was also a profitable
occasion to explain the disastrous effects of
attempts at abortion in the case of an unwanted pregnancy.)

Within the brief space of four years we
had in the Centre an increasing number of
wanted conceptions. The situation was in
more than one way a novel one, for where a
family joined before conception had occurred.
both parents had been examined, and, so
far as possible, had had their disorders
removed before the conception of the child.
We had started from the beginning, creating,
as far as modern science allowed us, a fit
intimate environment for the new individual
—as well as a general environment capable
THE PECKHAM EXPERIMENT 53

of enriching the home into which that
individual was to be born.

After the first “‘ parental consultation,”’
the wife went to the laboratory fortnightly,
and to the biologist every month. Presented
thus with pregnant women who, through
their periodic overhaul as members of the
Centre, had rid themselves of their disorders
before conception occurred, we had little to
set right. So each successive ante-natal
consultation became a recurring opportunity
of placing at their disposal knowledge as to
the developmental changes that were taking
place during the course of pregnancy. Here
could be stressed the importance of nutrition*
not merely for the embryo but for the family
as a whole, including food for both their
physical and social needs during this active
phase of family growth. Both husband and
wife were participators in pregnancy, and,
looking forward to the birth of the child;
they were ‘‘ expectant parents.”

In this situation full attention could be
given to building up the woman’s reserves,
checking their maintenance by means of the
laboratory records. The wife was on top of
her form, her capacities sharpened by use
and the ‘“‘tuning up”’ of her physiological
engine. She did not experience the sickness,
lassitude, tiredness and depression, nor suffer
from the minor disorders so commonly
regarded as ‘‘normal’’ at this time. So,
quite naturally, she remained an active
participant in the social life of the Centre
with her husband. She continued to go to
her ‘‘ keep fit’’ class, to play badminton,
and to swim (up to fourteen days before
delivery), and was to everyone’s surprise in
no way remarkable in doing so. And, because they as a “‘family’’ were growing,
they began to find themselves making new
friends among other families in the same
stage of maturity that they themselves were
now approaching. Instead of retreating and
retiring from society; they were growing
farther into society through their own

* The Centre Home Farm at Bromley Common provided live milk and vegetables which were made

available to the family at the time of pregnancy,
lactation, and the weaning of the child.

growth. Life was acquiring a fuller savour
for them both.

This very striking change in the pair
during the ante-natal period had, as might
be expected, its effect upon their outlook
upon delivery. Labour, no longer anticipated
as some drastic surgical operation, became
the accepted climax to pregnancy, which
the woman, feeling full of vigour, approached
with the quiet confidence of being able to
achieve naturally and unaided.

It was impossible to subject such women
to the ordinary circumstances for delivery
in which they are reduced to the status of
invalids for two or three weeks. Through
the courtesy of the obstetric staff of one of
the teaching hospitals, who co-operated
with us for this purpose, special arrangements were made for this still relatively small
category of mothers. Under this scheme,
the mother went into hospital for fortyeight hours—for labour and the sleep that
followed—coming back to her home immediately afterwards. In this way the initiation
of lactation was carried on in the intimate
environment of their own home and under
supervision of the Centre’s midwife and
biological staff. In circumstances like these
ope watched a smooth progress : conception
welcomed, pregnancy enjoyed, labour accomplished with a sense of achievement,
and no doubts or difficulties with the subsequent feeding of the child. And after a
period of absence from the general social life
of the Centre, first the young father would

be seen again among his friends and asso
ciates, and later the mother would bring her
baby to the Centre Nursery for an hour or
two in the afternoon, while she joined her
friends for an afternoon’s sewing, or a swim
and a cup of tea.

The result of this successful and easy
progress of a family through pregnancy,
child-birth and infant rearing, was that the
having of children came to be seen amongst
the Centre community not as a danger or a
burden upon the parents, but as a very
desirable experience. There were, indeed,
indications that pregnancy taking place in
these circumstances was an infectious element
in the community—a stimulus to other
54

young married people to want and to have
children.

If on further research this proves to be

the case in general, it has a very direct

bearing on the population question, and —

would indicate that one of the main causes
of a falling birth-rate lies in the absence of
the natural biological stimulus to maturity
due to the isolation of the young married
couple in the disintegrated state of contemporary society.

It was quite a common thing for young

families who at their first overhaul expressed |

the firm intention of having no children, to
come to us after their second or third family
consultation saying that they had changed
their minds. It is impossible to say whether
fear had been eliminated as a result of seeing
easy, natural and successful pregnancies, or
how far the general environment of the
Centre, with its opportunities for information
and for action, was responsible. The fact
that it happened within four years is nevertheless a very significant one. It is of equal
importance that it happened in the-case of
young couples who in the intervening period
had acquired neither better housing accommodation, a rise in wages, nor any other
change in their financial prospects.

But perhaps of even more interest from
the eugenist’s point of view were the young
couples who, within two and a half years of
opening the Centre, began of their own
accord to seek to make use of the examination department to ensure that they would
be as fit as possible before setting out on
pregnancy. Such couples would come to
us to ask if their next overhaul, due perhaps
in August, might be put forward to the end
of June; for they wanted to start their
baby during their annual holiday in July.
In these ‘ bespoke conceptions’’ we find
evidence of an intelligent and live parental
sensibility operating from the outset towards
responsible nurture of the child.

That we should have found evidence of
such a deep-seated change in outlook and
action in young families in instance after
instance during the four and three-quarter
years during which the full-scale experimental Centre was working, seems to indicate

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the urgency of pursuing this research into

‘the potency of environment upon family

action.

There is a further interesting indication
that has arisen from close study of the
expectant mother and her child. Intractable
deficiencies in the mother are very apt to
manifest themselves in the child three
months or more after birth. But where,
however, a “‘floating’’ reserve has been
maintained in the mother during the pregnancy, the child born of that woman will
not only be born with a higher standard
than his mother could reach, but appears to
maintain it at least during the first year of
life.* Time has not permitted us to carry
out observations on this subject over a
longer period upon the offspring, or to collect
sufficient numbers to substantiate this point,
but the indication has been explicit enough
to demand the fullest investigations when
the cessation of hostilities makes the resumption of this research possible. If true, it
means something very important, namely
that by the use of pregnancy as a particularly
fiud phase of differentiation in the life cycle
of the family, we can enable a child to reach
and maintain a higher standard than its
parents can maintain. Is there here a means
of breaking the vicious circle in family
inheritance ? Tt

Courtship

But even “‘ bespoke conceptions ”’ are not
the beginning of eugenic “‘ practice.’’ The
new individual is subject from the moment
of conception to the intimate environment
created by the interrelations of the parents.
This has its physical aspects (about which
in the human species we know but little as
yet), and its social aspects, as expressed in
the nature of the home (or zone of sociobiological influence), that the parents may
“‘induce’’ through the nature of their
mutual interaction with their environment.
These influences have their beginning in
falling in love, grow in courtship, and are
confirmed in the intimacies of marriage.

*See The Peckham Experiment, Pearse & Crocker,

Allen & Unwin, 1943, pp. 141-4.
t Ibid., pp. 243-5.
THE PECKHAM EXPERIMENT | 55

Thus the appropriate field for the beginning
of eugenic research and practice is one in
which the adolescent is moving towards the
courtship phase.

To this end in the Centre there was one
exception to the rule of family membership.
The adolescent sons and daughters of member-families were allowed to introduce the
girl or boy friend of the moment as
“temporary members.”’ Such temporary
members were not offered periodic overhaul
—for we were busy enough already, and boy
and girl friends tend to come and go—but
they had the full run of the activities of the
Centre. Here, then, were young boys and
girls, growing up in the midst of a general
society, and passing through the phase of
fleeting attractions to that of permanent
attachment, in a situation where each had

not merely two or three to choose from and °

to-‘move amongst, but in active contact with
two or three hundred of roughly the same
age. There was no segregation of sexes or
of ages; all therefore were subject to the
influence of those slightly more mature than
themselves. Thus there was no tendency
for them to be confirmed in their adolescence.
Parents would say to us that when a son
was attracted to a girl they did not think
suitable they would in the old days have
worried and wondered whether they ought
not to say something to the boy about it ;
but that as members of the Centre they were
relieved of this worry, for the boy saw the
girl doing a great number of things in contact with a great number of other people of
all ages, and came to know for himself that
she was not the type of girl he was looking for.

We had created circumstances in which
there had gathered spontaneously a society
of people of different ages and different

types, in which the young adolescents had a
far wider choice than is possible in ordinary
circumstances. We were coming nearer to
circumstances in which natural selection
could operate in the selection of a mate. We
had created a field for the observation of
human courtship. We now know that it is
as easy to study human courtship as to
study the courtship of birds—of which
Julian Huxley has so fascinatingly written.

Conclusion

Time does not permit a description of the
atmosphere of the Centre, except to say that
it was an exceptionally free and natural one.
Nor“is it possible here to speak of the way
other aspects of its work proved full of
interest. The fact that the family rather
than the individual was used as the basic
unit for organization meant that no side of
life was outside the Centre’s range of observation. Hence, through its work wide fields
of research hitherto unexplored have opened
up and await investigation. Its facilities are
unparalleled for research into the physical
constitution and diathesis of the individual ;
into the origins of clinical disease, seen for
the first time at the period of departure from
health ; for research into the biology of sex
in its subtler manifestations ; and into the
socio-biology of the family group in its environmental associations. It opens up
possibilities for research into psychology
proper, that is to say of the healthy or socalled “ normal,’’ and for a scientific approach to education of the child from a
biological standpoint. But, more important
perhaps than all at this juncture in history,
it affords a field for the exploration of
eugenics and a rational means of translation
of eugenic principles to the public need.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXXVI, No. 2
