The Eugenics Review

NOTES OF THE QUARTER

IMMIGRANTS AND THE SOCIAL SERVICES

THE NATIONAL INSTITUTE of Economic and Social Research is undertaking a study
on the economic aspects of immigration, which it is hoped to publish as an Occasional
Paper by the end of 1968. The project is clearly an interesting and valuable exercise. A
first instalment has been issued in the form of a contribution by Mrs. K. Jones, published
in the August, 1967, issue of the National Institute’s Economic Review.

The cost of the social services may be sub-divided into two elements, namely the age
of the recipients and the extent to which the services are used. The author estimates the
cost per head of the health and welfare services in England and Wales in 1961-62 as being
about £20 for young people (under age fifteen), £14 for those of working age and £39 for
the old (65 and over). She finds that young immigrants cost rather more, but old immigrants
less, per head than these averages. Thus the intensity of use does not greatly differ as between
immigrants and the population at large. As, however, relatively few immigrants are old,
and the cost is highest for the aged, the average for immigrants of all ages (about £17) is
below that for the home population (£18). It seems likely to remain relatively low for many
years to come.

Other important aspects of the social services are (i) education and child care, and (ii)
national insurance and assistance benefits. In respect of the first of these, the cost of
immigrants is slightly above the average; in respect of the second, because of their young
age distribution, the immigrants are relatively inexpensive and will probably remain so.

On balance, therefore, the immigrant population—defined for this purpose as those
coming from the British Caribbean, India and Pakistan, Africa, Cyprus and Malta—costs
materially less than the native population so far as the social services are concerned. The
extent of the saving is of the order of twenty per cent. In view of the suspicion in many
peoples’ minds that coloured people in Britain put a strain on the social services, it is good
that the facts have been so carefully elicited and balanced together to present a clear
conclusion to the contrary.

THE INCIDENCE OF GAMMA-CHAIN VARIANTS OF FOETAL
HAEMOGLOBIN

HAEMOGLOBIN PROVIDES a convenient subject for the study of the incidence of mutations in polypeptide chains, since the amino acid sequence of the polypetide chains of
haemoglobin are known and the usual type of mutation is expressed as a single amino acid
substitution which may be chemically identified. Many such variants of adult haemoglobin
(which contains alpha and beta chains) are known. Foetal haemoglobin contains alpha
and gamma chains. Until recently the chemical identification of gamma-chain variants
had only been carried as far as the finding that Haemoglobin F Texas has a substitution
of lysine for glutamic acid (glu-lys) at either the fifth or sixth position in the gamma
chain.!

There are 146 amino acid residues in the gamma chain and variants were previously
thought to be “probably rare’’.2 Numerous hospitals in Great Britain are at present
collaborating on a survey of umbilical cord blood specimens to determine the incidence

ER—Q 219
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of electrophoretically abnormal gamma chain variants. Five have been found in the first
13,000 specimens. So far three have been chemically characterized. They are: Haemoglobin
F Hull (y 121 glu-lys)3}, Haemoglobin F Texas I (y 5 glu-lys)4, and Haemoglobin F
Texas II (y 6 glu->lys).5 The incidence of electrophoretically abnormal gamma-chain
variants is therefore about one in 2,000-3,000. This is certainly a low estimate for the
incidence of mutants; from work on the genetic code 6 it appears likely that in addition
about twice this number of variants occur when the amino acid substitution does not involve
a change in charge such as is found, for example, in glu-lys mutations. Such mutations
would not be detected by electrophoresis. Electrophoresis detects only those variants in
which the substitution involves a charged amino acid, and most amino acids are neutral.

REFERENCES

. Schneider, R. G. and Jones, R. T. 1965. Haemoglobin F Texas: gamma-chain variant. Science. 148, 240.

. Schroeder, W. A., and Jones, R. T. 1965. Some aspects of the chemistry and function of human and
animal haemoglobins. Fortschritte der Chemie organischer Naturstoffe. 13, 113.

. Sacker, L. S., Beale, D., Black, A. J., Huntsman, R. G., Lehmann, H., and Lorkin, P. A. 1967. Haemoglobin F Hull (y 121 Glutamic acid—>Lysine), homologous with haemoglobins O Arab and O Indonesia.

. Jenkins, G. C., Beale, D., Black A. J., Huntsman, R. G., and Lehmann, H. 1967. Haemoglobin F
Texas I “(ceo 5 ’Glu—Lys): a variant of "Haemoglobin F. Brit. J. Haemat. 13, 252.

. Larkin, I. M. L., Baker, T., Lorkin, P. A., Lehmann, H., Black, A. J., and Huntsman, R. G. Haemoglobin
F Texas II (any 6 Glu—Lys), the second of the Haemoglobin F Texas variants. Brit. J. Haemat.
1968 (in press).

6. Nirenberg, M., Leder, P., Bernfield, M., Brimacombe, R., Trupin, J., Rottman, F., and O’Neal, C.

1965. R. N. A. Codewords and protein synthesis, VI. On the general nature of the R.N.A. code.

Proc. nat. Acad. Sci. (Wash.). 53, 1161.

vA & WY N=

“UNSTABLE” HAEMOGLOBINS REPRESENTING A NEW TYPE OF
GENETICALLY DETERMINED PROTEIN DYSFUNCTION

THE DETECTION and isolation of haemoglobin variants usually depends on the electrophoretic difference between the variant and normal haemoglobin. This has virtually confined
the identified abnormal haemoglobins to those in which the change in amino acid sequence
involves the substitution of an amino acid by another whose side chain bears a different
charge. If there is no change in charge one would not expect electrophoresis to discover
the altered amino acid content. That this has so far been found to be true for the identified
haemoglobins associated with disease such as sickle-cell haemoglobin, Haemoglobin C,
E etc., was not unexpected as it seemed that this type of replacement would be most likely
to cause dysfunction of the molecule.

Surprisingly, in view of this, there is now a report from the Medical Research Council
Abnormal Haemoglobin Research Unit in Cambridge that in certain instances replacements
causing haemoglobin dysfunction may be virtually confined to those involving only uncharged
or non-polar amino acids. These will result in little or no change in the electrophoretic
mobility of the protein. Carrell et al. (Nature 1967, 215, 626)* review the findings of the
investigation of nine abnormal “unstable” haemoglobins. These are haemoglobins which
precipitate inside the red cells in vivo and cause a haemolytic anaemia. Carrell et al. find
that none of these haemoglobins have an inherent change in charge and have confirmed
this by identifying the amino acid replacement in three of them. They conclude that the
major factor in producing the instability of these haemoglobins is that the amino acids
that are replaced are non-polar residues inside the molecule whose hydrophobic bonding
is the most important factor in determining the shape and stability of the molecule.

* Carrell, R. W., Lehmann, H., Lorkin, P. A., Raik, E. and Hunter, E. 1967. Hemoglobin Sydney: 867
(E11) Valine — Alanine: an emerging pattern of unstable hemoglobins.

220
NOTES OF THE QUARTER

Replacement of one of these residues by a charged residue would almost certainly result
in a completely non-viable molecule whereas replacement with another uncharged residue
of different dimensions will result in dysfunction, but is not incompatible with survival of
the molecule.

It is likely that these unstable haemoglobins are a prototype for other proteins showing
dysfunction and causing disease.

THE ANTI-FERTILITY ANTIDOTE

IN THE JUNE 1967 number of the REVIEW we reported Dr. G. I. M. Swyer’s Oliver
Bird Lecture (59, 76) in which he said that the most rational form of fertility control would
require the participants to “exercise their desire to multiply by a simple act of free will”—
that is by taking the antidote to the anti-fertility agent (whatever it might be) which everyone
would be having.

It would have been apposite to have then reprinted a letter which Dr. P. D. H.
Chapman contributed to THE EUGENICS REVIEW in January 1956 (47, 267). Dr. Chapman
wrote:

Everyone will recognize the importance of a reliable oral method of birth control
in the struggle against over population. That such a drug could be an equally potent
weapon in furthering eugenic progress is not perhaps so obvious.

Let us suppose that drug X is an effective oral contraceptive and that drug Y is
an equally effective antidote to drug X.

Let a government add drug X to the staple food of its people and let it sell drug Y,
the antidote, at a price fixed at its discretion. By varying the price of drug Y, the size
of the population could be controlled, and at the same time the genetic quality would
improve, for only the philoprogenitive and reasonably successful would be willing to
pay for drug Y. The irresponsible and the feckless would automatically be sterilized.

Naturally, I would not expect a democratic government to have the foresight or
the courage to adopt such a scheme until famine was upon them, but it seems likely
that famine may not be far off.

Whether or not all would agree on the eugenic potential of such a measure, it would
certainly put an end to the problem of the deprived and unwanted child.

221
