HEREDITARY BLINDNESS

The Report of the Prevention of Blindness Committee

By J. MYLES BICKERTON, FRCs. (Eng,)

the findings of the Prevention of Blind
ness Committee of the Union of Counties Associations for the Blind dated April
1933. The recommendations of this Committee often lead to immediate action, and
they are read widely in the right quarters.
The members of this Committee consist of
persons who have to do with the care, cure,
or education of the blind, and who have only
the interests of the blind at heart. Its funds
are charitable.

The material about to follow consists of
extracts that I have selected.

The Report opens with some “ General
Observations.”” It says: ‘‘ A mass of data
has been collected by individual ophthalmologists, but the correlation of the data
is a matter for the genetic expert who has
already done a good deal of work onit.” .. .
“Tt is hoped that in the future Public
Health Departments may be willing to
undertake a certain amount of investigation
of cases which come before them in the course
of their work, with a view to submitting
them to scientific analysis by a genetic
expert.” ... “We can point to cases in
which the marriage of one man or woman
suffering from, say, retinitis pigmentosa,
has resulted in some forty cases of blindness
in subsequent generations. All will agree
that such a possibility is intolerable, but we
have no idea what proportion of the total
number of persons suffering from some such
disease has married with no ill result to their
descendants.”’

Proceeding then to discuss its new form
for the certification of blindness (Appendix
II) the Committee writes as follows: ‘ This
form of report will in certain cases indicate
the possibility of hereditary disease which
requires further investigation, but neither
the ophthalmologist nor the specialist in

efi ISTS will be very gratified by

heredity would be able to form an opinion as
to the hereditary nature of the disease
without a pedigree’’ (my italics). The
consultant, it goes on to say, would not‘ be
justified in giving advice against parenthood ‘‘unless his opinion on the disease qua
disease is reinforced by the evidence of a
pedigree ’’—which should contain all the
relevant information and apply, as strictly
as possible, the principles set out in Appendix
I to the Report. “ It is, however, possible

for an ophthalmologist, in consultation with

a genetic expert, to state for any individual
whose family history has been carefully
investigated, the degree of risk of blindness
in succeeding generations which parenthood
would involve.” Further: ‘“ Hereditary
blindness, in common with other inherited
tendencies, is inherited not only through
persons actually suffering from it, but also
(and in some diseases predominantly) through
persons who, though not themselves affected,
are nevertheless carriers of the taint.
Abstention from parenthood by blind persons who are the subject of hereditary eye
disease is not therefore of itself sufficient.
An intermarriage of blind persons should
always be approached with caution, and it
may be said that parenthood of persons
suffering from inheritable blindness is inadvisable unless the ophthalmologist is
prepared to say that the risk is so slight as
to be negligible.”’

Here follows a “ Classification of the main
hereditary eye diseases,’’ some causing blindness (a), and less serious ones causing grave
visual defects (0).

(2) Retinitis pigmentosa.

Hereditary optic atrophy (Leber).
Anophthalmos.

Familial macular degeneration.
Microphthalmos.

Oxycephaly.

167
168

(0) Albinism.
Aniridia.
Cataract (congenital and lamellar).
Coloboma of the iris.
Congenital night-blindness.
Ectopia lentis.
Familial degeneration of the cornea.
Glioma of the retina.
Buphthalmos (slight hereditary tendency).

Myopia is mentioned in a special paragraph. “‘ The fact that the lability to
myopia may be accentuated in the children
of myopic parents is admitted.”

Under the heading “ Transmission of
Disease : The View of the Eugenist ” appears
the following interesting statement :

‘“The transmission of disease may be considered purely from a eugenic point of view,
regardless of all other considerations whatsoever.
From this point of view, a eugenist would
probably urge that ascertained facts would
justify the following conclusions :

(a2) Any man or woman who has had aniridia,
congenital cataract, glioma of the retina,
hereditary opacity of the cornea or
ectopia lentis, microphthalmos, retinitis
pigmentosa, and of whom either parent
has been similarly affected, is likely to
transmit the defect and should abstain
from parenthood.

(b) Any normal parents who have more
than one child affected with any one of
the above-mentioned diseases, or with
buphthalmos or total colour blindness,
should have no more children, and such
children as they have should abstain from
parenthood—whether they themselves be
affected or not. Even if the parenthood
of such children does not lead at once to
the manifest reproduction of the disease,
it inevitably adds to the latent defect in
the population, which becomes manifest
when two people carrying such latent
defect marry and have children.

(c) If in all stocks in which Leber’s Disease
(hereditary optic atrophy) has occurred
more than once, the sisters of affected
males were to abstain from parenthood,
the disease would be almost exterminated,
except for sporadic cases of no genetic
significance. In general, there is no risk
to the descendants of men who are suffer
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

ing from Leber’s Disease; the cases in
which they transmit the disease are very
rare, but should be borne in mind, and
if one such case in a family has occurred,
all other affected members of that stock
should be regarded as liable to transmit.”’

The Committee sums up the present
position with five recommendations under
the heading “‘ General Conclusions.”’ Here it
points out that as a Committee it cannot
subscribe to all the limitations on parenthood
proposed by eugenists, if only for the reason
that some of the diseases do not cause
certifiable blindness.

However, they would like to see (I) more
complete statistics, and (2) better certification of the blind. (Both of these steps were
urged by me in letters to the Joint Committee of London Ophthalmological Hospitals, the Ministry of Health, and the Council
of British Ophthalmologists in 1930 and
1931, and in an article sent to the British
Medical Journal in 1931, printed in 1932.)
And they state their conclusions as follows:

From the point of view of the causation of
blindness, the most important inheritable
diseases which have to be considered are
retinitis pigmentosa and Leber’s Disease.

If a member of a stock in which there is
definitely inheritable disease causing blindness,
even if the disease is not manifest in his or her
case, marries, he or she should be strongly urged
to consult an ophthalmologist, who, with the
assistance of a pedigree, would advise as to
abstention from parenthood. This statement
need not apply to males in a stock carrying
Leber’s Disease, except in the very exceptional
families in which males have been known to
transmit.

Unless there is medical evidence to show that
the case does not fall within the hereditary class,
a blind person contemplating marriage should
seek the advice of a competent ophthalmologist
before marriage, in view of the complex nature
of the problem and the serious handicap imposed
upon the children of persons suffering from
inheritable eye disease. The ophthalmologist
will no doubt obtain a pedigree and, if necessary,
consult a genetic expert.

The Report is excellent and is a real
justification for eugenics; it is a very fair
résumé of the facts and the members of
the Committee are to be congratulated on
HEREDITARY BLINDNESS

making such a difficult subject clear and
understandable. It is quite possible that the
work of the Eugenics Society has hastened
and assisted the findings of this Committee.
It will be at once apparent that the work of
the Eugenics Society must continue; this
Report shows that only the most serious and
obvious dysgenic factors have been dealt with.

The Committee points out that it is
presenting the report of a Prevention of
Blindness Committee and not the report of a
Committee for the Prevention of Eye Disease,
and that it has considered the question from
the medical and not the social aspect. It
states that albinism, aniridia, congenital
cataracts, ectopia lentis, congenital degeneration of the cornea, glioma of the retina, and
buphthalmos, “‘ would not, in all probability,
cause certifiable blindness.”’

I should have preferred the statement,
“‘ might not, possibly, cause certifiable blindness.’ I have seen many persons certifiably
blind with these diseases. They are terrible
‘afflictions and always cause some degree of
blindness. I can imagine the acute anxiety
of any of the members of the Committee
viewing their offspring for the first time, if
any of these diseases were “in the family.”
In my opinion death is preferable to most of
them and their victims are terribly handicapped in the struggle of life, and find
themselves shut off from hosts of occupations and recreations. Employers employ
them with diffidence. The treatment of
glioma of the retina is mutilating, and the
death of a child with this disease is sometimes frightful. In 25 per cent. of cases the
disease is bilateral, and excision of both eyes
to save the life of the child may be necessary.

The remarks with regard to myopia are so
short that perhaps the seriousness of this
disease might not be appreciated. About 20
per cent. of our registered blind are blind
through myopia, which is a_ hereditary
condition not yet fully understood. In addition to the blind, immense numbers of
persons have very defective vision due to the
higher degrees of myopia. Many people
suffering therefrom do wish to avoid inflicting a similar handicap on their children
when the risk is explained to them. The man

169

in the street is eugenically minded and needs
no compulsion ; only the mentally deficient
require this.

Under the heading ‘‘ General Conclusions,”’
the Committee, as I have pointed out,
stresses the importance of securing more
complete statistics and better Certification
of the Blind. There are important genetical
reasons for these measures. For instance, it
is possible there are one million persons in
Great Britain who are blind in one eye. Now
a person who is blind in one eye from an
inherited defect might have, say, four children
each blind in one eye, or possibly four children two of whom are blind in both eyes.
We eugenists stress the fact that every child
has the right to be born fit in fit surroundings: we respect the rights of the unborn child.

From my work at four large hospitals in
the poorest parts of London I have been led
to the conclusion that only about one in five
of the blind are registered. The certification
of a blind person is nobody’s business. The
blind person cannot be responsible, for
obvious reasons, and he often objects to
certification ; the surgeons at the clinics are
often loath to mention the subject, in the
rare event of their thinking about it or
knowing the necessary standards and procedure. The Public Authorities in London
and many other places do not pay an
adequate fee for the examination, and often
no fee at all, as the work is not considered
important, apparently. The British Medical
Association has said it is not part of the
duty of the surgeons of voluntary hospitals
to undertake this work. Hence the Committee’s recommendations on this matter.

It is to be hoped that, as funds permit, the
excellent work of the Prevention of Blindness Committee will be extended. Indeed,
the Committee is working on parallel lines
with the Eugenics Society, and I consider
that the data which will be assembled when
its recommendations are adopted will have
considerable value. There is more public
sympathy for the blind than for the mentally
deficient. The Report, which deserves to be
widely read and studied, may be obtained
from The Secretary, Prevention of Blindness
Committee, 66 Victoria Street, London, S.W.1.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXV, No. 3.
