THE

EUGENICS REVIEW

THE RELATION OF EUGENICS TO
ECONOMICS

By C. J. HamItton, M.A.

Ir is often remarked that a prominent characteristic of modern
scientific study is its increasing specialisation. New sciences are
constantly claiming recognition, and within the old ones the
subject matter is more and more falling into separate departments, any one of which sufficiently absorbs the attention of a
student.

This tendency to specialisation is no less true of the Social
Sciences than of the older branches of study. The application
of scientific conceptions and methods to the explanation of
human activities is still a recent development, but since Mill’s
day the controversy between the advocates of synthesis
and analysis has resulted in the victory of the latter and a
variety of distinct Social Sciences, Economics, Politics, Ethics,
Psychology, Anthropology, Eugenics has arisen, each claiming to
investigate more or less in abstraction, a particular aspect of
social life.

No doubt such specialisation has been, and will continue to
be justified. The extent and complexity of the subject matter
has compelled students to divide the field. But, however purely
scientific may be the standpoint of such students, the ultimate
justification and end of science is the practical aid which it
affords to the achievement of well-being.
288 C. J. Hamilton, M.A.:

And herein lies the danger besetting every specialism.
For life is not a collection of distinct and isolated activities.
It isa whole of connected and mutually determining interests
and needs. The keynote of our practical effort at the present
time is the determination to view life as a whole; to organise our
activities in the interests of a Common Good; to assign their
true relative values to the competing ends which life presents.

If Science is to be the handmaid to Art, is to direct the
work of social organisation, it is imperatively necessary that we
should transcend the limitations imposed by specialisation in
order that the abstract conclusions of the different specialists
may be synthesised, arranged in their true perspective, and
assigned their respective values for practice.

It is a profound misfortune that the task of making such a
synthesis has been mainly left to those practical reformers and
politicians who have often lacked the scientific knowledge
necessary for the purpose. A true scientist rightly hesitates
to indulge in hasty speculation or prophecy. Realising the
abstract nature of his conclusions, he shelters himself from any
responsibility with regard to their application by speaking of
them as “‘ tendencies ” rather than laws.

But such caution may be carried to excess. It may even be
evidence of intellectual cowardice and of an unjustifiable divorce
between science and practice, which the scientist might himself
be best qualified to prevent. At the outset of this paper then, I
wish to warn my hearers against the dangers of specialisation, the
over-emphasis of conclusions drawn from a partial study of some
isolated aspect of social life, and to plead the urgent necessity of
a synthetic study of society by means of which specialist
conclusions may be co-ordinated and interpreted in rules of
conduct.

This need for synthesis is being increasingly manifested in
the demand for an ethical review of economic conclusions. The
older habit of regarding a purely economic deduction as the
equivalent of a command in the imperative mood is fast disappearing. The younger economists are constantly reviewing
economic institutions in the light of ethical standards. A few
years back Dr. Marshall stated that little or nothing remained to
THE RELATION OF EUGENICS TO ECONOMICS 289

be achieved by the economist in the direction of qualitative
analysis: that his future concern would be altogether with the
discovery of more accurate quantitative generalisations. This,
within the sphere of economic specialism, is true. But even
more true is it that the economist of the future will have to study
the social and ethical quality of those particular activities and
institutions which he studies.

But the ethical problem itself presents two aspects. It
raises the question as to what things are desirable in themselves
and the further question as to what are the best means to the
desired ends.

Among social reformers there is probably little real difference
regarding ultimate ends, but profound disagreement as to the
best means. In its most frequent manifestation this disagreement has turned upon the extent to which economic conditions
may be improved by leaving individuals free to act as they think
best, free also to experience the results of their own misfortunes
or defects, or, the extent to which by forcibly interfering with
individual freedom an improvement of environment and condition
may be secured. The former opinion is supported by those who
emphasize the dependence of good conditions upon goodness of
character, and believe that character is, in the main, moulded by
leaving individuals to experience the fruits of their own conduct.
Thus disciplined, it is thought, the individual will be competent
to reform his environment to the best purpose.

The latter opinion rather lays stress on the dependence of
character upon environment and upon the impotence of the
individual to improve that environment, unless by the aid of farreaching changes in the existing economic and political structure,
to be effected by Corporate intervention.

Now it will be noticed that in both these schools of thought
the individual is regarded {as modified by external influences.
The one relies on the invigorating effect of leaving people to face
and surmount the evils of life. The other believes that a fitting
environment will alone produce the desired qualities in the
individual.

It is here that the modern biologist enters into the controversy and propounds a theory that is in opposition to both
290 C. J. Hamilton, M.A.:

alike. Improvement, he argues, in the individual does not come
primarily from the reaction of external circumstances. It depends
upon the innate qualities which are inherited from the parents.
To ask whether life may be improved mainly by relying upon
individual effort or by State interference thus leaves out of
account the most important consideration of all, namely, that the
general level of capacity can only be raised by the improvement
of inherited characteristics.

The application of biological conceptions to economic and
political life, is, of course, not new. Spencer indeed lays the
foundation of his politics in biology. From hedonic motives the
organism, he taught, is constantly striving to adapt itself to
environment. This effort leads to the development of socially
useful qualities in the individual, which are strengthened in the
using, and transmitted in their heightened form to the next
generation. Spencer’s individualism is chiefly the result of his
desire to leave people free to adapt themselves. Forcibly to
change environment by means other than the natural process of
adaptation, is only to cause a greater estrangement between that
environment and the organism, and to prevent the appearance in
the individual of those desirable qualities which are strengthened
by individual activity.

The fundamental difference between the new biology and
the old arises from the modern rejection of the transmission of
acquired characteristics. Individuals differ primarily in respect
of mental and physical qualities on account of differences
inherent in the germs from which they spring. The quality of
these germs is not affected broadly speaking, by their environment. The only true method therefore by which the general
level of these qualities can be permanently improved is to secure
the perpetuation of the human race by the selection of the fit and
by eliminating the unfit. The Mendelian discovery is equally
important, although in a secondary sense, for by its application
we can, having analysed human qualities into their biological
elements, fix them by the process of selection in the course of
a few generations.

The Science of Eugenics is concerned with the application
of these biological ideas to the improvement of the human race.
THE RELATION OF EUGENICS TO ECONOMICS 291

We have to ask what is the bearing of this new science upon
Economics, or rather upon that branch of Economics, called
Economic Politics, which is devoted to the practical amelioration
of economic conditions.

It should be clearly understood that the Science of Eugenics
does not include within its scope the determination of the
ultimate end or goal of human activity.

That is an Ethical problem. As Professor Hobhouse has
recently said, the application of Eugenics must be directed by a
social philosophy to which belongs the task of defining the end
to be sought. Without entering into a discussion as to the
nature of good, we shall probably at least agree, that it is much
wider in its nature than the immediate object which Eugenists
set before themselves, namely, the improvement of the physical
and mental qualities of the community. It is necessary therefore
to ask at the outset, whether this larger end is compatible with
the Eugenic method. There are some at least who argue that
any attempt to control the free activity of the individual in
matters of breeding must involve a greater evil than any good
that may result. The picture of society organised as a studfarm arouses disgust. It is sometimes feared that the Eugenic
programme would involve the destruction of normal family life
and the mutual affection upon which it is based. To favour the
‘successful types”’ it may be argued, would result in the evolution of hard, unlovely characters. To some the continuance of
the poor and weakly is even approved as a necessary condition
for the expression of the nobler qualities of mercy and pity. It
seems a sufficient answer to objections of this kind to point out
that the Eugenic proposals do not contemplate the conversion
of society into a stud-farm, neither are they likely to result in
suppressing those forms of social life necessary to the manifestation of love and pity. The young and the old at any rate will
remain. Moreover, as regards the poor and inefficient we are all
as a matter of fact striving in one way or other to prevent their
continuance. It would be strangely illogical to desire at the same
time that we should be unsuccessful.

If it be maintained that on grounds of justice we have no
right tointerfere with the individual liberty of defectives such as the
292 C. J. Hamilton, M.A. :

feeble-minded or the chronic inebriate, then on the same ground
we should not interfere with the thief or the murderer. The
only difference is that we restrain the latter in the interest of the
present generation, the former in the interest ofthe next. It is
a pity that some enthusiasts give needless ground for such
fears when using phrases about, ‘‘ compelling if need be healthy
women to have children.”’

While I think there is no ground for believing that there is
any necessary opposition between the Eugenic method and the
true End of Social Life, it may be at once admitted that the
application of Eugenic ideas is still in a speculative and often in
an uncritical stage. Such individual speculations and suggestions
are often hasty and untenable. They show an ignorance regarding the psychology of the individual and the economic organisation of society. Often they assume a finality in the conclusions
of biology which leading biologists would be the first to reject.
But such defects are the inevitable consequences of applying
new and important conceptions to a sphere in which they have
not yet been tested or received.

It is the more necessary that social students should, in a
scientific spirit, examine the relation of these new ideas to the
science of social organisation, the more so if one is convinced, as
I am, of the extreme importance of wisely applying them.

Eugenic methods fall into two divisions; (a) the direct,
and (6) the indirect.

The direct methods are mainly negative in character, that
is, they aim at the prevention of propagation among certain
classes of marked defectives, the defects being ascertainably
hereditary in character. With our present knowledge such
methods are usually advocated only in the case of the feebleminded and less frequently in the lowest class of paupers,
habitual inebriates, and syphilytic patients. Positive direct
methods aim at the encouragement of propagation among the
admittedly fit, as for example, in the proposal of Dr. McDougall,
to differentiate the salaries of the higher Civil Servants according
to the size of their families.

Since the application of the direct method depends upon
the possibility of defining the class of fit or unfit and showing
THE RELATION OF EUGENICS TO ECONOMICS 293

that their condition is due to hereditary causes, the same question
has to be discussed as is raised in considering the indirect
method, namely, whether we possess the requisite knowledge
of individuals and of the laws of heredity to make such definition
possible. The direct application of Eugenic method is, however, more drastic and is therefore to be used with the greater
caution.

The indirect method consists in favouring such forms of
social organisation as will result in the improvement of the
general standard of physical and mental capacity other than by
direct methods.

It is mainly the application of this latter method that I
want further to discuss.

The subject falls into three divisions :

(a) What is to be the criterion of “‘ fitness ’’ ?

(0) How far does the existing Economic system enable us to
apply such criterion ?

(c) How may survival of the “ fit’ be better secured.

A. The criterion of ‘‘ Fitness.”’

In discussing this subject we may easily become involved in
endless difficulties. Ultimately “fitness ’’ implies the possession
of those qualities compatible with or necessary for the maintenance of a proper society. Since we cannot pretend to foresee
the end of social progress, neither can we foresee the character of
perfect men. It is profitless, therefore, to discuss the ultimate
implications of the term “ fit.”

We must equally beware of assuming that those qualities,
and only those qualities, are marks of fitness which enable
persons to flourish in existing society. Men often live upon the
folly, or the wickedness, or the passing necessity of their fellows.
Not a few are Socialists primarily because a system of competitive industry appears to put a premium upon the qualities of
selfishness and love of material wealth.

There is, nevertheless, a general agreement regarding the
necessity in any form of society for the presence of certain
qualities—good health, a well-developed physique, energy, and
mental power. With these as a basis the “social virtues ” can
be acquired. But these are themselves not simple qualities.
294 C. J. Hamilton, M.A.:

‘‘ Effective mental ability is largely a matter of temperament
and this in turn is quite possibly dependent upon the various
secretions produced by the different tissues of the body.

Though there is no doubt that mental ability is inherited, what
it is that is transmitted is at present uncertain,’’ says Professor
Punnett.

For the purpose of the indirect Eugenic method, what is
needed is a general external index of Eugenic worth, such,
that by favouring for purposes of propagation those in whom
the desirable qualities are present in preference to those in
whom they are absent, we may raise the general quality of the
community. Does such an index exist in our present state
of knowledge? It must be admitted, I think, that it does
not exist in sufficient degree of accuracy to make possible
the application of the direct negative method—that is the
direct prohibition of propagation in specific individuals apart
from the few cases already admitted. But it may exist sufficiently accurately to enable us to define the broad social groups
from whom it is desirable that the majority of our children
should be born.

Admitting that there are many other qualities of worth besides
those of physical and mental vigour, and even admitting further
that these are not simple qualities, it seems to me defensible to
accept these qualities for the purposes of our index, if we may
assume that the other undefined desirable qualities are either less
important than these or are not possessed in inverse proportion
to them. General experience affords no evidence that this last is
the case.

If we can obtain an external index of the presence or absence
of these qualities we may provisionally accept it.

It is comparatively easy to maintain that the occupants of
the more important administrative posts, the recipients of the
chief scientific and artistic honours, etc., are more than usually
endowed with eugenic qualities. Can it be maintained that the
poorer classes are less than normally so endowed or, further, tht
an economic or money income measure of eugenic value can be
accepted as valid throughout the range of society ?

A modern doctrine of economic distribution lends some
THE RELATION OF EUGENICS TO ECONOMICS 295

support, at least on the surface, to this theory. It is said that
competition fends to make economic wages and salaries proportional to efficiency. Those who subsist on rent and interest are
of course excluded, as persons, from this theory, although it might
with some plausibility be argued that under modern social conditions it requires considerable powers to retain the possession of
‘‘ unearned ” income in face of temptations to foolish speculation
or extravagance. In examining the Eugenic application of this
theory of remuneration it is important to consider two points:
(1) What is the “efficiency” referred to? Is it the same as
eugenic quality? (2) How far is the competition, which is presupposed, really present? On the first point it is obvious that
economic efficiency is not in its outward form a simple quality.
The efficiency of the sign-painter 1s different in kind from the
efficiency of the navvy. Further the economist has no mode of
comparing the relative efficiencies of different kinds except in
terms of money, and this begs the question as to whether
difference of money-income measures difference of efficiency.
Again the remuneration of different kinds of efficiency depends
on the relative demand for and supply of that particular form of
capacity. It is only if we can assume the potential development
of some common elements in efficiency, elements present in our
definition of eugenic “fitness,” into any one of a number of
alternative forms according as the economic motive dictates, that
we could accept the economic efficiency as measured by money
income as an index of eugenic value.

In a broad view I believe this assumption to be true. It
receives a measure of support from an investigation made by
Professor Moore into the relation of American wages and the
distribution of efficiency independently determined. (Ec. Journal,
Vol. 17, p. 571.) He accepts Professor Marshall’s theorem that
‘what makes one occupation higher than another, what makes
the workers of one town or country more efficient than those of
another, is chiefly a superiority in general sagacity and energy
which is not specialised in any one trade.’’ He then accepts
Professor Pearson’s theory that the distribution of mental and
moral qualities in men follows the normal or Gaussian curve.
By reference to the United States wages statistics in all manu296 C. J. Hamilton, M.A.:

factures he shows that the actual curve of wage distribution
conforms approximately to the Gaussian curve.

The wages of those employed in manufacture would thus seem
to be a fair index of the extent to which “ general sagacity and
energy ” are present.

But the wage-earners employed in manufacture are in an
environment in which competition is fairly effective and in which
we should expect to find that degree of mobility which will result
in individual earnings being proportional to efficiency. Even
within this group economic friction is considerable. Lack of
education and industrial training, together with the evil influences
of home surroundings, prevent many at the lower end of the
scale from attaining the position to which their natural powers
entitle them. From this point of view improvement in environment and increased equality of opportunity are essential if the
economic index of eugenic quality is to be rendered accurate.

To what extent, however, is the manual wage-earning group
continuous with the clerical group and with the organising,
directing and professional group, as regards the free mobility of
individuals between them ?

The other day Mr. Andrew Carnegie was asked what chance
an able employee had in modern industry of rising to the
employer class. He answered that some day the employer
would be ill. He would send for his employee. Perhaps the
employee would meet his master’s daughter. That would be his
chance. The story suggests that able men in the subordinate
ranks can not rely upon ability alone to advance them in the
economic scale beyond the boundaries of their own group.

The chief avenue to advancement open to the wage-earning
class used to be through the ranks of the retail shop-keeper or
small employer. The eagerness with which working-class people
adventure their savings in small shops is partly due to the greater
freedom of such a life, partly to the opportunity it affords to social
ambition. With the decay of the small shopkeeper through the
growth of department stores, and with the decline in small scale
industry, these opportunities may be reduced. But it seems
probable that in modern large scale industry, with the variety of
economic posts included within each industrial unit, the
THE RELATION OF EUGENICS TO ECONOMICS 297

opportunity to rise is not less than before but greater. For
mobility within the unit is probably greater than between
different units and the capable individual is enabled to rise without being compelled to bear the heavier risks of business success
or failure. This was the opinion of Viscount Goschen, who,
when Chancellor of the Exchequer, made some interesting
investigations into the growth of income which showed that
moderate incomes were increasing at a faster rate than large
incomes. Thus, from 1877 to 1886 the increase of incomes
between {150 and £500 was 21°4 per cent. This is a much
greater increase than can be accounted for by natural increase of
population within the class, and points to a considerable flow
from the lower economic grades to the higher. A not inconsiderable effect in the promotion of inter-class mobility results from
the method of recruiting elementary school teachers. They are
largely obtained from the children of working-class parents.
They need show little more than the requisite ability and
inclination, since the chief expenses of education and even of
maintenance are disbursed by the State. We may conclude then
that there is, mainly through the rising generation, a very
considerable degree of mobility between the different economic
groups, and that the determining factor in the movement is
largely the possession of ‘‘ energy and sagacity.”

Friction, nevertheless, probably causes the lower grades of
one social group to be of considerably lower ability than the
higher grades of the group next below it. But social classes are
not coincident with economic classes as determined by income.
The latter index is likely to be considerably more accurate except
for the upper exterior than the former.

It is not sufficient, however, to show that society is roughly
graded according to economic ability and that this appears to
coincide with fair accuracy with Eugenically desirable qualities.
It must also be shown that these qualities are primarily of
an hereditary character and not simply due to differences of

environment.
In our present state of knowledge it is, it seems o me,

impossible accurately to determine the extent to which the
qualities which ensure success are due to hereditary equality
298 C. J. Hamilton, M.A.:

or to environment. As Professer Pigou has said ‘‘the original
properties of the next generation are determined by the nature
of the germ cells that produce them, but the goodness to which
the social reformer looks is the goodness of concrete men
and women, and not of original properties. In the formation
of these concrete persons original properties do indeed play a
part, but not a predominant part.” ‘‘ The current environment
actually enjoyed by a living being co-operates with his original
properties to form the sum of his qualities.”

All that we are justified in affirming is that in the upward
and downward flow, which is constantly re-grading society,
economically, inherited quality, plays an important part. Galton
sums up the case when he says, ‘“‘ Enough is already known to
those who have studied the question to leave no doubt in their
minds about the general results, but not enough is quantitatively
known to justify legislation or other action except in extreme
cases.”

It may be taken as established, therefore, but in an
approximate and rough degree only, that the economic index of
money income corresponds to innate and eugenically desirable
qualities.

B. Eugenic Grading : how far it may be improved.

Passing now to my second chief point, I wish to maintain
that it is desirable that Society should be graded with increasing
accuracy according to eugenic quality, and that this will be
best effected for practical purposes by seeking to make the
economic index as correct as possible. This leads to the
question, how far do present economic and social tendencies
make for such a result.

In view of the fact that the birth-rate is highest among the
poorer sections of the community and that at present they are
contributing more than in proportion to the future population, it
might perhaps be argued that it would be Eugenic to reduce all
to a perfect equality of economic condition. For then all classes
would probably contribute nearly equally to the population, and
the somewhat higher death rate of the least fit would result
possibly in some slight increase in the general level of Eugenic
quality. But, apart from the other evil results that would
THE RELATION OF EUGENICS TO ECONOMICS 299

probably follow from such artificial equality, it would prevent
one of the most effective means of applying the direct Eugenic
method, namely, by putting under control those members of the
community who fall below an assigned economic standard; in
other words by making the poor law an Eugenic agent.

To improve the accuracy of the Eugenic index it is necessary
that all members of the community should be dependent for
their economic position on their own efforts and that by competition they should find their proper level according to their
‘‘energy and sagacity.” It should be our aim, therefore, to make
as great as possible the economic mobility of individuals, and for
this purpose each should be secured in the greatest possible
degree in such necessary preparation for economic life as will
give full opportunity for the exercise of natural ability. Incidentally it should not be forgotten that capacity to overcome
obstacles is a desirable form of natural ability.

What are the chief obstacles to such economic grading
presented in our present society? I can only here mention a
few instances by way of example.

I. Restrictions upon free competition.

I do not here refer to such legislation as the Factory Acts,
or to the compulsory Eight Hours Act in Mines. The purpose
of these Acts is to prevent private enterprise from assuming
forms which are destructive of normal health and strength.
They do not prevent economic grading according to ability for
they do not prevent each individual from doing his best and
receiving a proportional reward.

Again, I do not include such limitation to competition as is.
secured by the Trades Boards Act. Such interference is definitely
Kugenic, provided the necessary further steps are taken. For it
prevents those unable to earn a minimum wage from earning at
all and thus helps to mark off the class for whom the direct
method is appropriate.

But all interference is bad which prevents a man from having
the freedom to do his best and to be graded according to
capacity. Trade Union action is sometimes of this kind.
State employment often tends to be of this character. There is,
however, little effective interference of this kind outside the
300 C. J. Hamilton, M.A.:

sphere of the lowest class, subsidised by an indiscriminate poor
law. This suggests the second anti-Eugenic influence.

II. The transference of burdens from the individual to the
Community.

Clearly by making goods of individual consumption a common charge, we tend towards relieving such individual from the
necessary exertion to provide for himself and, if the process is
carried to extremes, it does away with the economic index
altogether. But the argument must not be pressed too far.
Wants are elastic. If relieved from the necessity of supplying
some wants a man will gradually develop others that appear
equally urgent. The efforts to supply them will thus involve the
expenditure of energy probably as great as before. Moreover, as
society is now constituted, it is desirable that some charges, e.g.,
Education, should be a common charge in so far as without such
method of provision, a considerable number of persons would
be prevented from making the best use of their natural capacity.

The objection to such community of provision in its extreme
form implies that low-grade population is thus enabled to live and
propagate that would otherwise die out or be forced within the
sphere of direct Eugenic control. The answer to this objection
is that to rely upon natural selection of this sort is impossible in
a civilised community and that the lowest class may still be
segregated by raising the minimum demands so as to be effective
notwithstanding a certain measure of collective provision.

III. The absence of equality of opportunity.

So long as private family life and differences of family
income continue, those of the rising generation who spring from
homes where the influences are good and where the parents can
give their children ‘‘a start in life,” will have a better opportunity than the rest. I do not wish to press the idea of equal
opportunity beyond such limits as are implied in securing a
sufficiency of the necessaries for physical health and strength to
every growing member of the community, together with facilities
for obtaining such general and special education as can be
profitably acquired, having regard to the ability of the learner.
It used to be thought that in the interests of parental responsibility children should only be relieved when the parents had
THE RELATION OF EUGENICS TO ECONOMICS 301

reached such stage of destitution as led them to seek aid from
the poor law. Some biologists would seem to favour a rigorous
adoption of this method for two reasons. (1) The poorest
classes, and so far as the economic index is accurate the least
naturally capable, if deprived of assistance, will either cease to
propagate, or, owing to the ravages of ill-health, will not survive.
Those among the very poor who have capacity will be stimulated
to use it, and so rise above the need for relief. (2) Since
environment. does not affect the germ, poverty will not weaken
the natural powers of the stock.

In opposition to this theory I should maintain (1) that an
administration of relief so vigorous as effectively to check the
survival of the unfit 1s impossible under modern social conditions.
If the state is harsh, private charity is lax and abundant.

(2) That in thickly populated countries to leave the poorest
classes unaided makes eugenic selection among them impossible,
since the evil effects of environment are so serious that they
effectively hamper the majority of those who possess even a fair
fheasure of natural capacity. They therefore fail to attain to
positions in which their powers are of use.

(3) That failing to achieve the desired eugenic purpose,
such a policy causes much unnecessary suffering and perpetuates
a class that is a burden upon the community.

If this argument is sound it seems to follow that other
means of enforcing responsibility must be found. That to
improve the economic and eugenio grading of society our social
institutions must afford to individuals reasonable economic
security against the risks of life. That, given a fair opportunity
to all, we must replace natural selection by social selection by
preventing those who fail from adding to the population. To
make this an effective instrument of progress we must make the

am of demands upon the individual an increasing, not a diminishing quantity. Life must become more, not less strenuous.
equality of opportunity is likely to have this result. This leads
y the last point upon which I would touch.
PC. Howto secure a better Eugenic quality inour population.
‘- The outstanding feature of existing society upon which

mg

Mlogists lay stress is the extent to which the population is

    
  
302 C. J. Hamilton, M.A.:

recruited from the poorer sections of the community. As Mr.
Heron has said, “ the wives in the district of least prosperity and
culture have the largest families and the morally and socially
lowest class in the community are reproducing themselves with
the greatest rapidity.’’ Moreover, the intensity of the relatidn
between undesirable social conditions and a high birth rate has
almost doubled in fifty years. Admitting that the economic.
index is but a rough measure of eugenic quality, still the fact is
extremely serious. We cannot shield ourselves from responsi
bility behind our ignorance of the exact distribution of eugenic
quality among the economic classes, for we do know enough to
give a real and serious import to Mr. Heron’s figures. Professor
Hobhouse, in a recent article, argues that we need not be
disturbed by this phenomenon of class reproduction since there
are no signs of degeneration, despite the fact that natural
selection has been suspended long enough to have produced such
result if we were really breeding from inferior stocks. Mr.
Balfour in his address to the Prevention of Destitution Congress
questioned the biologist’s argument on the ground that, if the
poor were the unfit and the successful the fit, we should long ago
have had a segregation of efficiency among the upper and social
classes.

To the former objection I would answer (1) that the deterioration would not necessarily show itself in any easily measurable form
such as physical defect or decreased longevity counteracting the
influences of better hygiene; (2) that evenif thereisa mean standard
of efficiency to which all classes tend to return, we may lower this
mean standard by selecting from inferior stocks, while we should in
fact aim at raising the mean standard. But Professor Hobhouse
relies mainly for comfort upon the new theory of mutation,
arguing that mutations of a useful kind may occur in any grade
of society, thus giving rise to new and desirable stocks. It is,
therefore, primarily important to preserve an environment of a
favourable character to welcome the mutations where they may
occur. This seems to me merely trusting to luck, while, mutations apart, if mental ability is really hereditary then clearly we
shall decrease the general ability by breeding from the least able.

Mr. Balfour’s question is an attempted reductio ad absurdum.
THE RELATION OF EUGENICS TO ECONOMICS 303

But is it so certain that we have not something approaching to
segregation of higher grades of ability in the middle and upper
classes? The considerable measure of family stability under the
conditions of modern competition suggests that the idea is not
wholly absurd. No doubt fairly able persons are constantly
falling considerably in the social scale through misfortune or
vice and thus leavening the lower grades. Is it certain that at
these lower levels there is not a fairly permanent body of persons
having a low level of ability, a class that might be called an
hereditary pauper class ?

While readily admitting that we are here in a region where
investigation is badly needed for the purpose of throwing fresh
light, I still think there is strong prima facie ground for
uneasiness. .

But, admitting the reality of the evil, the important questions
for social politics are to what cause is it due and how may the
evil be remedied ?

Such questions cannot be attacked at the end of a paper,
but I should like to refer to a few points. Some Eugenists have
recently propounded the theory which may almost be stated
as involving an essential opposition between the attempt to
improve Environment and the attempt to improve Eugenic
quality. In a recent most interesting essay Mr. and Mrs.
Whetham maintain this thesis, although in a manner intentionally one-sided, and intended as ‘‘ a suggestive and challenging
statement.” Remembering this, I would still argue that the
opposition is not a true one, in the sense that it does not present
a true alternative between two causes of social development.

They say ‘‘ as long as, or whenever, man has been an unconscious, natural, freely breeding animal, Nature has provided a sure
method of attaining her end, the survival of the fittest, and man
has found himself endowed progressively with the necessary
means of keeping pace with her movements, and has been able
to profit by every increase she has affected in his aptitudes and
intelligence.”

But surely it is not Nature’s changes that are of chief importance in respect of the demands made upon human aptitude. It

is the changes that occur in human ideals, in the nature and
2
304 C. J. Hamilton, M.A.:

complexity of human wants and interests. But these are themselves dependent on the change and improvement of environment
by which man is set free from the pressure of the primary wants.
The very medium in which alone the higher work of selection
can be achieved is a medium in which civilisation, the social
organisation necessary to overcome primitive nature, exists.
Improved environment is not thus opposed but complementary
to improved natural quality in man. And one condition of improved environment is a general restriction of the population so
as to bring members within the capacity for economic production
at a high level of individual consumption. Apart from complete
state control of all child-bearing or child-survival, this restriction
must be attained by voluntary limitation. Thus the present
tendency towards a reduced birth-rate is a condition of progress.

It may at once be admitted that, if, as has been argued, the
economic index is a rough measure of eugenic worth, it is not
desirable that this restraint should be chiefly imposed by the
abler classes. How can we redistribute the proportions in which
the social classes contribute to the next generation? Not by
abstention from an enforcement by legislation of improved education and hygiene among the poor, but by further educating the
poor, compelling a good environment, and raising the sum of
economic demands upon the individual. Broadly speaking, it is
in those classes in which an effective home life exists that the
tendency to a lower birth-rate is seen. Compelsuch a minimum
standard of housing, and of family expenditure, as will make a
decent home life the effective test of capacity for self-maintenance
and there will be strong motive towards limitation of families and
an indication of those who are proper subjects for eugenic control.

That the cost of such social legislation, ¢.g., as is implied in
the maintenance and control of the unfit, will seriously limit the
birth-rate among the well-to-do classes, supposing the cost to fall
solely on them, I do not believe.

To some small extent it may be operative. But the effective
force that is limiting the size of families among the middle
classes is the rapid growth in the average standard of comfort
and enjoyment, especially in the increasing degree to which it is
shared by women. This force works to a large extent indepenTHE RELATION OF EUGENICS TO ECONOMICS 305

dently of any absolute size of income since the standard of
comforts desired expands at as fast a rate as income.

The economic motive may be used to reverse the effect of
this influence on the birth-rate to some small extent. We might
institute a tax on bachelors or exempt from the payment of
income tax those under thirty years of age who are living on
earned income. But an effective appeal on a large scale would
involve the expenditure of larger sums than the national exchequer
could bear.

The reform must come through a modification in moral and
social ideas. Into this subject it is no part of my purpose to
enter.

May I conclude with a quotation from the article by Mr.
and Mrs. Whetham, which I regard as summing up from the
Eugenic standpoint the fundamental truth that, if society is to
advance, it is by steadily replacing Natural Selection, at best
blind, cruel, and imperfect, by Social Selection. ‘‘ If, accepting
the burden of moulding the destinies of the race, we relieve
Nature of her office of discrimination between the fit and the
unfit, if we undertake the protection of the weaker members of
the Community, if we assume a corporate reponsibility for the
existence of all sorts and conditions of men, then, unless we are
prepared to cast away the labours of our forefathers and to vanish
with the empires of the past, we must accept the office of deciding
who are the persons whose moral and intellectual worth make it
right that they and their descendants should be placed in a
position of pre-eminence in our midst”; or, rather, as I would
add, be placed in a position of free and independent citizens as
opposed to those to whom parenthood is refused.
