STERILIZATION IN SWITZERLAND
Professor Hans Maier’s Address at the Royal College of Surgeons

T the Royal College of Surgeons,

London, on September 28th, Professor

Hans Maier, director of the Psychiatric

Clinic of the University of Ziirich, read a

paper on the practical experience of steriliza
tion in Switzerland over the past fifty years.

Sir Humphry Rolleston, President of the
Eugenics Society, was in the chair.

August Forel, who became director of the
Zurich Mental Hospital (Biirghdlzli) fifty years
ago, instituted out-patient clinics for early
treatment; and he included, said Professor
Maier, prevention of procreation among the
prophylactic measures applied to patients
with hereditary disorders. Interruption of
pregnancy and sterilization formed part of
the normal armoury in Swiss psychiatry,
both among private practitioners and in
public hospitals ; but in the Ziirich area the
machinery for collaboration between those
concerned (namely—the patient, his family,
the general practitioner, the communal
authority with its social workers, the hospital, and the recognized specialists) was
most completely developed, and here, too,
were performed the largest number of operations in proportion to the size of the population. During the past four years, in this area
of 400,000 inhabitants, there had been 500
requests for interruption of pregnancy alone.

The procedure which had been gradually
evolved and now obtained was as follows:
when the surgeon or the surgical clinic
received a request for operation, the patient
was sent forward for examination to the
appropriate special clinic (e.g. the ear hospital, the tuberculosis centre, or the mental
hospital) ; and, when the case was not
primarily mental, it was sent also to the
psychiatric clinic to discover whether sterilization was likely to be contra-indicated on
psychiatric grounds. With few exceptions
interruption of pregnancy and sterilization
were carried out simultaneously, though
frequently in ‘‘constitutional’’ cases the
husband was examined and sterilized before

abortion was authorized. The opinion of each
specialist was furnished in writing to the
surgeon before the operation, and the documents were preserved by him for a given
period. It was noteworthy, especially in
view of the fact that the laws respecting
damage to the integrity of the person and the
guardianship of minors conformed broadly
to those obtaining in Western Europe,
that no special legislative enactments had
been sought ; nevertheless this procedure had
proved a sufficient safeguard to both sides,
the courts having held the term “ therapeutic grounds ”’ to cover the protection (by
prophylaxis) of unborn children, and indeed
racial hygiene in the widest sense of the
words.

Dr. Maier brought out two further points
of great importance. First, that marriage
without procreation, thus without parental
and added economic responsibilities, was
frequently held to have such therapeutic
value as to warrant sterilization of mental
patients, quite apart from the eugenic
motive. Secondly, that though eugenic considerations were accepted as valid in a
common-sense way, in practice they rarely
stood alone, and additional grounds for
sterilization or other operative interference
were found to be present in almost all cases.

Sterilization of the feeble-minded was
rendered relatively easy in Switzerland
owing to the high civil and legal ideals
obtaining in that country. Those unable by
reason of their mental condition or antisocial tendencies to assume the full personal
and parental responsibilities of the married
state could not get a licence in the civil
courts; furthermore, the Communes were
unwilling to contemplate the financial burden
of caring for illegitimate children. It followed that insane and feeble-minded persons
who were likely to procreate had to be
retained in institutions, except when they had
undergone sterilization. In many cases life in
the community was regarded as “ healthier,”’

173

Cc
174 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

and the recommendation for sterilization disorders with which they were concerned.
then went forward on therapeutic grounds. It was true that “ carriers’’ could present
It was interesting to learn that the Burg- themselves for operation, but at present such
hélzliinstitution had almost asmany patients cases came mostly from highly intelligent
at a time boarded out on licence as in families, so that some loss had to be set
hospital. against the gain. It would be by the spread
In replying to questions and discussion, of such demands among those who were
Professor Maier stated that differences in relatively ill-endowed by nature that dispractice existed between the various Cantons. cernible eugenic results could be anticipated.
Nevertheless, the line of demarcation of This brief summary can give only the most
feeble-mindedness was much the same inadequate indication of the importance of
throughout the country, and comparable Professor Hans Maier’s paper for students of
with that which was adopted in South Ger- the problems that formed its subject. For
many. Great care was taken in Ziirich not an accurate picture of the Swiss experience
to operate on patients under twenty, inorder of sterilization, and surveys of the social
to ensure correct differentiation between effects of this measure as well as its effects
cases of late development and those of true on the patients themselves, the complete
defect. As to the eugenic results, Professor paper must be consulted.*
Maier pointed out that such conservative
work as had up to the present been carried
out could not be expected to do more than * Professor Maier’s paper will be published in full in
prevent an increase in the prevalence of the our next issue.

  

 

PSYCHOLOGY of SEX

THE BIOLOGY OF SEX-——THE SEXUAL IMPULSE IN YOUTH—SEXUAL DEVIATION
—THE EROTIC SYMBOLISMS—HOMOSEXUALITY—MARRIAGE—THE ART OF LOVE

A MANUAL FOR STUDENTS
By

HAVELOCK ELLIS

Demy 8vo. Price 12s. 6d. net

The Times Literary Supplement: ‘“‘ It is to be hoped that the general reader will take this opportunity
under Dr. Ellis’s masterly guidance to acquaint himself with the workings of that impulse described by
Rank as ‘ the last emotional resource which the exaggerated rationalization of our education has left us.’ ”’
BERTRAND RUSSELL, in the New Statesman ; ‘“‘ Few books on the subject of sex can be so confidently
recommended to all and sundry as this truly admirable volume. . . . Its views on marriage are sane,
and even somewhat conservative. But what above all recommends the book is its universal charity,
resulting from the attempt at an understanding at once sympathetic and scientific.”’

H. J. MassincuaM, in the Sunday Times : ‘‘ A study of fundamentals by the wisest English thinker of
the twentieth century. . . . A light-bringer for the average man and woman whose ignorance of their
own psycho-physical processes is scarcely less dense to-day than it was in the days when the primary
constituents of being fell under an implacable taboo.”

The Practitioner : ‘‘ An authoritative work, moderate in tone, extremely well written, and fully up to
date from a scientific point of view.”

    
     
     
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
 

Prospectus on application.

WILLIAM HEINEMANN (MEDICAL BOOKS) LTD
99 GREAT RUSSELL STREET, LONDON, W.C.z

 
     

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXV, No. 3.
