THE

EUGENICS REVIEW

THE INFLUENCE OF RACIAL ADMIXTURE
| IN EGYPT.

By G. Ettiot Smitn, M.A., M.D., Ch.M., F.R.C.P., F.R.S.,
Professor of Anatomy in the University of Manchester.

I SUPPOSE it is inevitable in these days that one trained in
biological ways of thought should approach the problems of
anthropology with the idea of evolution as his guiding principle’; but the conviction must be reached sooner or later, by
everyone who conscientiously and with an open mind seeks to
answer most of the questions relating to man’s history and
achievements—certainly the chapters in that history which come
within the scope of the last sixty centuries—-that evolution yields
a surprisingly small contribution to the explanation of the
difficulties which present themselves. Most of the factors that
call for investigation concerning the history of man and his
works are unquestionably the direct effects of migrations and
the intermingling of races and cultures.

But I would not have you misunderstand my meaning.
The forces of evolution to-day are at least as potent to influence human structure and capabilities.as they were in the
past to bring an ape to man’s estate. The effects of selection
—not only the variety which Darwin qualified by the term
‘* sexual,’’ but also what we have learned to call ‘‘ organic ”’
and ‘‘social’’ selection—are certainly emphasised by the
heightened powers of discrimination which the intelligence and
the fashions of civilised man create.

But one of the effects of the contact of races of different
origins and traditions—each of which in its own particular way

1Some of the opening paragraphs of this report are taken from my address
to the Anthropological Section of the British Association (Dundee, 1912, Report,

pp. 576 and 577).
164 EUGENICS REVIEW.

and in the seclusion of its own domain had successfully overcome the difficulties of existence, and incidentally become more
or less specialised in structure and ability, as the result of thus
meeting and overcoming its own special difficulties—was the
benefitting of the whole community of intermingled races by the
knowledge and experience acquired by each race individually.
The pressure of maintaining the struggle for existence was
thus enormously lightened and the influence of such factors
correspondingly lessened. The apparent inhibition of some
of the potentialities of the force of evolution among civilised men
is not to be regarded as a token of its dwindling efficacy, but
rather as an effect of the superior knowledge and experience of
mankind enabling him to shield himself against those destructive factors that weeded out and so more rapidly modified his
ancestors before they had acquired this wider experience and
accumulated wisdom.

Whatever the explanation, the fact remains that during the
last sixty centuries the distinctive features of the main subdivisions of mankind have undergone surprisingly little
modification.

The negro was quite as definitely negroid when we first meet
with his sixty-centuries-old remains as he is now; the narrowheaded brunet of small stature (Fig. 1), who has dwelt around
the shores of the Mediterranean since the dawn of history, was
almost, if not quite, as definitely differentiated from the roundheaded Armenoids of Western Asia (Fig. 2) at the end of the
Stone Age as are their modern representatives; and all the millennia of exposure of their scattered descendants to vastly different
climates and conditions of life have produced amazingly little
effect upon their physical characteristics. Further evidence may
perhaps lend some measure of confirmation to the contention of
Professor Boas! that the uprooting of European people, and
their transferance to America, leads to an immediate effect upon
the physical characters of such of their progeny as may happen
to be born in the new environment; but while not denying the
possibility that such an influence may be exerted, no anthro
1‘*Changes in the Bodily Form of Descendants of Immigrants.” United
States Government Reports, 1910, 1911.
THE INFLUENCE OF RACIAL ADMIXTURE IN EGYPT. 165

pologist, however strongly he may be inclined to accept evidence
in support of such a contention, can seriously take Professor
Boas’s data, or the inference he draws from them, at his valuation. For he would have us believe that the forces of environment, which produce little or no effect upon the growing child
(of aliens in New York) who happened to be born in Europe
immediately before his parents emigrated, can nevertheless so
influence the germ-plasm of his parents that their Americanborn progeny will be instantaneously modified. I know that it
is easy to find parallels from biology, and especially from
botany, to justify such an effect on the germ-plasm under the
influence of sudden changes of temperature, climate, soil, and
other conditions of life, but until Professor Boas has dealt
more exhaustively than he has, even in his second report, with
the possibility of racial admixture as the obvious explanation
of his statistics, and excluded it definitely, anthropologists must
continue to view his data and the inferences from them with
the most profound suspicion.

I, for one, am quite prepared, if not to admit, at any rate
to recognise the possibility that a new environment might produce immediate changes in the physical characteristics of the
human body. The enormous influence of internal secretions on
the growth of various tissues of the body (and of even a slight
increase or diminution in the activity of the glands providing
such secretions, which may perhaps be caused by new dietetic,
climatic or other conditions) is quite sufficient to suggest
that the observer must keep his mind open impartially to view
new observations concerning the immediate effect of a new
environment which might conceivably afford a handle for
the forces of natural selections to seize hold of and produce changes in the progeny of the altered parents. But
there is a vast difference between admitting the possibility and
recognising the proof of such an hypothesis; and I am still
entirely sceptical of Professor Boas’s so-called proofs. One is
certainly not the more disposed to accept such hypotheses when
the attempt is made to bolster them up with a tissue of statements intended to minimise or even deny those physical, mental
166 EUGENICS REVIEW.

and moral distinctions between different races of mankind,’ the
result of many thousands of years of differentiation, the reality
of which is substantiated by the whole history of the world
and the experience of those who have watched the intercourse
of the various peoples.

Difference of race implies a real and deep-rooted distinction in physical, mental and moral qualities; and the contrasts
in the achievements of the various peoples cannot be explained
away by lack of opportunities, in face of the patent fact that
among the most backward races of the present day are some
that first came into contact with, or even were the founders of,
civilisation, and were most favourably placed for acquiring
culture and material supremacy.

The main problem that calls for solution when we attempt
to trace the history of civilisation concerns the intermingling
of peoples and the influence of their contact one with the other.

It is the fashion among ethnologists at the present day
to attribute most of the factors in the history of human endeavour and accomplishment, recent no less than remote, to
evolution, but, as Dr. Rivers? and I® have striven to show,
racial admixture and the spread of cultures have played a vastly
greater réle.

The interpretation of the effects of the contacts and admixtures of different races is beset with enormous difficulties.
Most of the populations of the world, not excepting those which
many anthropologists are in the habit of regarding as primitive, are so mixed that it is impossible accurately to identify
and separate the various ingredients which have gone to their
making; and even if it were possible to do so, the task of
estimating the extent and nature of the contributions of each
to the common culture, or of determining their distinctive
physical traits and intellectual aptitudes, is still more difficult.

1‘“The Mind of Primitive Man,” rg11.

2W. H. R. Rivers, Presidential Address, Section H, British Association,
Portsmouth, rgr1.

3G. Elliot Smith, ‘‘ The Significance of the Geographical Distribution of the
Practice of Mummification.—A Study of the Migrations of Peoples and the
spread of certain Customs and Beliefs.”” Manchester Memoirs (Literary and
Philosophical Society) [re-issued in book form by the Manchester University Press under
the title ‘* The Migrations of Early Culture ”], 1915.
THE INFLUENCE OF RACIAL ADMIXTURE IN EGYPT. 167

For many reasons? Egypt offers the most favourable
opportunity for the study of such problems, the true solution
of which, though still a formidable task, even in her case, is
not quite so hopeless a matter as it is in most other countries.

In Egypt, as nowhere else, there are available for
study in adequate numbers the accurately dated bodily remains
of the population (representative of every period for the last
sixty centuries) of a relatively small and well-insulated tract
of country, together with a much more complete record of their
achievements and their mode of thought than any other land
has preserved of its inhabitants. Moreover, the series begins
at a time (a few centuries before the first great historic admixture
of peoples on a grand scale) which inaugurated the development of a real civilisation—at a time, in fact, when Egypt was
inhabited by a population revealing in the extensive series of
human remains that have come down to us perhaps less evidence of racial admixture than any other known and numericallv
comparable series of human remains.

As probably the earliest people to set out on the path of
civilisation, the problems of the proto-Egyptians’ early
achievements are free from the complexities and uncertainties
that beset similar inquiries concerning other peoples’, who
borrowed the whole or the greater part of their initial cultural
capital, so that it has become a difficult matter in their case
for the historian to decide how much of it is their own and
how much they obtained elsewhere. There is no greater fallacy
in modern ethnological discussions than the assumption, tacitly
made by most writers, that every people is imbued with the
desire to progress and strive after the attainment of the artificial
complex of arts and practices which we call civilisation. The
universal experience of those who have studied the habits and
the modes of thought of so-called primitive peoples in every
part of the world is that nothing is more alien to their inclinations and desires than progress in this sense. Left to themselves they do not attempt to initiate any of the arts and
crafts of civilisation; nor, when they have been inoculated with
its practices, do they manifest any tendency to develop or in

* G. Elliot Smith, ‘‘ The Ancient Egyptians,’? Harpers, 1911.
168 EUGENICS REVIEW.

any way to cultivate the new learning, unless they have been
leavened with elements of the peoples who introduced the new
ideas. Civilisation is a wholly artificial and unnatural manifestation of human thought and activity; it was as truly an
invention as the making of a steam engine or an electric
machine, and, like them, was built up in its original form by
one particular group of people, and one only, however many
others may have taken a share in modifying and adding to it
subsequently. It gradually took shape, not as the result of a
conscious striving after the features which we are apt to regard as its most distinctive traits, but out of the efforts of a
particular group of people to meet certain simple needs and
aspirations of which their customs and their special circumstances suggested the desirability.

Out of the burial customs of the proto-Egyptians, and the
special conditions, climatic and otherwise,’ of their country,
the art of building took its origin; and if, as Lethaby? has truly
said, “‘ Architecture is the matrix of civilisation,’? Egypt must
be regarded as the place where not only this matrix was evolved,
but also as the birthplace of the ancillary arts and crafts of
the weaver, the stonemason, the carpenter and the worker in
metals, not to mention the invention of writing, which represented some of the essential elements of the civilisation that
grew up in association with it. —

In Egypt we are able to study not only the physical
features of the unmixed original population, and the circumstances under which they were impelled to invent these essential arts of civilisation, but also the distinctive features, and
to some extent the mental traits, of the two streams of alien
immigrants that began to intermingle with its population about
fifty centuries ago.

The peculiar geographical circumstances of Egypt, which
regulated the process of admixture, enables us the more easily
to study it and appreciate its effects. For the country may be
compared to a moderately well-insulated tube into the lower
extremity of which negroid people forced their way, while into

1See ‘‘The Geographical Distribution of the Practice of Mummification,”
op. cit. supra.
3W. R. Lethaby, ‘‘ Architecture,” p. 1.
THE INFLUENCE OF RACIAL ADMIXTURE IN EGYPT. 169

the upper end the inhabitants of the Mediterranean littoral were
percolating.

These are some of the main reasons why Egypt provides
us with an exceptionally favourable opportunity for studying
the process of racial admixture and its effects.

At the beginning of the fourth millenium B.C., Egypt
was occupied by a population almost entirely free from the
two chief alien elements which began to appear a few centuries
(five or six) later, and throughout the whole of her subsequent
history exerted such a profound influence upon Egyptian
culture. |

 

Fic. 1. FIG. 2.
Profile view of an Early Predynastic Profile of the Skull from the Giza
Skull from Naga-ed-dér (Hearst Ex- Necropolis (circa 2600 B.C.), showing
pedition). Beard and soft parts drawn alien Armenoid traits—Harvard and
from other specimens from the same Boston Expedition’s excavations.
site.

The proto-Egyptians were a branch of that swarthy,
narrow-headed, black-haired people of small stature that I have
called the ‘‘ Brown Race,’’? which probably assumed its distinctive traits somewhere in North Africa—probably at its
eastern end—and from its original home spread until it occupied the whole littoral of the Mediterranean, north and south,
and Western Europe, the eastern shores of Africa as far as
Somaliland, and the southern coastlands of Asia, at least as
far as India.

1“*The Ancient Egyptians,” of. cit.
170 EUGENICS REVIEW.

In course of time this race became to some extent
differentiated into two branches, Mediterranean and Ethiopian,
occupying respectively the milder and the hotter parts of this

 

Fic, 3. Fic. 4.

Profile of a Skull exhibiting alien traits, Profile of a modern Armenian (drawn
obtained by Flinders Petrie at Mediim from a photograph of a head dissected
(Fourth Dynasty), now in the Museum of at Cairo).

the Royal College of Surgeons, in London.

extensive domain. But the attempts which have been made by
Professor Giuffrida-Ruggeri' and others so to emphasise this
distinction as to separate the two branches into independent
races 1S opposed to all the facts of the case.

[For fuller discussion of this problem I must refer the
reader to the note just mentioned and the literature
cited in it. A more general statement of the facts of
the case will be found in my book, The Ancient
Egyptians, from which the following six paragraphs
and Figs. 1 to 5 have been taken.]

‘*The distinctive rdle that Egypt played in the history
of the world was to a great extent the result of her peculiar
geographical situation, which was also a potent factor in
moulding her own culture into the form it assumed.

‘* Sequestered in the north-eastern corner of Africa, Egypt
has been in intimate contact with the Mediterranean littoral
and Western Asia from remote ages. She was so situated as

to be shielded from the danger of being overrun by the peoples
* See my note in Man, May, 1915, p. 71.
THE INFLUENCE OF RACIAL ADMIXTURE IN EGYPT. 171

of these lands, yet sufficiently in touch with them to feel the
stimulus that comes from mingling with people of different
traditions and ideas. In other words, Egypt was adequately
isolated to bé free to develop her own civilisation without interference from outsiders, yet at the same time so closely in touch
with the world at large as to be spared the fate of nations that
are utterly isolated.

‘* A narrow ribbon of exceptionally fertile soil, providing
an easy and ample means of sustenance, and endowed with
a genial and beneficent climate, free from the enervating influence of extreme heat as well as from the rigours of great
cold, the Nile Valley provided an ideal home for primitive
man. The exceptionally fertile soil, renewed annually as the
gift of the river, yielded rich pasturage for his flocks and
abundant crops in return for a minimum of toil; the river and
its banks provided an ample supply of easily obtained fish,
meat and poultry; it was indeed a land flowing with milk and
honey. It was amidst this plenty and freedom from the trials,
which Nature and the danger of rival nations inflict upon the
inhabitants of most other parts of the earth, that the genius
of the ancient Egyptians took root and flourished, protected from disturbances from without by the broad stretches of
insulating desert on each side, and from violent and _farreaching commotion within bv the attenuated, ribbon-like form
of the land itself.

‘““ With no rigours of climate to fight, neither houses nor
clothing were matters of vast importance; with no _ great
dangers of foreign foes, there was no need for any special
devotion to military practices; with ample means of livelihood,
easily obtained, the early Egyptian had ample leisure in which
to cultivate the arts and crafts, and to attain the early
pre-eminence in these accomplishments that was his great
distinction.

‘‘ Living on the natural bridge across the great African
desert that led to the home of the negro, the Egyptians, or
their southern kindred, were the first people to come into
contact with the black man, to mingle with him, and to be
influenced by his beliefs and customs.
172 EUGENICS REVIEW.

‘* All these circumstances combine to enhance the peculiarly distinctive position occupied by Egypt sixty centuries
ago, and to emphasise her unique claims upon the student of
man.”’

Under these favourable circumstances the proto-Egyptians
easily acquired exceptional skill in pottery-making, the working of stone for making implements, beads, mace-heads and
jars, and probably invented the arts of weaving linen and working gold and copper. In course of time also they were led
on step by step to work in stone on a grander scale, and laid
the foundations of architecture and the crafts of the sculptor
and the carpenter.

There was a strong element of chance in all these remarkable inventions. The dwellers on the banks of the Nile did
not deliberately plan to erect stone buildings, or to make metal
tools and weapons. They were gradually led on step by step
to the realisation of the possibility and the desirability of doing
such things, and to the acquisition of the necessary new knowledge and skill, the driving force in most instances being some
endeavour entirely alien to the result eventually attained. The
proto-Egyptian who first intentionally smelted a bead of copper
from the ore no more realised that he had acquired the means
of revolutionising the world’s civilisation than did the ancient
Greek foresee the modern development of electrical engineering when he discovered that amber, when rubbed, would
attract a scrap of paper.

What I want to emphasise by these remarks is the falsity
involved in much of the modern ethnological doctrine that
mankind, under the stress of necessity, evolves practices and
customs to meet his particular needs. Under the exceptionally
favourable circumstances which I have already mentioned, the
Egyptians happened on a number of discoveries which have
proved to be of vast importance in shaping our civilisation ;
but he was not looking for the things he stumbled on by chance,
and, as in the case of most great inventions, it took him
centuries to realise the full significance of what he had discovered. If there had been any conscious striving after such
discoveries and inventions, it would be necessary to assume
THE INFLUENCE OF RACIAL ADMIXTURE IN EGYPT. 173

that primitive man foresaw as in a dream the glories of architectural achievement and the vast potentialities of metallurgical
knowledge; but we know as a matter of historical fact that, so
far from this being the case, it took him centuries to realise the
value of metals or the possibilities of building in stone after
he had accidentally discovered these powerful aids to progress
in the arts and crafts.

The series of happy accidents, and the more or less fortuitous shaping of the course of events that led to the full
tealisation of the immensity of such discoveries, did not occur
more than once in the world’s history for any given discovery.
The steam engine was not invented independently in every
country where it is now in use, but in one definite part of the
world by one particular group of people; but, once discovered,
and when people in different parts of the world were putting
it to a variety of uses, it is not surprising that different groups
of people may possibly have attempted independently the one
of the other to devise marine engines. But the suggestion
to do so is naturally to be attributed to the inventors of the
steam engine itself.

So in the case of all great original inventions the argument against independent evolution in various places is overwhelmingly powerful; for such a hypothesis is opposed to all
that we know of the history of inventions and the common
experience of mankind.

[Since this has been in print I have learned that Mr.
William McDougall, F.R.S., has discussed this matter with
his usual lucidity in his book, ‘‘ Social Psychology ”’ (eighth
edition, p. 340). But he makes a reservation concerning the
very class of evidence upon which my own conclusions were
primarily based, when he claims that this world-wide diffusion
of inventions ‘‘ is, perhaps, less strictly true of such customs as
peculiar methods of sepulture.’’ This is surely wholly irrelevant to the rest of his statement, and if it is admitted would
stultify his own argument.]

Without wishing to minimise the inventiveness of the
proto-Egyptian, or the momentous importance of his achievements in laying the foundations of the civilisation which the
174 EUGENICS REVIEW.

world at large now claims as its own, I want to make it perfectly clear that the peculiarly favourable circumstances under
which for many centuries he lived and toiled played at least
as great a part in his discoveries as the mental and moral
qualities of the Brown Race as a whole, or that particular
branch of it which taught the world the arts and crafts of the
weaver, the stonemason, the carpenter, and the worker in
metals.

For, great as these inventions were, it is perhaps not
without significance that they were not put to their full usefulness until contact with a more virile, larger-brained, alien
people, coming into the delta from the north, seems to have
stimulated the Egyptians to bring their discoveries to complete
fruition.*

So far as can be gathered, the immigrants brought into
Egypt no appreciable contribution to the arts and crafts, for
the development of civilisation in Egypt continued to follow
the lines laid down in pre-dynastic times, ages before the coming
oi the aliens. But the sudden speeding-up of this evolutionary
process, no less than the fact that it occurred especially in the
north, where the alien admixture naturally made itself felt more
potently, is a significant demonstration of the stimulating influence of the contact with people of different ideas and
traditions. Before following this theme further, let us consider the question of the distinctive features, and so far as is
possible the mental and moral qualities of these northern
immigrants into Egypt. |

In my book, The Ancient Egyptians, 1 adopted Professor
von Luschan’s term, ‘‘ Armenoid,’’ to define the nature of the
aliens who began to make their way into Egypt from the
Mediterranean littoral at the beginning of the historical period
(at about the time of the First Dynasty). The use of this term
without any qualification, however, is likely to give rise to
serious misconception. For there is a most pronounced
differentiation between those Armenoids who dwell in the
Anatolian highlands (and their kinsmen, commonly known as
the ‘‘ Alpine Race,’’ who are scattered throughout Europe and

1Qn this point see my ‘“ Report on the Ancient Egyptians.’”? Report of the
British Association, 1914, p. 228.
THE INFLUENCE OF RACIAL ADMIXTURE IN EGYPT. 175

especially in the centre of the continent) and those who made
themselves conspicuous in all great maritime enterprises in
the Mediterranean (as well as in the Red Sea and Persian
Gulf) at the close of the Neolithic phase’ of culture and sub
 

FIG. 5
An Armenoid Captive
(First Dynasty). After
Flinders Petrie.

sequently. Both groups present in common the characteristic
cranial, facial and mandibular features which distinguish them
from other races, and especially from the Brown Race, the
intermingling with which we are specially concerned here.

In the Alpine branch these distinctive features are found
in a very much more pronounced and exaggerated form than
they are in what may be termed the ‘‘ Maritime branch ”’ of the
Armenoid race. In the former the cranium tends to be broader
and rounder and the occiput flatter than in the latter, the nose
to be narrower and more prominent, and the mandible more
massive and with more extensive ramus (Figs. 2 and 4).

At first sight it would seem that the features of the Maritime branch (Figs. 3 and 6) might possibly be explained on the
supposition that the obtrusive traits of the Alpine race had been
toned down by admixture with people of the Mediterranean
branch of the Brown Race. No doubt extensive intermingling
of these peoples did take place, but careful consideration of all
the available evidence does not lend support to the view that this
affords the whole explanation of the contrast between the two
branches of the Armenoid race.

1 The use of the term Neolithic ‘‘ Age”’ is apt to give rise to confusion, seeing
that the Neolithic phase of culture came to an end at different times in the
various areas. For this reason I use the term “ phase.”’
176 EUGENICS REVIEW.

The only explanation that seems to be in consonance with
the evidence is that at some remote period the Armenoid race
became differentiated into two groups. One of them developed
the common distinctive features to a much more extreme degree than the other. At the same time it (the
northern branch) developed a remarkable partiality for dwelling on high lands, which earned for it in Europe the
appellation, ‘‘ Alpine.’’? The other branch did not become so
extremely specialised in physical type, nor did it become so
partial to mountainous country. On the other hand, it developed an equally remarkable and distinctive aptitude for
maritime pursuits. How and where this remarkable trait developed—whether on the Caspian or the Black Sea—there is no
evidence to show; but the fact remains that as soon as this
(southern) branch of the race reached the shores of the wider
seas, the Mediterranean and the Persian Gulf, it became
conspicuous in all great maritime enterprises. From very early
times all the branches of the Brown Race had cultivated seamanship upon the rivers in their territories as well as along their
coasts; and the fact that islands like Crete became colonised
in Neolithic times shows that even extensive sea journeys were
not beyond its powers. But with the advent of the southern
branch of the Armenoid race maritime pursuits received a great
impetus, and a much freer intercourse between the peoples of
the eastern Mediterranean was established.

There is reason to believe that other members of the
southern Armenoids made their way—perhaps by the Euphrates
—to the Persian Gulf, and that the blending of these people
with the representatives of the Brown Race population already
established there may explain the distinctive features and
aptitudes of the Sumerians.

If the story of Herodotus is to be believed, it is interesting to note that it may have been the descendants of these
people, after an intensive cultivation of the art of navigation for
several centuries in the Persian Gulf, who, as the Phoenicians,
migrated to the Levant, and after contact with their own
distant relatives, and aided by the knowledge the latter had
independently acquired in the Mediterranean, undertook the
first really great maritime enterprises the world ever witnessed.
THE INFLUENCE OF RACIAL ADMIXTURE IN EGYPT. 177

While indulging in such speculations, the curious reflection suggests itself that from this remote time—about twentysix centuries ago—onward, in every great maritime exploit,
whether of the Phoenicians, the Arabs, the Indians or Polynesians, or, later, of the Spanish, the Portuguese, the Dutch
or the British, a very strong leaven of this mixture of ‘‘ Maritime Armenoid’’ and Mediterranean people is to be found
amongst these hardy mariners; and in some cases—as, for
example, the Polynesians—the essential substratum of this race
of famous mariners conforms unmistakably to what I have
called ‘‘ The Maritime branch of the Armenoid race.’’ There
is something more than mere coincidence in this fact. It tends
to show that not only the physical, but also the mental and
moral, distinctive features of the races of mankind were also
well established at the dawn of history.

I have been led into this long digression partly to emphasise a remarkable illustration of the persistency of those
subtle, inborn aptitudes of races which have played so large
a part in directing the course of the world’s history, but also
in part to make it clear that the southern branch of the
Armenoid race, with which alone the student of Egyptian
history is concerned, was really differentiated in something more
than merely physical characters from his heavy, unventuresome,
conservative, mountain-dwelling, Alpine cousin.

But in this lecture I am not concerned with the aptitude
for maritime adventures that distinguished these early immigrants into Egypt, even though it may throw some light upon
their advent there. It is of vastly more importance as a demonstration of the means by which Egyptian civilisation was
able to exercise such a far-spread influence upon the rest of
the world, as I have explained elsewhere.*

So far as the information in our possession goes, this alien
element in the population of Egypt manifested itself first in the
north, probably soon after the amalgamation of Upper and
Lower Egypt under the First Dynasty; and by the time of the
Second Dynasty? the aristocracy was permeated with the

1‘*The Geographical Distribution of the Practice of Mummification,”’ of. cit.
supra.
2See British Association Report, 1914, p. 227.
178 EUGENICS REVIEW.

influence of these foreigners. Not only the actual human remains,
but also the remarkable portrait statues of the Pyramid Age
reveal the profound influence of the new-comers. Without any

 

A Portrait Statue of Ra-nefer. A memphite noble of the Fifth
Dynasty (circa 2700 8.C.)

marked change in stature, or in the colour of the hair or eyes,
the Egyptian’s physique now becomes much more robust and
muscular. The effeminate features of the proto-Egyptian are
replaced by the more virile type of the mixed dynastic
Egyptian race. The skull is appreciably broader and not so
bulged posteriorly—sometimes it is distinctly flattened—as that
of the autochthonous people. The eyebrow-ridges tend to be
much better developed, and the forehead is often sloped, the
nose often much narrower and more prominent; and the orbits
distinctly larger and of a different shape. But perhaps the
THE INFLUENCE OF RACIAL ADMIXTURE IN EGYPT. 179

greatest change of all is noticed in the massiveness and altered
appearance of strength in the jaw.

These alien traits were much more common and pronounced
in the aristocracy than in the working classes.

In spite of the considerable infusion of alien blood into
the Egyptian people, and the obvious stimulus which this
admixture gave to the development of the high civilisation of
the Pyramid Age, it is impossible to detect any material
addition to Egyptian culture that can be attributed to the
new-comers. All the wonderful developments of the arts and
crafts that followed upon their coming were clearly the result
of the evolution of the characteristically Egyptian practices and
inventions, which can be referred back to a period centuries
before the aliens reached Egypt. In spite of this surprising
fact, if it is safe to argue from cranial capacity or the configuration of cranial casts, the new-comers were, on the whole,
much more highly endowed with brain than the protoEgyptians were.

 

Fic. 7.

Photographs of cranial casts of (left) an Armenoid buried at the Giza Pyramids
in the Fourth Dynasty, (centre) a Proto-Egyptian, and (right) Dean Swift.

The cranial casts of some of the Pyramid builders are comparable to those obtained from skulls of some of the most
intellectual men of modern Europe. Compare, for instance,
that (Fig. 7) of an ancient Egyptian of the Pyramid Age with
the mould obtained from Dean Swift’s skull, and contrast these
180 EUGENICS REVIEW.

two remarkably similar exhibits with that of a proto-Egyptian
taken at random—a small, narrow, ill-developed specimen.

It is inconceivable that such big-brained, virile men should
not have exerted a profound influence upon the development
of Egyptian civilisation, especially when it is recalled that men
of this type certainly became the dominant class in the
community, as the human remains found in the cemeteries
abundantly demonstrate. Yet the fact is definite enough that
their influence was exerted almost exclusively in stimulating the
further development of the characteristic local culture.

During the centuries from about 3000 B.c. onwards the
influence of these alien people gradually spread up the Nile,
so that by the time of the Middle Kingdom throughout Egypt
the upper classes (and to a less extent the rest of the population) were permeated with the effects of the admixture.

From that time onward, during the chequered history of
Egypt, the alien element in the ruling class seems in some
measure to wax and wane with the fluctuating fortunes of the
country. There is no exact agreement between the two events,
but there is a complex interdependence that seems to lend
itself to interpretation. I can best explain my meaning by
taking a specific example. :

The glorious period of Egyptian history—the New Empire
—seems to have been inaugurated by an Upper Egyptian family
of moderately pure Egyptian type. No doubt it had learned
by bitter experience in the contact with foreign oppressors the
means of securing its independence and of restoring the
damaged fortunes of the country.

As the result of their conquest of western Asia the alien
elements in the ruling classes were strongly reinforced. This
in turn reacted upon Egypt, and may have been in part responsible for its abounding prosperity later on in the
eighteenth and at the beginning of nineteenth dynasties. There
was certainly a strong influx of Western Asiatics into Egypt at
this period, the effects of which were so strongly imprinted in
the features of the Pharaohs Seti I., Rameses II., and
Merenptah. This was due, of course, to the intimate contact
with Syria; but the point that seems to emerge from the study
THE INFLUENCE OF RACIAL ADMIXTURE IN EGYPT. 181

of the evidence is that the establishment and maintenance of
the powerful influence of Egypt’s golden age may have been
due in large measure to the reinforcement of the virile element
in her population, which resulted from this closer intercourse.

Whether this conclusion is justified or not, it certainly
seems to be a fact that the period of the decadence of Egypt
coincides with the effacement of those traits which the particular
alien element I have been discussing was responsible for
introducing.

At about the same time as the Armenoid and Mediterranean
influence began to exert itself in the north, the southern extremity of the Egyptian population began to mingle with an
alien race of a very different character. For just before the
time of the first dynasty small negroes, in some respects akin
to pygmies, began to appear in Lower Nubia; and from this
time onwards this influence, and that of a variety of other
negro tribes, became more and more potent.

If the alien influence that was brought to bear on Egypt
from the north exerted a stimulating effect upon the development of her culture, it is equally certain that the negro
infiltration from the south was a drag and a hindrance.

That this is not mere surmise, but a conclusion based upon
irrefutable facts, the evidence collected by the Archzological
Survey of Nubia’ clearly demonstrates.

The development of civilisation in Nubia presents a
remarkable contrast to that of Egypt, especially when it is
considered that the one territory adjoins the other and that
both form parts of the same narrow ribbon of habitable land
on the banks of the Nile. Nubia was not only almost entirely
uninfluenced by the momentous developments that followed
from the contact of peoples in Egypt, and especially Lower
Egypt, but in addition her culture was definitely degraded as
the influence of the dark races of the south made itself more
and more felt.

This contrast between Nubia and Egypt is particularly
instructive from the emphasis it affords to those factors to
which I have called attention in the foregoing remarks; for it

1See the Bulletins and Reports published by the Egyptian Government.
182 EUGENICS REVIEW.

demonstrates in the most striking way the reality of the farreaching effects of admixture respectively with a stimulating,
virile, white race and a retarding and sensuous black race, to
both of which, in varying degrees, Egypt was subjected
throughout the whole of her history from the time of the First
Dynasty onwards.

The operation of similar factors did not cease with the
downfall of the Ancient Egyptian Empire, for ever since then
Egypt has continued to be subjected to these two conflicting
racial influences; even at the present day intermingling with
the negroid populations of the south is still going on, and from
the north a continuous stream of Syrians, Armenians, Greeks
and other people from the Mediterranean littoral continue to
pour in. But there is this difference—while Egyptian blood is
constantly being adulterated with negro, there is little intermixture with the more virile northern peoples.

It is a striking fact that, amidst the conflicts which finally
put an end to the Egyptian Empire and prepared the way for
the continuous foreign domination, which has now lasted for
twenty-five centuries, the Armenoid traits in the population
became to a large extent deleted, so that the physical characters
of the population came more and more to approximate to the
original type. This, however, cannot be regarded as a
‘* reversion to type’’ in the ordinary sense in which biologists
understand this phrase, but a reversion which is due primarily
to the wiping out of the alien strain, and partly to the fact that
the dominant foreigners who took the place of the former alien
immigration no longer were settlers who contributed their quota
to the blood of the nation.

Whatever the explanation, however, the fact is indubitable
that the population of Egypt as a whole has now to a large
extent reverted to the type of the proto-dynastic period, but with
the difference that it is permeated through and through with
negro admixture in varying degrees.

At the commencement of this lecture I endeavoured to explain how it was the peculiar circumstances in which the protoEgyptians were placed rather than any special inventive faculty
that explain their great achievements in laying the foundations
of the world’s civilisation.
THE INFLUENCE OF RACIAL ADMIXTURE IN EGYPT. 183

Even if they had remained unmixed with foreign elements,
it is altogether questionable whether in the modern world,
where the special circumstances that not only gave the Early
Egyptians their opportunity, but forced them to take it, no
longer exist—for the qualities which make for inventiveness
to-day are not necessarily those that brought success fifty
centuries ago—the Egyptians would have maintained their
reputation and repeated their ancient achievements. But the
singular lack of originality, and the slavish devotion to convention, which are the outstanding features of the modern
Egyptian, are sure tokens that the former abilities of the race
have been affected by fifty centuries of negro admixture, which
has more than counterbalanced the infusion of virile northern
blood that in some measure helps to explain the greatness of
Egypt’s achievements in the zenith of her power and influence.

In this brief sketch I have attempted to emphasise the
importance of the part played by the intermingling of peoples,
not merely in the development and spread of civilisation, but
also in shaping the course of the history of different nations.
Such principles apply not only to nations but also to
individuals. The present war is bringing home to some of
those who are tending the wounded the importance of the factor
of individual experienceon the mental state of the soldier. Before
this Society it is unnecessary to call attention to the influence
of heredity upon the physical, mental and moral qualities of
every human being: but the impressive fact that so large a
proportion of those who, under the stress of war, suffer from
mental shock were the victims of some fright or other terrifying
experience in their early childhood (and that this moral damage
shapes and determines their present affliction) is a most striking
reminder of the importance of early experience and education
upon the mental and moral characteristics of each and every
unit of the nation.
