THE HEREDITY OF ABILITIES.
By C. SPEARMAN,
Grote Professor of Philosophy of Mind, University of London.

1.—TIHE PROBLEM. DIVERSITY OF VIEW.

“YouR eugenists hope in time to produce an ideal race of
men by scientific methods. But will they ever agree on the
ideal to be produced ? ”’

Such is one of the objections most frequently levelled at
the eugenist movement. For instance, it has been illustrated
and enforced in the daily press by the following lively
sketches :—

EUGENIC IDEALS FROM DIFFERENT POINTS OF VIEW.

THE, CRICKETERS (OGAL THE PRIZE -PICKTER'S IDEAL

 

Reproduced by kind permission of the ** Datly ‘Mirror, ”)
The view underlying these sketches is, if true, damaging
enough. It regards each kind of ability as conflicting with
220 EUGENICS REVIEW.

every other kind. The progeny raised for the purposes of
playing cricket would be likely to show incapacity in the matter
of prize-fighting. The zygote possessing exactly the system
of ‘‘ gens ’’ needed to secure academic laurels would be a disappointment on the stock exchange, and vice versa.

—This ‘‘ theory of compensation,’’ as it has been called, is
amongst the most ancient and widely accepted. It pervades
literature in such mottoes as: ‘‘ Ne’er a rose without a thorn.”’
Biologists give it more definite expression in the doctrine that :
**A normal or diseased organ never reaches an extraordinary
size without another organ—of the same or a similar system—
correspondingly suffering.’”’? Or again, ‘‘ When an organ
from any cause has been developed excessively, then the neighbouring organs suffer thereby, they remain diminutive ”’ ;?
““ when a useful change occurs at one point of the living being,
at some place a change takes place in the contrary direction.’”*
So too in popular psychology we find a series of beliefs such
as: ‘‘that superior ability to get impressions through one
sense is related to ifferiority in getting impressions through
other senses; that intensity of attention varies amongst individuals in opposition to breadth of attention; that the quick
learner is the poor rememberer; that the man of great artistic
gifts, as in music, painting, or literary creativeness, is weak in
scientific ability or matter-of-fact wisdom, etc.’’*

A second view as to the relation between abilities—one
whose defenders have been less numerous, but equally distinguished—is that of general independence; that is to say, it
held that every ability develops without appreciable interference
from the others. Among the biologists inclining in this direction is Wallace, who writes that every part or organ may
exhibit large variations independently of the other parts.*

A similar position seems to have been defended by an
important American school of psychology.* Even on this sup
1 Pr. de Saint Hilaire, Balancement Organiquement, 1807.

2 de Caudolle, Introduction to Botany, 1835.

3 de Caudolle, Introduction to Botany, 1862.

4 Thorndike, Educational Psychology, 1910, p. 183.

5 Darwinism, 1889, p. 81 ff.

6 See Aiken, Thorndike and Hubbell, Psych. Rev., IX., rgoz2.
THE HEREDITY OF ABILITIES. 221

position, the eugenists would be seriously hindered. Their
efforts to better the race could be of slight avail, if they had to
be dissipated in hunting after innumerable independent abilities.

The third chief view—one that appears to have had, and
still to have, the greatest following in psychology—is that all
the varied manifestations of mental ability may eventually be
traced back to a small number of basal powers, such as observation, reasoning, memory, judgment, discrimination, imagination, etc. These powers are regarded as constituting functional
unities. A person gifted with close observation or sound
judgment is considered able to apply such power in any
direction he may choose, whether to business organization or
to botanical research, to the field of battle or to the medical consulting room. But between one of these powers and another,
the unity of function is no longer upheld; keen observation is
not regarded as guaranteeing excellence of memory, nor is a
ready memory taken to indicate profound power of judgment.
This doctrine, it is clear, has much in common with the old one
of ‘‘ faculties ’’; it differs therefrom in having dropped all the
latter’s metaphysical implications; but it still retains similar
functional unities. Here, the task of eugenics would at any
rate be reduced to reasonable dimensions; instead of innumerable independent abilities, there would only be some half a
dozen basal powers to cultivate.

But far more hopeful still is the fourth view, voiced by
Carlyle: ‘‘ For at bottom the great man, as he comes from
the hand of nature, is ever the same kind of thing: Odin,
Luther, Johnson, Burns; I hope to make it appear that these
are all originally of one stuff; that only by the world’s reception of them, and the shapes they assume, are they so
immeasurably diverse.’’* Similarly, if in more prosaic fashion,
among many psychologists ‘‘the assumption seems to have
been that intelligence is some central ability which comes into
function in every mental operation, and that if a person has a
certain degree of intelligence in one direction, and if allowance
is made for practice, experience, and acquired interest, he will
be found to have about the same degree of intelligence in other

1 Heroes, Hero-worship, and the Heroic in History, Lect. II.
222 EUGENICS REVIEW.

directions.’’! Indeed, it is in this view, it would seem, that the
logical basis must be found for many of our social institutions.
It is hard to see else, for example, why we should examine our
young men in Latin and Greek in order to select the fittest for
ruling the inhabitants of India.

How shall we decide between these four, and possibly other,
claimants upon our belief and action? Each of them quotes
weighty authorities on its side; each is the product of a wide
range of actual experience; each is affirmed with the same confidence—not to say, intolerance of contradiction. Ordinary
experience and knowledge of human nature have, then,
foundered into a quagmire, from which they appear impotent to
extricate themselves.

2.—MoODERN METHODS OF INVESTIGATION.

Fortunately, there has in recent years sprung up a
psychology of more exact character. For the purpose of
estimating abilities, we are no longer at the mercy of hearsay,
casual experience, and remote reminiscence; instead, the
abilities can be definitely measured and permanently recorded.
Further, there is no longer any need to trust in general impressions on the all-important point, as to whether two series of
measurements are dependent on one another. Through the
genius of Galton, we can now estimate the degree of correspondence between the two series by means of the “‘ correlational
coefficient.”’

This is so constructed that, when the two series are strictly
proportional to one another, it takes its maximum value of +1.
Such should be its amount between the measurements of the
same set of persons in two different kinds of ability, then, if
Carlyle is right in holding different abilities to be essentially
the same.

As the correspondence between the two series becomes less
and less close, the coefficient continually diminishes; and on
their being wholly independent of one another, it goes down
to o. This, then, is the result needed between different kinds
of ability, in order to agree with the independence theory.

* Colin Scott, Jour. Ed. Psych., IV., 1913, p. 509.
THE HEREDITY OF ABILITIES. 223

When the measurements in the one series even tend in the
reverse direction to that of the other series, the coefficient takes
a minus value, with an extreme limit of -1. Some such minus
value can alone satisfy the theory of compensation.

Finally, for agreement with the view of basal powers or
‘* faculties,’’ the coefficient should vary according as any two
abilities compared with one another belong to the same or to
different powers. In the former case, it should approach to +1;
in the latter to o.

These newer methods have been freely put into practice.
A great variety of test performances, including many kinds of
observation, memory, reasoning, etc., have been devised and
applied to thousands of men, women, and children, in every
civilized country. The surprising result has been, however,
not a verification of one theory out of the four competitors, but
a refutation of them all. Nothing could be more emphatic than
the rejection of the theory of compensation championed by the
newspapers ; the correlation between different abilities has turned
out to be never inverse, but always direct; the fear of one
mental endowment being at the expense of another has been
allayed. The theory of independence is also put out of court,
since the correlation has rarely been zero. But on the other
hand, it has not risen to +1; nor does it seem capable of doing
so with any equalization of experience and interest, as needed
to agree with Carlyle. Still less has it alternated between plus
one and zero, as demanded by the theory of faculties.

3.—THE LAW OF PROPORTIONALITY.

This unsatisfactory result is a useful warning against the
earlier extreme notions about the use of correlational coefficients. Some of their advocates seem to have naively
hoped that the bare calculation of the coefficient would
furnish the last word of science. Everywhere this expectation has been disappointed. Scientific investigation has
proved itself to require, over and above mathematics, a
profound knowledge of the concrete facts, together with an
active experimental groping after new points of view. But
still less support has been given to the opposite extreme view,
224 EUGENICS REVIEW.

which desired to continue placidly in the old rut of investigation, regardless of the new potent calculus offered to them.
The complexity of science, far from dispensing with mathematics, only makes the higher claims on their services; if
rejected in their original crude forms, they sooner or later return
to the field in greater elaboration than before. In the present
case, we shall find that the problem which was so insoluble by
single correlational coefficients yields easily enough to the
consideration of systems of correlations.

This may be illustrated by an instructive research due to
Bonser.' He applied five intellectual tests to 757 schoolchildren,
and calculated the correlational coefficients by the usual method
(that of ‘‘ product moments’’). The results are given in the

following table.
TABLE [.

Bonser’s Correlations.

se 22 ¢ 22 3

3 s = 5°9 5

googe gb a i
Selective judgment "307, 195 «397 335
Mathematical judgment 307 295 ‘485 = °400
Spelling "195 ‘295 247 275
Controlled association °397. 485 = ‘247 "397
Literary interpretation "335° ‘400 ‘275 °397

At first glance, the figures look as unpromising as before ;
not one of them suits any of the four theories mentioned above.
But let us turn from the single values to the table as a whole,
and consider, not the absolute, but the relative magnitudes.
Take any two colums, for example, the first and second,
omitting the values that have no correspondent in the other
column. This gives Table IT.

TABLE II.
The first two columns from Table I. :—
I 2
"195 ‘295
‘397 "485
"335 ‘400

1 See Brit. J. Psych., V., 1912, p. 62.
THE HEREDITY OF ABILITIES. 225

It is at once seen that the values in column one are very
nearly proportional to those in column two. But the tendency
of two series of values to be proportional to one another is just
what is measured by correlational coefficients. Let us, then,
measure the correlation between column one and column two.
This correlation between columns of correlations, calculated in
the usual way, turns out to be no less than plus 1°00; that is to
say, it is perfect to the first two decimal places.

The procedure which we have just applied to columns one
and two is, of course, equally applicable to any other pair of
columns. In all, there are ten different pairs. Out of these,
the correlation between correlations comes no less than four
times to the complete plus unity. Once, it comes to +°'99;
once, to +°98; while even the remaining four pairs give high
positive values.

Such a constant and close adherence to proportionality is
beyond all suspicion of arising from mere chance. It becomes
necessary, then, to inquire under what conditions it occurs.
This is a question requiring careful reply. Though the
phenomenon is palpable enough in the above instance when
pointed out, it may otherwise easily escape detection; Bonser
himself seems to have quite overlooked it. But in other similar
investigations, even keen scrutiny will rarely find cases so
evident as to be beyond the range of dispute.

It must, however, be remembered that in psychology, as in
physics and other sciences, the raw experimental data are
subject to various disturbances, for which due correction must
be made. A mechanical machine always appears at first sight
to give out less energy than is put into it, a fact which, if
verified, would contradict the law of conservation. But
narrower inspection invariably shows that there has been an
escape in other forms, such as heat, On making the necessary
corrections, the energy put into the machine and that taken out
of it always prove to be equal. Analogous corrections are
naturally required in the case of our tables of correlations also;
generally, they will*be of a very simple character, consisting
merely in an allowance for the ‘‘ errors of sampling ’’ (t.e., the
226 EUGENICS REVIEW.

errors whose general magnitude is indicated by the ‘‘ probable
error ’’ of the coefficient).

 

TABLE III.
Correlation between correlations for all hitherto published
researches.
Mean Correlation
Year. Investigator. Subjects. between Correlations.
1889 Oehrn Io students > + '93
1902. Thorndike 160 boys and girls + 1°04
1904 Spearman 37 boys and girls +1°16
1904 Spearman 24 boys and girls +10!
1906 Krueger and I1 students => + ‘96
| Spearman
1908 Peterson 96 students > + ‘94
1909 Foerster and Gregor 11 insane patients +1°12 .
1909 Burt 30 boys +1°06 .
1909 Burt 13 boys + 1°06
1910 Brown 56 boys + ‘86
1910 Brown 39 girls +1°02
1910 Brown 40 boys + ‘97
1910 Brown 23 students + °93
1910 Brown ‘56 women + ‘89
1910 Bonser 385 boys > + ‘97
1910 Bonser 372 girls > + ‘96
1912* Simpson 37 adults + °96
1913* Wyatt 75 children + ‘Q7
1914* Abelson 78 children + 1°02
1914* Webb 200 students +1°O2
Average bes _ we .» + °99 + ‘OI

 

The above data up to Bonser inclusive are given with detailed references
and a discussion of the whole problem in a paper on ‘‘ General Ability ”’
by Hart and Spearman, Brit. J. Psych., V., 1912, p. 51. The data for
Simpson are given in ‘‘ The theory of two factors” by Spearman, Psych. Rev.,
March, 1914. Those of Wyatt appeared in his paper in the Brit. J. Psych., VI.,
1913, p. 109. The researches of Abelson and Webb are just about to be published.
It should be noted that the method of ‘‘correction,’ as usual, is devised so as to
furnish a value which will be right on an average. Consequently, when, as here,
the true value approximates to complete unity, about half of the individual
‘corrected” values ought to be greater than unity; although, of course, no true
value of a correlational coefficient could be greater.
THE HEREDITY OF ABILITIES. 227

On making such corrections, the remarkable and apparently
exceptional proportionality found in the above table of Bonser
proves to hold good universaliy and exactly. Facing is a table
summarizing the work of all the investigators of the subject,
most of whom approached the problem with a strong bias
against the proportionality and its theoretical consequences ;
even in publishing their results, they declared the proportionality to be absent... But at that time, the methods of
calculation were comparatively crude. On applying the present
more exact methods, the following list of results ensues. The
average value of the correlation between correlations comes to
+ ‘99 + ‘o1; and in not one single case is the departure from
+ 1 greater than could reasonably be attributed to mere chance
variation of samples. It is not too much to say that such an
agreement between all investigators at all times and under all
conditions is unparalleled in psychology and scarcely to be
matched in the most exact of the sciences.

4.—THE THEORY OF Two FACcTors.

We have thus succeeded in piercing the outward shell of
seeming irregularity in the experimental results, and have penetrated to an underlying universal orderliness. The next step is
to ascertain what light is thereby thrown on our present
problem, the connection between different abilities.

It may easily be shown that we are as far as ever from being
able to accept any of the four previously mentioned rival solutions. Just as these could not be reconciled with the absolute
values of the correlations between abilities, so too they are incompatible with the proportionality between these correlations.?

It has turned out, however, that, though every one of the
four views taken singly is impotent to explain the facts, a perfect
solution is afforded by two of them taken in combination.
These are the second and fourth, the former holding that all
the abilities are independent of one another, and the latter that
they are all connected by common dependence on the same
thing. That is to say, the sole hypothesis compatible with the

1 Those who, on the contrary, have supported the proportionality are Krueger,
Burt, Wyatt, Abelson and Webb.
2 For proof see ‘‘ General Ability,’’ Brit. J. Psych., V., 1912.
228 _ EUGENICS REVIEW.

facts is that every ability depends on two factors; the one of
these is a specific ability or disposition, different and independent for every different kind of ability; the other is the
general energy of the mind, always the same. The mathematical
proof of this fundamental proposition of psychology is so simple
that it can be given below in a footnote |

This analysis of every mental ability into two factors will be
found by many to be more clearly conceivable when expressed
in terms of physiology. The function of the central nervous
system has for centuries been the subject of heated controversy.
On the one hand, Flourens and his followers have declared
that the whole cerebrum acts as one single organ subserving any
kind of mental operation. On the other hand, a long array
of investigators have maintained the directly opposite doctrine,
that every part and parcel of the cerebrum has its special
work to perform. The above discovery of the two factors
supplies the simple reconciliation between the two warring
parties; as so often occurs, both were right in what they
affirmed, but wrong in what they denied. Every mental
process is, indeed, served specially by some _ particular
part or process of the cerebrum; this constitutes our
specific factor, different and independent for every different
ability. But at the same time, every mental process utilises
also the energy of the whole cerebrum, especially the cortex;
this is the general factor, always the same whatever the mental
process.

The double truth had already been suspected by some of

our leading physiologists and neurologists. Mott, for instance,

* Let a, b, p, and q denote any four abilities, each assumed to depend
partly on aspecific independent factor, and partly on a general factor; call the
latter G. Let the correlations between the abilities be written in the usual way as
Tap Taq etc. As the specific factors are by assumption independent of one another,
any correlation between the two abilities must be due to the G and would vanish if
the influence of G were eliminated. But Yule’s well known formula for partial
correlations expresses the value of a correlation on elimination of a factor (Introduction to the Theory of Statistics, p. 235). By this formula, the correlation
between a and p on excluding G is:

Yap — TaG- Ipe@
J1—, 7/1 - 1,
And as this value vanishes, tg. 'pq = tap; Similarly, thq-tpq = Top Hence,
raa/Tpa = Tap/Top =, in the same way, Myq/tpq- So that rap/tpp = Tag/Thq» Which is
precisely the proportionality actually observed, making the correlation between
the columns=plus unity.
THE HEREDITY OF ABILITIES. 229

twelve years ago suggested in this sense that ‘‘ the total nervous
energy is at the disposal of the whole nervous system ’’; and
the suggestion elicited the cordial approval of Sherrington
(Journal of Mental Science, 1902, Oct.). Further, the psychophysiological work of McDougall, if not as yet reaching quite
to our present problem, appears to be directly heading towards
the above analysis into the two factors.

5.—MENTAL MEASUREMENT.

Thus, then, the eugenic problem from which we set out has
reached a definite solution in the theory of ‘‘ two factors.’’ And
here eugenics will find, it is believed, not only a refutation of
popular objections, but also a general firm basis for positive
investigation. In particular, this theory appears to make possible, for the first time, meaningful and reliable mental measurement, a matter in which previous researches have been gravely
defective.

The prime necessity is to distinguish mental measurements
into three classes. Of these, the first is that directly obtained
from any properly conducted test; it indicates the person’s total
power for that particular kind of performance. The other two
classes of measurement are only to be got by theoretical deduction from the first class; they refer to the two factors, general
and specific.

We will consider the general factor first. Perhaps the
nearest approach to it previously has been the ‘‘ general intelligence,’’ as estimated by school teachers, fellow pupils, . medical
attendants, prison warders, etc. Unfortunately, investigation
has shown such estimation to be.vitiated by errors of surprising
magnitude. This erroneousness is now usually measured by
means of the “‘ reliability coefficient,’’ or correlation between two
independent estimates of the same thing; evidently, this must
approach to plus unity, as the estimates become perfectly
correct. When the present writer first reported the reliability
coefficients for estimation of general intelligence to be as low as
‘64, he was suspected of exaggeration. But further inquiry has
proved matters to be, if anything, worse. An extensive research
has just been completed in our laboratory by Mr. Webb. Two
230 EUGENICS REVIEW.

hundred students in a training college had their principal qualities estimated by their prefects; these were fellow students, with
whom they were in continual contact. To each prefect were
allotted twenty students, to be carefully observed for six months.
The average reliability coefficient proved to be as low as ‘55.
Even less successful have been the estimates made in schools.
Recently, the general intelligence of 1,405 children was judged,
in each case by two teachers independently ; the correlation between the two judgments came to no more than ‘47. In a second
investigation involving 2,018 children, the correlation came to
"50. Even more significant is the fact that when, in a further
investigation, the two estimates of the same child were made by
one and the same teacher, but with a lapse of nine months
between them, the correlation still only came to ‘66. Moreover, the investigator, Waite, convinced himself that substantially the whole of this astonishing discrepancy lay with the
teachers’ judgments, and not with any real changes in the
children.” The effect of such errors of measurement is to reduce
or ‘attenuate’ the correlation by an amount admitting of precise valuation.* This amount is-sufficient to render the correlations usually published invalid and delusory.

Nor is this all. It must be remembered that the reliability
coefficient only manifests those errors which vary from one estimator to another; they say nothing about any bias common to
both. This has turned out to be, at times, even more extraordinary. In Mr. Webb’s research, for example, the prefect’s
estimates of the ‘“‘ quickness of intelligence’’ of their fellow
students proved to be almost wholly based on the latter’s manifestations of humour; the correlation between the estimates of
intelligence and those of humour was no less than ‘85. Naturally
enough, the humour showed no appreciable correlation with the
intelligence of the students when measured in any other way,
whether by the estimates which the teachers made, or by various
objective tests ; humour is generally recognised to depend rather

1 Proceedings of Brit. Psych. Soc., 24-1-1914.
2 Biometrika, VIII., 1911. °
* Amer. J. Psych., XV. 1904, p. 289; Brit J. Psych., III., t910, p. 271; Ibid., V,

1913, Pp. 417. The formula usually most convenient is that given at the top of
p. 276, Vol. TIL., Brit. J. Psych.
THE HEREDITY OF ABILITIES. 231

on emotional than intellectual factors. Similar estimates by
other judges appear to be little better off ; some have one kind of
bias, others another. If the teachers escape the bias towards
humour, they fall into that towards examinational success.

A very different picture is presented by diagnosis based on
the experimental determination of our general factor, the free
energy of the cortex. This admits, not only in principle, but to
a large extent in practice, of as definite measurement as the
length of an arm or the circumference of a head. Also the
probable error of the measurement can be determined at the
same time. The simple formula combining both purposes is :—

G, = Ty. tre + 67 J 1 43, (1)
where T,, denotes the result of the experimental {test T applied
to the person x, G, is this person’s general mental energy, and
rrg is the correlation between the test and the general energy.

The formula (1) is directly derivable from the theory of
correlations.’ The essential point is that, recently, a method has
been devised for determining frog, thereby rendering the
formula usable for our present purpose.”

It is clear that the error of G, diminishes as rpg increases.
Also, it has been: shown that the size of rzg is enhanced by
letting T consist, not of a single test, but of many tests pooled
together.?

So far we have regarded only the general factor in ability
and the inadequate surrogate for it presented by the popular
‘* general intelligence.’” But analogous considerations apply to
the specific factor also. Here, the popular surrogate is even
less adequate; a person’s specific ability for a performance is
confused with his total power for it, although the two may in
reality vary inversely. Suppose, for instance, that a child
surpasses most of his fellows in the power of remembering
colours; this would usually be taken as indicating a specific
ability for this operation. But the child might possibly manifest an even greater superiority at most other intellectual

1 Yule’s Introduction to the Theory of Statistics, pp. 177.

2 See Mental Tests of Dementia, Hart and Spearman, to appear in the next
number of the Journal of Abnormal Psychology.

3 See Abelson, Brit. J. Psych., IV., 1911, p. 298; also ‘‘ The Correlations of
Sums”? in the same journal, Vol. V., 1913, p. 417.
232 EUGENICS REVIEW.

operations; his power of remembering colours, though good as
compared with that of his comrades, might nevertheless be poor
as compared with his own general ability. Physiologically
expressed, the particular cortical structure subserving the operation might in itself be weak, but be rendered efficacious by the
extremely high grade of the supporting energy of the whole

cortex.
To determine the specific ability, then, we have first to

deduct the influence of the general ability. This gives, as a
first approximation, and on choosing suitable units :—

th =t - G (2)
where t, denotes the total power of the person x for the
test t, G, is his general ability, and t! is his spectfic ability for
the test. t and t/ will, of course, usually refer to some single test,
not to a pool of them as the T in equation (1).
6.—DETERMINATION OF THE INFLUENCE OF THE ENVIRONMENT.

Having achieved this indispensable preliminary of measuring the two factors in ability, the next task is to ascertain how
far they are respectively transmissible by inheritance. The
direct method of attack is a comparison between the qualities
of the parents and those of the offspring. But the difficulty of
effecting this in the case of the human race has led to the
adoption of a less direct procedure; the attempt is made instead
to determine in the first place the influence of the environment ;
and then, all variation not traceable to the environmental
influences is attributed to heredity.

If we may believe the statements made in newspapers and
public speeches by many eminent politicians, divines, sociologists, and others, the influence of the environment on general
ability may be very great. Nor have educationalists been
behindhand; there is not one of the ordinary studies, whether
classics, mathematics, science, or modern languages, that has
not been recommended for its peculiar efficacy in promoting the
growth of “‘ general intelligence.’’ Similar claims are being
put forward on behalf of manual training. During the last few
months we have even been gravely assured that a general intellectual expansion may be secured by well devised dancing
exercises.
THE HEREDITY OF ABILITIES. 233

Eugenic research, however, appears to have uniformly
arrived at negative results; it has always reported the action of
the environment to be insignificant. And this conclusion has
been corroborated by the more exact work in psychological
laboratories. For instance, the investigations into the so-called
‘formal training ’’ have decisively contradicted the claims of
particular studies to produce improvement of a general character ;
whenever any kind of performance has been trained, that kind—
with all its constituent elements—has alone reaped the benefit.*

This seems to indicate that the effect of training is confined
to the specific factor and does not touch the general one;
physiologically speaking, certain neurons become habituated
to particular kinds of action, but the free energy of the brain
remains unaffected.

Further corroboration may be found in the evidence as to
the time at which this general cerebral energy becomes mature.
This, as far as can be seen at present, is surprisingly early;
the cerebral energy seemis to be nearly complete by the age of
puberty. The experimental determination is far from easy, and
almost all the results hitherto published are vitiated by such
grave errors as to be quite untrustworthy. But, perhaps, the
least affected is the above-mentioned work of Bonser, and his
results in this respect are given in the following table.

TABLE IV.

The percentage of children reaching each of the five grades of
ability at Bonser’s tests2

Years of Age.

Grade of
ability. 8-10 10-II II-I2 12-13 13-14 14-16
I. 5 4 2 2 4 2
Il. 17 9 10 8 15 IO
ITI. 31 30 27 26 2I 30
IV. 37 35 35 39 39 33
V. IO 22 26 25 21 25

100 100 100 I0O TOO 100

1 See especially the elaborate research conducted (in our laboratory) by Dr.
Sleight, Brit. J. Psych., IV., 1911.

* see his “‘ Reasoning Ability of Children,” Columbia University Contributions to
Education, 1910, p. 75.
234 EUGENICS REVIEW.

It is clear that the children under 1o years of age furnish
a relatively small percentage in the highest grade of ability ; but
afterwards, if these rather surprising values may be trusted, the
improvement with age is so minute as to be masked by the
variations due to mere chance.

That general mental ability reaches its full development
about the period*of puberty is still further evidenced by
physiology. For the human brain has been shown to attain
its maximum weight between the ages of 10 and 15 years.’
And since the general ability is so little affected by all the
years of education after puberty, it can have but little dependence on education at all.

If this reasoning is accepted, we arrive at a conclusion of
fundamental importance for eugenics. This is that, though
unquestionably the development of specific abilities is in large
measure dependent upon environmental influences, that of
general ability is almost wholly governed by heredity.

There is, however, at present, a weak point in the above
reasoning and in the whole attempt to estimate the influence of
heredity through that of environment. It involves some
common but questionable assumptions. In particular, the
“environment ’’ is taken in the sense of the ordinary outer
world, where the sun shines and the air circulates. But does
not really the environment begin where the gametes first unite
into a zygote, or even earlier? If one may judge by analogy
with the lower organisms, some such extremely early stages
of existence engender very large non-inheritable differences
between individuals. A notable example has been found in
the culture of beans. When continued careful selection has
secured a perfectly ‘‘ pure ’”’ variety of this plant, the offspring
still continues to differ largely both from the parents and from
one another ; some, for instance, will be much heavier and others
lighter. But if the heaviest be sorted into one group and the
lightest into another and both groups be further bred from,
the offspring of neither group will show any advantage as to
weight; nor will such differentiation appear even if the selection

be continued for several generations.” If this is experimentally

1 See Vierordt, Arch. f. Anat. und Physiol., 1890.
2 Johannsen, Elemente d. exakten Erblichkeitslehre, 1914, ch. IX. and X.
THE HEREDITY OF ABILITIES. 235

demonstrable in the case of plants, there is surely no warrant for
taking it to be a priort impossible in the case of man. It still,
therefore, remains conceivable, that individual differences of
general ability, though not due to environment after birth, may
nevertheless be largely due to environmental influences at an
earlier period, of whose conditions we have not yet any definite
knowledge.
4,—-DIRECT DETERMINATION OF THE INFLUENCE OF HEREDITY.

Here, therefore, the investigation of heredity through that
environment breaks down. At any rate, it requires to be supplemented by other more direct procedures.

The most prominent of these, at present, is the determination of correlations between brothers or sisters. And although
the earlier researches on these lines had to suffer from the
difficulties that almost inevitably beset pioneering work
(especially the above-mentioned ‘‘ attenuation ’’ of correlation
by errors of measurement), such disturbances may well be
overcome in the future. Nor is the old objection insuperable,
that any observed resemblances between the brothers and sisters
may be due, not to common ancestry, but to common home
education, etc. This would only be fatal to the procedure as a
self-sufficient mode of investigating heredity, not as a supplement to the investigation of the environmental effects.

But there still remains the difficulty arising from the abovementioned prenatal influences. The result of these must be an
undue lowering of the correlations observed between brothers
and sisters. The observed values of the correlations can perfectly well furnish proof that qualities are inherited, but it is
hard to see how they can ever measure the full amount of this
inheritance.

Thus, there seems to be no escape from facing the problem
of heredity in the most direct manner, by determining the correlations between parents and offspring. Nor does the task—
in view of the psychological discoveries given in the earlier part
of this paper—any longer present insuperable obstacles.
Definite measurements of both specific and general ability can
be made on parents and offspring alike.
236 EUGENICS REVIEW.

The specific abilities might seem to present little interest.
Our knowledge of a person’s intellectual capacity is not, it
might be thought, very usefully advanced by measuring exactly
how well he can memorise nonsense syllables or erase the r’s in
a page of print. But it must be remembered that in some cases,
as in word blindness, a specific inability may have very widespread and serious consequences, even for practical purposes.
While for the theoretical investigation of the laws of heredity,
specific abilities are likely to prove as fundamentally important
as general ability itself, and they are certainly far easier to determine.”

One often expressed fear must here be dismissed briefly.
It has been said that the abilities of parents and offspring
do not admit of comparison owing to the large differences
of age between the two. This difficulty is to some extent
eliminated by the above-mentioned fact, that general ability
ripens so early. But in any case, each class can be measured
according to its own appropriate standards. The feasibility of
this has been demonstrated by the relatively successful standardisation of the Binet-Simon tests, although these are probably
as far behind future tests as Fitch’s steamboats were inferior to
modern Atlantic liners.

8.—HEREDITY DEDUCED FROM THE THEORY OF TWO FACTORS.

There is yet another method of arriving at evidence concerning the inheritance of general ability. We have seen that
the correlations between mental tests present such numerical
relations as to be solely explicable by some general factor in all
the abilities tested. The psychologists who demonstrated this
fact refrained from proceeding to draw any conclusions as to
how far this general factor could be considered innate. The
merit of bringing forward this point belongs to Dr. W. Brown,
who made the important observation that a general factor might
possibly be produced by conditions of environment. He suggests the conceivability, for instance, that some of the children
tested might have had a stricter discipline than the others, and

1 It has been shown, especially by Burt, that general ability is most strongly
manifested by tests involving the higher mental processes, such as reasoning,
etc. And these tests present some experimental inconveniences.
THE HEREDITY OF ABILITIES. 237

thereby have gained an advantage which would serve them
more or less in all the tests; that is to say, the superior discipline
would furnish a general factor, exactly as indicated by the
correlations.*

Now, this idea admits of interesting developments. No
one, it seems safe to assume, will think of attributing the whole,
but only a part, of the observed correlations to such casual
influences. Let us accordingly suppose that the different
degrees of success at the tests are partly due to innate differences
of capacity and partly to acquired differences of discipline.
Each of these two kinds of influence will, naturally, have
its sphere of special effectiveness. Thus, while the innate
capacity might mainly make for success in tests of a
highly ‘intellectual nature, the benefits of superior discipline
would be most evident in unremitting application to tests that
were long and dull. But it has been demonstrated that in the
case of two or more such diversely acting influences, the correlation between correlations, far from amounting to the plus
unity actually found, would necessarily have a very low or even
minus value.?

The conclusion seems inevitable, that the general ability
indicated by Table III. does not appreciably depend, either upon
discipline, or upon any other analogous influence of the environment.

To sum up, it appears that the future of research into the
inheritance of ability must centre on the theory of ‘‘ two factors.”’
This alone seems capable of reducing the bewildering chaos of
facts to a perspicuous orderliness. By its means, the problems
are rendered clear; in many respects, their answers are already
foreshadowed ; and everywhere, they are rendered susceptible of
eventual decisive solution.

1 Brit. J. Psych., VI., 1913, p. 235.

* Such diverse influences would produce what has been called the ‘‘ multifocal” type of
correlational tables, see Brit. J. Psych., V., 1912, p. 57.
