NEWS FROM THE USS.A.
By NORMAN E. HIMES, Pap.

Hewitt Sterilization Case

URING January the American newspapers were filled with the so-called
Hewitt sterilization case. Before com
menting upon the possible effects of this

publicity upon public opinion, I shall review
briefly the facts as nearly as they can be
pieced together. It is alleged that Ann

Cooper Hewitt, who has since attained her

majority, was recently sterilized by two

California physicians upon the consent of her

mother and guardian, now Mrs. Maryon

McCarter. The alleged motive was to secure

a larger portion of the income of the estate

of Ann’s father, Peter Cooper Hewitt. On

August 14th, 1934, a California State Health

Department psychologist rated the girl, then

twenty, as having a mental age of eleven.

The mother’s physician, Dr. T. E. Tillman,

recommended that Ann be sterilized as

feeble-minded. On August 18th, in the course

of an appendectomy, the surgeon, Dr. S. G.

Boyd, at Mrs. Hewitt’s request and without

Ann’s knowledge, performed a sterilizing

operation. The mother is now being sued for

mayhem, and is at present near death in New

Jersey as a result of an overdose of a drug

alleged to have been taken in an attempt to

commit suicide.

Ann comes of a long line of distinguished
inventors, her great-grandfather, Peter
Cooper, having built the first U.S. steam
locomotive, the Tom Thumb. He pioneered
in iron manufacture and promoted the first
transatlantic cable. Her grandfather, Abram
Hewitt, who married Peter Cooper’s only
daughter, built the first U.S. open-hearth
furnace, early manufactured steel, and became mayor of New York by defeating
Henry George and Theodore Roosevelt.
Abram’s son developed the mercury vapour
lamp, discovered a basic principle of the
vacuum-tube amplifier, pioneered with
numerous other inventions, and died in 1921.
Ann, Peter Hewitt’s only child, was born

51

illegitimate. Four years after her birth he
married the mother. According to a report
in Time (January 20th), Mrs. Hewitt II
(Mrs. McCarter) by the terms of his will
“receives one-third of the income from a
$1,300,000 trust fund, Ann Hewitt two-thirds
—the daughter’s share to pass to her children,
if any, or to revert to her mother if she [the
daughter] should die childless.”” Hence a
motive for the operation. The daughter, in an
affidavit, declared that the mother, though
claiming descent from Southern aristocracy,
was actually the daughter of a San Francisco
horse-car driver, an allegation confirmed by
old inhabitants of that city.

In thousands of columns this story has
been spread over the pages of American
newspapers. What will be its effect upon
public opinion? No one, of course, knows ;
but it is interesting to speculate. It is reasonable to suppose that hundreds of thousands
and probably millions of American citizens
have learned for the first time that sterilization is medically possible. Will it bring
sterilization into disrepute? That seems
doubtful. Certainly if the much-married
Mrs. Hewitt II (she lost one husband by
death, two by divorce, two by annulment)
succeeds in what looks like a suicide attempt,
an interesting legal battle will be avoided.

The case has brought into public focus the
possibilities of abuse in sterilization ; but, as
Mr. E. S. Gosney, of the Human Betterment
Foundation, pointed out in an interview to
the Press, this is the first case of its kind
known in the United States in thirty-six
years of the history of sterilization. Mr.
Gosney further pointed out that we have
numerous court records of heirs or beneficiaries who have murdered relatives in
order to secure insurance money. But no one
proposes that life insurance should therefore
be“abolished. My personal judgment is that
this case will not do material damage to the
voluntary sterilization movement in the
52 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

United States. The California law, of course,
applies only to those legally committed to
State institutions for the insane or feebleminded. In California there have been
10,000 patients sterilized since 1908—nearly

goo in 1935.

The Human Betterment Foundation

According to the report of-the Human
Betterment Foundation for the year ending
February 11th, 1936, increasing interest in
voluntary sterilization is being shown
throughout the United States. Some 436
college instructors, widely distributed geographically over the United States, have
asked for more than 40,000 copies of the
Foundation’s pamphlet on sterilization during the year. Leagues of women voters and
clubs belonging to the General Federation of
Women’s Clubs are increasingly seeking
literature for study groups. There is also an
increasing demand for lectures from high
schools and colleges. The Los Angeles Times
has introduced a department of Social
Eugenics in its Sunday magazine. Though
the material is written up by members of the
staff, the data are largely supplied by the
Foundation. This is believed to be the only
permanent newspaper feature dealing with
eugenics, at least in the United States.

Mr. Gosney and other members of the
Foundation have been working for some
years on a revision of the California sterilization law. The Assembly Bill (A.B. 1607)
passed by a vote of 42 to 32, but the corresponding Senate Bill (S.B. 380) failed in the
legislative congestion of the closing day.

South Carolina passed a sterilization law
during 1935 modelled upon the Virginia law.
Though Georgia and Alabama passed sterilization statutes, these were in each case
vetoed by the governor. A special session of
the Oregon legislature adopted a revision of
its sterilization law, which was designed to
make it more workable by simplifying procedure and reducing expense. Nebraska has
recently provided by statute for the enrolment of the feeble-minded of the State
through county and State commissioners.
Such enrolled persons are ineligible for

marriage unless one partner is sterilized.
This seems an excellent step forward.

It will be recalled that some of the earlier
American statutes on sterilization were
declared unconstitutional as contrary to the
“due process’ clause of the Constitution,
or as discriminatory in nature, since they
allowed freedom from sterilization to the
feeble-minded and insane outside of institutions, but provided for the sterilization of
those incarcerated. Steps like those recently
taken by Nebraska should do much to avoid
such criticisms in the future. Little is heard
nowadays, however, of these constitutional
arguments. We have acquired sufficient
experience to realize the necessity of protecting the legal rights of patients by
providing in sterilization statutes for due
process through appeal clauses.

The Foundation is making a second case
study of sterilization in California. This has
been under way since 1932, in collaboration
with the California Bureau of Juvenile
Research (Director, Dr. Norman Fenton).
The full results are expected to be available
some time this spring.

Report on Sterthzation

The American Neurological Association’s
report on sterilization, published in 1935,
urged voluntary rather than compulsory
sterilization, research rather than more laws,
and, where indicated medically, the availability of sterilization for those in private as
well as in public institutions and for those
not in institutions. These findings caused
considerable comment in the newspapers,
especially in the New York Times (February
2nd) where Waldemar Kaempffert, an opponent of eugenics, gave an erroneous impression of their nature. The errors were corrected in letters published by the editor ; and
the chairman of the Committee, Dr. Abraham
Meyerson of Harvard, himself attempted to
clear up the issues in a letter published in the
Times of March 15th.

Dr. Meyerson took the view that “the
claims of most eugenists as to the incidence
of mental disease and mental defect are unwarranted. There is no evidence of an actual
NEWS FROM THE U.S.A. 53

increase.’’ He denied that the feeble-minded
are more prolific than the general population.
He stressed their low marriage-rate, low
birth-rate and high death-rate, and even high
divorce-rate. A case could be made for this
view ; but I suspect that it evades the real
issue—the rate of reproduction of stocks of
different genetic endowment. Dr. Meyerson
admitted that there might be an increase in
the incidence of senile mental diseases,
especially owing to the increased average
- age of the population. He has repeatedly
debunked—I think to excess—the studies of
defective families. He admits that Huntington’s chorea, hereditary blindness and deafness‘are unquestionably of genetic origin, and
thinks that there is an hereditary basis for
manic-depressive psychoses and for dementia
preecox, though the mechanism is “ entirely
unknown.” He adds that “ the attempt to
prevent these diseases by sterilizing those
who themselves are not sick would be futile.”
Sterilization would not reduce their incidence. A large proportion of feeble-mindedness is inherited, but its mechanism is
uncertain. ‘‘ Epilepsy can be, practically
speaking, eliminated from consideration as
hereditary.’’ He takes the view that sterilization cannot scientifically play any part in the
elimination of criminality. This seems to me
an extreme view, even though no one would
allege that criminality as such is inherited.
The old notion that genius is associated with
mental disease is dragged out.

Dr. Meyerson adds: “ The crying need of
eugenics, as this Committee sees it, is not
legislation but real research. There have been
no vesearches which fully ment the term
scientific.’’ (Italics mine.) Need more be said
about the diligence with which the Committee has searched the literature ? What the
Committee means is that it found much of
this literature unconvincing. To be sure,
much of it is, but can it all be dismissed so
lightly ? On controversial questions it is
always safe to call for an increase of knowledge. That in itself is not controversial.
The Committee overlooked that, in the course
of evolution, mankind moves from one crisis
to another; that man is constantly attempting to bring about accommodations in

situations of maladjustment ; that adjustment
never stops while ajJ the facts are collected ;
for all the facts are never there. From this
standpoint the report of the Committee is
thoroughly utopian and impractical, though
I have an idea that no charge would so
annoy them.

Consider the history of restriction of
immigration in the U.S.A. We were faced
with the necessity of absorbing from one
half a million to over a million new arrivals
each year for several decades. It was a
strain upon national unity, a problem in
adjustment for large numbers of people.
Many of our social problems were complicated by the disturbance set up in the social
equilibrium. There was a widespread feeling
that it was necessary to protect our standard
of living as well as the integrity and unity of
our culture. Before restricting immigration
could we wait until all the scientific evidence
was in upon which to base a perfectly intelligent restrictive policy ? No. We had to
do the best we could in the light of what we
knew. This is exactly what America is
doing with its sterilization statutes. The
Committee’s ignorance of elementary sociology has led it into serious error. It is
to be hoped that less sociological ignorance
will be revealed in future studies of this
kind.

Moreover, I have every reason to believe
that the Committee of the American Neurological Association was “ packed.’’ About
ten years ago I heard Dr. Meyerson admit, in
an address before the Boston Ethical Society,
that, while training as a young man for
medical service, he was emotionally conditioned against the hereditary interpretation
of any phenomenon. And yet this is the
individual that the Association selected for
the scientific investigation of sterilization,
while adopting a superior attitude towards
previous studies of the subject. Incidentally,
there is reason to believe that the Committee of the American Medical Association
appointed to study the problem of birthcontrol—yes, the Association has at last
come round to the view that contraception
is at least worthy of study!—has been more
or less packed in the same manner.
54 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Conferences

The National Conference of Social Work is
to be held in Atlantic City, New Jersey, in
the latter part of May. Inasmuch as the
American Birth Control League is an affiliated organization, there will be a discussion
for medical social workers at which short
papers will be read by Dr. Eric Matsner, Dr.
Hannah Stone, and probably also Dr.
Norman E. Himes.

The National Council of Parent Education
(60 East 42nd Street, New York City) is to
hold a congress on education for family life
and parenthood, from November 11th-14th,
at the Edgewater Beach Hotel at Chicago.

At the University of North Carolina, from
July 6th to roth, there will be held the second
one-week course on “Teaching Marriage
and the Family.’ The first was held during
the summer of 1934, much to the interest
of college teachers in the United States.
Although the present conference is concerned
primarily with problems associated with
teaching courses on marriage, it is somewhat
broader in its appeal, including conservation
of marriage and the family. There will be
discussions led by Professor E. R. Groves,
professor of sociology, on ‘‘ College Instruction in Preparation for Marriage.’’ Professor
Fred B. McCall, professor of law at the
University of North Carolina, will give an
address on the evening of July 6th on “ The
Family and the Law.”’ Dr. E. C. Hamblen
of the Duke University Medical School will
discuss ‘‘ Medical Aspects of Preparation for
Marriage.” On July goth, Mr. Ralph P.
Bridgman, Director of National Council of
Parent Education, will lead a discussion on
“The Role of the Teacher in Counselling
and the Limitation of his Functions.”’

New Books

The National Committee on Maternal
Health has just published three new books
in its series on the Medical Aspects of Human
Fertility: Abortion—Spontaneous and Induced: Medical and Social Aspects, by
Frederick J. Taussig (St. Louis: C. V.
Mosby) ; Medtcal History of Contraception,
by Norman E. Himes (Baltimore: Williams

& Wilkins) ; Time of Ovulation in Women :
A Study of the Fertile Period in the Menstrual

Cycle, by Carl G. Hartman (Baltimore :

Williams & Wilkins). Attention should also
be called to the publication, under the
editorship of Dr. Victor Robinson, medical
historian at Temple University, of the Encyclopedia Sexualis, the first American
encyclopedia of its kind. English students of
eugenics will be particularly interested in the
three articles on sterilization and possibly
in those on contraception by the American
correspondent of the EUGENICS REVIEW.
There are also contributions by Professor
F. H. A. Marshall, Dr. Enid Charles, Dr.
Norman Haire, Dr. F. E. A. Crewe, and
Professor Edward Westermarck.

Population

According to a February release of the
Bureau of the Census, the official estimate
for the U.S.A. population on July Ist, 1935,
was 127,521,000. Since the 1930 census total
was 122,775,046, this estimate represents an
increase of 4,746,000, or nearly 4 per cent.
Assuming that the same rate of increase continues until the end of the decade, we shall
have as the U.S.A. population in 1940 about
132,000,000. The average annual increase
for the 5}-year period was 904,000—a little
more than one-half of the 1920-30 average of
1,665,000. The total number of births
between April rst, 1930, and July rst, 1935,
including an allowance for under-registration,
was 12,420,000. The number of deaths in the
same period, likewise allowing for underregistration, was 7,423,000. There was a net
emigration in the 54-year period of 251,000.

According to a report to Congress recently
submitted by the Surgeon-General of the
U.S. Public Health Service, about 94,000
more babies were born in the U.S.A. in the
calendar year 1934 than in 1933. Later
figures are not available. There was a slight
increase in the mortality in 1934. However,
the rate was lower than in 1932. The deathrate was also slightly higher in 1934 than in
1933; but again this was lower than any
recorded rate earlier than 1932. The deathrate for 1934 was 10-9 per I,000.

The provisional death-rate for eighty-six
NEWS FROM THE U.S.A. 55

major cities, for 1935, based upon weekly
telegraphic reports, was 11-4 per 1,000 of
estimated population. The 1935 provisional
infant mortality rate for the eighty-six
reported major cities was 49 per 1,000 live
births. This is somewhat lower than the
55 reported for these cities in 1934.

New York City’s Health Department,
which, on a budget of less than $4,000,000
takes care of 7,500,000 people, reported its
lowest death-rate on record for 1935 (9°9) ;
its lowest infant mortality rate (47-8 per
1,000 births); and the fewest diphtheria
mortalities (66 deaths) ; the fewest typhoid
deaths (37); and reduced mortality for
pneumonia, tuberculosis, appendicitis and
suicide. Generally speaking, certain diseases
of middle life increased. Commissioner J. L.
Rice in his annual report noted that while the
birth-rate was 35 in 1900, it is now 14.
Average age has also increased. Those over
sixty-five years of age constituted 2-8 per
cent. of the city’s population in 1900; in
1935 they were 4 per cent. Accordingly, Dr.
Rice thinks increased dependency in old age
quite certain, since there will be fewer

children to care for the aged. The conclusion
does not seem to me to follow necessarily.

Miscellaneous Notes

Dr. James J. Walsh, a well-known Catholic
physician of New York City, created something of a stir recently in admitting in a
meeting before a Catholic group that the socalled safe period was not yet well established by medical science. This is the first
time, to my knowledge, that a Roman Catholic physician, at least one who has been strong
in his condemnation of contraception, has
publicly admitted that the Church has
founded its programme upon a technique as
yet not completely scientifically demonstrated.

We regret to record the death, on January
6th, of Dr. William J. Robinson, editor of the
Critic and Guide and prolific author of many
popular books on sex instruction. For three
or four decades Dr. Robinson has waged a
courageous campaign for sexual enlightenment including instruction on contraception.
This he did at a time when such views were
not commonly expressed.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVIII, No. 1.
