BIOLOGY AND EUGENICS

Being a Request to Certain Professional Biologists

By MAJOR LEONARD DARWIN, D.Sc.

ANY will no doubt have read with

much interest Professor A. V. Hill’s
Sidgwick Lecture, published with
the issue of Nature of January 3rd, in which
he expresses thoughts of great value
to us all. Here I should like to use it, if
I may, as a convenient if not an altogether
appropriate peg on which to hang a plea for
the more open support of eugenics on the
part of certain biologists.

The general reader does not absorb many
actual facts from an address, whilst often
retaining permanently some strong general
impressions, and I will begin by asking what
is the general impression concerning eugenics likely to be produced by the following
sentences taken from this lecture :

‘There are many common fallacies
about inheritance, derived from imperfect
experimental knowledge or by false deduction from experience. Much of so-called
eugenics is based on such fallacies.”’

In the absence of any quotations bearing
on this point, the general reader will be in
no better position than I am in attempting
to decide what should be classed as eugenics
and what as so-called eugenics, and it seems
likely that the public will be led to accept
that alternative which best justifies them in
throwing away all eugenic literature unread.
If we eugenists blunder, we want to be set
right by experts, whilst vague criticism
impossible to answer does nothing but harm.
We are told that a ‘‘ type of eugenics, based
on the analogy of the domestic animals, does
not lie within the bounds of practicability.’’
But what responsible eugenist has ever advocated such a system as that alluded to in the
quotation given from Professor Jennings’s
book? And may not the general reader

21

thus be led to imagine that nothing useful
in regard to human breeding can be learnt
from the study of animal life?

Professor Hill tells us that if we could
prevent parenthood amongst all mental defectives we should on certain assumptions
reduce their numbers by 11 per cent. in the
next generation; and we thank him for
definitely saying that this. should, if
possible, be done. But he unfortunately
goes on to say of this procedure that if
‘“ repeated in the next generation it would
have comparatively little additional effect.’’
Now I am informed on good authority that
by the same method of calculation it can be
shown that there would be a reduction in
these hypothetical circumstances of about
27 per cent. in three generations. Would
Professor Hill consider the diminution of,
say, nearly 100,000 mental defectives in a
century to be but a slight achievement? If
he had mentioned this latter deduction,
which he could have done with no greater
inaccuracy as regards actual facts, he would
have left a far more hopeful impression on
the minds of his readers.

A little later on in this address certain
figures are given which have every appearance of being quoted from a paper published
by Professor Punnett, with, as I believe, a
different object in view. As here given,
they indicate that it would take between
two and three thousand years by eugenic
means to reduce the incidence of mental
defect to I in 10,000. This statement is so
surprising that it may well drive all that has
been said before out of the head of the
casual reader, and it is hardly possible to
conceive figures which, standing alone,
would be better calculated to leave an erroneous impression on the mind. All the main
underlying assumptions are inaccurate if
22

judged by existing conditions, though this
is not my main point; for the necessary
corrections might tell in both directions.
What should be noted is that the unchallenged calculations of Dr. R. A. Fisher
show that, on the same assumptions, mental
defect would be reduced by 17 per cent. in
a single generation, this being comparable
to the above-mentioned 11 per cent. Professor Punnett’s figures can only be fairly
quoted as showing that if mental defect
were to be reduced to what may be called
manageable proportions, then no doubt
further progress by any means now known
would be very slow indeed. This moral not
being clearly stated, the main effect of these
startling figures will be to discourage anyone who is thinking of aiding in the eugenic
campaign.

The figure of 17 per cent. above mentioned has no doubt been vigorously
attacked by certain high authorities, and on
this question I wish to make two observations. If it can be proved that eugenists
were too optimistic in the earlier stages of
their campaign, is not this a common and a
venial fault? Are all democratic institutions now to be condemned because the
radical of times gone by painted democracy
in too glowing colours? All we ask is that
biologists and others would quote our actual
words, which they seldom do; for then we
should be able either to defend ourselves
vigorously or openly to sit in sackcloth and
ashes.

My second point is that for the following
reasons there are good grounds for believing
that the birth rate of mental defectives,
taken as a class, is low, this being quite
consistent with the fact that those individuals who are allowed to procreate are very
fertile. Nature prevents many imbeciles
and all idiots from breeding. Nature also
seems to have implanted in the minds of
normal women an instinctive dislike of cohabiting with mentally-defective men. Considerable numbers of mental defectives are
prevented from procreating by being placed
in institutions or under guardianship. And,
possibly most important of all, successful
endeavours are constantly being made pri
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

vately in many classes of society to prevent
feeble-minded relatives from breeding. In
short, nature and society combined are now
really doing a great deal to reduce the incidence of mental defect, a fact of which little
or no notice has been taken in _ these
discussions.

Now the reduction of 17 per cent. above
mentioned was avowedly calculated on an
erroneous assumption underlying Professor Punnett’s figures, namely, that all
mental defectives are normally fertile; and
if allowance be made for what is now being
done in the way of rendering them infertile,
this figure may be in accordance with what
Dr. Tredgold, I believe, suggests as now
being practically possible, namely, a reduction of 5 per cent. in a generation. But let
me clearly state that, in the existing shameful absence of reliable statistics, I make no
comment one way or the other on the
correctness of this last mentioned estimate.

Later on in this same address appear the
following words. ‘‘ By eugenics, so far as
it is practicable—and with further knowledge it may become not only practicable but
easy—we shall ensure that the survival of
the fittest. . . .”’ As to eugenic reform
becoming easy, a reference is doubtless here
made to the possibility of discovering a
method of recognizing the apparently normal carriers of hereditary defects. This
would indeed be a splendid achievement,
greatly facilitating the elimination of insanity, mental defect, and other less common evils. It would, in fact, render possible
a reduction in what is known as the social
problem group, this being probably an
essential step if racial decay is to be avoided.
But it must be remembered that this riddle
may remain unsolved for long or for ever,
and that when solved, the task of preventing
parenthood by compulsion or persuasion
amongst the many hundreds of thousands
of ‘carriers’ of recessive factors would
remain one of great difficulty.

Those who are induced to wait until the
task of the eugenic reformer becomes easy
will wait for ever before putting their
hands to the plough. Moreover, we should
indeed be guided to some extent by our
BIOLOGY AND EUGENICS

knowledge of the process of evolution in
nature, and we should remember that in
that drama the elimination of harmful recessives, though an essential feature, has
hardly played the leading part; for fewer
recessive defects are in all probability carried by monkeys, for example, than by
civilized men. Other means must be
adopted when trying to prevent the dying
out of so many of our best stocks, now going
on at an alarming rate. In fact, innumerable opportunities for benefiting future
generations are being lost every day.

Then as to eugenic reform being pursued
as far as is practicable, it is possible that
some readers will be led by these words to
what is, I hope, a false conclusion, namely,
that Professor Hill thinks that little can

23

now be accomplished in this direction. All
that I have been saying has indeed been
with the object of leading up to an expression of the most earnest hope that biologists
without exception will in the future endorse
all those eugenic reforms which meet with
their approval in the most open, unequivocal, and decisive manner possible. Let them
criticize what they hold to be erroneous as
strongly as they like, making it quite clear
whom they hold to be the sinners; for the
opinion of biologists is of primary importance in these regions of thought. But
let it also be recognized by them that the
half-hearted and indecisive attitude adopted
by some of their leaders constitutes a definite impediment both to racial progress and
to the prevention of racial decay.

—_$—_$—  — ey”

EULA NVN EAS ACE CUE PUUDUEUOVEUOCHUGERVONUTETEL COUNTED OA TOT ETD AAT OA ERATED TET ATO es

BIBLIOGRAPHIC SERVICE

FOR THE

Journal of Morphology and Physiology
The Journal of Comparative Neurology
The American Journal of Anatomy
The Anatomical Record .

The Journal of Experimental Zoology

American Anatomical Memoirs

American Journal of Physical Anthropology
Folia Anatomica Japonica (Tokyo, Japan)
Physiological Zodlogy (Chicago, Illinois)
Stain Technology (Geneva, New York)

Ecological Monographs (Durham, North Carolina)

EARLY SERIES
Bibliographic reference cards, without abstracts, for articles which have appeared in the

Journal of Morphology, from Vol. 1 (1887) to JUNC ISt, IQTZ .....ccccecccececccsesnceencesececevsesstessceseesuceuens 380 titles
The Journal of Comparative Neurology, from Vol. 1 (1891) to June ISt, IQ17 .......ccccseceeeeeeeees 459 ‘455
The American Journal of Anatomy, Vol. 1 (1901) to June ISt, 917  .....cecccecccseeseeceeeeenceeseeeeees 34455
The Anatomical Record, Vol. 1 (1906) to JuMe ISt, IQI7Z — ..cceiec cece ccc ceeencee cee eneeeeueeseeeeeesaeeenseeseeeeneens 404 55

The Journal of Experimental Zodlogy, Vol. 1 (I904) to June ISt, IQI7  .....c cece cece cee eeee ens 42355
The American Anatomical Memoirs Qo
These cards, containing full bibliographic references, enable a subscriber to have complete author and
subject tnMises of all articles which have appeared in the above journals from their beginning to date
mentioned.
The price for these Bibliographic Reference Cards is two cents for the first card of each title. Additional
cards for each title may be had at one-half cent per card when ordered at the same time.
ADVANCE ABSTRACT SHEETS
bearing ten or more abstracts without bibliographic references, are sent to members of the American
Association of Anatomists and to members of the American Society of Zodlogists, without cost, and sold
to others at $3.00 per annum for all abstract sheets issued. This is a convenient means of selecting such
articles as may be desired in reprint form. Prices of reprints are given on each Advance Abstract Sheet.
BIBLIOGRAPHIC CARDS a.
bearing authors’ abstracts with complete bibliographic reference for all articles appearing in The Wistar
Institute journals and those co-operating, $5.00 per year.
Abstract cards may be obtained from the beginning of the series, June 1st, 1917.
Each abstract card is issued to subscribers before the complete paper appears in a journal.
ABSTRACTS IN BOOK FORM
Abstracts with authors’ and analytical subject indices are brought together periodically
Volumes 1 to 5, covering the abstracts issued from June ist, 1917, to December 31st, 1929,
Liberal discount to subscribers to the Bibliographic Service Cards.

Terre ee eee eee ee eee ee ee ee eee ee ee ee eee eee ee eee ee ee eee ee ee eee ee eee ee

in book form.
$5.00 each.

THE WISTAR INSTITUTE OF ANATOMY AND BIOLOGY, Philadelphia, Pa., U.S.A.

SUTAINAEUEANUADLADEODGEOEAUGEAGSONERUAGNOUENUNUEOUCODEGGSREDSOUEAUAGENGEAEODCOUONSSDONDENOUOLSSNOAUGOUENNRUOONEGGONASONEOUGSOOOOUEOOEHCGUOOONGEOONAUCONEUEOANCUEGONGESNNGzSINGOT
STHUANIIUANLAUAQUAYUNSAEAUOQUUNANERSEEUUAQGGGUANUCEEEUEOUUGGRAEOOEEEELUUAUCOOGENALUEUUOUOEACANNLUUOGUOAOOONEUTOALUUOUQLOOOENEOUOQUGOOOOQAERUGUEUnOUOAAOSNOnEEUTOGUUCUONUAEE

STAN AANTNA LTDA EEE
