THE EUGENICS SOCIETY
STATEMENT OF AIMS *

in 1907-8. At first it was entitled the
Eugenics Education Society, but the
present title was adopted in 1926.

The General Aims of the Soczety put briefly
are:

To study the influences that may modify
inborn human qualities; to formulate and
support policies for developing these qualities
to the utmost advantage; to promote research on eugenic problems; to. foster a
responsible attitude to parenthood; to guide
public opinion in these matters.

These aims fall into three parts: the study
of the scientific aspects of the subject, the
education of the public, and the consideration
of practical policies by which good effects
may be produced. More detailed accounts
of these studies and policies will be found
below.

The Society every year holds about six
meetings open to the public, each of which
is devoted to a lecture or a discussion on
some pertinent question.

Once a year the Galton Lecture is delivered
to the Society by some distinguished person
dealing with an aspect of the subject in
which he is an expert.

The Society publishes THE EUGENICS
REVIEW as a quarterly journal.

It publishes Occasional Papers, of which
a list will be found on page 2

The specialist library of the Society is
available to Fellows and Members.

The Soczety’s financial position is favourable compared with that of many other such
voluntary organizations. A legacy from an
Australian pastoralist in 1929, Mr. Henry

“Tin: Society was organized and founded

Twitchin, has provided capital assets and .

income which have enabled the Soczety to

assist other societies with cognate aims.
Mainly through its council—elected each

year at the annual general meeting—the

# See p. 6.

23

Society works out the detail of its studies
and policies. This is partly done by taking
note of the activities of other societies and
workers, some of whose aims are cognate
with eugenics, and by co-operating with
them.

THE MEANING OF EUGENICS

Man is gifted with pity and other kindly
feelings; he has also the power of preventing
many kinds of suffering. I conceive it to fall well
within his province to replace Natural Selection
by other processes that are more merciful and
not less effective. This is precisely the aim of
eugenics.

This quotation is from Memories of My
Life (1908, pp. 322-3) by Sir Francis Galton,
F.R.S., O.M. (1822-1911), the founder of
the subject of eugenics.

Galton grew up under the profound influence of the writings of his first-cousin
Charles Darwin, and he devoted most of his
long life to the study of how the principles
of evolution might affect humanity. In this
he drew lessons from the animal kingdom,
where the process of Natural Selection usually
controls animal populations by the brutal
process of causing each generation to produce
too many offspring and then killing off the
less fit among them in the course of the
Struggle for Life. It was recognized that
the same rule used to apply to mankind in the
past, but during the last century or so, with
the great developments in the fields of science
and technology, it seemed to have ceased to
operate at any rate in western countries. It is
true that the old system with ‘nature red
in tooth and claw”’ was ruthless, but still
it did ensure the Survival of the Fittest. In
the quotation cited above, Galton expressed
the hope that this process might be replaced
by something more in conformity with man’s
moral sense. He asked whether by the
exercise of his intelligence, man might not
be able to discover a way which would replace

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, April 1958, 50, 1
24 : oe _ THE EUGENICS REVIEW —

nature’s brutal methods by something more .

merciful and not less effective. He recognized
that this change will not occur of itself, and
he therefore set to work to study the subject
of eugenics, whereby man might hope to
accomplish this tremendous change.

It was Galton who invented the name
Eugenics. It is intended to signify the study
of the problems of increasing the good inborn
qualities and decreasing the bad in the
successive generations of a people. The
term might have been used for the improvement of any race of animals, but in fact it
has always been applied only to mankind.

The question then arises as to what would
constitute an improvement in the inborn
qualities of the race. Galton gave a considerable list of qualities relating to physique,
health, ability and character. No doubt
some would emphasize one among the
qualities. that he named more than the rest,

and some would add further ones to the list,.

but there would surely be a broad consensus
of opinion on the subject. The aim then of
the eugenist is to study what.is happening
to the successive generations of the human
race, and to see whether policies can be
found which will improve their inborn
qualities. To quote from Galton again:

Let us for a moment suppose that the practice
of eugenics should hereafter raise the average
quality of our nation to that of its better moiety

._ at the present day and consider the gain. The
general tone of domestic, social and political life
would be higher. The race as a whole would be
less foolish, less frivolous, less excitable and
politically more provident than now. (Eugenics:
Its Definition, Scope and Aims. 1904.)

It is not, of course, enough merely to set
up an ideal, but the practical question arises
how this ideal is to be achieved. It would be
a formidable enough question anyhow, but
it has to be recognized that at the present
time many causes are operating which trend
in the precisely opposite direction. The
weight of taxation, the cost of housing, the
cost of further education, make it difficult
for many parents who undoubtedly have
valuable inborn qualities to have as many
children as they would like. On the other
hand there is a fraction of the population

with. undoubtedly inferior qualities, producing large families which all too often
develop the same characteristics as their
parents. There is a serious danger that this
fraction may be increasing in numbers relative to the other. The eugenist is acutely
conscious of such dangers as this, and it is
largely in the hope of overcoming them that
he explores the various problems that are
described below.

EUGENIC SCIENCE
Heredity

The science of genetics, that is to say the
study of the inheritance of various qualities
in successive generations of an animal, has
made enormous advances during the past
sixty years. This has been mainly accomplished through the study of various quick-.
breeding animals (in particular certain flies
which go through a generation in a month,
and mice which do so four times a year) so
that a great number of successive generations
can be observed. The study of the genetics.
of slow-breeding man is much more difficult;
and for the most part it has only been
achieved in countries which have good
medical services, so that pedigrees could be
traced of those suffering from various complaints. In this way many human diseases
and abnormalities have been recognized as
behaving according to genetic principles;
indeed much more is known about the
inheritance of diseases and defects than
about the inheritance of any of the valuable
qualities. But at best this study could only
involve a few of the past generations of
mankind, and it must take many generations
—which at best means several centuries—
before as much can be known of the genetic
constitution of man as is already known for
some of the quick-breeding animals.

Without this detail of genetic knowledge,
however, it is still possible to do a great deal.
Animal breeders have in the past produced
enormous changes in the characteristics of
our domestic animals with the much simpler
guide that lzke produces like, and the same

- principle can be applied to man. There is of

course no certainty about it, but we know
a _ STATEMENT OF AIMS ~ | 26

that the child will usually inherit a great
many of its parents’ characteristics. This
should be quite enough to make eugenic
policies very profitable to the human race.

‘It is hardly necessary to say there is no
proposal to take the parallel of the animal
breeder closely, involving as it does the
complete control of his animals. Such a
policy would be clearly intolerable to human
beings, even if it were possible. Furthermore,
the parallel fails because of the complexity
of human characteristics compared with the
rather few features which alone interest the
breeders of animals. Nevertheless much
could be done on a purely voluntary basis to
encourage those in the human population
who are evidently valuable to have more
children, and those who are judged inferior
to have less. :

Nature and Nurture

Man is always under the influence both of
his inborn qualities and of his environment,
and it would be most desirable to be able to
assess the relative importance of these rival
influences. There seem to be only two ways
in which this can be even attempted. The
first is the study of “identical twins,”
who certainly possess the same inborn
characteristics; the interesting cases are those
where the two twins have been exposed to
very different conditions of life, but the
number of known examples is not very great.
The second is the study of children possessing
usually quite different inborn characters,
who have been reared together in the same
environment, for example in an orphanage.
Both these groups very much repay study,
but it must be recognized that they are only
a small fraction of the population, and there
will always be an immensely larger number
in whom it is almost impossible to distinguish
the influences of the inborn qualities from
those of the environment.

The Family

It is necessary for the most part then, in
deciding on eugenic policies, to accept the
fact that the environment must be considered
as well as the inborn characteristics. With

this in mind the Soczety regards the family
as the centre of its interest, and this has been
the guiding principle of most of its studies.
If, as suggested by Galton, man is to succeed
in replacing the ruthless method of Natural
Selection by something more merciful, this
necessarily implies some limitation of population. Through the wonderful developments
of medical science the average length of
human life has been enormously prolonged,
and some factor must be found to balance
this great success in death control. Consequently the Soczety is deeply interested in
all the various methods of birth control. It
regards the adoption of planned conceptions
as one of the chief aims of the eugenist. Soa
main object of eugenic policy is the encouragement of appropriate couples to produce
healthy, energetic and intelligent families
by design, that is by planned parenthood
involving suitably spaced births. Conversely,
couples suffering from inborn physical and
mental disabilities can be saved from giving
birth to children who are likely to inherit
the same handicaps.

EUGENIC STUDIES

In view of these considerations a list
may be given of the main subjects in which
the Society has been and is concerned.

Human Heredity

As described above, this study only progresses slowly. Its results are watched by
the Society, but the work is for the most part
done by professional biologists in universities
or research laboratories.

Measurement of Qualities

Qualities such as height, weight or
longevity are easily measured, but more
important ones such as health, intelligence
or character less easily so. The Soczety is
deeply interested in all developments by
which human qualities can be measured,
because it may be hoped that such measurements, when perfected, will help towards
making easier a classification of people in
regard to their eugenic value.
26 | - THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Family Records

To enable studies of human heredity to
continue over long periods family records
are valuable. They should record details
such as health, physique, longevity, intelligence, and also the attainments in life, of all
the known near relatives on both male and
female sides of a family. Far too few records
of this kind exist at present. The Soczety can
supply on demand a schedule adapted to the
purpose.

Problem Families

Individuals suffering from such severe
mental handicaps that they are incapable of
managing their own affairs are now largely
cared for in institutions. The Problem

Family is the next higher level. These are

families where the parents, because of subnormal intelligence or unstable character,
do not provide minimum standards of care
for their often numerous children. The
parents are usually difficult to reclaim, and
the children all too often inherit the same
qualities, and in addition they are handicapped by growing up in such bad conditions.
Apart from other considerations, such
families are a great expense to the country,
both by creating slums, in the necessity for
special schools, and in actions in the criminal
courts.

A study has been made by the Society of
such families. It explores the best ways of
identifying them and it considers how afterwards they can best be treated. This type
of study is conveniently called Negative
Eugenics.

Promising Families

There is the opposite question, Positive.

Eugenics: the identification of families which
are likely to be exceptionally valuable to the
community. This is much harder than the
identification of the Problem Families, and
the best starting point would seem to be with
the schools. Every schoolmaster is aware of
children in his class who are notable for their
valuable qualities; they are by no means
always to be found at the top of the class, but
they are the type who hold the promise of

reliability, energy and general ability of the
kinds which will later make valuable citizens.

The Society has initiated an inquiry along
these lines. Its aim is that steps should be
taken to encourage such Promising Families
to have more children. It should be noted
that the project is not intended to include
the discovery of the rare genius (who anyhow
will be self-revealing); it is the more difficult
problem of discovering the next level, that
of the much greater number of families that.
will produce the generally valuable citizens
referred to in the second quotation given
above from the writings of Galton. Promising
Families call for much further investigation,
and the Society regards this matter as one of
the most useful things which it is doing.

Population Problems

The present rapid increases in world
population constitute one of the central
features of world development. Whatever
view may be taken of these increases and of
the possibilities or expectations of feeding
further thousands of millions of people,
ultimate limitation is quite inevitable. Thus,
whether the mode of limitation is to be
starvation, warfare or deliberate contraception, the eugenist cannot fail to be concerned
with the subject of population numbers.

Demographers study the numbers of
births, deaths, marriages and migrations in
the various countries, and as far as they can
they make estimates of the qualities of the
individuals concerned. All this is of immense
importance to the eugenist. In particular
he wants to know the relation between
fertility and survival on the one hand, and
such qualities as intelligence and character

‘on the other. It is important to him to know

what proportion of conceptions is deliberately
planned by the parents, and whether communities which extensively practice birth.
control are maintaining their numbers. On
the principle quoted from Galton, that the
ruthless method of Natural Selection for
controlling populations might be replaced by
something more merciful, it is of the very
greatest importance to the eugenist to know
how far such methods as birth control are
proving effective in maintaining population
STATEMENT OF AIMS: | | 27

as against uncontrolled conceptions, and in

‘particular he wants to know the effect of.

birth control in altering the relative fertility
of groups of differing genetic constitution.
All this information is clearly very hard
to gain, and difficult to analyse, but the
eugenist makes every effort to encourage the
demographer in his study of such matters.

Race Mixture

This a subject of profound importance to
the world, and with ever-increasing ease of
travel it is fairly certain that mixed marriages
will increase in frequency. The subject
excites violent passions in both directions,
so that it is hardly possible at the present
time to get it considered without arousing
deep prejudices. It is certainly of great
interest to eugenists, but it is difficult to
collect impartial evidence on the subject.
It is to be hoped nevertheless that information will be gradually accumulated on this
most important matter.

Migration

Ease of travel is also increasing migrations
from one country to another. This has a
national interest to us, because at the
present time it is occurring both ways not
only in Britain, but throughout the Commonwealth. It is of the greatest importance to
know how far the balance of eugenic qualities
is being disturbed by these migrations, and
it is a question to which the Soctety is giving
its attention.

Economic and Social Problems

The list given here is of subjects in the
public eye which are obviously connected
with eugenic matters. Some have been
considered by Royal Commissions and other
bodies. They are for the most part related
to the question of the family and its size:

HOUSING POLICIES AGE OF MARRIAGE
FAMILY ALLOWANCES AGE OF RETIREMENT
EDUCATIONAL REFORM SERVICES FORTHE OLD
SOCIAL MOBILITY DEATH DUTIES

5—EX

EUGENIC POLICIES

The studies enumerated above show the
subjects which interest the Society, and on
them they wish to get as much information
as possible. But the purpose of information
is to lead to action, and, since there is little
reliable information on some of these subjects,
policies determining action will be liable tomodification as new knowledge accumulates.
Consequently it is natural that the Soczety’s
immediate interests should be changing from
time to time.

Many of the subjects considered are being
studied by other bodies, each with its own
special interests, and, to save duplication of.
work, the general policy of the Soczety has
been to give assistance and co-operation to
such bodies in so far as they are connected
with the Society’s own interests. |

As has been said the central interest of the
Society is the family, and its policies have
mainly been adopted in this connection.
People usually enjoy what they do well, so
that there is a normal and natural tendency
for good parents to have larger families than
bad, though in the past the tendency was
often upset by the occurrence of unwanted
pregnancies among those who did not make
good parents. With the use of any of the
methods of birth control now available,
there is no need to leave the matter to chance
in this way any longer, and the couples who
make bad parents can be shown how to
avoid having a large family. In the case of
the good parents similar advice may be
useful, though, of course, here with the
opposite intention, but for them even more
important is the matter of overcoming the
economic penalties that are apt to attach to
a large family. All these matters are very
much the concern of the Society, and they
seem a particularly profitable line to follow,
because both for good and for bad parents
they are likely to be co-operating with the
natural instincts of the individuals.- In
general the Soczety would like to see eugenically inferior couples content to aim at one
or two children. Conversely, they would like
to see eugenically superior couples aim at
four or more children.
28. | _ THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Birth Control

For planned parenthood birth control is
practically indispensable, and it has to be
recognized. that one of the most formidable
difficulties is that some of the methods, in
particular those connected with the use of
appliances, are forbidden to some people by
religious doctrines. There is very great need
for the extension of researches on the general
subject of methods of birth control. It is of
importance to the whole world, in particular
to the over-populated countries of Asia and
elsewhere, that cheap and easy methods of
birth control should be developed. The
Society strongly supports these activities;
in particular it welcomes researches into
methods which would be effective, acceptable
on economic grounds, simple to use, and not
contrary to the doctrines referred to above.

Health Services

The Society associates itself with PEP
(Political and Economic Planning, 1948
Population Policy in Great Britain)
in supporting the proposal to establish
Parenthood Centres as part of the Health
Services. Such.centres would deal with many
aspects of parenthood which are important
eugenically. Among these the following may
be singled out especially.

Marriage Guidance. This includes sexinstruction to adolescents and young adults,
more specialized instruction to those about
to marry, and help and advice in the case of
marriages which are in danger of foundering.

Eugenic Prognoses. Guidance on genetic
problems is sometimes sought by those who
fear they may be affected by a hereditary
taint which they might pass on to their
children. Facilities should be provided within the Health Service to give them information about such dangers in so far as it is
available.

Pre-Marital Health Examinations. Such
examinations have been made compulsory
in certain countries, but there is reason to

believe that the intentions of this are often

evaded. The Soczety advocates a wort

system for Great Britain.

Irrespective of any visible signs of illhealth, physical examinations are already
carried out at various stages of life, such as
at schools and before engagement in certain
professions. There is no stage when such an
examination is more appropriate than before
marriage. Not only might the examination
detect threats to the success of the marriage
such as venereal disease or the early stages
of tuberculosis, but it would also give opportunity for advice about intimate problems
that may be causing anxiety to either party.
Such matters could also be discussed as the
spacing of child births and how it should be
related to the ages of the parents. ~

Advice on Birth Control. The Soctety
supports the Royal Commission on. Population* which recommended that, whereas
the local authorities are at present only
empowered to give advice on birth control
for reasons of health, this restriction should
be removed. The advice should be such as
would conform to the couple's religious
beliefs.

Infecundity. It is estimated that something like ro per cent of married couples are
involuntarily sterile; they want children but
do not succeed in having them. Such conditions, whether in the male or the female, are
mainly not congenital nor hereditary. They
can often be diagnosed and cured, as can
be cases of sub-fecundity where children
have been born, but more have been wanted
in vain. The Society supports the Royal
Commission on Population in advocating
further developments of this service.

Artificial Insemination. Closely connected
with infecundity is the question of artificial
insemination, which may arise when it is the
man who is at fault, either through being
naturally sterile, or through carrying some
hereditary taint which he fears to pass on to
the next generation. Artificial insemination

* Royal Commission on Population Report,
H.M. Stationery Office, Cmd. 7695.

1949.
STATEMENT OF AIMS 29

has been a subject of acute controversy on

moral grounds, and obvious legal questions —

might arise from it in connection with the
inheritance of property. The Soczety holds
that the practice should not be prohibited,
though it recognizes that attention must be
given to these moral and legal aspects, and
to prevailing sentiments on the subject.

Voluntary Sterilization. The introduction
of compulsory sterilization in Germany
during the war brought this subject into
discredit. The valuable possibilities of a
controlled voluntary measure have been forgotten, and yet the process has been legalized
in Scandinavian countries on a voluntary
basis and it appears to work well there.

Over twenty years ago a Departmental
Committee (Brock Committee, 1934, Cmd.
4485) unanimously approved the principle
that where a person suffering froma hereditary
infirmity applies, it should be admissible to
have a sterilizing operation performed.
There have been legal uncertainties which
have deterred doctors from taking action on
such grounds, and the Committee recommended that, subject to safeguards, the
process should be legalized. No action,
however, was taken, and not long afterwards
the idea appears to have been dropped,
partly no doubt on account of the dangerous
parallel of the compulsory sterilization
practised in Germany.

In view of its concern for the welfare of
the family as a whole, the Soczety holds that
voluntary sterilization should be legalized..

Termination of Pregnancy. The Society
holds that doctors should be permitted by
law to terminate a pregnancy at the request
of the parents and under suitable safeguards.
This would arise if there was good reason to
expect that the child would later suffer from
conditions like those regarded by the Brock
Committee as justifying the sterilization of
a parent.

General

The Soczety recognizes that many of its
questions of policy involve important moral

and ethical issues which demand informed
and impartial study.

The Soczety supports recommendations
made by the Royal Commission on Population on many subjects connected with the
welfare of the family. These include considerations of housing schemes, etc., suitable
for families of varying sizes and ages;
home-helps and nursery schools, etc.

Another recommendation that was made
was in connection with taxation. The
Commission recommended that the existing
flat-rate of child allowances should be
replaced by a graded system adjusted to the
size of the income and to the number of the
children. With its interest in the Promising
Families, the Soczety strongly endorses these
recommendations.

Eugenics is the science which deals with all

influences that improve the inborn qualities of a

race; also with those that develop them to the
utmost advantage.—Sir FRANCIS GALTON, 1904.

PAST ACTIVITIES OF THE EUGENICS
SOCIETY
Publications :
(1) THE EUGENICS REVIEW. Thisquarterly
learned journal has been issued since 1909.
(2) Occasional Papers. These special stud
ies have been published from time to time
since 1945.

Mental Deficiency Act 1912

This Act, authorizing the segregation of
mental defectives, resulted from the success
ful advocacy of the Society and other bodies.

Children’s Allowances

The Society's plea for Children’s Allowances for income-tax payers was largely met
by the Finance Act 1928.

Voluntary Sterilization

The Soctety’s proposals (1927-32) for the
legalizing of voluntary sterilization were
largely adopted by the Departmental Committee on Sterilization (Brock Committee,
1934). This Committee’s recommendations

have not yet been implemented by Parliament,
30 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Social Problem Group

The Society sponsored Mr. E. J. Lidbetter’s
now classical researches on the “ Social
Problem Group” (Heredity and the Social
Problem Group: Arnold, 1933). It has since
published a symposium on the same subject
(A Social Problem Group? Oxford University
Press, 1937), and a volume of recent studies
(Problem Families: Five Inquiries. Eugenics
Society, 1952).

Birth Control

The Soczety encouraged research on
methods of birth control (1930-6) and it
assisted the discovery of the ‘“ Volpar”’
group of spermicides, the first complete
reports of which were published in THE
EUGENICS REVIEW.

Morbid Inheritance

The Society produced a symposium by
medical specialists (The Chances of Morbid
Inheritance. H. K. Lewis. 1934) whose
object is to guide the medical profession in
advising persons with abnormal family
histories as to problems of marriage and
parenthood. A pre-marital health schedule
was prepared (1933) for use by doctors who
are asked to advise on fitness for marriage.

Family Records

A volume has been made available (1934),
wherein people can enter full records of
genetic and other features of their families
and ancestries, and which can be handed on
and kept up to date from generation to
generation:

Research Fellowships

Through its Darwin Research Fellowships
(1932-9) the Society has promoted and
subsidized research into the inheritance of
intelligence, the factors determining occupational selection and success, race crossing,
social and economic factors impeding early
marriage, twins, etc.

Annals of Eugenics

Between 1934 and 1940 the ‘Society
financially assisted the Galton Laboratory
of the University of London in the publication
of this Journal.

Population Policy in Great Britain

The Soczety, jointly with PEP (Political
and Economic Planning) established in 1936
the Population Policies Committee which
produced in 1948 the report entitled
Population Policy in Great Britain.

Population Investigation Committee

The Society called together (1936) and
helped to subsidize this Committee, which
has been responsible, directly and indirectly,
for inquiries of eugenic importance and has
itself become important. Among these
studies have been the relation between
intelligence and fertility (promoted by the
Scottish Council for Research in Education),
and the proportion of pregnancies which are
planned. These inquiries led to the more
comprehensive investigation promoted by
the Royal Commission on Population and
sponsored by the Royal College of Obstetriclans and Gynaecologists. (See Family
Limitation and Its Influence on Human
Fertility in the Past Fifty Years, by E.
Lewis-Faning. Papers of the Royal Commission on Population. Vol. 1. 1949.)

World Population and Resources The Society participated with PEP
(Political and Economic Planning) in the
production of two broadsheets and a volume
World Population and Resources (PEP.

1956).
Infant Sickness and Mortality

The Soczety financed and published a
report on this topic, following an inquiry by
the Medical Officers of Health in fifteen
special survey areas. (Morbidity and
Mortality in the First Year of Life. Grundy
and Lewis-Faning. 1957.)

Promising Families
An inquiry is in progress (1957).
