REVIEWS OF BOOKS

here is that translocation-type Down’s syndrome is probably more often than not a new
mutation in the affected child. Thus, to quote from page 55, ‘“‘Parents of a translocation
patient, on the other hand, may wish to discontinue having children in the face of a high
risk of recurrence’’, might be altered to suggest that, on finding a translocation patient, the
parents’ own chromosomes should be studied and genetic counselling given accordingly.

Many other chapters are admirable, notably those dealing with the basic chemistry of
chromosomes and genes (here the author wisely refrains from listing the base-sequence codes
for amino acids before they have been properly worked out); the relation between genes and
protein synthesis; and linkage. The mathematics is sufficient for the needs of most field
workers without being too advanced. The reader is taught something of probability and
how to assess the significance of his results. It is nice to find a section devoted to the chisquare analysis, and another to the effect of ascertainment on tests for recessive inheritance.
Standard error too is explained in the chapter on Population Genetics under “Accuracy of
Gene Frequency Estimates’’.

Twin studies are dealt with briefly and with more emphasis on their disadvantages than
their uses. One is reluctant to accept the conclusion that, “In practice, the type of information to be gained from twins is very limited in scope” since careful twin studies have made
major contributions in deciding the extent to which both normal characters and disease are
genetically determined, schizophrenia is just one example of many.

For single gene effects, there is no systematic consideration of family pattern, relation
between incidence, mutation rate and fitness (the equation is given only for autosomal
recessives), and implications for the family for the three major types of inheritance. Instead, different aspects are considered under “‘Mutations’’, ““Tests of Genetic Hypothesis’,
‘Population Genetics” and “Analysis of Pedigrees”. Genetic counselling is occasionally
mentioned but some important points are not well brought out. For instance, when considering dominant inheritance, the author stipulates that “Every affected person must have
at least one affected parent’, and goes on later to mention genetic counselling in such a
family without stressing that the faulty gene must start somewhere as a new mutation,
when both parents and all the sibs will be normal. Also, in “Recessive Inheritance” he works
out the probabilities that various relatives of an affected homozygote are heterozygous
carriers (accounting for the rather unwieldy diagram on the cover) but in practice this has
little application in medical genetics, where most recessive conditions are rare. Heterozygote detection by biochemical tests is much more applicable in genetic counselling and
could have followed the paragraph on galactosaemia on page 162.

In general, however, this book can be recommended as a good up-to-date introductory
work. No student should find it difficult; the print is clear and the style—with short phrases
and economy of words—easy to follow. H. B.

Winchester, A. M. Genetics: A Survey of the Principles of Heredity. Third edition. Boston,
1966. Houghton Mifflin (London, Constable). Pp. viii-++504. Price 60s.

Gottlieb, F. J. Developmental Genetics. Selected Topics in Modern Biology Series. London,
1966. Chapman and Hall. Pp. x-+118. Price 10s. 6d.

THE FACT THAT it has been considered worth while to produce a third edition of Professor Winchester’s textbook is a commendation in itself. The first edition was published in
1951 in the days before genetics went “‘modern’’, i.e. two years before Watson and Crick
produced their model of DNA. The new edition has been brought up to date to include
such topics as the genetic code with its codons, mutons and recons; the structure of haemoglobin with its opathies; the mapping of bacterial chromosomes; and so on.

The first fifteen or sixteen chapters cover the ground of classical genetics (particulate
inheritance, the physical basis of inheritance, segregation, linkage) adequately and well.

117
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

These chapters are easy and clear to read. The examples are taken from a wide range of
organisms, but animals are used more than plants to illustrate points, and human examples
are common. The subject is explained logically: by this I mean that descriptions of cell
division and chromosomal behaviour are given and then used to interpret genetical phenomena. There are still too many books about which describe Mendel’s experiments in the
first chapter and then enlarge upon a plethora of peculiar segregation ratios. In this way the
reader is persuaded that genetics is a somewhat mystical subject, although he gathers it
has some connection to structures found in cells (which are introduced about Chapter 5),

Winchester’s expositions are less sure in some of his later chapters. The chapter on the
“Gene control of cell activity” reads rather like a string of anecdotes. It is still too soon for
such a chapter to give a lot of answers, but the author could have improved the framework
wherein the partial answers are expressed. The chapters on mutation contain some odd
statements. For example the statement that “the mutation rate in Drosophila per generation
is much greater than the rate in man” requires a considerable amount of qualification.
Muller is quoted as the discoverer of the genetical effects of radiation once again, despite
Mavor’s right to the title.

The poorest chapter in the book is the one on population genetics. Polymorphism is
not even mentioned, and this makes discussion of population structure impossible, and
the account of the “‘decline in intelligence of the human population” facile.

Sex determination in man is described in terms which suggest that there is a similar
autosome/sex chromosome balance as in Diptera. For instance, it is stated that ‘in human
beings it appears as if a single X-chromosome can bring about the development of a female
body, but that two X-chromosomes are required for the development of normal ovarian
tissue and the secretion of the hormones required for maturity of the female organs and
reproduction’’. It would follow from this that triplo-X females are either super-females or
nymphomaniacs! No mention is made of the ideas of either M. F. Lyon or L. B. Russell.
There is a long chapter which is a “Survey of Human Heredity”’. This is a discursive list of
some of the inherited conditions known in man.

Most of the pictures and diagrams are good, although a few (such as the diagram of the
stages of mitosis) are not as informative as they could be. However, there is no doubt that
the good points of the book outweigh the bad. Furthermore, 500 pages of glossy American
textbook for three pounds is good value nowadays. Winchester’s Genetics can be regarded as
a good buy.

Developmental Genetics is a small paperback in a series conceived and first published
in the United States, entitled ‘Selected Topics in Modern Biology’’. The editor of the series
in a preface states that the “book will serve a dual need. It will introduce developmental
genetics to those to whom this is a new concept, and it will augment the knowledge of those
whose textbooks slight this important subject’. He may be right, but I doubt not that
students will do better to buy a good textbook than Professor Gottlieb’s book.

R. J. BERRY

Pratt, R. T. C. The Genetics of Neurological Disorders. London, 1967. Oxford University
Press. Pp. vii+ 310. Price 80s.

THIS IS THE second in a series of Monographs on Medical Genetics published by Oxford
University Press. The first was R. B. McConnell’s The Genetics of Gastro-intestinal Disorders

published last year.

' Dr. Pratt’s book certainly fulfils an important need for a well-documented (there are
over 2,800 references), up-to-date review of the genetics of neurological diseases. It is
primarily intended for the physician, to provide him with a review of genetic information

118
