 

  
  
 
 
   
 
    
 
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  

 

- President: Major LEonaRD: -Danw. ae . es

 

  

Vice=Presidents: Nemes
Sir JAMES Barr, M.D. Hon. Sir J. Finpuay,
Sir JAMES CRICHTON-BROWNE, F.R.S. Pror. STARR eee
Mr: MONTAGUE CRACKANTHORPE,' K.C, . Dr. A. PLOETZ..
BisHop D’Arcy. : PROF. BaV AED: F. RS.
Mr. W. C. MARSHALL. eee Gases
Members of. Councils) ae ee
‘Mr. Crorron BLack. — 3 Dr. F, W. Morr, ERS. e
S1r-E. BRABROOK, C.B. ae Mr. G. P: Mupem, °° =
- Mrs. THEODORE CHAMBERS. — MRks...E. F
Mr. R. NEwTON-CRANE. Mrs. G. Pot
Mr. A, E. CRAWLEY. Pror. E. Str H. CUNNINGHAM, K.C.1.E. a 3 , We

Hon. Sir JoHN CocKBuRN, K.C. M.G. — ~. Dro A. Rew. 
Dr. Lancpon Down. Mr. Joun Ru e
Mr. HAVELOCK ELLIS. fi ~ Dr. Errie soa
Pror. J. FINDLAY. _ Pror. A. SEDGEY

Dr. GREENWOOD. : os oe Ge S. SCHILI
Dr. W. HADLEY. |. S
- Mrs. H. C. HEATH.
ADMIRAL HENDERSON.
Major HILts.
Dr. INGE, THE VERY REV. THE DEAN OF
St, Pauw’ S.
Mr, Hopes-JONEs.
Miss KIRBY.
Mr. ERNzEST LANE, F.R.C.S. — eae
Mr.- W. C.: MARSHALL. 5)- ei
LADY OWEN MACKENZIE. = *

     
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
   
  
 

Hon. Treasurer: Mr. Pe VON.

ei R. Tr ‘Bonk, oo
Haslemere :
Mr. E, er F.R. S. ““PEoR: eee HL )
oa ce Zealand

      
   
    
      
   
    
    

OBJECTS.

Persistently to set forth the National atone of ae in Brake on ‘od
and create a sense of responsibility in the respect of bringing. all” a :
parenthood under the domination of Eugenic ideals. : ‘ 7

It. acs
To spread a knowledge of the Laws of heredity so far as sis are sly n
that knowledge may affect the improvement of ae face... Oe oem
i . aes aed ae
To further Maetvic Teaching, at home, in the schools, and elsewhere,
SUBSCRIPTION. t
5 Membership -. - - - rae
Associate Membership fee oy - : PRIVILEGES.

Attendance at Lectures, Discussions, and General gitar Use of Libary.

Members ovly receive THE EUGENICS REVIEW free.
Forms of Application for Membership: and Associate Membership and full partelor
can be obtained of the Hon. Secretary.

OFFICES: Kingsway House, Kingsway, W.c. aes
OFFICE HOURS: 10.30 a.m. to 5 p.m.,, Gempeare 10.30 “m, mt

a oS

Rew eee
PERIODICAL LITERATURE.

ARCHIV FUR RASSEN-UND GESELLSCHAFTS-BIOLOGIE IX., 2, March—
April, 1912.

H. Lundborg : Uber die Erblichkeitsverhdltnisse der konstitutionellen
(hereditdren) Taubstummheit und einige Worte tiber die Bedeutung der
Erblichkeitsforschung fur die Krankheitslehre. A paper based on the
statistical material contained in E. A. Fay’s “ Marriages of the Deaf,”
Washington, 1898. Lundborg’s conclusions are : (1) That constitutional
deafmutism (deafness) is transmitted according to Mendel’s Law and is
recessive and monohybrid, and that consequently it can appear in 0, 25,
50, and 100 per cent. of the offspring; (2) that congenital deafmutism
is not identical with constitutional, or transmitted, deafmutism—
strange that this fact should require demonstration!; (3) that inquiries
into heredity enable us to analyse diseases and “clinical entities” in a
much more exact manner than formerly; and (4) that Mendelism throws
a clear light on the nature and biological effects of consanguinity. All
these conclusions may be very true; but conclusive evidence is hardly to
be obtained in regard to the relations of deafmutism to Mendelism unless
we know in each particular case the chief causes of the defect, or are
at least able roughly to group them—a thing that is impossible to one
who uses Fay’s material, which takes no account whatever of the medical
side of the question.

W. Strohmayer: Die Vererbung des Hapsburger Familientypus. A
continuation of an interesting paper, of which the first part appeared in
No. 6 of last year.

W. Weinberg : Weitere Beitrage zur theorie der Vererbung. 4. Ueber
Methode und Fehlerquellen der Untersuchung auf Mendelsche Zahlen
beim Menschen.

M. Alsberg: Schddelform und Umwelt-Einflisse. A criticism of a
paper by J. Kollmann which appeared in the Archiv, 1911, No. 3. Kollmann holds that the characters of the existing races of man are fixed
and unalterable, and that the tendency of various types to merge into
one another is a result of crossing alone. Alsberg refers to papers
by Johnannes Ranke, Nystrém, Walcher, and Prof. Boas of Columbia
University, in support of his own belief that the form of the head, at
least, which has long been considered one of the most constant of racial
characteristics, can be rapidly changed by environmental influences.

K. A. Weith-Knudsen: Der Mensch. A descriptive account of G.
Sergi’s theories and classification of races.

S. Weissenberg : Zur Biotik der suidrussischen Juden. Beginnender
Zerfall. A study in degeneration.

F. A. Theilhaber: Die Genealogie etner jiudischen Familie in
Deutschland. A study of the Samson family.

To the Kleinere Mitteilungen: W. Claassen contributes a short paper
on comparative statistics, showing that in spite of the efforts of the
prohibitionists the consumption of alcohol in America is increasing.

W. Schallmayer: Rassenhygiene und sonstige Hygiene. An interesting discussion of the alleged incompatibility of individual and social
hygiene, and a criticism of W. Prausnitz’s rather needless defence of indi
vidual hygiene in his Grundatige der Hygiene, oth ed.
414 EUGENICS REVIEW

In the section headed Diskussion und Erkldrungen, W. Weinberg
replies to a letter from Karl Pearson which appeared in the preceding
number of the Archiv.

Among the books reviewed are the first three of an important series of
papers which is in course of publication in the Archiv fur Entwicklungsmechanik der Organismen, on the surroundings of the germ-plasm; a
recent study of the problem of the determination of sex by R. Hertwig;
papers by P. Kammerer, F. A. Woods; A. Grotjahn’s Soziale Pathologte,
and Slosse and Waxweiler’s Enquéte sur l’alimentation de 1065 ouvriers
hy (No. 9 of the Notes et Mémoires de l'Institut Solvay de Sociologie,
1QI0).
ARCHIV FUR RASSEN-UND GESELLSCHAFTS-BIOLOGIE. Vol. 9, Heft. 3.
May—June, 1912.

A. Hink: Selektion und Pathologie. Eine Kritik des UeberLamarckismus auf dem Gebiete der Pathologie. An able criticism of a
paper by Professor Duerst, of Bern, entitled “ Studies in the inheritance
of structural changes (variations) caused by disease processes, as well as
of pathological alterations, malformations, and diseases of the organs as
a cause of many species and variety characters in the animal world, and
their significance for practical stock-breeding.” According to Duerst,
such characters as the cranial development of Polish and Houdon fowls
and hooded ducks, the crooked legs of the Dachshund, the absence of
tails in certain breeds of fowls, the bare necks of vultures, the peculiarities of tumbler and pouter pigeons, etc., are of pathological origin,
and clear examples of the inheritance of acquired characters. According
to Hink and the majority of present-day biologists they are simply
variations that have been intensified by the breeder.

H. Roemer: Uber psychiatrische Erblichkeitsforschung. An interoene and suggestive paper read at the second Congress fur Familienforschung, Vererbungs-und Regenerations-Lehre (Giessen, April, 1912),
on the various methods of investigation of the inheritance of mental and
nervous defects, with a special plea for uniform methods and co-operation
between psychiatrists in the collection of statistical data.

Agnes Bluhm: Zur Frage nach der generativen Ttichtigheit der
deutschen Frauen und der rassenhygienischen Bedeutung der dratlichen
Geburtshilfe. The generative capacity of a woman depends upon the
sum of her capacities: (1) for conceiving; (2) for pregnancy; (3) for
child-bearing; (4) for resistance to disease, etc., during confinement; and
(5) for breast-feeding. In regard to (1) we have no trustworthy statistics
for the reason that the number of conceptions is not determined so much
by physiological capacity as by the wishes of the parents. The percentage of sterile marriages apparentlv varies from 7'5 per cent. (Austerlitz
and Prag) to 147 per cent. (Hofmeyer). According to a very careful
investigation by Pincus, 40 per cent. of cases of sterility are due to the
husband. A defective capacity for pregnancy is shown mainly by the
prevalence of miscarriages and premature births. Here again it 1s
difficult to get at the facts, for a large proportion of miscarriages are
intentional, and only a comparatively small number of them become
known. By comparing some statistics of miscarriages and premature
births collected in Baden and Hamburg at different times, Dr. Bluhm
arrives at the conclusion that, at least in the localities above mentioned,
there is a decrease, if only a slight one, in the capacity for pregnancy.
Very much the same can be said in regard to the capacity for childbearing, in regard to which the author quotes W. Schallmayer: “ The
more successful the advance of obstetrics, the more the coming generation will have the need of it.” (To be concluded in the next number.)

W. Claassen: Die Ernahrung der landlichen Bevilkerung in_ 30
rheinischen Kleinbduerischen Familien im Jahre 1910 und die Ursachen
der Fettibernadhrung in Stadt und Land. A study of the nutrition of
PERIODICAL LITERATURE 415

30 small peasant and labourer families in the Rhine Province with
remarks on the nutrition of the urban population. Claassen finds on the
basis of Hagemann’s investigations (1911) that the country population
of the Rhine Province, like the urban population of Germany, is
over-nourished with fat and under-nourished with carbo hydrates.
In the country districts this is largely due to the substitution of pigkeeping for cattle-raising and to the desire of the people to get as much
meat as possible for their money; in the towns it is closely connected
with the general use by the working-class population of beer restaurants,
where highly-seasoned dishes, rich in fat, enter largely into the diet
supplied, for the reason of their thirst-provoking qualities. As is well
known, in such restaurants, the beer and not the food sold is the chief
source of profit, and the landlord is as a rule merely a manager employed
by the brewer owners. Under-nutrition with the proteids is in part due
to the substitution of coffee for the milk-soup of former days, in part to
the idea that meat is the best of all diets. That the consumption of
carbo hydrates is much greater in the country than in the towns is largely
a result of custom and individual preference.

Diskussion und Erklérungen. H. ten Kate: Nachtrag zu “ Schadelform und Umwelt-Einfitisse” von Moritz Alsberg. The author is unwilling to agree with Alsberg (see supra) because he does not believe
either in the accuracy of F. Boas’s investigations or in the correctness of
his conclusions, and quotes from a criticism of Boas by Paul R.
Radosavljewich (American Anthropologist, New Series, Vol. 13, No. 3)
in confirmation of his doubts.

Among the books reviewed are :—R. Hertwig: Uber den derzeitigen
Stand des Sexualitatsproblems nebst eigenen Untersuchungen (from the
Biologisches Zeutralblatt, Vol. 32, Nos. 1-3, 1912). W. Wegelius:
Untersuchungen tiber die Antikérpertibertragung von Mutter auf kind.
(Archiv fur Gynaekologie, Vol. 94, No. 2, 1911). E. Mattauschek and
A. Pilez: Beitrag zur Lues-Paralyse-F rage. (Zeitschrift f. d. ges.
Neurologie u. Psychiatrie. VIII. pp. 133-152, 1911). An investigation
of army statistics relating to 4,134 German officers who were infected
between the years 1880 and 1900. Of the 3,430 cases that have been
under observation for ten years and longer, there are 160 paralytics,
or 467 percent. Inthe majority of cases of paralysis the disease appears
from g to 12 years after the infection. The percentage of cases of
paralysis is highest among those patients who recovered from their
original infection without suffering a relapse. G. von Bunge: Die
T abakvergiftung, Basel, 1912, 13 pages. The author endeavours to prove
that chronic nicotine poisoning as well as chronic alcohol poisoning is
a cause of degeneration. Mosse und Tugendreich: Krankheiten und
soziale Lage. The first instalment of a very important work on the
influence of social conditions in the causation of disease.

HENRY BERGEN.

, ,

THE ARCHIVES D’ANTHROPOLOGIE CRIMINELLE, DE MEDICINE LEGALE ET
DE PSYCHOLOGIE NORMALE ET PATHOLOGIQUE for March 15, 1912, contains a
short account of Professor Niceforo’s investigations into the connection
between economic conditions and causes of death, the death-rate and the
birth-rate. Returns from the eighty sub-divisions of the city of Paris
provided part of the material, and the degree of interdependence between
the phenomena was measured by means of correlation coefficients. As
indices of the economic conditions in the different quarters the proportion
of workmen among the employed inhabitants and the average rent were
taken. From the official statistics of the city of Lausanne the author
calculated the correlation between the death-rate and the average conditions of life with regard to hygiene and sanitation, prevailing in the
various quarters. The general results obtained in these two ways cannot
be profitably compressed into a smaller space than that which occupy
416 EUGENICS REVIEW

the article here referred to, but one or two special points may be noted.
Whatever index is taken of poverty the correlation between it and deathrate through pulmonary phthisis or other forms of tuberculosis is extremely high, reaching to ‘985. The death-rate from other causes is
generally strongly correlated with poverty, but not to this extent, and the
correlation reaches its lowest, ‘250, in the case of typhoid fever. The
influence of poverty on the death-rate from all causes in Paris is highest
between the ages of 5 and 60 years. In Lausanne the condition which
more than any other is correlated with a high death-rate is a low number
of cubic feet of air per person in the bedrooms. EpGAR SCHUSTER.

SOCIAL DISEASES (quarterly). The July number of this journal contains an interesting paper by Professor Seligman, epitomising the recent
history of the movement towards a proper view of the subject of prostitution. He shows how the best opinion steadily grows against State regulation, and urges the necessity of education on the subject. Florence Kelly
follows on the economic causes of prostitution, showing how they mainly
consist of under-payment of women workers. She advocates a wide
extension of the minimum wage principle. Dr. Kelly sees a close relation between sexual and other forms of vice; he looks on religion as the
main safeguard, while law and police (in America) do more harm than
good. The commercialisation of vice is discussed later on, and the need of
safeguards in public places of recreation.

The October number contains a hopeful report of the progress of the
Society, and of the increasing public interest in the evil results of vice
to the nation. There are two useful papers on sex instruction of the
young and adolescent. Notification of V.D. is also discussed; the author
believes in it, but waits for the education of public opinion. We ourselves believe notification in the full sense to be impossible; nameless
notification is much to be desired for statistical purposes; but even
in the way of this there are great difficulties, mainly owing to the common
employment of the quack for these diseases.

We recommend this quarterly to all who wish to keep in touch
with the progress of opinion on this subject. D. WHITE.

THE JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL ETHICS, October, i912. The
Decline of Culture, by E. Benjamin Andrews, affirms that culture
has declined in America—that the accepted system of values ignores the
higher attributes and qualities of man and awards recognition solely to
wealth. This is attributed to four main causes: (1) The wealth of the
country; (2) “the spread of communistic socialism ”; (3) bad theory and
practice in education; and (4) “ depressing views of the world, life, and
man.” ‘To the latter cause much weight is given, and the application of
biological laws to human society is regarded as a fostering of individual
selfishness, and necessitating a denial of all the moral qualities hitherto
valued. “ Either naturalistic thinking or altruistic conduct must go by
the board ” is one of the extraordinary statements made. Surely a knowledge of the laws that govern human racial development is likely to
require a great increase of altruistic effort on the part of its students. A
belief in special creation hardly seems necessary to culture or conduct in these days.

THE SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW, October, 1912. The Origin of Exogamy,
by W. M. Strong, M.D. The author analyses the causes of exogamy in
the evolution of human society, and traces its development through
primitive tribes, showing the need of such customs in the development
of a more stable form of society.

THE NINETEENTH CENTURY, December, 1912. The Church and
Divorce, by Bishop Welldon, gives a most clear and interesting statement
as to the position of the Church with reference to the problem of divorce,
PERIODICAL LITERATURE 417

considered in conjunction with the recent Report of the Royal Commission. In the lucid historical statement with which the article opens it is
shown that in pre-reformation days the fifteen grounds for the annulment
of marriage recognised by the Church did much to make the recognition
of indissoluble marriage a possibility, and yet bring it into conformity
with the demands of human nature. The Reformed Church retained the
sacramental view of marriage, but not the methods of annulment, hence
the present difficulty, although “the absolute indissolubility of marriage
.... is not the law of the Church accepted by the Reformers.” The
author concurs in the main with the Report of the Minority, although in
alluding to insanity as a ground for divorce, he recommendsthat it should
be a reason for prohibition of marriage, and emphasises the fact that the
Minority Report advocates that “ where one of the parties to a marriage
at the time when it takes place was suffering from an aggravated infectious disease, or where the seeds of insanity or incurable drunkenness
were already sown in him or her, the marriage should judicially and
ecclesiastically declared to be null.” Members of the Church are urged
to maintain the highest possible ideal of the sanctity and stability of marriage, the family being one of the corner stones of both Church and
State.

The Passing of Marriage, by W. S. Lilly, is an attack on divorce on
what purports to be sociological ground, but while being convinced that
the family should be the unit in the State, the question of the quality of
offspring is absolutely ignored.

The issue of BEDROCK for October, 1912, contains a number of articles
of considerable interest. Ju Recent Discoveries of Ancient Man Professor Keith gives an admirably lucid account of some of the recent
French, German, and English finds, with special reference to the relative
ages of the remains of the Neanderthal and modern types. In What will
Posterity say of Us the “Hermit of Prague” reveals the future as an
ample prospect of pleasant materialism. Dr. A. M. Gossage contributes
a criticism of a previous article by Dr. Archdall Reid; Dr. Gossage
inclines to the belief that different races are by nature equally susceptible
to disease, and that, whereas a rapid improvement in immunity may follow
the introduction of a disease, this improvement ceases in spite of further
selection. In a rejoinder Dr. Reid severely criticises Dr. Gossage’s
methods of reasoning, and gives a number of examples supporting his
original generalization that the inhabitants of the different parts of the
globe show insusceptibility to the various bacterial diseases according to
their past experience of them.

THE BULLETIN OF THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF MEDICINE, October, 1912.
In an interesting paper entitled Remedial Conditions of the Feeble-Minded
and Backward, Dr. Cornell discusses various theories of the causes of
feeble-mindedness, and expresses the opinion that feeble-minded children
cannot generally be cured, but can have their condition materially improved by appropriate treatment. Dr. Groszmann emphasises the difference between feeble-minded and backward children, contrasting those
whose development is arrested from those with whom it is retarded. In
reply Dr. Cornell describes both classes as mentally deficient, but advocates differentiation of treatment.

THE ECONOMIC REVIEW, October, 1912. In A Negative Ideal the
Reverend Edward Latham criticises the change of sentiment which this
country has undergone in abandoning the laissez faire doctrines of the
early Victorian economists in favour of the modern movements of social
reform on socialistic lines. The writer contrasts Ruskin’s ideal of “ the
greatest number of noble and happy human beings” with the modern
ideal of the abolition of poverty. Under the latter the State must sooner
418 EUGENICS REVIEW

or later concern itself with the problem of population, and take control of
domestic life. The proposed legislation for the better care of the feebleminded is regarded as constituting the thin edge of a very big wedge.

THE SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW, October, 1912. Science and Race Prejudice. Of the three theories, that the races of men are unlike, that they
are unequal, and that they are equal, Mr. G. Spiller attempts to establish
the third. Much emphasis is laid upon the success of coloured students
in white universities. The concluding dictum, “ Birth counts for nothing,
civilisation for everything,” sufficiently summarises the author’s point of
view.

THE INDEPENDENT, New York, September 12th, 1912, contains a short
account of the First International Eugenics Congress by Dr. Raymond
Pearl, one of the most distinguished of the American representatives.
After passing briefly in review the main characteristics of the Congress,
the large membership, the wide range of discussion, the undogmatic
tone of the meetings, and the objects of social and eugenic interest in the
exhibition, Dr. Pearl gives unstinted praise to the hospitality with which
the delegates were treated, and especially to the skill and ability with
which the Congress was organised and administered.

pie

BULLETINE DE LA STATISTIQUE GENERALE DE LA FRANCE. Tome I.,
fasc. iii. April, 1912. This important publication continues to maintain
the high level promised in the earlier issues. The special study in the
present number, contributed by M. Dugé de Bernozville, deals with the
statistics and administrative machinery of Poor Law relief in the United
Kingdom and in the German Empire. In the tables of general statistics
the speculative student may be interested to note that the highest position
in the scale of marriage and birth rates is occupied by Bulgaria and
Servia, while the “ Great Powers,” for the most part, rank relatively low
in these instances of racial vitality.
NOTES.

Congress of Family Histories, and the Study of Social Regeneration.*—1n April, 1912, an important meeting was held at Giessen with
the object of promoting the scientific investigation of family histories
and the study of heredity and social regeneration. Its business was
conducted in the following manner: First, lectures of an educational
kind were delivered to a very large audience, consisting largely of men
whose professional work brought them at one point or another in contact
with the series of problems under discussion. A congress was then held
for the purpose of hearing and discussing papers in the usual manner.
The contributions to the congress were classed in eight sections. Of
these the first dealt with methods of research and the laws of inheritance,
the second with the study of genius and of the normal in human beings,
and the third with abnormalities. Of the papers in this section we would
call special attention to Dr. Crzellitzer’s on the inheritance of diseases
of the eye. He finds that in short-sighted families the women are more
affected than the men, while the reverse is the case where the defect is
long sight. Consanguinity of the parents figured largely as a contributory cause of anomalies of vision, particularly of the rarer ones. The
first-born appear more subject to short sight than those born later, the
number of children in the family and the social class of the parents
appear to have very little influence, while their age at procreation
appears to have none at all. Crzellitzer’s paper is given only in abstract, and we hesitate to express an opinion on the validity of his conclusions without seeing the full evidence. For a detailed account of his
investigation the reader is referred to the Berliner Klinischen Wochenschrift for 1912.

Criminal propensities are the subject matter of Section IV., which
contains an interesting paper by Professor Rosenfeld on the relation
between race hygiene and the prevention of crime. The question of the
sterilization of the insane and of insane criminals on social and eugenic
grounds was introduced by Dr. Oberholzer in a paper which led to a
lively discussion.

The fifth section contained contributions dealing with the results to be
obtained from the investigation of particular families. Among them is
one by Professor Sommer on the family of Schiller’s mother, which is
valuable as an attempt to elucidate the causes which produce genius.

Under tne heading of heredity and sociology two very interesting
studies may be found, namely, that of Professor Roller on the length of
life in Germany during the Middle Ages, and F. Macco’s attempt to
answer, by the investigation of records preserved at Aix-la-Chapelle, the
question : Does the economic or social rise of families lead to dangers in
relation to race hygiene ?

The seventh section is concerned with breeding and inheritance,
while the eighth is headed “ Regeneration,” which means apparently race
* Bericht iiber den II. Kurs mit Kongress fiir Familienforschung, Vererbungsund Regenerationslehre, in Giessen vom g. bis 13. April 1912. Von Geh. Med.Rat Dr. Robert Sommer, o. Professor an der Universitit, Giessen. Halle,
Carl Marhold, 1912, pp. 190.
420 EUGENICS REVIEW

regeneration. The only contribution which touches this subject is that
of Professor Sommer, “ Renaissance and Regeneration,” and this consists almost exclusively of a consideration of the causes which led to
the renaissance in Florence and Tuscany. Though necessarily rather
speculative in its nature, this paper is one of the most interesting and
suggestive of those read before the Congress. Professor Sommer does
not attempt to find any single explanation of the remarkable fact that
in the period beginning in the middle of the thirteenth century and
ending with the close of the fifteenth, so many men of genius or remarkable talent were born in Florence; he attributes it rather to the combination of a variety of circumstances of which the most important are to be
looked for in the political condition of that city during and preceding
the renaissance. On the one hand, the constant conflicts and fights
between the dominant factions led to the development of a true aristocracy of war, while on the other hand among the more peaceful citizens,
who were constantly struggling to obtain their rights, another aristocracy
of trade and craftsmanship arose. The happy combination of the best
psychical traits of both classes, which was brought about by intermarriage between them, provided the biological basis on which outside
influences, such as the notable beauty of the neighbourhood, could
operate to produce the creators of so many noble works of art.

In conclusion, it must be said that, although the Giessen Congress
did not bring to light any notable contribution to the sum of human
knowledge, it provided opportunities for the careful consideration of
facts already wholly or partly known, which was no doubt the object
for which it was organised. EDGAR SCHUSTER.

Mental Deficiency Bill.—It is with the deepest regret that we have
had to relinquish all hope of seeing this much-needed measure become
law this Session. The most important clauses were discussed in Committee, and considerably amended; and a promise has been given that
a Bill on the lines thus laid down will be introduced next Session. Our
efforts to secure this result must not, however, be in the slightest degree
relaxed; for the danger of measures being dropped if no party capital
can be made out of their enactment seems to be increasing. Great numbers of Boards of Guardians have passed resolutions of protest against the
diopping of the Bill, and these afford the best possible indication of the
widespread demand for this measure. Members of Eugenic Societies
should continue to urge on their representatives in Parliament by every
available means the necessity of dealing with measures affecting the
nation as a whole, and should dimemarin gt condemn their abandonment
on account of the mere demands of party.

Eugenics Edueation Conferenece.—On the recommendation of the
Education Sub-Committee, the Council have decided to support the
organisation of a conference of heads of elementary and secondary schools
and training colleges to discuss the desirability and method of introducing
eugenics into the educational systems. The appended letter has been
widely circulated, and has already elicited a large response. The date of
the conference will be Saturday, March 1st. The morning session will be
opened at 11 a.m., and take as subject for consideration, “ The Eugenic
Ideal as a Factor in the Formation of Character.” The afternoon session,
opening at 2.30 p.m., will discuss “ Methods of Introducing the Eugenic
Ideal into the Schools.” Among those who will probably speak are the
Headmaster of Eton, the Dean of St. Paul’s, the Principal of Bedford
College for Women, and the Headmaster of Bedales.. Members of the
Society are invited to attend the conference as passive members; only
those who are qualified as experienced teachers are eligible to take part
in the discussions. Members wishing to attend should apply for tickets
NOTES 421

to the Offices of the Society, as admission will be by non-transferable
ticket only.

Letter circulated to heads of schools and colleges :—

Dear Sir or Madam,

It has been suggested to us by a number of Head Masters and Head Mistresses that the
problem of infrodeciag the idea of Eugenics—and, to a limited degree, Sex Hygiene—into the
educational systems of the country needs special attention at this moment. Many teachers are
feeling the need of such instruction, but also realise that, in the present state of ge lic opinion, it
needs trained and competent handling, if it is not to prove more harmful that beneficial.

Although many would like to see the teaching given, the lack of teachers with the necessary
knowledge and training stops the way.

After having been approached by several educationalists, this Society obtained the advice of
the Educational Officer of the London County Council, the Head Inspectors of the Board of
Education, the Heads of Training Colleges and others, with a view to introducing the subject into
the curriculum of the Training Colleges, and thus ensuring that in future at least some teachers
shall receive an elementary grounding in Eugenics.

It seems to be the opinion of those of experience in educational matters, and also of the
Education Committee of this Society, that while instruction in Eugenics and Sex Hygiene must be
directly given to teachers, it should be transmitted through them to children and adolescents, only
indirectly—through Nature Study, History, Literature, and for more advanced students, through
Biology and Civics. It also appears that alterations in the curriculum of the Training Colleges are
made at the suggestion of the Heads of Schools.

To offer an opportunity of free discussion as to the best methods of introducing these subjects
into the various systems of education, and to enable those who have not yet dealt with the subject
to hear accounts of the results obtained by those who have, a small Conference will be held towards
the end of the Spring term. Only Head Masters and Mistresses (of Elementary and Secondary
Schools and Training Colleges) are invited, but when prevented from attending in person, the
Head may appoint a duly qualified teacher as his or her representative.

To facilitate attendance the Meeting will be held on a Saturday afternoon probably March &th
or 15th, in Londor.

The Agenda will be drawn up by a small and representative Committee of Heads of Elementary
and Secondary Schools and Training Colleges, meeting before Xmas. :

Attendance will be free, the Conference being organized by the Education Committee of the
Eugenics Education Society. ss

If you wish to attend, will you kindly inform us of your intention, and all further particulars
= be sent to you. In the event of our receiving no reply to this letter, no further intimation will

sent, etc.

Lecture Course.—The growth of interest, due in part to the International Eugenic Congress, has brought a fresh duty before the Society—
that of providing an elementary grounding in the science of eugenics for
those who wish to study the subject seriously, and are not content with
the superficial knowledge obtainable from general lectures. There is
also a growing demand for speakers who will deal with elementary practical eugenics in such a manner as to arouse interest in its problems in
the minds of the public. It is impossible to speak on such a
difficult subject as eugenics without an elementary knowledge of biology,
heredity, genetics, and recent statistical work. The following course
has therefore been arranged, and the warm thanks of the Society are
due to Professor Adam Sedgwick, Mr. Dobell, Professor Punnett, and
Mr. Udny Yule for ensuring the success of the first year’s work by their
co-operation and support.

GROUNDWORK OF EUGENICS.-—A year’s course of lectures will be
held, by kind permission, at the Imperial College of Science, South
Kensington, from January to December, 1913. It will be arranged so
as to be open to the public on the payment of the fees stated, and previous
university training will not be compulsory. The course of elementary
biology is to meet the needs of those who have not already studied that
subject elsewhere. The session will be divided into three terms: January
to March; April to July; October to December. An examination will be
held at the end of each term.

Certificates will. be awarded to students qualifying in all three examinations, proof of having qualified in an examination in biology held elsewhere and recognized by the Committee as being sufficient, being accepted
as qualification in the subject in question. As the number of students is
limited to twenty-five, application should be made immediately by those
who wish to take the course. Fees must be paid in advance, and all communications addressed to the Hon. Secretary, Eugenics Education Society.
422 EUGENICS REVIEW

Spring Term, Tuesdays, 5.30 p.m., January 14th to March a2oth.
“Elementary Biology,” with special reference to the reproductive system.
A course of twelve lectures, followed by practical and experimental work
in the laboratory by Clifford Dobell, M.A. (Lecturer in Zoology, Imperial
College of Science). Lecture, 5.30 to 6.30 p.m.; practical work, 6.30 to
8.30 p.m. Synopsis of syllabus: “ The general anatomy and physiology
of a mammal”; “ The general anatomy and physiology of a flowering
plant ”; “ Outlines of cytology ”; “ Anatomy and physiology of the reproductive systems of mammal and flowering plant: gametes, fertilization,
and embryonic development.”

Summer Term (April to July). “ Heredity ” (including evolution,
genetics, and heredity in man). A course of twelve lectures by R. C.
Punnett, F.R.S. (Arthur Balfour Professor of Genetics in the University
of Cambridge). The course will deal primarily with the facts of heredity,
though some attention will be devoted to the various theories which have
been held at different times. The lectures will also deal with some of the
problems associated with the terms evolution, variation, and mutation.
Illustrated specimens will be provided, as far as possible, to serve for
demonstration and discussion at the end of each lecture.

Autumn Term (October to December). A course of twelve lectures on
** Statistical Methods applied to some Problems in Eugenics,” by G. Udny
Yule (University Lecturer in Statistics, Cambridge). The course will deal
primarily with the statistical methods of greatest importance to the
student of eugenics, the practical calculation and the interpretation of the
constants involved. Examples of the application of such methods will be
drawn, as far as possible, from recent work, and some problems of special
interest will be considered in detail, as illustrations in the latter part of
the course. Exercises may be given or discussions held after each lecture.

Fees : For complete course of three terms, £10 1os.; for each separate
term, £4 4s. Lecture Committee (appointed by the Council of the
Eugenics Education Society): Dr. M. Greenwood, junr., Dr. E. Schuster,
Professor A. Sedgwick, Dr. Douglas White; secretary, Mrs. Gotto.

NOTICES.

New Offices.—The new premises of the Eugenics Education Society
are at Kingsway House, Kingsway, W.C. Several members have generously assisted in the furnishing and fitting of the offices. _ Our thanks
are especially due to Miss Henderson for the loan of the Council room
furniture and many gifts; to Mrs. Heath for a bookcase; to an anonymous
donor for two further bookcases; to Mrs. von Fleisch] for curtains and
mirror; and especially to Mr. Newton Crane for having found the offices,
and arranged the terms of the lease on behalf of the Society.

Voluntary Workers.—The increase of accommodation makes it possible for us to invite the help of two more voluntary workers to
help with the secretarial and other work for one or two days in the week.
Such help is especially needed from the middle of January during the
organisation of the Education Conference, to be held on March rst.

A course of six lectures will be given at University College, on
Tuesday evenings, 8 p.m. Admission is free, but by non-transferable
tickets, which may be obtained from W. A. Seton, M.A., University
College, Gower Street, W.C.
NOTICES 423

February 11th: I. “ Heredity, Environment, and Parental Habits in
their Relation to Infant Welfare,” by Karl Pearson, F.R.S. (Galton Professor of Eugenics).

February 18th: II. “ Heredity of Piebaldism and of Albinism in
Man,” by Karl Pearson, F.R.S.

February 25th: III. “ The Relation of Fertility in Man to Social
Value in the Parent,” by Ethel M. Elderton (Galton Eugenics Laboratory).

March 4th: IV. “On some points with regard to our Present Knowledge of Heredity in cases of Feeble-mindedness,” by David Heron,
D.Sc. (Galton Eugenics Laboratory).

March 11th: V. “On the Mortality of the Phthisical under Sanatorium and Tuberculin Treatments,” by W. Palin Elderton, Fellow of
the Institute of Actuaries.

March 18th: VI. “On Recent Studies of aochaig in Dogs, and
their Bearing on Heredity in Man,” by Karl Pearson, F.R.S.
QUARTERLY CHRONICLE.

CENTRAL SOCIETY.

PROGRAMME.

October 18th, at the Theatre, Burlington Gardens, 8.30 p.m.—Mr.
E. J. Lidbetter opened his course of four lectures on “ The Social Applications of Eugenics ” with No. I., “ The Basis of Eugenics.” The President in the chair.

November 7th, at the Grafton Galleries, 5.15 p.m.—Mr. Lewis P. Orr
on “Insurance Research and Eugenics.” The President in the chair.

November 15th, at the Theatre, Burlington Gardens.—Mr. E. J.
Lidbetter, “ The Social Applications of Eugenics,” No. II., “ The Public
Service.” Mr. Newton Crane in the chair.

December 5th, at the Grafton Galleries, 5.15 p.m.—Dr. M. Greenwood on “Some Popular Misconceptions of Eugenics.” The President
in the chair.

December 2oth, at the Theatre, Burlington Gardens.—Mr. E. J.
Lidbetter, No. III., “ Social Sanction the State Control.” The President
in the chair.

MEETINGS.

October 15th.—The Dean of St. Paul’s addressed a meeting of the
Rural Deanery at St. Leonard’s Vicarage, Hoxton Square, on “ The
Church and Eugenics.”

October 16th.—Major Hills gave an address to the Christian Social
Union on “ The Care of the Feeble-Minded.”

. October 24th.—Mr. Lidbetter addressed the Ilford Women’s Adult
School.

October 25th.—A public meeting was held at the Town Hall of
Manchester, preparatory to the formation of a branch of the Society in
that place. The Lord Mayor presided. Major Darwin delivered an
address, and among those who spoke in support of the resolution
advocating the formation of a branch were Bishop Welldon, Professor
Arthur Schuster, Dr. Mumford, Professor Findlay, and Father Day.

November 1st.—Mr. E. J. Lidbetter gave an address on “ Eugenics
and the Poor Law” to the St. Matthew’s Literary and Debating Society.

November 11th.—Mr. E. J. Lidbetter gave an address to the Battersea Polytechnic Literary and Debating Society.

November 17th.—Mr. Dixon Kingham addressed the British Socialist
Party.
November 18th.—__Mrs. Gotto read a paper on “ Women and
Economics in relation to Eugenics,” before the Union of Ethical
Societies, at the Emerson Club.

November 21st.—The Rev. the Dean of St. Paul’s addressed a public
meeting at Worthing on “ The Aims and Method of Eugenics.”

November 27th.—Mr. Rolleston Stables gave an address at the
Peel Institute, Clerkenwell Green.

November 28th.—Mr. Dixon Kingham gave a lecture to the Forest
Gate Literary and Debating Society on “ Practical Eugenics.”
QUARTERLY CHRONICLE 425

January 6th.—Miss March read a paper before the Training College
Association at the London University on “ Sex Studies in the School and
Training College.”

January oth.—Mr. F. Fisher gave an address to the Women’s Liberal
Federation, Shoreditch, on “ Popular Eugenics.”

COMMITTEES.

October 22nd.—Education Committee Meeting, 3 p.m.
November 1st.—Executive Council Meeting, 4.30 p.m.

es 6th.—General Council Meeting, 3 p.m.

‘a 19th.—Education Committee Meeting, 3.30 p.m.
December 4th.—Research Committee Meeting, 4 p.m.

¥ 13th.—Research Committee Meeting, 11 a.m.

‘a 13th.—Executive Council Meeting, 4.30 p.m.

4g 14th.—Education Conference Committee, 6 p.m.

- 19th.—Education Conference Committee, 5.30 p.m.

HASLEMERE.

This Branch has held two meetings this quarter. On Monday,
November 11th, Mr. Marshall read a paper on “The Connection
between Economic Conditions and Eugenics ”; and on Monday, December
16th, Dr. Tredgold lectured on “ Heredity and Environment in regard to
Social Reform.” This lecture was open to the public, and a good number
assembled. L. E. Muir, Hon. Secretary.

LIVERPOOL.

A meeting of the Society was held in the Anatomy Lecture Theatre
of the University on Monday, December 2nd, when Dr. W. H. Broad,
lecturer in physical anthropology, gave an admirable lecture on
“ Heredity and Skull Form,” in which he explained the chief methods of
craniology, drew attention to the index differences among different races
of mankind, and showed how a change in social conditions might alter
the relative chances of survival, and therefore ultimately the proportion
of different elements in the population of the country. The audience
was, unfortunately, small.

A resolution was passed unanimously protesting against the abandonment of the Mental Deficiency Bill, and was communicated to the Home
Secretary and to the local Members of Parliament. Letters have also
been sent to the Education, Health, and Insurance Committees, and to the
various bodies of Guardians of the neighbourhood, as well as to the
Lancashire Asylums Board and their institutions, calling attention to
the same matter.

Our President, Sir James Barr, has delivered an address on Eugenics
at Birmingham. The Philomathic Society of Liverpool has debated
upon the question whether the time was ripe for incorporating the principles of eugenics in legislation, and decided that it was not.

Subscriptions for the calendar year 1912 should now be sent in.

R. T. Bopey, Hon. Secretary and Treasurer.

MANCHESTER AND DISTRICT.

The Manchester Branch has been formed as the sequel of the public
meeting held on October 8th, 1912, the constitution being ratified at the
last Council Meeting of the Central Society. The following members
have been elected as officers and members of committee :—
426 EUGENICS REVIEW

President—Bishop Welldon, Dean of Manchester.

Chairman of Council—Professor Arthur Schuster, F.R.S.
Vice-Chairman—Dr. Mumford

Hon. Treasurer—Mrs. Maxwell Garnett.

Hon. Secretary—Dr. D’Ewart, Middleton Street, Manchester S.

General Committee.

Mr. Russell Allen Dr. Barbara Cunningham Mrs. Mumford

Sir Charles Behrens Professor Findlay Dr. James Niven

Mrs. Harold Behrens Mr. J. C. Maxwell Garnett Mr. Paton

Dr. Vipont Brown Mr. T. C. Horsfall Councillor Mrs. Jane Redford
Mr. Alfred Cann, B.A. Dr. Emerys Jones Rev, G. E. Rees

Professor Chapman Mrs. McKellan Mr. J. H. Reynolds

Dr. Catherine Chisholm Dr. Milligan Dr. Edward Somers, J.P.

The first general meeting will be held the third week in January,
when Dr. Melland will lecture on “ Legislation for the Feeble-Minded.”

Bishop Welldon will shortly address a meeting of the clergy on the
subject of Eugenics.

Dr. D’Ewart addressed the Jewish Working Men’s Club in November,

The Eugenics Class at the Technical School is still in progess.

NEW ZEALAND.

Miss Macgeorge, honorary secretary for the New Zealand branch of
the Eugenics Education Society, commenced work as honorary organiser
for the Society in November, 1912. Since that time, besides the inauguration of the Timaru Division, lectures on “ Heredity and Eugenics ”
have, with the aid of Professor Pearson’s and other charts, been given
before the Waitaki Boys’ High School, Waitaki Girls’ High School,
Lyttelton Women’s Christian Temperance Union, Christchurch Kindergarten Association, Worcester Street Girls’ Bible Class, Mothers’ Meeting
at Merivale Church, the Fabian Society, students of Normal Training
College, inmates of Te Oranga Reformatory for Girls, Mothers’ Meeting
at Papanui, Women’s Social and Political League, workers of junior
branches Young Men’s Christian Association, Society for Health of
Women and Children, Women’s Christian Temperance Union, Christchurch, Canterbury Women’s Institute, Ministers’ Association, Girls’
Friendly Society, Avonside, Girls’ Friendly Society and others at the
Vicarage (St. John’s), Hospital and Charitable Aid Board, North Canterbury Educational Institute, public lecture at Kaiapoi (Eugenics and the
Scriptures), Mothers’ Meeting, Lyttelton, Lectures were also dedivered
at “ drawing-rooms ” which were specially given.

Miss Macgeorge, in a statement regarding her work, says :—The
lecturer is at present handicapped in her work by the want of further
data on the laws of heredity as discoverable in the lower forms of life—
plants, lower animals. Supply of any such matter (preferably in chart
form) would be gratefully received by her.

In Christchurch, as everywhere else, the keenest interest in eugenics
is invariably evinced whether in the case of personal interviews or at
the lectures given. The first object is always education on eugenic lines,
chiefly through the Eucenics Review. Up to the present, subscribers
to that publication number: Dunedin 120, Christchurch 20, Timaru 50,
Nelson 20, besides individuals in other parts of New Zealand. Representation on the local Council is being largely added to. The practical
and sympathetic aid of the local Press and of each town visited by the
honorary organiser is invaluable to the work undertaken. These towns
include Dunedin, Timaru, Oamaru, Temuka and Christchurch. Thanks
to these and other agencies, interest in eugenics is rapidly spreading
over New Zealand as well as to many parts of Australia.
PUBLICATIONS RECEIVED.

A Catechism of Life, by A. M: BucKTON. (Publishers: Methuen & Co.,
Ltd. Price 1s. net.)

A Short Study in Ethics, by C. F. D’Arcy, D.D. (Publishers: Macmillan
& Co., Ltd. Price 5s. net.)

Baby, The, by A UNIVERSITY Woman. (Publishers: T. C. & E. C.
Jack. Price 6d. net.)

Changes in Bodily Form of Descendants of Immigrants, by FRANZ BOAS,
Ph.D. (Publishers: Columbia University Press. Price 7s. 6d.)

Confidences: Talks with a Young Girl Concerning Herself, by Dr. C. B.
Lowry. (Publishers: Forbes & Co., Chicago. Price 50 cents.)

Cults, Myths and Religions, by SALOMON REINACH, translated by E.
FROST. (Publisher: D, Nutt. Price 7s. 6d. net.)

Daughters of Ishmael, The, by R. W. HAuFFMAN. (Publishers: S. Swift
& Co. Price 6s. net.)

Elements of Child Protection, The, by SIGMUND ENGEL. Translated by
Dr. EDEN PauL. (Publishers: George Allen & Co. Price 15s. net.)

False Modesty, that Protects Vice by Ignorance, by DR. E. B. Lowry.
(Publishers: Forbes & Co., Chicago. Price 50 cents.)

Fourth Annual Conference of the National Association for the Prevention of Consumption and other forms of Tuberculosis. (Publishers:
Adlard and Son. Price 3s. net.)

Fourth Scientific Report on the Investigations of the Imperial Cancer
Research Fund. (Publishers: Taylor and Francis. Price 7s. 6d.
net.)

Fifth Scientific Report on the Investigations of the Imperial Cancer
Research Fund. (Publishers: Taylor and Francis. Price 5s. net.)

Growth of Groups in the Animal Kingdom, The, by R. E. Lioyp, M.B.,
D.Sc. (London). (Publishers: Longmans, Green & Co. Price 5s.
net.)

Herself: Talks with Women Concerning Themselves, by Dr. E. B.
Lowry. (Publishers: Forbes & Co., Chicago. Price $1 net.)
Himself: Talks with Men Concerning Themselves, by Dr. E. B.
Lowry and Dr. R. J. Lampert. (Publishers: Forbes & Co.,

Chicago. Price $1 net.)

Hygiene for Health Visitors, School Nurses and Social Workers, by C.
W. Hutt. (Publishers: P. S. King & Son. Price 7s. 6d. net.)
Hypnotism and Self-Education, by A. M. HuTCHINSON, M.D.  (Pub
lishers: T. C. and E. C. Jack. Price 6d. net.)

Introduction to Experimental Education, by ROBERT R. Rusk.  (Publishers: Longmans, Green & Co. Price 4s. 6d. net.)

Love and Ethics, by ELLEN Key. (Publishers: G. P. Putnam & Sons.
Price 1s. net.)

Main Currents of Modern Thought, by R. EvucKkeN. (Publisher: T.
Fisher Unwin. Price 12s. 6d. net.) |
428 %s EUGENICS REVIEW.

Malthusian Limit, The, by E. Isaacson. (Publishers: Methuen & Co.
Price 3s. 6d. net.)

Marriage and the Sex Problem, by DR. F. W. FOERSTER. Translated
. by Merrick Bootu, B.Sc., Ph.D. (Publishers: Wells, Gardner &

Co. Price 5s. net.)

Marriage and Motherhood, by H. S. Davipson, M.B., F.R.C.S.E.
(Publishers: T. C. and E. C. Jack. Price 6d.) .

Meaning of Christianity, The, by the REV. FREDERICK A. M. SPENCER.
(Publisher: T. Fisher Unwin. Price 7s. 6d. net.)

Minority Report of the Divorce Commission, The. (Publishers :«
Longmans, Green & Co. Price 1d.)

Modern Problems, by StR OLIVER LopcE. (Publishers: Methuen & Co.
Price 5s. net.)

Mother and Baby, by SELINA F. Fox. (Publishers: J. & A. Churchill.
Price 15. 6d. net.) |

Nutrition of the Infant, The, by D. R: VINCENT. (Publishers: Balliere,
Tindall & Cox. Price 1os. 6d. net.)

Perfect Health for Women and Children, by E. SLOANE-CHESSER. (Price
3s. 6d. net.)

Progress! What it Means: The Evolution of Education, Religion, and
Woman, by Mrs. R. Morpecal. (Publishers: Sands & Co. Price
Is. net.)

Psychology of Insanity, The, by BERNARD Hart, M.D. (Publishers:
Cambridge University Press. Price 1s. net.)

Responsibilities of Fatherhood, The, by FRANCIS SwIney. (Publishers :
The League of Isis. Price 3d.)

Truths: Talks with a Boy Concerning Himself, by Dr. E. B. LOWRY.
(Publishers: Forbes and Co., Chicago. Price 50 cents.)

Woman and Womanhood, by C. W. SatgeBy. (Publisher: W.
Heinemann. Price tos. net.)
