INHERITANCE OF MENTAL DISORDERS

An Address to the Society at the Annual General Meeting
By AUBREY LEWIS, MD., MR.cP.

HE inheritance of mental disorder

can be regarded as a body of

knowledge and a subject of inquiry.
The knowledge, in short, is still incomplete; the method of inquiry neither fully
worked out nor fully applied. But,
although the knowledge is incomplete, it is
trustworthy as far as it goes. If, therefore,
one is concerned, as members of this
Society are, to improve the human stock,
one can feel that one’s zeal in this regard
need not be intemperate or blind. Such
zeal, exercised upon the elimination of
mental disorder, will be zeal informed by
the assured knowledge that permits of prediction, and tempered by the limitations
that are the sober outcome of critical examination; such critical examination is continually being applied.

As in all fields of busy scientific inquiry,
there is here much conflict and questioning
and examination of evidence. Although
two or three may be found to sing together
in tuneful choir, there is nearly always
another singer over against them, or many
such, who are sometimes strident and
adverse. So the inheritance of mental disorder is being inquired into very actively,
but not without much controversy. Those
who explore the territory differ somewhat
about the value of each other’s ways of
exploration ; they do not accept each other’s
charts and maps out of hand, but when all
agree about a discovery—and such agreement is surprisingly frequent in so new a
subject—it is pretty certain that the thing
is as they say. That, no doubt, sounds a
limited, feeble thing to say about the science
on which one wishes to base action of the
first importance for future generations.
But, in fact, the difficulties of research in
this subject are so great that the concordance of critical and experienced opinion is
a very remarkable achievement.

79

What then are these difficulties, and what
is the actual substance of the achievement?
The difficulties are, in part, those of
psychiatry, which has no certainty that in
its clinical varieties of mental disorder it is
dealing with biological entities, if I may be
permitted the term. Indeed, it is certain
that the current groups or types of reaction
—the best one can work with—are not satisfactorily defined as yet, even for clinical
purposes, how much less for biological?
The difficulties are also, in part, those of
biology, which is, in some respects, inadequate in the apparatus of methods and data
to be applied to the problem. But most of
all the difficulties are those of the animal
investigated, the human being, a wilful,
perverse creature who persists in going on
living a colossal length of time—as long as
the investigator indeed—that does not
always welcome inquiry into its habits,
refuses, not unnaturally, to submit to
planned genetic experiments, and is likely
to go on being as recalcitrant to research of
this kind as it has been to systems of
government or plans of regeneration. Such
is the nature of the creature, man, considered as an object of genetic research—
amiable in his tendencies, but inherently
unamenable, and with a mind of his own.

Perhaps it would be best for me to illustrate these difficulties by some examples. I
have said that the types of reaction which
psychiatry uses as categories of mental disorder are not satisfactorily defined. If, for
example, an inquiry is being made into the
inheritance of hysteria, one will be uncertain whether the biological attribute of
which one must investigate the transmission is the limited hysterical type of
reaction, or a larger grouping which will
include other psychopathic forms. One will
not know whether some kinds of, say,
schizoid personality, are not to be regarded
80

as hysterical, or the reverse; and whether
hysterical personality must be regarded as
distinct from hysterical reaction. ‘That is
different from, let us say, some forms of
muscular hypertrophy—I am taking an
instance from neurology—where there are
universally accepted means of distinguishing the anomaly in question—bodily
changes recognizable beyond all doubt,
either during life, or on special examination of the affected parts of the body after
death.

Mental disorders are not so clear-cut. I
do not wish to suggest that psychiatry is a
grandiose synonym for specialized muddle,
or that psychiatrists are babes in the wood,
not even sure which trees are which. Most
of the trees can be identified, and they do
not prevent the wood being seen as a whole;
but in some cases indubitable criteria of the
separate groups, the species and genera, as
it were, are lacking. One does not know
for sure what is the true relation of a particular kind of constitution to a particular
kind of mental disorder. Things essentially
different may conceivably be lumped
together in schizophrenia, for example, and
partial deviations from the norm may be
equated with whole deviations, as in cyclothymia. The difficulties, in short, are
greater than in other medical fields; the
closer one gets to them the more alarming
they become—these ‘‘ sturdy doubts and
boisterous objections wherewith the unhappiness of our knowledge too nearly
acquainteth us.’’ But they are steadily and
ingeniously being surmounted; many of
them have already been put out of the way
for good.

Then there are the difficulties more
strictly biological. The appropriate statistical methods are not agreed upon; Weinberg and Bernstein have been at each other’s
throats for the last three years or more as
to the merits of their respective sibship and
a priori methods, and other people say that
the methods are complementary and both
useful. The relation of physical to mental
constitution, or the larger issue of what is
constitution, is unsettled. The way of
assessing the relative importance of in
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

herited predisposition (genotype) and environmental means of manifestation or
modification, is not certain, nor the possibilities of summation, multiple gene determination, blastophthoria, etc. ‘These difficulties are among the least troublesome.
The biological weakness in much work in
this field has not been due to the inadequacy
of the methods and knowledge available, but
to the failure of the investigators to acquaint
themselves with it and to use it.

The difficulties of the animal tnvestigated: he has small families; he cannot be
observed for long enough; he drifts out of
one’s reach—he goes from London to Valparaiso or Leeds, and is lost. Perhaps I
can illustrate this by some work being done
at the Maudsley Hospital on the melancholia that occurs in people who have passed
the prime of life—climacteric depression.
These patients have reached the age of
fifty or thereabouts before they come under
one’s notice. Full information about their
parents, uncles and aunts and grandparents will, by this time, be very difficult
to get. Their children will still be twenty
years or so short of the age at which the
illness often makes its first appearance, and
the investigator must, therefore, wait until
he is himself past the prime of life before
he can draw his conclusions, or must leave
his data for posterity to complete.

You might object that as regards the
children one could overcome the obstacle by
selecting for investigation cases of this disorder which were diagnosed say twenty or
thirty years ago; their children will now
be old enough to justify you in drawing conclusions. But it will be difficult to trace the
children of people who were in a mental
hospital twenty years ago, and if you did
trace them, they might not be willing to be
investigated. Also, you are not always able
to use diagnoses made twenty or thirty
years ago; the fashions of psychiatry have
changed a good deal—especially the fashions
in terminology and grouping, and still more
important, the fashion of writing a full
account of the patient’s life and symptoms.
Had full records been kept, one could now
make one’s own diagnosis, but in the old
INHERITANCE OF MENTAL DISORDERS

days records were very meagre; moreover,
one often wishes to correlate clinical findings with genetic findings, and for this the
record must be full and preferably collected
by only one or by very few observers.

And, of course, human beings sometimes
conceal and vary the truth when an inquiry
is made into such painful matters as those
relating to mental disorder in their family
or themselves. But even these great diffculties—the worst dragons in the path—can
be disposed of in one way or another: the
chief weapon against them is the patience
and tact of the inquirer.

WHAT IS NOW KNOWN

So much for difficulties. Perhaps I have
put too much weight on them: as though
I wished to glorify the workers who have
tilled such stubborn soil; or perhaps as
though I wished to extenuate the meagreness of the fruits. And certainly the latter
is not my intention. The fruits are considerable. Much is now known.

Huntington’s chorea, a rare but striking mental affection of middle life, is inherited as a simple dominant: myoclonus
epilepsy as a simple recessive. Manicdepressive psychosis is, in its most typical
recurrent form, a highly transmissible disorder: the probability is that of the children of a parent with it, a third will also
suffer from the disorder. Another sixth
will show milder mood-disorders. If both
parents have manic-depressive illness, twothirds of the children will show it, and the
remaining third will show milder affective
swings of mood, not reaching definite mental
illness. Of the brothers and sisters of such
a person, a tenth show the disorder : if both
the parents have been free, the probable
incidence is 7 per cent. : if one parent shows
it, 23 per cent.

In schizophrenia there are some forms in
which the causative influence of the environment has been great: in these the
hereditary factor, thongh considerable, is of
less importance than in the much more
numerous cases which constitute the bulk
of the conditions widely known by the term
Dementia’ Preecox. Of the children of a

81

patient, 8-10 per cent. will probably themselves show this directly ; 40 per cent. will
show schizoid disorders of personality ; only
about half will be mentally normal. This
represents ten times as great an incidence
of schizophrenia and twenty-five times as
great an incidence of schizoid psychopathy
as may be expected in the offspring of
healthy parents taken at random. If both
parents are schizophrenic, half the children
will be so, and only a fifth of the children
normal. Of the siblings of a schizophrenic
5 per cent., of the grandchildren 2 per cent.,
of the nephews and nieces and the cousins
I°5 per cent., will probably have the same
disorder. The probability for all these
relatives is higher where one or, worse,
both of their parents show schizophrenic
or schizoid features. Furthermore the mortality curve for tuberculosis rises and falls
in the different generations parallel to the
morbidity curve for schizophrenia among
them.

I shall not go on to discuss the findings
in paranoia, paranoid states, cerebral
arteriosclerosis, hysteria, etc., because of
the difficulty of explaining their significance briefly. Perhaps it would be of more
interest to mention the particular investigations that are being carried on at the
Maudsley Hospital. I cannot tell you the
results because these investigations take a
long time, and no conclusions have been
arrived at yet. Several of them deal with
special types of reaction: the family history of obsessional patients is one study;
that of schizophrenic children is another;
a third is concerned with the inheritance of
involutional melancholia in men; another
covers the psycho-neuroses associated with
accident claims and prolonged unemployment.

These are the special investigations.
Others deal with more general problems:
twin studies, concerning which I have
spoken here before; studies on the children
of couples both of whom have been insane;
and inquiries into the frequency of mental
disorder in the average population.

A word may be said about how the last
two investigations are being conducted. A
82

card-index system permits one to discover
the instances where both husband and wife
have been inmates of one of the L.C.C.
mental hospitals during the last fifty years.
The records of these patients are gone
through to discover the features of their
illness and the number of their children.
An attempt is then made to get in touch
with as many of these children as possible.
Information is collected about their history
generally, their personality, and any
mental illness they may have had; the
information is then examined in the light
of necessary qualifications as to age, accessibility, etc. In this study, as in almost all
such investigations, the services of a
specially trained psychiatric social worker
are invaluable. My own experience makes
me say with the strongest conviction that
without one or more such helpers, trained,
intelligent, tactful, and keen, research of
this kind is practically impossible.

Then there is the last investigation I
referred to—the assessment of psychic morbidity in the average population. The
method being employed in the Maudsley
investigation is to collect from patients in
a surgical ward of a general hospital information about their parents, brothers and
sisters, and children. These may be
regarded as a fair sample of the average
population of a given district of London.
This method has the advantage of calling
for relatively little time, money, or trouble.
But it is by no means a_ satisfactory
method; the surgical illness brings in a
possibly detrimental element of selection :
one is dependent on the possibly untruthful, prejudiced, or ill-informed statements
of one member of the family. It is therefore necessary to supplement the information by further inquiries outside hospital.

The need for such a study as this may
not be obvious. Mental hospital statistics
already give the incidence of gross mental
disorder. ‘To what use can one put a more
detailed assessment? ‘To explain this one
must consider that the mode of transmission of the various mental disorders is not
simple and is not yet certain. Investigators
have therefore turned their attention some
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

what away from the search after mendelian
relations and towards the empirical assessment of probability. How many of the children of a parent with a particular disorder do
as a rule, inherit the disorder? But perhaps
this incidence is no higher than one would
find if one were to take any chance group of
people. Is there, for example, any more
cyclothymia among the children of manic
or melancholic parents than among the
people of the same age taken at random
from the average population? One must,
therefore, discover the incidence in the
average population and compare it. I
would say, parenthetically, that for this
study, as for many others, research in a
small rural community with fixity of residence over many generations, is a desideratum.

This matter of empirical assessment of
probability is of the utmost importance in
genetic prognosis. In the absence of a welldefined theoretical knowledge of the mode
of transmission and the intensity of transmission, if J may use the term, of the particular syndrome, one must rely on these
empirical estimates and upon clinical
experience if one is to give sound advice to
those who ask whether they should have
children.

These are the equipment with which the
psychiatrist deals with the individual problem: but such an equipment is of little use
unless one has full access to the factual
material in each case. “This can only be
gained by a careful study of the members
of both families concerned in the proposed
union.

Here arises a larger issue: that of the
stock as a whole, the constituents of the
nation. The individual is traditionally the
chief object of the doctor’s concern, but for
eugenists and even for doctors in the
modern view, it is the stock, the nation,
society at large that must finally be the
body treated. Would the thorough application of our present knowledge appreciably
diminish the amount of mental disorder
and the consequent human misery?

Whatever one’s values, whether one put
emphasis on ethics or economics, health or
INHERITANCE OF MENTAL DISORDERS

social stability, one must hope for the
lessening and even disappearance of mental
disorder in most of its forms. Would
voluntary sterilization, for example, do
this? I am afraid we must answer that it
would not: it is very doubtful whether
even compulsory sterilization would do so.
We know too little: we have no means of
recognizing those who transmit the morbid
quality though they do not exhibit it, nor
can we detect with any certainty those who
have so far been healthy but will later
become ill. And even if we could, it would
be a Draconian and possibly disastrous
measure that rooted out all morbidity at
the cost of much excellence that went with
it.

This is a large issue, concerned as much
with the positive as with negative eugenics ;
the consideration of what is desirable in
mental quality is as important as the getting rid of what is unhealthy. When we
know more, extremism in this matter may
be justified, but I do not think it is now.
Certainly in individual cases one must
decide whether propagation would be
unwise, and one would in most instances
be able to give good advice. But any rootand-branch methods for the elimination of
mental disorder as a whole are as yet
illusory. All the more reason for. further
research: all the more reason why sterilization and similar measures should be
available for the individual.

As for research, no doubt there will
always be workers who pursue research,
genetic or other, for the sole end of increased knowledge and the pleasures of the
chase, but the ends of research as a whole
must be its application in life. Thought
must issue in action which in the long run
becomes the test of its worth. So genetic
studies on mental disorder have as their
object and perhaps as their ultimate justification the discovery of means by which
these forms of illness and misery can be
eliminated not only in single cases, but
altogether.

Let us, however, be clear about what this
implies. Mental disorder, as nowadays
conceived, is a failure of social adaptation,

83

a failure of the human individual to be in
a harmonious relation to his environment :
this disharmony is occasionally associated
with other qualities socially most valuable.
Apart from the striking examples which
genius offers, there is the hypomanic person
who may be an admirably energetic member
of society ; the hysteric and the schizoid may
be an original leaven, an enlivening or a
creative force, and the obsessional a stronghold of order and painstaking work.

It is possible to imagine a society humdrum for lack of such people : but it is still,
I think, rather fanciful to picture a day
when society will have become so purged,
or could be so purged if eugenists wished
it. Should such a day come, eugenists
would have to be unanimous about the social
and ethical values which must stand, alongside those medical ones which to-day we
have chiefly considered. If I seem unduly
cautious about the large possibilities for
betterment of the nation, it is only that I
may stress the necessity for further research
into this subject, and for a clear understanding of the not purely medical or
genetic issues in it. Human personality is
the basis of all national betterment ; personality is closely related to mental disorder.
The study of the inheritance of normal personality, of varieties of human personality
sometimes the precursor of mental disorder
but still more often not so, and finally of
mental disorder itself—these studies are
essential towards the ends that eugenists
have in mind.

To under-rate the knowledge gained by
the very fruitful work already done is an
amusement only for the ignorant, an outlet
for the captious and the prejudiced : but it
is an unwise optimism that would over-rate
this knowledge or assume that the problem
has been solved in theory and now only
awaits enlightened social action. Propaganda to be effective must be honest as well
as zealous; and to this audience, already
convinced about the structure to be built,
the end to be aimed at, I may safely point
out the incompleteness of the foundations as
yet laid. It is not a question of pessimism.
Over-bold and premature claims lead to
84 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

refutation and over-refutation : and what is calamity. Much is now known, and the
true is then ignored or denied, and even work is hopeful; the present task is to
derided. To get for this branch of eugenics ‘‘ endeavour at more knowledge by labour
the false name of a chimera would be a_ and inquisition.”’

REUGENICS SOCIETY

MEMBERS’ MEETING
At the Rooms of the Royal Society, Burlington House, Piccadilly, W.1
TUESDAY, JULY 18th, at 5.30 p.m.
Eugenics and Consanguineous Marriages

Speaker: A. M. Ludovici, Esq.

Chairman: Sir Humphry Rolleston, Bt. K.c.v.o., K.cB.,
M.D., D.Se., LL.D.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXV, No. 2.
