> “INTELLIGENCE” TESTS

uw

aay jet By Cc. SPEARM AN, PhD., LLD., ERS.

Present Situation —
‘HE testing of ‘“‘ intelligence’ has
certainly attained an_ outstanding
position. In the whole of current
normal psychology, nothing can compare
with it either for theotetical novelty or for
practical utility. Twenty years ago it might
have seemed-to have reached its apogee in
the testing. of over 100,000 soldiers of the
American Army. But an even more solid
advance would appear to be its very recent
general adoption by such an eminent and
prudent a body as the British Board of
Education. - | | | |
Not a little surprising, and even disquieting, accordingly, must be the fact that
this testing, as currently done, is by many
competent authorities still regarded with
grave scepticism. Such warning voices
would appear to deserve from us at least a
hearing.* | : |
Equivocalaty of Term:
_ Now, the first and greatest charge made
against the testing of “‘ intelligence ” is that
no agreement has been achieved—or seems
likely to be—as to what mental power or
powers this name is conceived to comprise.
In very ancient times, it was limited quite
definitely to the power of abstraction as
contrasted in particular with that of sensory
perception. And some such scope of the
term is sometimes advocated to this day.
Terman, for instance, writes with irreproachable explicitness that ‘‘an individual is
intelligent in proportion as he is able to
carry on abstract thinking.”’ But. far more
usually, thé scope has in modern times
undergone some great but. undetermined
extension.. Thus, very many authorities do,
whereas others do not, make it embrace the
power of imagination. And as much can

 

ii Pethaps the fullest account of the grounds under
“is given in the present author's.

ving this sce ACIST |
he Abilities of Man, 2nd ed., 1932, chap IT.

be said about that of memory. But the
climax of equivocation seems to have been
reached when numerous testers make the
term harbour even sensory perception itself,
which originally, as we have just seen, was
taken to be just the power that intelligence is
not. Thus Binet wrote: ‘‘ A sensation, a
perception, are intellectual manifestations.”’
So, too, Haggerty: ‘‘ intelligence ” includes
“ sensation, perception, association, memory,
imagination, discrimination, Judgement, and
reasoning.” |
Moreover, not only do the modern leading
authors conceive the nature of “‘ intelligence”
in wildly discrepant theoretical definitions :
they present no less contradiction in their
actual practice of testing. Thus Binet in his
theoretical analysis of memory says that this
is not ‘‘ intelligence’ but only the “ great
simulator ”’ of it. Yet in his actual practice
his tests of memory play a very large part.
Even Terman, in spite of his avowed austere
doctrine of “abstraction,” actually introduced into his tests all sorts of other powers,
down even to mere sensory discrimination.
In view of all this discrepancy, what
information do we really possess when we
are told that a certain child has done badly
at the test ? Are we to understand no more
than that he is rather weak in abstract
thinking? Or else, that his deficiency
extends to memory, imagination, association,

Judgement, and even sensory perception ? To

ignore such equivocations in intelligencetesting—say its critics—is to run the risk of
doing the child the gravest injustice.

Composite Nature of Measurements

The second but less momentous criticism
raised against the current tests of “ intelligence ’ derives from the fact of their being
composite. Discrepant as may be both the
theoretical conceptions and the actual scopes
of the different tests proposed, these all at
any rate agree in one thing; this is that the

| total test consists ofa ‘‘ team ” or “ battery ”

249
250

of numerous sub-tests ee more or less —

randomly together.
Binet himself sought to explain and

justify this composition by the then current |

theory of faculties. He wrote: “‘ the mental
faculties are independent; with a little
memory, there may be much judgement ;

our mental tests are each appropriate to the 
analysis of a single faculty.’’ But if so, then
surely each faculty ought to have its own
separate measurement. And this neither he
nor any other tester even attempts to supply.

' Speaking more generally, to add together a

subject’s marks for judgement and for
memory would seem no more justifiable
than to add those, say, for length of a
person’s arms and for the blueness of his eyes.

Dependence on Accidental Experiences

As a third fundamental objection to the
current tests of intelligence may be urged
their dependence on the nature of the
testee’s previous experiences. Thus the
favourite sub-test of Binet consisted in the
interpretation of a picture. One of these, for
instance, represented an eviction. Here,
clearly, those subjects will be greatly
favoured to whom such evictions may happen
to be familiar. Or take the vocabulary subtest preferred to all others by Terman. Here
the child is asked what are such things as
** a bonfire,”’ “ a guitar,’’ “‘ treasury,’’ “‘ milksop,’ “ charity.’’ Again, clearly, a dominant
influence is exercised by the nature of the
subject’s experiences previously.

To all such dependence on previous
experiences there are at least two grave
objections. One is their usually accidental
character. And the other—of cardinal importance for the readers of the EUGENICS
REVIEW—is that such tests are obviously
invalid for the study of heredity.

Help from Theory of Two Factors

From all these defects in the current
methods of testing intelligence, let us turn

to another method that claims to overcome 
them. It has been designated as that of. Two
Factors. Its essential nature consists in
splitting the score of the subject at. any test
(or sub-test) into two independent parts, of

THE EUGENICS REVIEW ~

whole of genuine insightful knowledge.

‘base for measuring. it ;

which. the one, ‘* G,’’ is quite general, whereay_
the other, ‘‘ S, ’? is narrowly specific. Here,
it is said, the fatal equivocality vanish .
For G has been shown to measure a perfectly |
definite mental power: this may be roughly
described as that of originative thinking jy |
contrast with merely sensing or reproducing
More precisely, the process has been desig.
nated as “‘ eduction ” and has been show, |
to take two sharply distinguishable forms |
In one, the person sets out from two or more
items of knowledge and goes on to Perceive
how these are mutually related. For instance
he might hear and understand the word,

‘“‘ good” and “ bad,” which qualities he should then perceive. to be “contrary ” to
one another. In the other form of eduction, |
the person starts from any item of knowledge
together with some appropriate relation, and |
thence conjures up to mind the other item so
related to the first.one. For instance, he
might somehow be given the ideas “ good ”
and “contrary to,’’ and thence he should
derive the further idea of ‘‘ bad.” In these.
two forms of eduction, it is asserted, are
comprised the whole and nothing but the

  

As for the second objection to the current
testing of “ intelligence,’ this is now met
easily enough. For G and S, unlike the
alleged faculties, do supply separate measurements.

Even the third objection to the tests, that
of being at the mercy of previous experiences,
would appear to be now approaching its
solution. For, as we have seen, the very
essence of what is measured by G consists in
its originativeness: that is to ) say 1 in its xo!
being experiential.* 
Choice of Base of M counsuiail |

Moreover, from the nature of G there
follows a remarkable corollary. Since
throughout a person’s abilities this factor
remains always the same, the tester can
choose whichever of them he likes as his
his various possible
bases | will not differ from one another in i

_* A very clear exposition of this theory of Two Fac:
tors is to be found in. Anny ond. a Raawledes. by F.

- Thomas, 1935...
; Leh IP ae SNE TAR Cb +O. ove Z ~
Loe ey BE Mt tee,

. . . y Bm . y , %
awe MA vate, yng OE ee ¢@.y 8 : a Be on :
ae yer yr le fe : . ‘ : i
4 Vine ee Mee an) ee, . ot -, a 5S ‘ 4 .
A € 1 fat ES oe ‘ 5 bated rahe . a? $ ‘ ~—
. « mS Ny or) ‘ . .
? < tae : . .
’ : oF
tt ” : 3
of

 

rinciple, but ‘only in convenience. And so
he is at liberty-to-pick out whichever of them

may be'most accessible. They miay all lie

‘thin a-comparatively. narrow field of
should nevertheless: be valid for all abilities
whatever. 2 2 |

Such a restriction of the tests to an
extremely narrow field of ability, it will be
noted, is diametrically opposed to the
prevalent — policy. For, this consists in an

ttempt—quite futile, by the way—to include abilities of all kinds.*

 
 

 

%.t

Theoretical Progress versus Practical
Standardization |

But with ‘all:such. outstanding merits, it
may be asked, why has not the method of
Two Factors found. universal acceptance ?
One reason would seem to be that the other
methods. do. in. truth borrow very largely

from it in actual: practice, and only fail to

recognize that .they. are doing so. Thus —

Brigham writes ironically : “‘ In this cou..try
[U.S.A.] his theories [of Two Factors] seem

almost universally rejected in debate and ~

accepted .in practice.’’ More fundamental,
however, may be the fact that all testmaking advances along two lines; those of
theoretical improvement and of practical
standardization. The two are antagonistic ;
improvement breaks up standardization ;

* This freedom in the choice of base has been designated as “the theorem of indifference of indicator,’’
The Abilities. of Man, p.'197. oe

: : H
get . . “a 2 Me Ss. . x a :

   

 

a’ TESTS 251
standardization blocks improvement. Now,
almost -all. testers, faced by the choice
between theory and practice, have preferred
the latter; after expending great labour,

_ they have looked at least for quick returns.

The proponents of the Two Factors, far
otherwise, have for a very long period
plodded on with their theoretical studies.
Quite recently, however, a change has come
over the spirit of their dream. At long last,
they too have deemed themselves to have
reached a point when they can profitably
turn to practical issues. They have produced
some tests quite ready for actual usage.
Line and Others |

_As leading in this direction we may cite
the pioneer work of Line. The base chosen
by him was simply that of a few little black
linear figures on a white ground. In psycho
logical analysis, the elements of knowledge

here present are nothing but blackness and
position : these are presented in relations of
only three kinds ; those of direction, distance,
and resemblance. The detailed procedure is

as follows. The subject is shown three or four

figures all having some common characteristic, and he is told that all of these are
' Tight.” Then he is shown three or four
further figures which do mot possess that
characteristic and he is told that these are
“ wrong.” Finally, he is shown several yet
further figures and has to decide which of

them are “right” and which. “ wrong.”

The following (Fig. 1, a and 6) are two
252

 

Fig. 1b

instances, one very easy and the other more
difficult.

Already Line himself had developed his
test of this up to the point of reaching correlations with G over 0-8. In the hands of
Zubin, Arsenian and Lorge, this value has
been even exceeded, and moreover norms
have . been calculated from numerous
subjects.* |

Stephenson

Among other less systematic but not less
effective utilizations of the same meagre
visual material has been that of Stephenson.
In the following easy instance (Fig. 2) the
subject has the task of pointing out what
portion of the figure on the right is identical
with the figure on the left. The correct
answer is indicated by the dotted line.f

+ (t+
+ | wSy

+

+ i

 Fig.2

 

* The original and largest work of Line appeared as
a Monograph Supplement to the Brit. J. Psych., 1931.
toa ane study of Arsenian, see J. Educ. Psych., Nov.
19

°3 "For the tests chiefly used by Stephenson, see
J. Educ. Psych., 1931, 171. _

Raven and Penrose

Most fully developed of all such test;
based on the theory of Two Factors, how.
ever, appears to be that which has been
produced by Raven and Penrose under the
name of “ Progressive Matrices. ** Each
sub-test consists of eight figures together
with a blank space for a ninth. The subject
has to decide which of several further
figures fits best into the blank space. The
following (Figs. 3 and 4) are two examples,
one rather easy and the other rather difficult.

The Paradox

To conclude this exposition of intelligence
testing based on the theory of Two Factors,
we are bound to concede that the claims
advanced by it are extraordinarily large.
The startling paradox has been advanced
that a few stunts with little black figures
supply an adequate measure of all that is
common to the diverse transcendent glories
of the human intellect ; the abstractions of
a Plato; the generalizations of a Newton;
the reasonings of a Spinoza; the inventions
of an Archimedes.

For a final verdict, whether for or against
this bold thesis, we can look only to the many
and arduous researches which have been

 

. devoted to this end. But even on a com
paratively brief further consideration, the

* For the work of Raven and Penrose, see apes
Brit. J. Med. Psych., 1938.. Their. tests may now be
obtained from H. K. Lewis & Co., Gower Street, London.
“ INTELLIGENCE” TESTS

253

 

    
  
  
 
 
 

esting and the great achievements of science
undergoes much abatement. For in so far
as both are purely | processes of knowing, they
are subject to ‘the same inexorable limitations ;
by way of. the aforesaid two simple forms of
“eduction,” these and nothing more.

that pure. processe

 

all knowledge alike is obtained solely

~ Moreover,. ‘we. must always bear in mind
ses. of knowing are seldom.

if ever really attainable. There are almost
inevitably an admixture with, and a dependence on, the further processes of feeling and
willing. In mental tests, indeed, these can
for the purposes of analysis be approximately
eliminated. But in the practical of everyday
life, their influences quickly dominate again.

Woe to the psychologist ‘who ever forgets
this and takes his 1.0.’s—or even his G’s

and S’s—to say the last word about anybody!
SCIEN TIFIC BOOKS

_ Current and Standard ENGLISH, FREN CH and GERMAN Literature’.
in MEDICAL, CHEMICAL, BIOLOGICAL and PH YSICAL SCIEN CE.
supplied from stock, or obtained promptly to order.

A visit to this Department is respectfully eubpested.
Please write for CATALOGUES, 5 m mentioning interests.

"Phone: BUSton 4282 5 Hines)

Ss * f-. @
E gS . .
: —
ay a . af wa . yO >
oP ede. Se i & ee ‘ ett :
* N a vee as ‘ Tet tng Ses oly ' ‘ : - a _
2 pre a "ane ent tol oe se Se 3 . ay es
- 3 ' ye

a y @ \ Che 7 =] Se . ; ~ oASe ‘ee 4 x ee. . 4.

. * ot i . * - 4

s 1 a . pe £74 Ve ay a7 se E . = es
: 4 ros tee 4 ks . = ‘ Sd x oe Lo we, .

oe. - 7: ey. ‘ ~*~: ee oe oe PP.

- 4 . To ated aa vo ff 1

ye - ‘ s pk : an ee rent: 4 a

. 4 . > ¢ =F. Tyee gs 8 a 8 \

vm OR RAE tle ate te la a RARE OA

te er ee er, wet UN Eee oe :

SF ara ia 2 bee : ‘ - Poe Us Pe or ?
¢ “te ag 5 *
as 1 tee fy
.

 

ct gt eee Oy ee web gre ®
r ope Re eee Cog E Te. Sete Sa .
Beek a ght Ra ee aa
k aa bas Sa hog ee gl ee ee . .
< ‘ ee gee ep eae Pa es wf :
‘ « te a 5 7 pees By Note 6 A es
e wy 2 ‘ we
‘ :
yyeg FV wee 22 ' ®
5 ‘ . ce ene, Poe ee
