114 EUGENICS REVIEW.

REPORTS.

Carnegie United Kingdom Trust: Fourth Annual Report, 1917.
The four volumes dealing with the physical welfare of mothers and
children in England and Wales, Scotland and Ireland, published by the
Trust during the year, have already been reviewed in these pages. The
experimental policy on which the Trust is now embarking is to include
the building of and equipment of six infant welfare centres in the United
Kingdom, and also of two central institutions in London and Edinburgh
respectively. The functions of the latter will be:—(1) To formulate
policies or action to put before the Government or local authorities; (2)
to encourage experimental work by voluntary agencies; (3) to organise a
thoroughly efficient information bureau; (4) to provide an adequate
library, both English and foreign; (5) to organise conferences, lectures,
etc.; (6) to consider the training desirable for workers in maternity and
infant welfare centres, health visitors, etc., and to formulate conditions
of training which might be accepted for the standard of the country as
a whole. .

With regard to this last clause it is much to be hoped that the Trust
will see their way to incorporate the teaching of eugenics in their scheme
of training so that the whole emphasis may not be laid upon the claims
of environment to the exclusion of the more far-reaching ones of heredity.

N. A.

PERIODICAL LITERATURE.
AMERICAN.

The Causes of Suicide.

SUICIDE AND CIVILISATION, by Tom A. Williams, M.B., C.M. (Washington). This paper was read at the Forty-second Annual Meeting of
the American Academy of Medicine in New York City, and gave rise to
an interesting discussion. The author discusses the causes of suicide and
gives a number of illustrative cases. His conclusion is that the cause
is always psychological, and that it is not a matter of physical defect of
body or of brain at all. The remedy consists in discovering the psychological background which has perverted the will to live, and in altering
the train of morbid associations, in other words, in psychotherapy.

In the discussion which followed the opinion was generally entertained that suicide is on the increase in civilised countries, the rate of
suicide in school children in Germanic countries being specially notable.
Several speakers emphasised the influence of heredity, and gave examples
of families in which suicide had occurred in two or three generations.
Religious indifference was alleged as a cause of suicide, which is said to
‘be less frequent in Catholic than in Protestant countries. One speaker
thought that alcohol was the principal cause. Allusion was made to an
organisation which has been at work for ten years in New York City
for making systematic efforts to prevent suicide. The annual number of
deaths from suicide in the United States was said to be 20,000. Dr. Ira
S. Wile, of New York, thought that the punishments we inflict upon
attempts of suicide are vicious. He held that “the punishment of wouldbe suicides is contrary to medical judgment, common-sense, and any
reasonable theory.” Most thinking people will agree with this opinion.—
The Journal of Sociologic Medicine; February, 1918; $f. 4-10.

J. A. L.
