REVIEWS OF BOOKS

POPULATION

United Nations. World Population Prospects, as Assessed in 1963. Population Studies
No. 41. New York, 1966. U.N. Pp. vii+ 149. Price $2.00.

PROJECTIONS OF FUTURE world populations have been made by the Population Division
of the United Nations Organization on four occasions. The results may be simply illustrated
by reference to the range of possible figures for the year 1980 (world population in thousand
millions): |

1951 projection : 3-0-3-6

1954 projection : 3-3-4-0

1958 projection : 3-9-4-3

1963 projection : 4-1-4-6

It will be seen that on each successive occasion the assessment has been raised by
roughly 10 per cent. Effectively, future prospects have been increasing at some 2 per cent
per annum—just about as fast as world population itself.

This development in the expectations is probably the reflection of the increase in the
rate of population growth recently. Probably also it is attributable to the improved data
that have been collected. The method of calculation may also have contributed something
to the increase; it has certainly been applied in much more detail than the previous assessments. While an extension of the amount of work undertaken does not guarantee that the
results will be more reliable—the general approach to the calculations and the basic
assumptions made are vastly more significant—the general impression to be gained from
reading the new report is one of greater confidence than before, arising from improved
technique.

It is interesting to note that this report was issued for limited circulation three years
ago, to enable demographic experts all over the world to comment and suggest changes.
In the event, the estimates of projected population have been altered but little as a result
of these consultations, but the manner in which the report is presented appears to have
been improved. The new text is sharper and it is easier to find the figures one is looking
for than it was in the draft.

Ease of reference is important, as this work is likely to provide a standard for some
while to come. Indeed, its only rival appears to be the rough shot offered by Professor
Boyarsky at the World Population Conference in Belgrade in 1965. The Professor’s view is
that world population will rise a good deal less fast than is expected by the Population
Division of the United Nations. While the Russian’s basic assumptions do not appear so
reasonable as those emanating from New York, the extent of the difference, and indeed
the marked way in which the United Nations assessments themselves have varied, emphasize
that great caution should be the watchword in interpreting the findings of hazardous exercises
such as this. P. R. C.

Agarwala, S. N. Some Problems of India’s Population. Bombay, 1966. Vora. Pp. iii+ 151+2.
Price Rs. 10.
IN THIS BOOK the author discusses the demographic situation in the country and analyses
the social factors which have influenced fertility.

The population in India has increased from 238 million (the 1901 Census) to 439 million
according to the 1961 Census. A study of the growth of population in various states of

114
REVIEWS OF BOOKS

India shows that in the sixty years of this century population has grown most in Assam
(220 per cent) and least in Uttar Pradesh (52 per cent). But we have very limited knowledge
of the factors which may have contributed to differential population growth in various
states. The percentage of urban population in the country has increased very slowly, the
urban population being 11 per cent in 1901 and 18 per cent in 1961.

The ratio of females to males is declining over the years: whereas the number of
females per 1,000 males was 946 in 1951, it declined to 941 in 1961. This shows that,
demographically, India has not entered the modern industrial age with its complementary
characteristics of increased risk to male lives and reduced risk to female lives.

Illiteracy is being improved slowly, particularly in the rural areas. Adult education
does not seem to have made much of an impact there. According to 1961 Census, 66 per
cent of males and 90 per cent of females aged five and over in the rural areas, and 34 per
cent of males and 60 per cent of females aged five and over in urban areas were illiterate.

India continues to be a peasant economy, the primary sector dominates and the
secondary and tertiary sectors are small. In 1961, 68 per cent male workers were employed
in the primary sector, 13 per cent in the secondary sector and 19 per cent in the tertiary
sector. |

Up to the Census of 1951, no specific questions were asked for estimating the extent
and pattern of internal migration and its estimates have been made from census data on
age, place of birth and place of enumeration. The extent of net rural-urban migration has
not been great in this century; the figure for 1951-61 decade is estimated as 5-2million.
In the 1961 Census additional information on the subject has been collected and it would
now be possible to do a more detailed and accurate analysis of internal migration not only
between rural and urban areas and between states, but also between districts in each state
and within a district in each state.

The system of marriage registration being non-existent in India, the time trend in age
at marriage has been studied from data from decennial censuses on marital status by age,
after making appropriate corrections for mis-statements. The results show that for females,
the mean age at marriage of those married till age thirty-five in a no-mortality cohort,
was 12°8 years in the 1891-1901 decade, 15-4 years in the 1941-51 decade and nearly
16 years, estimated provisionally, in the 1951-61 decade. For males, the mean age at
marriage of those married till age fifty in a no-mortality cohort was 20-0 years in the
1891-1901 decade, 19-9 years in the 1941-51 decade, and nearly 22 years, estimated
provisionally, in the 1951-61 decade.

With a decrease in the level of mortality and some increase in widow remarriage in the
country, there has been an increase in the mean duration of fertile union which has been
defined as the duration from a woman’s effective marriage ceremony to her age at the
time of widowhood, death or reaching the age of forty-five years. It has been estimated
from the census data that the mean duration of fertile union was twenty years in the
1901-11 decade, 22-8 years in the 1921-31 decade and 25 years in the 1951-61 decade.

There are restrictions on remarriage of widows among high caste Hindus, though
among many lower castes remarriage is allowed. Demographic surveys carried out in
some villages in Delhi and in Western India indicate that about one-fourth to about
two-fifths of the widows remarry; the chances of remarriage being high for young widows
with no children.

The fertility is uncontrolled, and an average of six to seven children are born to a
woman of completed fertility. No differences in fertility are found between urban and rural
areas. In a sample census carried out in 1960-61 by the Registrar-General of India, it was
found that about one-fifth of all births were of sixth or higher order. More than half of
the total births took place between five to fourteen years of duration of marriage. So

115
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

fertility can be reduced only if birth control is started early—within the first few years of
marriage.

The birth rate in India is continuing at a high level of about 42 per thousand population,
while the death rate has come down to about 19 per thousand, resulting in a great increase
in population. So far, family planning has been accepted by a very few couples, and there
has been no reduction in the birth rate. Though there are about 15,000 family planning
clinics in the country, of which about 12,000 are in the rural areas, the attendance is poor.
The motivation for family limitation is low, and very intensive family planning education
is needed to increase it.

The Government of India plans to intensify family planning efforts to reduce the
birth rate by half in the shortest possible time. With every Five Year Plan, the money
allocated for family planning has been increased: Rs. 6-5 million in the First Five Year
Plan (1951-56), Rs. 49:5 million in the Second, Rs. 250 million in the Third (with a ceiling
of Rs. 500 million) and Rs. 950 million in the Fourth Five Year Plan (1966-71). The earlier
plans could not be implemented fully, as only 25 per cent of money allocated was spent
during the First, and 30 per cent during the Second Plan.

With an unprecedented increase in population obstructing the implementation of
programmes of economic development, family planning work must be treated as a national
emergency programme. The author suggests that its success depends on the effective
co-operation of Universities, demographic research organizations and workers in the
Community development blocks for family planning educational talks to the villagers.

The book draws upon the existing census material, and also upon a large number of
demographic surveys, some of which are not published, and makes a valuable contribution
in throwing light on some of the important population problems facing the country to-day.

SAVITRI THAPAR
GENETICS

Sutton, H. Eldon. An Introduction to Human Genetics. New York and London, 1965. Holt,
Rinehart & Winston. Pp. x-+262. Price 48s.

IT IS THE author’s wish that this introduction should serve students in general rather than
those following a particular discipline. To this end he has kept “‘nongenetic material’’ to
a minimum, supplied a genetic text which should be acceptable to students of whatever
following, and has left the instructor to supplement it with examples appropriate to each
class.

Starting in classical style with a tribute to Mendel, Professor Sutton introduces the
reader to such basic genetic terms as ‘“‘dominant”’, “‘recessive”’ and “‘gene”’ in the context ot
their earliest usage. He can then show how original concepts are modified as the subjecf
unfolds, avoiding the tedium of a list of definitions so early in the work as to be meaningless.
The care in introducing new terms (in italics) is notable in this work, although occasional
words or phrases are met before their meaning has been explained. For instance “chromosome”’ slips in on page 7, and on page 39 “identical twins” has to be defined sketchily in
brackets since, unlike many textbooks on human genetics, the section on twins comes late
in the text.

The chapters on cell division and chromosomes are illustrated with good uncluttered
diagrams (a general feature of this book) and Chapter 5 on Human Chromosomal Abnormalities includes the main clinical features of the established syndromes. In discussing
the possible offspring of a balanced 21/D translocation carrier, this author remembers all
six possibilities, where often the tri-D and mono-D are left out. One point which is not made

116
