JEWS AND GENTILES

Their Intellectual and Temperamental Differences —

A psychological study which reveals the innate superiority of London Jewish children
over their Gentile school-mates.

By A. G. HUGHES, M.Ed, B.Sc.

N investigation into racial differences

need no longer be prefaced by apology

or defence. We have become accustomed to the hard facts discovered by experimental psychologists in the field of
individual differences, and no one now
abjects that it is wrong to lay these differences bare. We recognize that the welfare
of the individual and of the community is
best served, not by ignoring or denying the
existence of such differences, but by getting
an ever-increasing knowledge of them. We
have learnt exactly the same truth in connection with sex differences, though in this
latter case the differences proved surprisingly small while in the former they were
surprisingly large.

Just as the measurement of individual and
sex differences is helping us to understand one
another, and is contributing towards a solution of the problem of fitting each individual
man (or woman) into his most suitable niche
in the world of work, so may we hope that
the measurement of racial differences will
some day help in the solution of national
and international problems. The race
problem in America, for example, is particularly acute and has stimulated most of
the experimental observations on racial
differences which have so far been made.

Though notions of ‘ Chosen Races’ are
more modest than formerly, and boastful
proclamations of racial superiority are less
frequently heard, it does not mean that the
existence of race differences has been disproved. Even the most ardent internationalist would admit that if races ought to be
reckoned as equal, it is on a basis of
diversity of usefulness and not of identity
of capacity. The result of this change of
attitude is that we can now approach our
problem in a relatively dispassionate scientific spirit: the aim of the psychologist is
not to prove that one race is more valuable

than another, but to measure as accurately
as possible specific differences between
them.*

That Jews differ from non-Jews is generally accepted as an axiomatic truth. Unfortunately, most of the descriptions of such
differences are based on unscientific observations heavily biased by strong feelings, and
there are consequently wide divergencies of
opinions as to their nature and extent. This
is particularly true in regard to alleged
differences in temperament and character.
It is interesting, however, to note that the
relative incidence of certain diseases among
Jews and non-Jews suggests quite definitely
that temperamental differences are likely to
exist.

RACE AND DISEASE

It is well known that the incidence
of tuberculosis among Jews is relatively
low,’ and the incidence of diabetes relatively
high.” Fishberg says that some writers
afirm a high incidence among Jews of
arthritism—‘‘ diseases usually due to disturbances of the normal metabolism which
manifest themselves primarily as chronic
rheumatism and gout, but which also include other morbid processes such as diabetes . . . and obesity.” Articular rheumatism, being an important etiological factor
in organic heart disease, the relatively high
rate of mortality from this disease among
Jews‘ is further evidence in the same direction. These diseases, tuberculosis and arthritism, are, according to Kretschmer,’
correlated with specific types of temperament ; and in any case the generally accepted
facts regarding the incidence of disease
show that Jews seem to inherit a somewhat
distinct physical constitution, probably

* It should be pointed ont that the term ‘ race’ is
used in this article in a very loose sense. Its use
is not intended to imply more than that the Jews

have been a relatively inbreeding group for a long
space of time.
go

dependent upon glandular balance, and
therefore very likely to carry with it mental
qualities of a particular kind.

A similar conclusion is suggested by the
high incidence of insanity and nervous
diseases among Jews, both in Europe and
America. In Italy, the proportion of Jewish
insane has been observed to be four times
that of the non-Jewish population ; in Germany the Jews appear to be twice as liable
to mental disease as the non-Jews, and there
are similar statistics for Russia, Denmark,
Vienna, and New York.* Jews are also
more subject to hysteria and neurasthenia
than non-Jews; and hysteria among males,
which is very rare in other races, is quite
frequent among the Jews. This high incidence of insanity is the more remarkable
because organic nervous diseases are uncommon among Jews, commensurate with the infrequency of alcoholism and syphilis among
them.’

But we have practically no direct scientific
data on temperamental differences between
Jews and non-Jews, nor does it seem likely
that psychological tests of temperament will
for many years be sufficiently developed to
reveal and measure them precisely and accurately.

Turning next to special abilities, we find
a similar paucity of data and abundance of
opinions. There is, however, somewhat
more unanimity among the opinions in this
field than in the field of temperament. Jews
are very generally credited with more
ability than non-Jews in music, mathematics, and languages, but with less ability
in handwork, drawing, and painting. These
are matters to which it is now possible to
apply psychological tests, and some data on
drawing ability which have already been
obtained, seem to confirm popular impressions.

PREVIOUS STUDIES

It is in regard to differences in general
intellectual ability that most psychological
work has hitherto been done. But even
in this department most of our knowledge exists as a by-product of investigations into broader subjects, rather than as
the result of any systematic application of

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

psychological tests to the subject of Jews
and non-Jews in particular. I have traced
eight previous investigations carried out in
America, which yield relevant data based on
the use of standardised tests. Most of the
investigators were primarily interested in
the problems of immigration : four of them
find that Jews are not more intelligent than
the non-Jewish American population, and
four of them find that they are ; none of them
gives any precise absolute measure of the
differences.

In this country Pearson and Moul,* as a
result of an investigation based on teachers’
estimates of intelligence, concluded that
*‘the Jewish girls have less intelligence
than the Gentile girls in any type of Council
School,’’ and that the Jewish boys ‘‘ are not
as good as the boys of the medium or average schools, but are better than the boys of
the poor type of school.’’ They found on
an average that the Jewish population they
tested was ‘‘ somewhat inferior physically
and mentally to the native population.’’
But it should be noted that their data were
collected in 1913 when most of the Jewish
children were those of recent immigrants,
suffering from a severe language handicap.
Further, since the Jewish and non-Jewish
children were not rated for intelligence by
the same teachers, the comparisons so made
are not likely to be very reliable.

In 1926 a grant from the Jewish Health
Organisation of Great Britain made possible
the carrying out of an extensive investigation into the subject in London elementary
schools. It was conducted by the present
writer, with the assistance of Miss Mary
Davies and under the direction of Professor
Cyril Burt. Three schools were chosen,
each containing about an equal number of
Jews and non-Jews in one and the same
school. ‘The three schools were representative of three levels of social and economic
status: thus School A, situated in North
London, contained both Jews and non-Jews
from better class homes; Schools B and C,
situated in East London, contained, respectively, poor and very poor children. All
the children from 8 to 14 years of age in
the three schools (a total of nearly 2,000),
JEWS AND

were given the Northumberland Standardized
Tests’ in General Intelligence, English, and
Arithmetic. These tests are printed booklets, each containing about two hundred and
fifty little questions which have to be answered rapidly, in some cases by writing
down one-word answers, in other cases by
underlining the correct answer chosen from
among several printed answers given.

TYPES OF QUESTIONS
The following are illustrations of the types
of questions :

General Intelligence.

If it takes longer to boil an egg than it
does to boil potatoes, write ‘‘ egg ’’; if not,
write XXIII in ordinary figures.

If MARMALADE contains more M’s than
MINIMUM, write M; if not, say how many
capital M’s there are in this question.

In the following the right word has to be
underlined :

Ancient . Antique . Same, opposite, unknown

money people much’ not have poor. True,

false, not known.

A (kind, tall, short) man is (often, always,
never) crueltoanimals.

May is darker than Lucy, but fairer than
Kate. Who is fairer—Lucy or Kate? . . Kate,
Lucy, I cannot tell.

English (including reading, spelling, geography,
history.)

“‘ Every rule, even this one, has an exception.”? Can this be true? Yes, no, I do not
know.

Daily means .
for ever.

She spoke kindly to you and (I, we, me).

New York is a large city in (Yorkshire,
India, America).

(Raleigh, Nelson, Drake) defeated the
Spanish Armada in (1488, 1588, 1688, 1788).

Arithmetic.

What fraction of £1 is a third of a shilling ?

In 12 years’ time Tom will be twice as old
as he is now. How old is he now?

(In addition to this type of question, the
arithmetic booklet contained straightforward
sums in adding, subtracting, multiplying, and
dividing.)

The administering and marking of these
tests is done in accordance with precise
directions. This is very important, for the
tests are standardized, that is to say, they
have been given to large numbers of children under exactly the same conditions, and
the average score at each age has been calcu
lated. From these average scores (or

. bread, every day, always,

GENTILES g!
‘norms,’ as they are called), we can tell
at once by looking at a child’s score if he
is above or below the average for his age.
For example, in the intelligence test, the
average score made by a large group of children who were 8 years old last birthday
was 95. ‘The average chronological age of
this group must necessarily be 8%, since
their ages range from 8.0 tog.o. If, therefore, a boy scores 95 marks, he is said to
have an ‘ intelligence age ’ of 8%, no matter
what his chronological age may be. If he
happens to be 8% years old, his intelligence
is obviously average or normal. The degree
of abnormality is generally expressed in
terms of the ratio obtained by dividing
the intelligence age by the chronological
age, and converting the quotient into a percentage. Thus the boy who scored 95
marks would have a mental ratio of 100 if he
were 8%, of 89 if he were 9% and of 113 if
he were only 7% years old.

Mental ratios in English and arithmetic
are obtained in a similar way.

JEWISH SUPERIORITY

The results of these tests were very striking. The Jewish children, both boys and
girls, in all three schools, at almost every
age from 8 to 13, proved to be superior to
the non-Jewish children, alike in intelligence
and in attainments in English and arithmetic. In only two out of one hundred and
twenty-six age groups tested, did the nonJewish children appear to be superior. Such
uniformity in the results suggests at once
that they are not due to chance sampling,
and in point of fact in more than half of the
age groups the differences satisfied the
statistician’s usual criterion of reliability.*

On an average, the mental ratios for intelligence of the Jewish boys in each school
were about ten greater than the corresponding mental ratios for the non-Jewish boys.
Thus in School A, in a good district, the
average mental ratio of the Jews was 105,
whereas that of the non-Jewish boys was
about 96; in School C, in a very poor district, the respective average ratios were 95

* The complete statistics are given in the British
Journal of Psychology, Vol. XVIII, Part 2, October,

1927.
92

and 84. ‘This means that, at the age of 10,
Jewish boys are on an average equal in intelligence to non-Jewish boys of 11. A
similar result was found in arithmetic: in
English the Jewish boys were even more
superior, the equivalent of a year and a half
at the age of 10. Among the girls the
differences were not quite so great, slightly
less than a year in intelligence and arithmetic, and a little more than a year in
English.

It is often alleged that, though Jewish
children are precocious, they do not fulfil
their early promise. But our results
(which so far refer only to children
of 8 to 13 years of age) show no such
premature arrest of development. If
there are any variations of ability with
age, it would appear that Jewish children
develop most rapidly about the age of 10;
during the next two years progress seems
to be slower, but at the age of 13 they
have apparently regained their original
degree of superiority. These variations
may quite possibly be due to the fact that
pubertal influences occur at different ages,
the Jewish children being affected somewhat
earlier than the non-Jewish children. In
view of our results and of the widespread
opinion that Jewish children do not maintain
their superiority in the later ages, further
investigation with older children appears to
be desirable.

RACE AND CLASS

A second possible criticism of our results
is that the Jewish and non-Jewish children
attending the same school may not belong
to the same social and economic classes. It
must be remembered however that the three
schools were specially chosen with a view to
getting Jewish and non-Jewish children of
approximately equal social status in
approximately the same _ proportions.
Nevertheless, it did appear that in each
school the Jewish children were on the whole
rather better clothed and fed than the nonJewish children. In many cases this was
doubtless due to the acknowledged care
which Jewish mothers bestow on their children. If this careful nurture were chiefly
responsible for the superiority in the test

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

results, the superiority could still justifiably
be called a ‘racial’ difference, though it
might not be a fundamental or even a permanent difference. With the spread of
education and infant welfare work, this
differentiating factor (if it exists to any
appreciable extent) may tend to disappear.
But in School A, the school chosen as representing the best neighbourhood, several of
the Jewish children belonged to an economic
class not usually represented in non-Jewish
elementary schools. One Jewish boy, for
example, had just returned from a holiday
on the Riviera; another had spent his holliday motoring. Well-to-do Jewish parents
are perhaps more ready to take advantage
of the educational facilities provided by the
State, and they are less enamoured of private schools than non-Jewish parents. ‘The
disparity is still further accentuated by the
fact that many of the Jewish parents are rising in social status; their economic position
is less static than that of the non-Jewish
population. A few years ago they were
alien immigrants, ready to take up humble
work to provide the bare necessities of life.
As their economic position improves, they
will migrate to better districts. But generally they are cautious about such removals,
so that, especially in poor districts, it is not
uncommon to find Jews who are superior in
economic standing to their non-Jewish
neighbours. ‘They are consolidating their
position before they seek a better home
such as they can now really afford.

It is therefore important that we should
try to discover to what degree the differences
observed are attributable to differences in
social status between the two populations
tested : any remaining differences can then
with some justification be attributed to innate ‘ racial’ conditions. At the same time,
it should be noted that if the populations
tested are fairly representative of the occupational distributions of the two races, disparity in economic status is itself an indication of a racial difference in general intelligence. The choice of the three schools in
this investigation was made in order to get
some such representative samples.

Previous investigators have given us some
JEWS AND GENTILES

idea of the extent of the variations in intelligence with variations in social status.
Burt,” for example, compared the intelligence of children attending two London
schools, ‘‘ selected as representing opposite
extremes of the social scale,’’ ‘‘ as typifying
the best and the worst from a representative
borough.’’ ‘Taking age groups from 7 to
14, he found an average difference of 2.2
mental years: ‘‘ the ‘ superior’ school is
nearly a year ahead of the general average ;
the ‘ poor’ school more than a year behind.’’ If the disparity in social status
between Jewish and non-Jewish children
attending the same school were as great as
that between children attending an ‘ average’ school and the ‘ best’ school, or an
‘average ’ school and the ‘ worst’ school,
then it might be argued that the differences
measured in this investigation were fully
accounted for. But our study of the social
conditions of the several families indicates
that the social difference is far smaller than
the differences described in the investigation
just cited.

OCCUPATIONAL GROUPING

In order to rule out as far as possible
the irrelevant influence of social status, we
compared the intelligence and attainments
of groups of Jewish and non-Jewish children,
these groups being arranged according to
the occupational status of the parents.
Since none of the groupings of occupations
used by previous investigators” appeared to
be satisfactory for our special problem, the
following scheme was devised :

Division Class Group.

I Masters A. Professional 1. Professional
men and mas- men, manufacters (higher turers.
grade)

B. Craftsmen 2. Craftsmen
and masters 3. Shopkeepers

II Employees C. Employees 4. ‘‘ Assured ”
(higher grade) | workers

5. Factory
workers
6. Builders
7. Shop assistants
D. Employees 8. Unskilled
workers

9g. Labourers

93

The following are the chief details of each
group :
1. Manufacturers, merchants, travellers, Rabbis,
teachers, higher grade clerks.
2. Engineers, electricians, cabinet makers, metal
workers.
3. Shopkeepers, dealers, and small masters.
4. Policemen, postmen, bus and taxi drivers,
conductors, soldiers, sailors, railway porters.
5. Makers of boots, clothes, umbrellas, buttons,
boxes, cigarettes.
6. Bricklayers, carpenters, painters, plumbers.
7. Shop assistants, hairdressers, tobacconists.
8. Carmen, coalmen, caretakers.
9. Labourers (mainly in docks), hawkers.
Two miscellaneous groups must be added :
10. No father; 11. No occupation.

The results of our analysis on this basis
are summarized in the following table:
AVERAGE MENTAL RATIOS (INTELLIGENCE) OF JEW
ISH AND NON-JEWISH CHILDREN BELONGING TO
DIFFERENT OCCUPATIONAL GROUPS.

 

 

 

 

 

 

GROUP | I 2 3 | 4 | 5 6
ee eee eee
Jews ..  ../109:7|107-7|IIO-1/105-+ 4/103 °Q|105°1
Non-Jews ..j/103°5|101°3} 98-4|101°5| 97°3| 93°7
Differences ..| 6:2; 6:4] I1-7| 3:9] 6-6) I1°4

GROUP 9 Io II

* =
Jews . {102 -O|L12 + 4/103 -8/100-6] 85-8
Non- Jews .| 88-7] 92-8] 90-1} 93-0] 90°7
Differences 13°3! 19°6| 13-7) 7:6] ~4°9

* Less than 20 children in the group.

In groups 4, 6, 8, 9, and 11 the numbers
of Jewish children were too small to give
any reliable result. There is a very steady
superiority in the mental ratios of the
Jewish children in Groups 1, 2, 5 and 1o,
amounting to about 6.5, the equivalent of
more than half a year at the age of ten.
In Groups 3 and 7 the difference is about
twice thisamount. ‘These groups, it will be
noticed, are the ‘shop’ groups. ‘This
result, especially in Group 3, seems to indicate that commerce attracts Jews of good intelligence, men of the calibre who, if they
were non-Jews, would probably enter the
professions. Group to, children who have
no fathers, may be considered as a random
group and in the light of the figures from
the other groups, the difference (7.6) is prob94

ably a very fair measure of Jewish racial
superiority when differences due to social
status have been eliminated. These results
suggest that part of the difference revealed
in the original investigation is due to differences in social status between the twa
populations tested, but that after allowance
has been made for this, there still remains
a ‘racial’ difference equivalent at the age
of 10 to about 0.7 mental years.

ON THE POVERTY LINE

We next attacked our problem from another angle. With the help of head teachers
and Care Committee workers, and of Mr.
W. H. Winch, L.C.C. District Inspector of
Schools for Stepney, we chose School D,
as the school attended by the poorest Jewish
children in London, no regard being paid to
any other condition. (It will be remembered that though School C was chosen as
representative of a very poor district, the
choice was restricted by the need of having equal numbers of Jewish and non-Jewish
children.) The same standardized tests were
given as in School A, B, and C.

On an average, the children in School D
(they were all Jewish) proved to be but
slightly inferior in intelligence to the general average of unselected non-Jewish children ; in English they were superior, and in
arithmetic they were equal to the general
average.

The poorest Jewish children in London
are therefore very much in advance of the
poorest non-Jewish children, who in Burt’s
investigation already quoted, were found to
be more than a year behind the general average. ‘Taking into account the relative sizes
of the two populations, we should not expect
the poorest Jewish children to be as low in
intelligence as the poorest non-Jewish children : such equality would only be found if
the general average of Jews were distinctly
lower than that of non-Jews. But the
poorest Jewish children, according to our
results, are so far superior to the poorest
non-Jewish children as to be practically
equal to the general non-Jewish average, a
fact which points very definitely to ‘ racial ’
superiority.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

It is interesting to speculate why Jews
should appear so much more intelligent than
non-Jews. We have already noted the sug
. gestion that the superiority is more apparent

than real; that it is due to more rapid
growth, both physiological and mental, and
that in time the non-Jewish children will
overtake their precocious Jewish classmates.
Others suggest that the Jewish superiority
is not temporary, but that it is a result
of generations of ‘‘ breeding for intelligence.”” They point out how it was for
years a tradition for rich Jewish fathers to
seek out men rich in learning rather than in
goods, as husbands for their daughters.
Then there is, of course, the unnatural selective influence of years of persecution. In this
connection, it should be remembered that the
data given in this article refer to Jewish
children living in London. It should not
be assumed without further investigation
that they are equally true of Jews living in a
different environment, or of Jews who have
been subjected to a different process of selection from that which operated in the case of
Jewish immigrants into this country.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
x. R. N. Salaman, Anglo-Jewish Vital Statistics,
Jewish Chronicle Supplement, July, 1921.
W. Osler, Principles and Practice of Medicine,
p. 161, 1925.

2. R. N.‘Salaman, loc cit. : W. Osler, op. cit., p. 433.

3. Jewish Encyclopedia, IV, 574, Article on
Diathesis.

4. Jewish Encyclopedia, IX, 1-7, Article on Morbidity.

5. EK. Kretschmer, Physique and Character, trans.
by W. J. H. Sprott, 1925.

6. Jewish Encyclopedia, VI, 603-5, Article on
Insanity.

7. Jewish Encyclopedia, TX, 225-7, Article on Ner
vous Diseases.
8. Karl Pearson and M. Moul, ‘“‘ The Problem of
Alien Immigration into Great Britain,’? Annals
of Eugenics, 1925, I.
9. Northumberland Standardized Tests, prepared
by Cyril Burt, Univ. of London Press, 1925.
to. C. Burt, Mental and Scholastic Tests, pp. 190 ff.
11. J. F. Duff and G. H. Thomson, ‘‘ The Social and
Geographical Distribution of Intelligence in
Northumberland.” Brit. Jnl. Psych., 1925, XIV,
192-8. 8
D. Caradog Jones and A. M. Carr-Saunders.
. The Relation between Intelligence and Social
Status among Orphan Children,’ Brit. Jnl. .
Psych., 1927, XVII, 343-364.
K. Pearson and M. Moul, op. cit.
