THE EUGENICS REVIEW.

MARRIAGE.

By Masor Lreonarp Darwin.

In a recent issue of this Review I discussed the question of mate
selection, but no mention was there made of the legal precautions
which should surround the marriage contract. Since then the question
of State certificates of marriage has been raised by Dr. R. A. Gibbons,
with the result that I have thought it desirable to endeavour to
crystallize my own opinions on these topics.*

The following tentative notes are here published mainly in the
hope that they will bring forth comments and criticisms from various
quarters. Though all the points at issue are regarded merely from the
eugenic point of view, in attempting to forecast the advantages and
disadvantages likely to result from any proposed reform, the immediate
effects should in fact always receive full consideration. In regard te
checks on marriage, it must never be forgotten that marriage is
natural, that marriage makes for happiness, and that bars to marriage
encourage immorality.

Here, then, are strong arguments in favour of great caution being
exercised in introducing any changes in the laws or customs affecting
marriage. But against this plea for caution it must be remembered
that any legislation which tended to delay or diminish marriages
amongst the inferior types to a greater extent than amongst the
superior types would in the long run be beneficial to the race. We are
here dealing with a difficult balancing of good and evil effects.

In regard to the feeble-in-mind and the insane, it is now generally
agreed that they ought not to become parents ; and as regards those
who have been duly certified as belonging to either of these categories
it seems, therefore, rational that in their case marriage should be
legally prohibited. I have in consequence elsewhere suggested that
the Mental Deficiency Act should be amended so as to make it a
misdemeanour knowingly to marry or to promote or connive at the
marriage of a person certified as being mentally defective ; and similar
provisions should be made applicable to those certified as being insane.
Here we should be dealing with persons already selected under carefully safeguarded legal provisions, which are designed to prevent
those who are not definitely mentally defective or insane from ever
being certified. These suggested amendments to the existing laws
would no doubt be effective in very few cases, and they would be chiefly
beneficial from their educative influence.

* See Eucenics Review, Vol. XV., p. 459, and Vol. XVI., p. 117.
178 EUGENICS REVIEW.

There are other classes of persons who ought not to become
parents, but in whose case the legal enforcement of provisions preventing marriage would be attended with almost insuperable difficulties.
That the tuberculous, the epileptic and the habitual criminal should
have no offspring is a general proposal which will receive wide approval,
but when we come to look into details, we find that in each case we
should be dealing with a class so difficult to define accurately that
the fact of a person being described as belonging to it could not well
be made the basis of legal decisions. In Sweden the marriage of
epileptics has been for long forbidden by law, but I believe that few
if any cases have actually come before the law courts in consequence
of this enactment. Epilepsy is a term which covers a wide diversity
of ailments, some of them being of so mild a nature as to be detected
with difficulty ; and it is probably this fact which has made this
Swedish legislation inoperative. Somewhat the same difficulties would
be felt in making tubercular diseases a bar to marriage, for if all those
who are infected with the microbe in question were to be classed as.
tuberculous, immense numbers when young would be included in this
category. The declaration that the tuberculous should not marry is
intended only to apply to those persons in whom the disease is in an
active and progressive stage, and to decide when this is the case is not
always an easy matter. Then again there are cases where persons
affected by these ailments, or who have been insane, might rightly
marry provided that no children were to be forthcoming ; and to make
marriage legal and parenthood illegal would place a severe strain on
the skill of the parliamentary draughtsman. Then as to the man who
constantly commits small offences against the law, it would be most
desirable that he should not marry, but as marriage in his case might
be a stepping stone to better things, it is doubtful if public opinion
would ever allow it to be actually prohibited. The marriage of neither
the tuberculous, nor the epileptic, nor the habitual criminal, can now,
it is feared, be legally prohibited.

In order to overcome some of the above-mentioned difficulties, it
has often been proposed that the deposit of a medical certificate should
be a necessary preliminary to the issue of a marriage licence ; but even
this proposal is open to various objections. It is with regard to
venereal diseases that this suggestion has most often been made, and
in this connection it is no doubt worthy of careful consideration. The
points at issue concerning these diseases will not, however, here be
discussed in detail, both because I am not an expert, and because I
prefer to limit the scope of my observations to such effects on future
generations as are due to natural inheritance and not to infection. I
will content myself with remarking that, as far as I am able to judge,
the detection of the presence of gonorrheal infection is surrounded
with so much doubt and difficulty that it could not be made the basis
of any legal prohibition or penalty.

The strongest objection to making it necessary to obtain a medical
certificate as a pre-requisite to marriage is, however, in my opinion,
that it would place too much power in the hands of the medical profession. In the case of insanity or mental defect, the certificate perMARRIAGE 179

mitting a person to be confined can no doubt be signed by two medical
men, if endorsed by a magistrate ; and in any case equal precautions
would be necessary as regards the issue of marriage certificates. The
decisions in regard to insanity are frequently revised, and in the same
way, after the necessary licence had been refused, another application
might be permitted after a few months’ interval. But a first failure
to obtain a licence would in many cases break off an engagement ; it
would often be an irremediable injury to the party concerned ; and a
corresponding responsibility would be thrown on the medical man who
had refused to sign the certificate. Then as regards tuberculosis,
epilepsy, insanity, and other diseases, all the difficulties mentioned
above in reference to where the line should be drawn when deciding
whether to sign a clean certificate of health would be felt to the full
by the medical man on whom this duty fell. Lastly, amarriage might
often be justifiable after the woman in question had passed the period
of child birth, even if objectionable when progeny might be forthcoming, and the decision as to when parenthood had become an
impossibility would often raise great difficulties. We must here again,
I think, come to the conclusion that no actual legal prohibition could
be based upon such doubtful foundations.

In promoting eugenic reforms it would often be best to try to
link them up with reforms which, by producing immediate benefits,
would be more likely to attract the attention of the public. No couple
should be tied together until separated by death or divorce unless each
is acquainted with certain facts concerning the other, and further legal
safeguards might well be introduced to prevent anyone from marrying
a lunatic, a criminal or an habitual drunkard in ignorance of what they
were doing. With this object in view, and also to reap certain obvious
concurrent racial advantages, the following proposals are suggested for
consideration :—Each party should be obliged before the issue of a
marriage licence to sign a certilcate in a prescribed form, and this
certificate should be handed to the other party by the authority some
time before issuing the licence. This certificate should contain a
declaration of belief that he or she is not suffering from certam noncontagious diseases or certain contagious diseases in a form which
might injure the other party or the children of the proposed union, the
diseases in question including : (1) insanity, (2) epilepsy, (3) venereal
diseases, (4) tuberculosis, and possibly others, being set forth in the
printed form of certificate. The certificate should also include @
declaration that he had never been confined in a prison, lunatic asylum,
or home for inebriates, or had been certified either as a lunatic or as a
mentally defective person, or had been convicted of any offence or
previously married or divorced. When any such statement could not
be truthfully made, full particulars should be given of the facts which
made this impossible. The name and address of a doctor who had been
consulted should be stated, with a definite request to that doctor to
answer any inquiries made by the other party, or by his or her parents
or guardians. A knowingly false declaration, with intention to deceive,
should be punished with imprisonment of specified length and without
option of fine ; and it should moreover, generally speaking, be made
180 EUGENICS REVIEW.

a sufficient ground for the annulment of the marriage. By means of
such an enactment, considerable immediate and racial advantages
would be obtained.

In certain countries the relationship, if any, existing between the
parties has to be declared before marriage ; but if consanguineous
unions are, as I hold, more likely to benefit than to injure the race,
this precaution would have no advantages from the purely racial point
of view. In fact it might be injurious in spreading false beliefs as to
the evil effects of cousin marriages. There are, in fact, no reasons
known to me which make it desirable that the English laws in regard
tu this point should be altered and the same applies to those regulations affecting the age at marriage.

It has been suggested that, in the absence of any such suggested
system of certificates, it would be well that a demand should be made
by the woman’s relatives that the man should insure his life, for in
this way it would be made necessary for him to obtain a medical certificate. On consideration it appears, however, that though the woman
might be in some degree thus safeguarded, the racial effects would be,
to say the least, of doubtful value. Trouble would certainly arise with
reference to the value of the insurance, with the result that more
marriages would thus be hindered amongst the prudent than amongst
the impudent. The benefit, if any, would consist in separating the
prudent from the imprudent stocks.

Even if all the safeguards above suggested as desirable were to be
introduced, the number of marriages thus frustrated would be very
small in proportion to the whole population, and any measures intended
to prevent racial deterioration must be more widespread in their scope
in order to produce material results. If precaution could be introduced
placing a check on rash and ill-considered marriages amongst all classes
of the community, the racial results might be very beneficial, the
reason being that it is only rash and foolish people who attempt to
enter into such unions, and that their rashness and folly are qualities
which are transmissable to their offspring. No doubt this argument
is too subtle to attract public attention, and here any reform dealing
with this question would have to be advocated mainly on the ground
that marriages without forethought often result in unhappy unions.
With these objects in view the following suggestions seem to be worthy
of consideration :—Both parties should be made to produce birth
certificates before the issue of the marriage licence ; and if the man
was, let us say, under 28 years of age and the woman under 21, they
should be made to state the names and addresses of their parents or
guardians, to whom a notice of the proposed marriage should be sent
in good time by the proper authority. It has also been suggested that
the proposed marriage should be advertized in the newspapers in
advance at the public expense, on the ground that anything that
makes for publicity would be advantageous. But here again the doubt
cannot but arise as to whether such precautions would not on the
whole reduce parenthood more amongst the desirable than amongst
the undesirable stocks.

If destitution is in any degree correlated with inferior hereditary
MARRIAGE 181

qualities, nothing would be more desirable from the racial point of
view than the absolute prohibition of marriage when the income earned
by the man would not be sufficient to keep a family in decency. It
may, therefore, plausibly be suggested that if any certificate were
demanded from the man before marriage, it should contain a statement in regard to his income. But such a provision would be most
likely to be operative in enabling prudent parents to prevent their
daughter from marrying a less prudent partner. Would that be a
beneficial effect as far as the race is concerned? Does not the answer
depend on which of the two would, in consequence of this interference
with their designs, be prevented for the longer period from obtaining
another mate? If the prudent daughter remained for long unmarried,
whilst the less prudent man soon obtained a partner who was not so
careful about his future prospects, would not the net results on the
race be definitely dysgenic? What would be desirable is that marriage
should be absolutely prohibited when the income of the bread winner
is below a certain figure ; but even though the eugenist may point
triumphantly to the fact that the young Zulu had to prove that he
had killed his man before he could take unto himself a wife, doubts
must yet be felt whether in this more civilized age any effective
arrangements could now be made which would serve as a bar to
marriage to those who seem unlikely to make a suitable head of a
household.

Here an obvious objection may be raised in certain quarters on
the ground that to stop marriage does not stop procreation. It would,
however, somewhat lessen undesirable procreation ; and to prove that
benefits will be small is no argument against trying to obtain them.
Another objection likely to be raised against the foregoing proposals is
that they would result in the birth of an increased number of illegitimate children, because the consequent delays in the marriage ceremony
would often result either in it not taking place at all, or in the birth
taking place before the ceremony. If we calmly recall the subsequent
history of those whom we have seen forced into marriage because of
the expected appearance of a child, we must have grave doubts as to
the moral or other advantages likely to result from such a course ;
that is to say, as to whether the appearance of an illegitimate child
would not have really been preferable. Enforced marriages not infrequently lead to divorce, and sometimes result in the man becoming
the legal father of a child not his own ; and certainly where all affection
between husband and wife is absent, misery is likely to be present.
The remarks only apply to enforced marriages ; for if prospective
‘parents wish to get married they will seldom be prevented from doing
so. Then as to a child appearing before the marriage ceremony rather
than soon after it has taken place, the child will according to recent
legislation be legitimate. But here again let anyone consider what
he would now feel if he discovered that either he was illegitimate, or
that he had been illegitimate for some time after birth, or that he was
born a month or two after his parents’ marriage ; for these are the
only alternatives when parenthood is the result of intercourse before
marriage. To a person with right moral feeling, would the difference
182 EUGENICS REVIEW.

between these alternatives appear very material? To be illegitimate
may entail some disagreeable consequences, but we thus see that a
delay in the marriage ceremony, though objectionable, would not be
materially damaging. At all events legislation should, broadly speaking, be enacted with the object of promoting the morality of the public
in general and in the interests of the moral rather than of those who
have proved themselves to be immoral. The sentimental desire to
avoid suffering by whitewashing immorality is one with which I have
no sympathy, and if a certain number of permanently or temporarily
illegitimate children would be born in consequence of any legislation
beneficial to the race, that fact should not deter us from advocating
such measures. The question to which our attention should be mainly
directed in regard to any reform is as to whether it would in truth
tend to raise the moral and material welfare of the whole nation.

Our conclusions may be summarized as follows :—Though caution
is certainly needed in introducing reforms affecting marriage rights,
yet many steps in this direction might now usefully be taken. The
marriage of certified insane and mentally defective persons should be
prohibited. As a preliminary to the issue of a marriage licence, certificates should be exchanged between the parties of such a nature as
best to insure that the ceremony should not be performed whilst one
party remained in ignorance of the defects of the other, false declarations being severely punished, and in some cases permitting the
annulment of the marriage. The numbers of intended marriages
abandoned in consequence of such precautions being adopted would
be small, and more useful racial results would be produced by greater
publicity being given to intended marriages, and by parents being
given reasonable opportunities of bringing pressure to bear on their
children when young marriages are contemplated, the object being to
place impediments in the way of the marriage of rash and foolish
persons. All impediments to marriage which are less likely to be
operative amongst the destitute and the imprudent than amongst
the better types would have certain dysgenic effects on the nation
as a whole, these impediments including a man being made to insure
his life or declare his income before marriage. They would, however,
tend to differentiate the less fit from the more fit stocks, and they
would, therefore, be beneficial if combined with drastic measures
calculated to keep down the rate of multiplication of the inferior

types.
