A Guiding Principle for Practical Eugenic
~ Reform.
By C. V. Dryspate, O.B.E., D.Sc., F.R.S.E.

From its inception to the present time the Eugenics movement has
been confronted with one serious difficulty , which has greatly hampered
its practical activites. I refer to the difficulty which practically
every Eugenist has felt in formulating some definite principle as a guide
to race improvement. In most, if not all, of the general pronouncements of the leaders of the movement, stress has been laid on the paucity
of our knowledge of the racial value of various types and characteristics, and on the necessity for prolonged and careful study before
practical action is decided upon. Nowhere is this point of view more
strongly emphasised than in the recent most interesting Galton Lecture
of Prof. Bateson before this Society ; and the fact that it is so strongly
held by our foremost geneticist, and was endorsed by our President,
forcibly shows the difficulty which is felt by the most eminent scientific
experts in formulating a positive code of racial characteristics which
it is desirable to breed for, or a definite scheme for attaining this end.

This reluctance to act in advance of sufficient knowledge is wholly
scientific and praiseworthy, and is in sharp contrast to the behaviour
of the generality of social reformers, whose zeal usually greatly outruns their discretion; yet it is a serious bar to the popularity of the
Eugenics movement, as mankind is never satisfied with purely academic or negative teaching concerning social problems. But the
spirit is sound and honest; and if it be true that our knowledge is insufficient to allow us to take definite action or put forward a positive
principle or set of rules, no considerations of popularity ought to
induce us to modify it.

In so far as what has been termed positive eugenics, 7.e. the mating
of special types with the object of promoting the reproduction of the
fitter, and more especially for the development of genius, is concerned,
I think that few will now dispute that our present knowledge is insufficient. Human beings are not like domestic animals in which the
development of well-marked physical characteristics is aimed at, and
in which, by the way, the intervals between successive generations
are generally relatively short, so that conclusions can be arrived at
in a moderate time. Practically the whole value of a modern human
being hes in his mental ability, provided that his physical characteristics are sufficient to give it full opportunity; and this ability is so
difficult of accurate appraisement, and takes so many and various
forms, that it would need a bold person to formulate rules for procuring it. We may certainly predict with a fair degree of confidence
104 EUGENICS REVIEW.

that from a number of unions of superior types a fairly definite proportion of offspring of a more than average ability in certain directions
will ensue; but not even a Galton would venture to state that a certain
union would result in the production of a Beethoven, Michael Angelo
or Shakespeare. And the difficulty is enhanced by the fact that
genius is essentially unorthodox, as Professor Bateson has strongly
contended, so that the folly of attempting to appraise and foster it by
orthodox judgments at the outset is almost self-evident. True, we
have an attempt at assigning a numerical grading in intellectual
attainments in our examination systems; but the mediocre success
which this grading has achieved may be gauged by comparing the subsequent careers of the examinees with those of many who have never
attended a university. More than a century ago, Adam Smith raised
a protest against the scholarship system as tending to divert our brightest intelligences into orthodox and unprofitable channels, and it is
unfortunate that the general application of his remarks has been so
generally disregarded.

And, apart from this, the important question has to be faced as to
what it is we wish to breed for. Were it only a question of securing
well-marked characteristics, such as ability in art, music, or poetry,
it is quite probable that our knowledge, even if insufficient at present,
will soon be adequate for the purpose. But if we consider the needs
and happiness of humanity, rather than the delectation of a cultured
minority, we cannot be satisfied with such a solution. Until the mass
of humanity is able to command a reasonable level of comfort, i.e.
sufficiency of the necessaries and comforts of existence, the great need
is not for Beethovens, Michael Angelos or Shakespeares, but for people
who are able to increase the efficiency of the productive arts so as to
provide this sufficiency. This may appear rank philistinism to the
cultured, but the times are past when the providing of delectation to a
leisured class was the sign or proof of genius. For every individual
to whom the works of the old masters appeal, there are thousands whose
lives never have been, and cannot be illuminated by them; and until
the bulk of humanity has been raised to the standard of comfort, education, and leisure needed to be able to appreciate them, such works
should be regarded by every true humanitarian as eminently dispensable luxuries, rather than as indispensable necessaries. Let us by all
means be grateful for such genius in these directions as spontaneously
arises, but to make its production the chief aim of eugenics would be
an unworthy betrayal of a great humanitarian cause. The man who
makes two blades of grass grow where one grew before, or who invents a
machine whereby greater production of the necessaries and comforts of
existence can be obtained with less human toil, is the type of genius
humanity now requires, and will rightly demand until its needs are
satisfied .

The production of such types is an infinitely more complex problem
than that of genius in well-defined, highly-specialised directions. It
not only involves high intellectual ability, but enterprise, caution,
and business acumen in nicely balanced proportions. The most
valuable invention may be, and frequently is, of very little service,
because the inventor lacks the capability of interesting others in it,
A GUIDING PRINCIPLE FOR PRACTICAL EUGENIC REFORM. 105

development, or the business faculty to bring it into practical shape
and stimulate public interest in it. It is the combination of these
faculties that is of the highest public and national service, and either a
deficiency or an excess of any one of them may result in failure. Those
who have read the controversy between Mr. Bernard Shaw and Mr.
W. H. Mallock on ‘‘Socialism and Superior Brains’’ will realise that
this is the real crux of the question, and that Mr. Shaw’s examples of
great inventors who have failed to secure due acknowledgement and
reward are illustrations of types whose inventive faculties have not
been accompanied by the capability of rendering their inventions
of immediate service to the community. Anyone who has been brought
much into touch with inventors will know how rarely they show a sense
of proportion in relation to the business side of their affairs.

Physical analogies to biological phenomena are often misleading,
but perhaps you will allow me as a physicist to illustrate this allimportant point by a simple, musical device, the tuning fork, which
when struck gives out a pure musical note. If such a fork is set up ona
sounding box and a musical note of the same pitch is sounded in its
vicinity, the fork will pick up or respond to this note, and will vibrate
in unison with it. The note which is sounded may be considered as
the environment of the tuning fork, and the extent to which the fork
vibrates as the measure of its response to, or harmony with its environment, which may be taken as representing its success.

Now there are three properties of a tuning fork upon which the
extent of its response depends. The first is its mass or inertia which
tends to check its rapid response to sudden forces, and may be likened
to caution or conservatism in a human being. The second is its
elasticity or springiness which has the opposite effect to inertia, and
resists steady forces while responding to sudden changes. This may
be compared to enthusiasm, originality or quickness of apprehension,
and progressive or even revolutionary characteristics, in the human
being. And lastly, there its friction or viscosity which tends to check
either steady or sudden motion, and which may be compared with
human lethargy, idleness, or physical weakness. It is obvious that
if the last quality is excessive no great response can be obtained, and
that as a general rule the smaller it is the better; but as regards the
other two, no such simple rule can be formulated. For the greatest
response, the tuning fork must be in tune or resonance with the note
which is sounded; and for this to be the case there must be a certain
proportion between the elasticity and the inertia. A deficiency or
excess of either quality of only one per cent. will enormously reduce
the response, and an excess is just as bad as a deficiency. In terms of
the human being this means that for the greatest success in the environment there must be a certain exact proportion between enterprise and
originality on the one hand, and of caution or of conservatism on the
other, and that the slightest deficiency or excess of either characteristic
may seriously impair his efficiency.

And supposing this nice balance of orginiality and caution to have
been attained, there is yet another consideration. If our tuning fork
is in perfect resonance to a powerful note it may be thrown into such
excessive vibration as to strain it beyond its elastic limit , or even break
106 EUGENICS REVIEW.

it. In this case the factor of friction, which was undesirable in most
cases, becomes of value, and it should be sufficient to check the motion
to just below the elastic limit. In like manner, if our human being has
the right balance of characteristics to be in resonance with his environment, he may easily be strained beyond the limit of his physical endurance and die early, as so many geniuses have done. In this case, the
factor of idleness which is harmful in most people may be of the greatest
value in prolonging the life and usefulness of the individual. But,
again, either a deficiency or excess of this characteristic will impair the
efficiency.

Nothing is further from my thoughts in this analogy than to liken
a human being merely to a machine for producing a maximum amount
of material possessions, My object is to show the factors upon which
the capacity of a human being depends for successful effort, and they
apply equally to every branch of human activity.

This analogy, though far too simple to represent the manifold
complexities of the elements which go to the making of an efficient
human being, or of the conditions of human environment, is yet of
great value as showing the futility of artificial standards of judgments.
Examinations, for example, are devices for ascertaining the intellectual
capabilities of individuals in certain well-defined directions. But
the candidate who heads the list may quite likely be too intellectual in
proportion to his other qualities, and be quite out of harmony with his
after-environment. For instance, it has been found, I understand,
that aeronautical engineers who actually design and know all the details of aeroplanes do not make good pilots for them, for the reason that
their very knowledge prevents tham from acting quickly and instinctively on an emergency. Civilised society may be likened to a concert
hall in which a large variety of notes is being sounded, and the successful individuals to those who are able to get into rescnance with certain
dominant notes of the orchestra. The very nature of any human
judgment, such as that of an examination which lays stress on certain
faculties, makes it unsuitable for gauging that nice balance of characteristics upon which success depends; and nothing but experience can
decide it, in view of its critical character. The want of sympathy
which has generally been shown by leaders of industry to university
qualifications , though often carried too far in this country, is an indication of the fact that education and examination standards are usually
quite out of touch with industrial needs. For this reason, Galton’s
proposal, that the value to be assigned to an individual should be
decided by a committe of experts in his own particular sphere, can only
be regarded as a meritorious but unsuccessful attempt at solving a
practically insoluble problem ; and the Fabian ideal of government by
experts is equally unsound. Success in the environment is the only
true test of fitness, as the Darwinian doctrine maintains, and no human
prophecy can every hope to prove an efficient substitute for it.

The importance of the critical balance of faculties, if it is accepted,
as it appears to me it must be by those who are able to take a wide outlook, affords an additional most cogent justification for the reluctance
of the leading Eugenists to lay down definite rules for race-improvement
on positive lines, and for their disclaimer of the ‘‘stud-farm ’’ principle;
A GUIDING PRINCIPLE FOR PRACTICAL EUGENIC REFORM. 107

and it offers no prospect that such rules can be formulated within any
measurable times. But does that mean that Eugenics can have no
definite message upon which immediate action can be taken, and no
influence upon social legislation? On the contrary, I venture to think
that Eugenics has a perfectly clear and simple principle ready for
immediate use, and which can effect immense beneficial influence upon
the race.

Surely Eugenists, as followers of Darwin, accept the doctrine of
evolution i.e. of race development and improvement from the unicellular protozoa up toman. If so they must admit that there has evidently
been some great principle operating throughout the ages for raceimprovement. It has brought about those marvellous adaptations to
environment which no one can study without admiration; and where
it has had free play, as in the undomesticated animals, it has produced
a harmony and perfection which is unfortunately painfully lacking in
the human race. It is the principle of natural selection due to the
struggle for existence and the elimination of the unfit. However
limited our knowledge may be concerning the origin of variations, we
have here a clear object lesson of the fact that immense progress can
be made in race-improvement by the straining-out of unfavourable
ones. Natural selection is, in fact, like so many otber great principles,
a negative rather than a positive principle. It operates not by the
selection of the most fit, but by the elimination of the least fit, and
points definitely towards negative rather than positive eugenics.
Although the great interest and value of genetic research is indubitable
we have no need to wait for its verdicts before getting to work to clear
away the huge mass of obvious unfitness which festers in our midst; and
the mere clearing away of this would be such an immense step forward
that we could then wait with patience for further guidance on positive
eugenic lines.

If we could imagine a biologist from another planet and thus sufhciently detached from his human attributes to be able to make a dispassionate comparison between the civilized human beings of our large
towns and the wild animals, the painful lack cf fitness of a large proportion of humanity in comparison with the almost uniformly high
standard of the birds and other animals would probably be the first
thing which would strike him. In contrast with the high standard of
physical health, beauty, harmony with environment, and joie de vivre
which characterises most of the lower animals, he would find the majority of human beings with thin, anemic, and joyless faces and with
stunted bodies covered with shabby raiment, and he would probably
find more than one in ten, especially among the women, who appeared
robust in health, attractive, and in obvious harmony with the environment. The mens sana in corpore sano is conspicuously absent
from the great majority , and they make a very poor show in comparison
with the cats and birds to say nothing of the wild animals of the plains
or the jungle.

Why is this? Social reformers are fond of ascribing it to bad
economic conditions and environment, but the truth is that sentimental
humanitarianism has constantly interfered with natural selection.
The ‘‘slave morality’’ which Nietzsche so eloquently denounces has
108 EUGENICS REVIEW.

been invoked in favour of the preservation and propagation of the
unfit. Poverty, humility, and physical weakness have been exalted,
first through the tenets of theology and recently by the social-demoeratic legislation which has been such a marked feature in Great Britain
and other countries. In addition, the medical profession, aided by
hospitals and sanatoria, has contributed in a very serious degree to
the preservation of the most severe cases of unfitness, which would have
been ruthlessly eliminated in the unrestrained Darwinian struggle for
existence. At the same time the appeals to charity and the burdens of
taxation have militated against the propagation of the fitter types,
first through voluntary celibacy, and latterly through birth restriction, while the poorest and most reckless classes have been marrying
and reproducing more rapidly than ever before. It is little wonder
therefore that the problem of what is called a C3 population is now one
of the most serious which confronts civilised nations, especially as it
bas now become an active instead of merely a passive menace, insisting
on its so-called rights through the ballot-box, the strike, and revolutionary action. Satan could devise no more effective plan for the ruin
of the race than that which is being now deliberately followed to a
greater or lesser degree by all civilized democractic nations, and this
has led thoughtful and courageous leaders like Dean Inge seriously to
question the wisdom of democracy. That democracy brings grave
dangers in its train, which has usually led to its overthrow in the past,
no candid student of history would deny. These dangers have been
fully recognised by many of its advccates—such as John Stuart Mill,
whose famous work cn Liberty pointed out these dangers and provided
safeguards against them, which have unfcrtunately been entirely disregarded by our politicians. Mill was not a Darwinian or a Eugenist,
and was unaware of the much stronger arguments that would be furnished in favour of individualism and competition by the doctrine of
heredity than were given by him on economic grounds; but had his
advice been followed, many of the economic and racial evils which
menace civilisation at present would never have assumed such serious
proportions. Poverty, at any rate of such a degree as to prevent a
person supporting himself and his family, as our President has rightly
pointed out, must be regarded as a mark of unfitness in the Eugenic
sense as indicating want of success in the environment. We may
sympathise with the poor, but our sympathy most certainly ought not
to take the form of subsidizing poverty at the expense of the fit.

In any case, however, it appears to me futile to denounce democracy. In olden times when internationalism and international communication were little developed, nations or tribes which had gone too
far in advance of others on the road to democracy were sooner or later
overthrown by more warlike nations, and their democractic régime
destroyed. To-day the telegraph and the press keep all nations in
touch with one another, and the world is marching steadily forward
towards universal democracy. Few will deny that this would be a
welcome sign, if the evils we have referred to could be eliminated ; and
the movement is far too universal and too strong to be checked by
scientific reasoning. Democracy is now bound up with civilisation,
and nothing but a universal collapse of civilisation will destroy it.
A GUIDING PRINCIPLE FOR PRACTICAL EUGENIC REFORM. 109

And when we bear in mind the utilitarian principle of the greatest
happiness of the greatest number, which is the only scientific moral
sanction, we have to remember that the great bulk of the people are
those who are only of mediocre capacity and it is our duty to seek to
make existence as satisfactory as possible for them. Those who have
had better heredity or opportunities than the masses have every right
and indeed the duty to seek to educate them towards better things; but
only by persuasion, not by ruling them through force or deception.
They must go out into the market place like Socrates, and undo the evil
work of the demagogues who batten unchecked on human ignorance.
Government by experts—the watchword of the Fabian Society—is as
unjustifiable and unscientific as any other form of tyranny, in view of
what has been said as to the unreliability of human standards of judgment. What is now wanted is not only to make a world safe for
democracy, but to make democracy safe for the race, i.e., to make
humanitarianism compatible with race-improvement, and to make
Tace-improvement compatible with humanitarianism.

Now, if we examine the mechanism of natural selection, we shall
soon see that the direct elimination of the unfit is only essential for the
purpose of preventing their reproduction or the survival of their offspring. The effect of the struggle for existence on the existing individuals is physically, mentally , and morally injurious, and it has not even
the saving grace of being a stimulus to effort in humanitarian civilisation. The only useful stimulus is struggle for improvement, not for
existence. In any case, regarding the matter quantitatively, as each
unfit individual may be the parent of several children, the suppression
of the progeny is of far greater importance than the elimination of the
individual. So long therefore as the unfit do not reproduce, there is
little or no eugenic object to be served in allowing them to die; and
humanitarianism, which is a factor of social psychology which we cannot disregard even if we would, forbids us to do so if we can avoid it.
Among the wild animals there is no way of checking their reproduction
but by death, but this is no longer the case with human beings. If we
could only clear our minds of prejudice, it would be obvious that the
power to cut off human fertility at will gives us the key to the greatest
of all human problems—how to reconcile humanitarianism with raceimprovement. This is the great problem which confronts the Eugenic
movement. Can it solve it? I think it can, if it bears the lessons of
Darwinism constantly in mind. All we have to do is to imitate the
Darwinian process as closely as possible, preserving the competitive
system which brings out superiority or inferiority, but to substitute
humane elimination by refusal to propagate, for its cruel eliminaticn by
death. Let us continue to provide and discover remedies for disease
threugh medicine and surgery , but whenever we find a case which would
have succumbed but for such help let us enjoin abstention from parenthood. Let us continue to help the poor and weak through private or
public charity, but only on condition that they abstain from propagation unless or until they become self-supporting. For this purpose,
however, it is essential to have the minimum of interference with the
competitive struggle, which provides us with the only true test of fitness or unfitness. All legislation or organisation which seeks to
110 EUGENICS REVIEW.

eliminate competition or to establish false equality should be sternly
opposed by Eugenists, and the maximum of liberty fur individual
effort maintained at all costs. Under these circumstances, as in uncivilised Nature, success in the environment is the true test of fitness,
and all those who fail either through disease, accident, or inability to
gain a livelihood are the unfit whose lives may be preserved but only at
the price of renouncing the right to perpetuate their type.

The guiding principle which I venture to suggest for practical
Eugenic acticn may therefore be briefly enunciated as :—

Rational Selection in the closest possible Conformity with Natural
Selection,

the rational selection being exercised by abstention from reproduction
whenever the individual would have perished but for charitable,
legislative or medical aid.

Until some much better guidance for race- -improvement on positive
lines arises than we have at present, or seem likely to get for many years
to come, surely the best and safest line to work on is to keep as close as
possible to natural selection, which at any rate tends to secure a fairly
homogeneous race in harmony with environment, and advancing even
if only at a moderate rate. To advocate the unchecked struggle for
existence as some Eugenists, notably the German Race Hygienists,
have done, would damn the Eugenic movement; but once we can reconcile the Darwinian principle with the free operation of human sympathy and mutual aid the popular dislike of it will rapidly disappear.

Of course, the objection which will immediately be raised to this
suggestion is that we can have no guarantee that rational selection by
voluntary absention from parenthood will be in conformity with
natural selection. But the very factors of non-success or racial unfitness we have mentioned—poverty , weakness, disease—are precisely the
factors which lead the majority of human beings to desire, either from
self-interest or maternal love, to refrain from having children if they
only know how to do so. Therefore it is only the mentally defective or
the utterly reckless section of the community who would not be willing
and anxious to act as closely as possible in conformity with the above
formula, provided that safe, easy, and reliable methods of avoiding
parenthood were available to them. The mentally defective are
already dealt with, thanks to the efforts of this Society ; but the experience of tbcse who have made efforts on the lines I have been suggesting
appears to show that even those who might be supposed to be past
influencing in this direction are generally keenly anxious to avoid the
procreation of diseased or wretched offspring, provided that it dees not
involve the deprivation of natural marital] relations.

Another great merit of this proposal is that it does not involve any
restraint upon marriages of inclination. In the absence of more exact
knowledge, we must admit that the mutua] attraction which we call
love must rest on a biological instinct of a eugenic character, although
its manifestations may often appear puzzling. All we have a right to
say that if either of the partners is suffering from a definite hereditary
taint, they should not have children, and that they should be warned of
this before entering on marriage; but there is no need to prohibit their
union if they are ready to forego parenthood.
A GUIDING PRINCIPLE FOR PRACTICAL EUGENIC REFORM. lil

It may be pointed out that the most important of such attempts as
humanity has hitherto made to deal with this problem have been in
accordance with this principle. The first great effort at dealing with
the problem of poverty was the English Poor Law of 1834. It was
certainly founded on the false idea that the State can guarantee support
to all its inhabitants, regardless of their number; but it had the great
saving grace that it put a bar to their reproduction while in receipt of
relief, by compelling the whole of the family to enter the workhouse
with segregation of the sexes. John Stuart Mill wrote of
this law that ‘‘humanity has no worse enemies than those who lend
themselves, either knowingly or unintentionally, to bring odium on
this law, or on the principles in which it originated’’;* but, unfortunately, modern sentimentalism, headed by the Fabian Society, has
entirely broken down this valuable safeguard, with the result that we
now have the cool demand on the part of the unemployed that they and
their families shall be supported in idleness on terms which are almost
as good as they would obtain when at work ; with the even worse proviso
that their allowance should be proportioned to the number of their
children, while they are quite free to procreate without limit.

The only other enactments to which it is necessary to refer are the
sterilisaticn laws which have been adopted by some states of the U.S.A.
and the Mental Deficiency Act in this country. These are also essentially of a negative eugenic character, and are perfectly sound as checking the perpetuation of types whose hereditary unfitness is indubitable.

And from the democractic point of view this is unquestionably the
right course. I have ventured to speak of positive and negative
eugenic action as comparable with scientific horticulture and agricul‘ture respectively. The great aim of the horticulturalist is to produce
the most perfect specimens. To do this he concentrates his attention on
breeding from the best types, ruthlessly clearing away the inferior ones,
thus producing a relatively few highly superior specimens. The
scientific agriculturist is however concerned with producing a large
crop of fairly uniform good quality, and for that purpose he adopts the
negative process of weeding out only the obviously defective specimens.
Both processes make for improvement, and to the purely scientific
eugenist, untrammelled by considerations of human feeling, the first
may appear as good as the second, or even better if he is anxious for the
development of supermen. But, from the democratic, human standpoint, the superman is not to be greatly desired for psychological
reasons, however useful he may be. We may take it for granted that
humanity will never be satisfied with great disparities of ability and
reward ; and if we insist, as I contend we must as Eugenists, on preserving the competitive system, we must at the same time bend our
energies towards devising a process which eliminates its brutality and
tends to a general moderately high level of ability, instead of advocating one which tends to accentuate disparities. Therefore, even if
genetic research were so far advanced that we could embark with confidence on the breeding of supermen, I suggest that we should do well to
neglect it in favour of a process which tends to the production of a high

*Principles of Political Economy, Book II. Chap XII.
112 EUGENICS REVIEW.

average type of human being, and to eliminate extremes. We may be
fairly confident in doing this, that accidental variations will give us all
the leadership we require, and the need for such leadership will diminish
as the mass becomes more advanced. While every rational sociologist
should sternly set his face against all assumptions of false equality,
he should do all in his power to secure a nearer approach to real equality
and the negative or agricultural process, which follows the Darwinian.
process, is obviously the means to this end, as is shown by the comparatively small divergences from the average type and the much
greater harmony with the environment which are exhibited by the undomesticated animals. It should also be realised that this process is.
the only one which offers any prospect of success in a democratic community, as the voting power of the masses is so great that they will
inevitably lay ever increasing burdens on the fit unless they are given
the opportunity of restraining their own reproduction.

The practical formula which I venture therefore to submit as the
most practicable method of securing the greatest possible concordance
between rational and natural selection is as follows :—

Restriction of Reproduction according to Natural Inclination under Free
Competition.

This simple principle appears to me to combine the great desiderata
for racial and social improvement—elimination of unfitness in close
conformity with natural selection ; an ever increasing tendency towards.
greater real equality ; the maximum of individual liberty and initiative;
free play for humanitarianism and medical aid towards the poor and
suffering, and the elimination of the antagonism between the interests
of the individual and the race. I therefore venture to think that it is
not only scientifically sound, but that it is the principle which will find
the most ready acceptance by all classes of the community.

If this be granted, then the practical course to be followed by the
Eugenics movement appears clear, and it gives ample scope for un
limited activity. The principal features of this activity would appear
to be as follows :—

(a) The Eugenics movement should advocate and assist in the
spreading of hygienic methods of birth-control to all married
people, and especially to the poor and diseased. For this.
purpose it should strongly urge the giving of such information
at all hospitals and welfare centres, as they are the great foci
to which the physiologically and economically unfit converge.

(b) It should advocate and encourage general early marriage for
love by pointing out that the possibility of birth-control
removes the economic obstacles to such marriage, and thus.
also removes the principal cause of sexual irregularities and
therefore of venereal disease which is one of the most serious.
dysgenic influences.

(c) “It should set its face absolutely against all socialistic or other
proposals which aim at restricting competition and setting up.
a false equality, and it should work for the elimination of all
existing laws or organisations which uperate in this manner.
A GUIDING PRINCIPLE FOR PRACTICAL EUGENIC REFORM. 113

In doing so it should point out that the provision of birthcontrol information absolves it from any accusation of
brutality in taking this course. The evils mistakenly
associated with the competitive system are not inherent in
competition but in too many competitors, and they would
rapidly diminish as birth-control becomes more general
among the poor.

(d) It should emphatically discountenance all bonuses or encouragement to parenthood, such as maternity endowment or
relief of taxation on account of children.

(e) It should maintain the principle of segregation or offer the
alternative of sterilisation of the mentally defective, but only
when voluntary restraint of reproduction is hopeless.

(f) It should urge upon the medical profession that it is its
duty to recommend all patients suffering from hereditary
disease cr defect, or from diseases or malformations which
would have caused death but for medical or surgical intervention, to abstain from further parenthood.

As regards the last proposal! it should be mentioned that the medical
profession are supposed to be bound by the ‘‘Hippocratic oath’’ that
they will use every effort to save life however undesirable. According to the above principle we need not raise any objection to such an
oath, but the Eugenics movement should seek to extract from them in
addition what we may term a ‘‘Darwinian oath’’ that before curing an
individual who would die but for their intervention they should exact
a solemn promise that he or she will not have children, and they should
give the necessary information. No one who appreciates the true
meaning of natural selection can have any hesitation in adopting this
course, and its enormous importance in checking the increase of unfavourable variations needs no emphasis.

What however should be emphasised is that these proposals instead
of being coercive and antagonistic to human feeling is in complete
accord with it, and therefore has every hope of acceptance. Mankind
naturally desires liberty,and has only mistakenly consented to interference with it under the stress of economic evils caused by overpopulation which would be eliminated by this process. And women are
natural and instinctive eugenists from their own self interest and
maternal feeling. Assuming control of reproduction to be universally
understood, parents and especially mothers naturally desire for their
own sake and that of their children to avoid further reproduction if the
health of either of the parents renders it unlikely that the children will
be healthy and capable, and if their economic conditions do not permit
of their bringing them up in comfort. From considerable experience in
this matter I can confidently assert that even the poorest women are
pathetically anxious to avoid having children by drunken and diseased
husbands, or if they are diseased themselves, and to space out births so
as to give themselves and their children decent opportunities; and I
venture to think that the complete emancipation of women from the
obligation of passive maternity would be a eugenic reform of the first
114 EUGENICS REVIEW.

magnitude, which would go far in itself towards eliminating the worst
features of race deterioration which confront us to-day. This point of
view was eloquently proclaimed many years ago by Robert Ingersoll,
and it is not only to be endorsed from negative eugenic motives, but it
would conduce to the greater reproduction of the educated classes, by
relieving them of the great burden of supporting the children of the poor
through taxation and charity.

The experience of Holland, the only country in which birth control
information has been widely circulated among the poor through the
agency of doctors and trained nurses in all the important centres,
appears to give conclusive justification to this view. Some of you may
remember that at the first Eugenics Congress Dr. Soren Hansen made
the startling statement that the average stature of the Dutch people had
increased by four inches within the last fifty years (the Dutch birthcontrol movement started in 1881) and the Dutch army records lend
some support to this statement in the fact that the proportion of young
men over 5 ft. 7 in. m height entering the army has increased from
24.5% in 1865 to 47.5% in 1911; while the proportion of those under
5 ft. 24in. in height has decreased from 25% to under 8% in the
same period. The death rate in the large towns (the great centres of
birth-control information) had fallen to 10.7 per thousand in 1920, and
the infantile mortality to the extraordinarily low figure of 49.6 per
thousand, although no special campaign against infant mortality has
been carried on in Holland that I am aware of. These facts appear
definitely to show that the general provision of birth-control knowledge
in Holland kas automatically operated on Eugenic lines as predicted.

It would therefore seem that ample scope fcr immediate practical
activity is open to the Eugenic movement on the lines indicated above,
and without prejudging genetic conclusions; and the advocates of
birth-control would not only warmly welcome the support of the
Eugenics movement, but are most anxious to avail themselves of its
guidance as to its best eugenic application. I earnestly hope therefore
that you will give these proposals your sympathetic consideration, and
that the result will be to make the Eugenics movement a great active
force for the uplift of humanity, and cause it to be blessed by future.
generations.
