THE GALTON LECTURE, 1949

HE 1949 Galton Lecture, under the
| title “‘ The Mixing of Races and Social
Decay,” was delivered before a large
audience, which included Fellows and
Members of the Society and an unusual
number of visitors, at Manson House,
Portland Place, on February 18th. The
‘lecturer was the Rt. Rev. the Lord Bishop
of Birmingham.

Lord Horder, who was in the Chair, said
that his task was pleasant and also very
easy. It was pleasant because he was, if
he might say so, an old friend of Dr. Barnes,
whose brother was a cléser friend and a
fellow leech. The Bishop of Birmingham
needed no introduction to a British audience.
The Galton Lecture was held as near to
Galton’s birthday as practicable ; February
16th of this year was the 127th anniversary
of Galton’s birth. An invitation to deliver
the Galton Lecture was the greatest compliment which the Society paid to a distinguished person, who was very “‘ hand-picked.”
Dr. Barnes had chosen a slightly controversial subject, but one of great interest.

At the close of the Lecture, which is published in full elsewhere in this issue, there
was a lively discussion opened by Mr. J. C.
Trevor.

Mr. Trevor said that the subject of Dr.
Barnes’s Galton Lecture had interested him
for some years. Nobody, hé imagined, would
dispute two of the propositions advanced,
namely that all human groups, however
diverse their origins, were interfertile, and
that, as opportunities for communication
and contact improved, racial crossing must
increase. He would also accept, with little
reserve, the conclusion that the prospect
before us need not be depressing since we
were all in a sense hybrids. On the other
hand, speaking both as an anthropologist
and as somebody who was reared in South
and East Africa and had lived and worked
among racially mixed communities in the
New World, he felt that several points raised
by Dr. Barnes stood in need of very serious
qualification.

28

Was prejudice or antipathy towards colour
in Britain, or for that matter elsewhere,
which, as the lecturer had rightly assured
his audience, distorted judgment on miscegenation, in fact “‘ instinctive ’’ ? Growing
up on a lonely farm in the Zoutspansberg
with Bantu children as his only companions,

the speaker had been unaware of it until

inculcated with the Herrenvolk idea, of which
it had taken him years to disabuse himself.
Again, as Professor MacCrone of Johannesburg had shown in a brilliant historical and
psychological study,* the sanctions relating
to marriages between early Dutch settlers at
the Cape and non-European women were
those of religion and not of colour or race.

He appreciated Dr. Barnes’s difficulty in
assessing the extent to which the alleged
defects of “‘ half-breeds ’’ were due to innate
limitations rather than to unfavourable home
or environmental conditions, yet this had to
be faced by every investigator. It seemed to
the speaker that experience favoured the
second possibility, but the real issue here
was the quality of the parents irrespective
of their racial origin. While he believed Dr.
Barnes to be correct in asserting that unions
between different European peoples did not
on the whole arouse popular disapproval, he
deplored his confusion in such a context of
nationality, language, culture and race.

The Germans were by no means wholly
or even mainly “ Nordic” in the widely
accepted sense of that equivocal term.
There was no single Latin “race,” nor did
the Slavs form a racial entity. These distinctions were far from being mere categorical quibbles but were fundamental to the
proper consideration of problems of the kind
under review. Dr. Barnes had said that
“troublesome or degenerate children ’’ were
not expected from alliances involving the
groups just mentioned, implying the opposite in other cases but excepting the products
of the ‘‘ best representatives”? of AngloChinese unions. He had further contrasted

*I. D. MacCrone, Race Altitudes in South Africa,
London, Oxford University Press, 1937.
THE GALTON LECTURE, 1949 29

the members of “advanced” European,
Arabian, Indian and Chinese civilizations
with those belonging to the ‘ more primitive ’’ Negroid vaces of Africa. Here, too,
culture and race were confounded and a
social heritage was equated with a biological
one.

This masked clear thinking on the subject.
Dr. Barnes’s “advanced ”’ civilizations or
cultures surely meant those developed in
literary and technological resources, his
““ primitive ’’ ones those not so developed,
and race was only incidental to them. The
barbarities wrought in Europe in our generation in the pursuance of so-called racial
policies would recur to all, and they were
largely the outcome of anything but dispassionate theories of the nature of race.
Like the social workers that Dr. Barnes
quoted, the speaker took the view that
where “‘ degradation ”’ occurred it was not so
much to be attributed to “racial disharmony ”’ in any physical respect—the weight
of anthropological and genetical evidence
seemed patently ranged against that—as to
environmental maladjustment.

To be more specific, continued Mr. Trevor,
the crossing of races appeared to him in
the final analysis a social rather than a
biological problem, and a noted authority,
Dr. Castle of Harvard, had repeatedly
stressed the same conclusion.* Its success
or otherwise depended on the degree to which
the offspring of inter-racial matings were
socially acceptable to the community into
which they were born. If the prevailing
attitude was that the community stood in an
inherently superior position to any other,
then the results of miscegenation might be
tragic. In the present state of knowledge,
however, value-judgments as to “ higher ”’
and ‘“ lower’ races were best avoided and,
to recast the parable, the rdle of the scientifically humble publican was to be preferred
to that of the racial Pharisee.

The speaker agreed entirely with Dr.
Barnes in the importance he ascribed to
isolation and inbreeding in the formation of
“pure ’’ races. Expressed in another way,

*W. E. Castle, J. Hered., 15, 1924; Amer. J. Phys.
Anthrop., 9, 1926; Science, 71, 1930.

they were groups among which the variability of physical characters was small,
though this need not imply singleness of
racial origin. For example, the descendants
of the Bounty mutineers, sprung from half a
dozen Englishmen and twice as many
Tahitian women, were less variable than
either of the two parental populations.*

As to Dr. Barnes’s views on the Norman
Conquest and its consequences, Mr. Trevor
felt it was extremely hazardous to interpret
history in racial terms. A still incomplete
study of the skeletal remains of the inhabitants of medieval England suggested that
the bulk of immigrants into this country
following the Conquest conformed to the type
generally known as Alpine than to Ripley’s
Teutonic or Nordic type. Whether they
improved the existing native stock by
diluting the “ Celtic or pre-Celtic ’’ strains
within it was a matter of opinion. An
element common in the Iron Age of Britain
had long reasserted itself, having predominated among us since at least Tudor times.
Was it not the culture of the invaders rather
than their genes that might have formed the
intellectual catalyst of the Elizabethan
period ? Regarding the emergence of “a
new racial type”’ in France and the belief
to which Dr. Barnes had alluded, that the
ephemeral nature of recent French governments was due to the racially unstable
character of the inhabitants of that country,
he would point out that Professor Vallois,
in a work published during the war,f had
described France as a mosaic of races from
the Bronze Age onwards.

The speaker hoped that Dr. Barnes would
furnish more precise details of the “ disreputable pockets’? he had stated were
formed by the alliances of Indian pedlars
with “‘ certain types ”’ of English girls in our
midst. ‘‘ Centres of social disorder ’’ and
“‘moral contamination”’ were strong phrases
requiring the support of explicit evidence,
and who were the “ decent people ”’ usurping
the functions of the police and indulging in
racial riots ?

* J. C. Trevor, EuGrEnics REvIEw, 30, 1938
t Henri V. Vallois, Anthropologie de ba Population
Fran¢aise, Toulouse, Didier, 1943.
30 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Turning to the Negro, Mr. Trevor felt there
could be no solution of the antagonisms that
existed in South Africa to-day other than
tolerance, understanding and, above all, the
recognition of human dignity. In the U.S.A.
legislation forbidding interracial marriage
was not merely proposed but already in the
statute books of thirty States, by no means
allin the South. The fact that most eminent
American Negroes were of mixed racial
origin was no mark of any inborn inferiority
on the part of the African Negro. Owing to
wide-scale miscegenation in the United
States, this might well be a question of simple
probability. At the same time it was
notorious that a light skin colour among
Negroes there conferred immense material
advantages on its possessor, as it did in every
other “ chromatocracy ”’ with which he was
familiar.

Dr. T. M. Ling said he felt he was somewhat at a disadvantage following two such
erudite speakers. He had greatly enjoyed
Dr. Barnes’s paper, but wished to make two
or three points. Dr. Barnes made no reference to the considerable increase of nationalism in Western Europe which had built up
opinions based partly on economic factors.
It should also be remembered that improved
transport did not necessarily lead to increased
inter-breeding. He was surprised at the
fatalistic way in which Dr. Barnes spoke of
these examples of social decay. The important factor was the influence of antagonistic social and economic pressures. We
knew the child’s need for a sense of security
in its early years; in racial groups living in
areas where social antagonism existed it was
hard to give the child emotional stability.
Such environmental and economic factors
needed the attention of us all.

Mr. Cecil Binney said that he had listened
with great interest to the paper, both because
he would always enjoy hearing the views of
the Bishop of Birmingham on any subject
and also because he was peculiarly interested
in the subject of the paper. He had, however, never previously spoken on it in public
because he did not feel there was any view
he could usefully express and he felt much
the same after hearing the paper. The

subject was, in his opinion, a very difficult
one, little definite being known and there
being great opportunities for confusion of
thought. Intentionally taking an example
which had fortunately not yet arisen, Mr.
Binney remarked that were the present
Government of India to decide to expel the
Eurasian population, which had been mentioned in the paper, the outcry aroused
would drown all consideration of the reasons
for such a policy. There were three entirely
separate grounds on which it might be
adopted. First, the Government of India
might merely be wishing to expel what they
regarded as an alien population and this
could not be said to be illogical, since no
nation state would admit within itself an
indefinite number of foreigners. Second,
the Indians might hold the view that they
were aS a race superior to white people.
Third, they might adopt the attitude that
while approving both white and coloured
people they disapproved of a mixed race.
This was the only true objection to miscegenation.

It had been frequently stated that a halfcaste population was inferior to either of the
races from which it came, but there was
really no evidence of this. Furthermore, it
depended on what criterion one took. It
was possible, for example, to argue that a
white race was superior to a black one, or
vice versa, and accordingly the whiter, or
the blacker, the person was the better. On
the other hand, the view might be adopted
that the white and black races were both
good, but a half-white race was inferior, just
as dog breeders might say that they liked
both bulldogs and bloodhounds but had no
use for mongrels. Obviously such decisions
were mere matters of taste, but that brought
one to the difficulty that the only points on
which different races could be valued as
against one another were questions of moral
character and intellectual ability, as to which
there were no statistics, and it seemed almost
impossible to obtain sufficient information
on these points to judge the value of any
mixed race. In most cases the objection to
a half-caste population was not that it was
mixed but that it represented an admixture
THE GALTON LECTURE, 1949 31

of a race which the dominant race regarded
as inferior. A further confusion easily arose
between race and civilization. It might, for
example, be thought that Chinese civilization
was inferior to our own, but this was irrelevant to race mixture, unless it could be
shown that a Chinese child if brought up
among Europeans was incapable of acquiring
European culture. Accordingly, Mr. Binney
thought that the Bishop was right in concentrating attention on the purely practical
problems raised by the pockets of mixed
race which he had remarked as existing in
England.

Dr. Barnes in replying said that he was
afraid that he could say very little that was
adequate. He thanked the speakers for the
kindness of their criticism, and confessed
that he was surprised that more strongly
expressed divergent opinions had not manifested themselves. Of course the whole
matter was full of complexities. We all
tended to argue from our personal knowledge and from the knowledge which came
to us from our newspapers. He personally
had tried to be free from the bias that came
from reading news that had been too carefully sifted and which tended to exaggerate
the difficulties of the mixture of races.
Naturally, when races were mixed, difficulties
showed themselves in political and social life

and we paid attention to them rather than _

to the success of the developing mixtures
which were being formed. There was surely
a very strong, though possibly irrational,
instinct which made many, he did not say
all, English people dislike the thought of
mixture with coloured races. He did not
think that the feeling was the result of
education. He had been for some eight years
a tutor at Trinity College, Cambridge. In

a college of some six hundred undergraduates
they deliberately took a number of men from
Asia, partly from India, as a result of a
request from John Morley, whose name
would still be remembered. There was some
hesitation with regard to these men even
from the best of the undergraduates, who set
themselves to make the visitors feel happy in
their environment.

As regards his suggestion that the result
of the Norman invasion was a mixture of
races somewhat analogous to the invasions
which produced in the ancient Greeks the
finest people in the history of the world, he
would accept correction, but the invaders
were certainly Northmen and the country
had had a succession of Northmen invading
it for two or three centuries previously. He
thought that there was a change not merely
in the quality but in the capacity of the race
after the two strains had been amalgamated.

We were bewildered by many factors and
by the possibility of arguing in many
directions. If what had been said led to a
little light he would feel that his contribution
had been useful.

Lord Horder agreed with Mr. Binney that
the problem lacked definition. The approach
therefore could be biological, anthropological
or psychological. Considering our limited
knowledge on this matter, the lecturer’s
presentation of the subject struck him as
having been extremely temperate, very
tentative and very intriguing, so that anyone
who might care to enter this very difficult
field of research had got all the encouragement he might want.

In conclusion, Lord Horder thanked Dr.
Barnes for his excellent address, and a most
successful Galton anniversary ended amid
general applause.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLI, No. 1
