THE DISAPPEARANCE OF CULTURE.
By W. J. PrErry.

One of the most striking phenomena in the development of civilisation is the frequency with which nascent civilisations have come
to a more or less sudden end. This phenomenon has been so widespread as to cause myriads of thinkers to conclude that culture, like
any living organism, is subject to the processes of growth, maturity
and decay, so that any civilisation has its life cycle just as has any
living organism. The great civilisation of Egypt can be watched in
its growth from a stage of culture somewhat akin to that of the paleolithic age, in its proud development of the Pyramid Age, and in its
decline after thousands of years of splendour. Assyria sprang up from
small origins, had its day of power, and disappeared for ever; so did
Crete, Phoenicia, Persia and many other civilisations. For reasons.
such as these men now speak of the decay of this or that civilisation,
and talk of the possibility of the vanishing of civilisation—meaning
that of Western Europe—altogether, as the result of the upheaval of
war.

It is easy to talk loosely about these facts, and to use biological
analogies in the discussion of social processes. But reasoning by analogy is dangerous: it is often the means by which the mentally fogged
hope to disperse the mists that lie about their minds. So, leaving the
biological analogy alone, let us inquire as to what we really mean by
the disappearance of civilisation. In the first place what is meant by
*“the civilisation of Egypt,’’ ‘‘the civilisation of China,’’ ‘‘the civil-.
isation of Mexico’’ and so forth?

For many years, thinkers, dazzled by the glories of the doctrine
of evolution, applied it without much criticism to the study of the
development of human culture. They assumed, without any detailed
examination of the facts, that various peoples, in different parts of theearth, had, independently of one another, elaborated the fundamental
arts and crafts. According to this point of view development of culture was inevitable: man was born to dominate the earth, and to master:
natural forces by some active power of his mind, which was readily
called into activity by the force of circumstances. These circumstances:
it was assumed, were so common, and acted so readily, as to produce:
advances in culture in all parts of the world independently of one
another. This is the doctrine tacitly or avowedly held until within
the last few years by the vast majority of thinkers. But when the
evidence really came to be examined in this country by
Rivers, it was evident that nothing of the sort could be postulated ;
that, on the contrary, all that could usually be discovered about.
the origin of the culture of any community was that it derived its
cultural heritage from elsewhere. Although Rivers, in his History:
106 EUGENICS REVIEW.

of Melanesian Society did not develop this part of his theme in detail,
yet later advances were implicit in this great work, so that it has
become possible, by following the clues given by him, to unravel
much of the history of the world’s culture. The result of the prosecutio1. of this line of study has been to shew that, far from independent
development of culture having taken place in all parts of the world, all
the available evidence points to transmission as the predominating
factor in the process whereby civilisations have taken their rise in
various parts of the earth. That is to say, it can confidently be said
that every community which has risen beyond the stage of development of the ‘‘food-gatherers’ ’ (who still persist in outlying parts of the
world)—has derived its cultural capital from some other community.
Each community has, in turn, added to or subtracted from its cultural
capital, so as to form a distinctive culture. But this culture is only
a modification of what we term ‘‘Civilisation,’’ and it can only be
said to be distinctive of the country in question on the terms just
stated. Therefore when we speak of the disappearance of civilisations
we mean, if this point of view be adopted, that some community that
had acquired a dose of culture from some source or other, had lost a
large amount of it, and had sunk in cultural level.

Another point must be made quite clear. What do we mean by
civilisation? Do we refer to the command of natural forces which so
distinguishes the culture of Western Europe: or do we mean some
moral standard of behaviour by which we compare peoples? It is
possible to adopt all sorts of measures of civilisation, but it is essential that some standard of reference should be forthcoming. I have
no hesitation in taking the material basis as the most satisfactory.
When I speak of a drop in cultural level, therefore, I mean that a community has lost some of its arts and crafts, and I make no assumptions
whatever with regard to its moral characteristics. Indeed, as can
readily be seen, loss of culture might mean the salvation of the soul of
a people, it might mean the breaking down of material bonds that
impeded the intellectual and moral progress of mankind.

It is possible now to go one step further. Since it can be assumed
that every community in the food-producing stage of culture has
derived its cultural capital from some other community, and thus in
a long chain of communities, from the original food-producing community of all—it follows that a community loses its culture owing to
some particular circumstance affecting that community alone. This
loss of culture may have nothing to do with the general process of
growth and decay of civilisation, considered in its widest sense. It is
possible, and indeed has happened continually during the history of
civilisation, that communities have lost their cultural capital, while
civilisation has been developing. When it is remembered that the
communities of America, once given their cultural capital from outside sources, proceeded steadily to dissipate it, while the communities
round the Mediterranean were steadily increasing their capital, it can
be seen that it does not necessarily follow that, because some communities lose their culture, this loss is an inevitable law.

Another point which must be cleared up is that concerning race
and culture. It is difficult to see what influence race has had upon
THE DISAPPEARANCE OF CULTURE. 107

culture. Generalisations in this direction are dangerous. It is easy
to conclude that, because a community has not advanced far on the
road to civilisation as we know it, or if it apparently has halted on the
road, this community is racially incapable of acquiring the same level
of culture as its more fortunate fellows. But this lag in culture may
be due to circumstances of position and other accidents. An isolated
community in the remote country districts of Britain is not so advanced in culture as London: in the same way a remote community in
the Jungles of India may have dozed during the centuries, while the
stream of life passed by. The whole problem of the capacity for the
acquisition of culture has yet to be approached in the proper manner,
for it can safely be said that the materials for the solution of thisproblem are as yet hardly amassed.

The danger of thinking that a community has its cycles of culture
or its fixed potentialities for the absorption of culture is well exemplified in the case of the Japanese. Originally culturally dependent on
the Chinese, and scorned by them as hopelessly inferior, the Japanese
for centuries did little but imitate the artistic and other products of
China. It would seem that they were incapable of the development
of an advanced form of culture. But since the middle of last century
the Japanese have advanced culturally with vast strides, until they
are on a par with the most developed civilisations of the world. It is
difficult, if not impossible, to think of the cultural history of Japan as
subject to the cycles so beloved of many thinkers of to-day. China,
again, the original civiliser of Japan, affords another instance of the
capacity of a community to persist through thousands of years with
its culture virtually unimpaired.

When we speak of the disappearance of a civilisation, say, that of
Assyria, what do we really mean? Ht is too often assumed that the
civilisation of any people can be equated to the people themselves, as
if it were somehow an expression of their innate physical and intellectual capacities. Thus we speak of the civilisation of France and of
Germany, as if, in some way, there were an equation between the two
elements, people and culture. Whereas, as is evident, the culture of
France is the result of various historical processes, in which the element of race has played a very problematical part indeed. We can
have peoples of varying physical types possessing the same cultures,
while peoples of the same physical type have different cultures. When,
therefore, we speak of the disappearance of a civilisation, we usually
mean the actual loss of arts and crafts, and not necessarily the disappearance of a population. Of course, it may indeed happen that the
two processes are linked together in some particular case, but it need
not be so. In the central parts of Asia there are numerous ruins of
deserted settlements, abandoned, doubtless, on account of the gradual
dessication of the country. Both the people and the culture have gone.
If the people go, so obviously does the culture. But that need not
necessarily always happen. A people can lose its culture, like, say,
the Etruscans, and yet remain in the country.

The problem of the disappearance of civilisations can thus be
divided, it seems, into two parts. In the first place there is that of the
disappearance of the population itself; and there is the disappearance
of the culture while the population remains virtually unaltered.
108 EUGENICS REVIEW.

The second instance of the disappearance of culture is by far the
more important. For it can be said, roughly, that the peoples of the
earth have wandered very little from their original areas of specialisation. We find the Mongols spread over a compact area; similarly with
the negroes, the people of Mediterranean stock, the Nordics and so
forth. The so-called Alpine, Armenoid or Central race has wandered
most of all; but this wandering apparently has had but little effect
on the development of culture, though it has been responsible for a
certain amount of culture-dispersion. The population of Britain
is, broadly speaking, what it was in the days when food-producers
first appeared on the scene. The subsequent incursions of Celts,
Teutons, and Romans, not to speak of the Normans, have had but little
effect on the physical characteristics of our population.

What is the cause of the disappearance of culture which has so
often taken place in all parts of the earth. In order to answer that
question we must know something of the way in which culture has
been transmitted from one community to another. I do not propose to
temporise with current views concerning the possible modes of transmission of culture, but rather to study one particular instance where
enough knowledge for the present purpose has already been accumulated.
I shall take my facts from the report lately published by Dr. Reisner of
his excavations in Ethiopia, and published in volumes five and six of
the Harvard African Studies. By means of his work in Nubia and the
Sudan we have been able to acquire much information of the exact
manner by which culture is transmitted, and to estimate the causes
which lead to the modification and disappearance of that culture.

This work of Dr. Reisner deals with the Egyptian colony
founded at Kerma in Nubia during the Middle Kingdom by a Prince
named Hepzefa, who was sent by the king to guard the road to the
south, whence came supplies of gold, ivory, slaves and so forth. In
founding this settlement the Egyptians were simply carrying on the
policy of extending their influence into places whence they got
supplies of raw materials, and thus setting in motion a process that was
destined ultimately to encompass the world. In the case of Kerma
the date of the settlIment can be put back at least as far as the time of
the Sixth Dynasty, about the middle of the Third Millennium before
Christ, when there was a trading post in that place. Ethiopia was
always a mere land of roadways, a barren land across which it was
necessary to penetrate in order to get access to the gold of the south.
In the Middle Kingdom Amenenhat I. and II. founded Kerma, and
in the time of Sesostris I. Hepzefa of Assiut was sent to Kerma, and
lived there with a considerable Egyptian community. The results of
this occupation were remarkable and illuminating, for it is possible by
studying them to understand many obscure points in the diffusion of
culture.

It is possible to gain a graphic idea of the manner by which the
Egyptians influenced Nubia and the south by studying the household of
Hepzefa. As Reisner says: ‘‘In the great houses in Egypt, as depicted
on the walls of the tombs of the princes of Beni Hassan, a most strict
division of labour appears, so that an enormous family seems to be a
self-sufficient industrial and agricultural group producing not merely
THE DISAPPEARANCE OF CULTURE. 109

all its own food, but all the other necessities and luxuries of daily life.
We find there not only sowing and reaping, hunting and fishing,
dancing and feasting, but also the manufacture of cloth, sandals,
pottery, stone vessels, wooden furniture, bows and arrows, metal
objects, and practically everything known to have been used.’’ Prince
Hepzefa belonged to Assiut, and presumably had a household of this
nature. When, therefore, he went to Kerma, it is highly probable that
he took with him such a community to supply his needs, as is the case
now with Oriental potentates.

What was the effect of the sudden transplantation of Egyptian
craftsmen into a new environment, among people who knew little or
nothing of the various arts and crafts that they practised? The
statues, scarabs, stone vessels, beads and amulets are typically Egyptian, and would pass unquestioned in an Egyptian tomb of the period.
It is therefore clear that the manufacture of these articles was demanded by Egyptian custom, and, given materials of the right sort,
the craftsmen would cling to the Egyptian technique. But the
Egyptian craftsmen were in a new environment. The life at Kerma
gave rise to new customs, such as bed-burial and the use of caps
decorated with mica. The carpentry of the bed is typically Egyptian,
but the actual form has never been found in an Egyptian grave, much
less the patterns of ivory inlays with which they are decorated. The
caps, on the other hand, appear rather to be adapted from Ethiopian
garments. Some pf the decorations in ivory and mica contain wellknown Egyptian forms, but many of the animals are strange, such, for
example, as the horned rhinoceros, the winged giraffe, the ant-bear,
the flying bustards and so forth. Yet every figure betrays the facility
in copying of the Egyptian craftsmen.

Hepzefa died about 1935-1880 B.C. He probably arrived at
Kerma from fifteen to thirty years before hisdeath. During these years
the arts and crafts peculiar to Kerma, and in particular the manufacture of pottery, had passed through all their creative stages. ‘‘New
developments in arts and crafts, seldom take any great length of time
when the moment of change has come; and the combination of trained
skill and environment, the conditions which led to the growth of the
handicrafts of Kerma, were all present from the first day on which
Hepzefa and his people arrived at that place. Training and skill, and
a body of technical traditions were imported ready made; the conditions of the environment were natural to the place.’’ So the Kerma
culture was at a climax in its earliest period.

The sudden culmination of a culture when in a new environment
is a commonplace of the diffusion of culture. The best instance is
that of the Maya cilivisation of Guatemala, which very rapidly reached
its summit, and then gradually but surely decayed, until practically
nothing of it was left but its ruins. A parallel instance is to be found
in the case of the earliest pottery at Susa, the ancient capital of Persia.
This pottery is immensely superior to that which followed. This can
well be the work—indeed it must have been—of skilled potters who,
coming from elsewhere and feeling the stimulus of a new paste and other
local conditions, were induced to make something new and wonderful.

Then follows the characteristic phenomenon of development of an
110 EUGENICS REVIEW.

introduced culture. I quote the words of Reisner. He says that the
development of the Kerma culture ‘‘is a fairly simple one. After the
burial of the members of the colony who came with Hepzefa, one craft
| after another begins to fail, some sooner and some later; but ‘n the
-end the Egyptian traditions are almost dead, and those which were
finally passed on to the men of the Nubian period are mostly so modified as to cease to be recognisable as Egyptian. In the end, environment overcame the acquirements of the early immigrants, even though
the colony was probably reinforced by fresh accessions in later years.’’
That is to say, the series began with a pure Egyptian culture, and
ended with one that is called ‘Nubian.’ ‘This derived culture
acquired so much power of resistance that it was hardly modified by
fresh impulses arriving from Egypt.’’

In these few statements from Reisner we have the epitome of the
mechanism of culture—transmission and modification throughout the
world. Once these principles are grasped, much becomes clear that
previously was obscure.

In The Children of the Sun I examined the cultural history of the
great region stretching eastwards from Egypt to America, and concluded from the evidence that the earlest stage of food producing culture
was higher than those which followed, with certain reservations in
the case of India. My argument rested, of course, on the basis of
the material arts and crafts. The great ruins of Ponape in the Carolines, the pyramids of Cambodia and of Java, and countless large
stone monuments scattered throughout this vast region testify to the
high degree of culture possessed by the folk of the archaic civilisation.
This ancient civilisation was destined in 21] parts of this vast region to
fall into decay, the craft of stoneworking was abandoned, cultivation
by irrigation gave rise to dry cultivation, and life altogether took on
a lower level.

How can this fall in culture be explained? I have urged that
along with this decay of culture went a growth of warlike behaviour.
The archaic civilisation was predominantly peaceful, whereas its successors were warlike. The war machine was getting to work and exercising its dread effects on mankind.* But this does not explain exactly
how the disappearance of the arts and crafts took-place.

When we recall what happened in the case of the Egyptian colony
in Nubia, it is possible to understand with clarity the reason why
civilisation can be lowered in standard without any disappearance of
population. For the viceroy took with him members of various crafts,
who were attached to his household. These crafts were doubtless
largely hereditary, so that the elimination of the family which possessed the secrets of the crafts would involve that of the craft itself.
This mechanism is precisely that which can be shown to have been at
work in Oceania. Dr. Rivers in his remarkable article on The Disappearance of Useful Arts published in Festskrift Tillagnad Edvard
Westermarck in 1912, had already shown clearly that various arts and
crafts have disappeared owing to the dying out of the families that
possessed the necessary knowledge. For instance, canoe-making was,

 

* See The Growth of Civilization, 1924, for a description of th‘s process.
THE DISAPPEARANCE OF CULTURE. 111

in Polynesia, a noble craft. Those who made canoes had to chant
certain songs while at work, and the knowledge of these songs was an
indispensable part of the craft. When, therefore, a family of canoemakers died out for any reason, the craft would itself disappear.

It is necessary, therefore, to imagine that in ancient times civilisation was carried about the earth by fairly large groups of people, led by
members of a ruling group, together with a certain number of skilled
craftsmen. They would settle, as in the case of the Nubian and
Sudanese settlement of the Egyptians, in places where there were
supplies of gold, copper, or some substance that interested them, and
would instal themselves there. They would incorporate the local
native population in the lower orders of their community, but would
not allow them to gain knowledge of the luxury trades. Consequently
the continuance of the higher arts and crafts would depend on the persistence of the hereditary element, on the unbroken: continuity in a
craft. Once this continuity of craft was broken it would disappear and
the drop in cultural level would occur.

One of the most important factors causing a drop in cultural
level is the disappearance of a ruling group. The archaic civilisation
which spread over the earth was led by the Children of the Sun, together
with a nobility. Round this group of rulers the culture of the community really centred. They supplied the skilled craftsmen—as in
Tonga—and the hereditary priesthood. All the ceremonial was
centred round them. In Egypt it is a well-known principle that
innovations were first of all associated with the ruling group, and then
gradually filtered down. to the rest of the community. This was also
the case with the Kerma colony. With the spread throughout the
world of the archaic civilisation there came the propagation of the
knowledge of arts and crafts and ceremonial associated with this
ruling group, and especially with the superior part of it, the family of the
Children of the Sun. It is a matter of historical knowledge that this
family was eliminated in various places. That elimination would
involve much of the culture of the original community. A great part
of the ceremonial would disappear, for the simple reason that the few
who possessed the knowledge of it no longer existed. We know that,
in places where the Children of the Sun once existed, but have since
disappeared, the whole of the ritual connected with the sky has gone,
or survives only in fragments. The important ritual associated with
the sun-god, and elaborate and artificial ritual built up by the priesthood of Heliopolis in Egypt, could only survive with the family that
carried it about, the Children of the Sun, and with them it disappeared.
Among the rest of the community there was neither the knowledge nor
the desire to maintain such cults, so they vanished.

An examination of the records of the family of the Children of the
Sun in a country like Burma shows at once that the scheme just put
forward is not imaginative. In the story of the foundation of Pegu
mention is made of princes who founded Pegu with one hundred and
seventy families—just as Hepzefa founded Kerma. The Glass Palace
Chronicles of the Kings of Burma likewise contain many references to the
foundation of cities by members of the royal family, often of the solar
line. Evidently it was a constant practice for princes to go out and
112 EUGENICS REVIEW.

found a new settlement for themselves. They would beyond doubt
take with them all manner of skilled craftsmen, and would organise the
community on the basis of that of their home. The disappearance of
the ruling group would leave the community lowered in cultural level:
there would no longer be the need for the elaborate technique necessary
for the building of temples, for the carving of statuary, for the casting
land working of metals, which would form so prominent a part of the
culture under the old regime. An incoming band of warlike people
would neither understand nor need all these things: they would be
content with what they could get in the way of skilled crafts. In
Cambodia there are immense ruins made by men coming from India,
who left Sanskrit inscriptions behind them. But they were overwhelmed in time by the war-like Tai-Shan folk coming down from the
north, and after a short duration all the old order of civilisation had
disappeared. Even the language had changed, and Sanskrit had given
place to that of the invaders. This simply means that the ruling group
had been eliminated, but that the rest of the population had persisted,
and had remained on the same level of culture at which it always had
been. The skilled element had gone—that is all.

The diasppearance of culture is often accompanied by the appear‘ance of warlike people. These warlike people are almost invariably
lower in level, culturally speaking, than those whom they overwhelm.
This is easily accounted for. Professor E. H. Parker, in his Ancient
China Simplified had shown that members of the ruling group of ancient
China went out and became the rulers of the barbarians who surrounded
‘them, and adopted the habits of the people among whom they came to
dwell. This is precisely what seems to have happened in the case of the
Egyptian colony at Kerma. The drop in cultural level, even where a
complete community apparently was present in the first instance, was
rapid and inevitable. The inertia of the local population is sufficient,
in the course of time, to cause the original level of culture to be depressed. Of course, it follows also, that the more highly civilised
can raise the cultural level of those among whom they dwell: but they
can only do this in a marked manner when their influence is strong and
persistent. The Chinese notables who had to flee the country, could
not possibly have been able to influence the local natives to any great
extent, especially if these were already somewhat organised, and therefore culturally resistant Since warlike peoples have invariably
taken their origin on the outskirts of developed civilisations, it follows
that they must necessarily be lower in cultural level than the communities to which they owe their cultural capital. When, therefore, they
rush in and dominate an advanced civilisation, exterminate the ruling
group, and destroy the fabric of the state, it follows necessarily that the
level of culture must drop. Anything else would be in the nature of a
cultural miracle.

It is evident that the argument just put forward only applies to
communities in certain cultural circumstances. In such communities
knowledge was in the hands of small groups, and its persistence
depended on the physical persistence of these groups. Knowledge was
not accessible to one and all. Only the noble canoe-maker of Tonga
could make canoes, and sing the necessary songs: no commoner might
THE DISAPPEARANCE OF CULTURE. 113

hope to attain to the performance of this craft. The knowledge of
crafts was not put into writing. Indeed, as culture moved out, as into
the Sudan from Egypt, the knowledge of writing itself disappeared.
Thus it was possible for the older civilisations, such as those of Assyria,
Mexico, and elsewhere, to undergo great transformations, to drop so far
in cultural level that their relationship to the original could hardly be
detected. But in the case of our western civilisation, the knowledge.
of the various arts and crafts is so widely diffused that it is not possible
to conceive of any convulsion that might eliminate knowledge to such
an extent as to cause a great drop in cultural level to take place. The
only possibility in this case is that of the elimination of the population
owing to physical degeneration, e.g., to the overwhelming increase in
such a disease as cancer, so that western civilisation disappeared
through lack of population. But short of some incredible horror of
that sort there is no reason to believe in any cyclic disappearance of
civilisation.
