STERILIZATION AND SOCIAL WELFARE

A Survey of Current Developments in North Carolina
By MOYA WOODSIDE

Institute for Research in Social Science, University of North Carolina

defined as an operation intended to

benefit the health of the subject,
whereas the purpose of eugenic sterilization
is to prevent the transmission of diseases and
defects to future generations. In everyday
practice, apart from certain grave mental
disorders or some urgent physical indications
for the procedure, we find that the two
categories are not sharply contrasted but
tend to shade into each other at different
points on a scale; and this overlapping is
especially noticeable in cases from those
lower-income groups which come within the
purview of State agencies.

«| aetna as a sterilization may be

We may cite, for example, the multipara
of borderline mentality, who is as likely to
require relief from further pregnancies on the
physical grounds of exhaustion, cardiovascular symptoms or pelvic damage as she
is on grounds of her undesirable genetic
potentialities ; or the mother of neuropathic
stock whose physical condition may be
normal, but who is so harassed by economic
misfortune and her own fertility that an
additional pregnancy may precipitate mental
breakdown. North Carolina eugenic sterilization law, confined as it is to three limited
classes of persons, psychotic, epileptic and
feeble-minded, cannot be interpreted to
cover cases of this nature, nor can it be
-employed to secure the sterilization of those
who are afflicted with hereditary physical
defect such as blindness.

It therefore happens that social agencies,

in their desire to lessen some of the many

problems presented by continued fertility,
ill-health and poverty, often turn to sympathetic surgeons who will interpret “ therapeutic ’’ in the broadest sense of the word.
Not only is sterilization widely carried out on

this social level, but it is sought after by
women of upper-income groups as a convenient contraceptive measure irrespective
of strict physical indications.

Extent of Practice in North Carolina

In the nature of things, exact figures are
difficult to obtain. It appears that some
sterilizations are not primarily recorded as
such, or the operation is incidental to an
obstetric procedure or major gynecological
repair. The head of the obstetric department
in one teaching hospital estimated that more
than 200 women had had a bilateral tubal
ligation performed on his service alone in the
past few years; another semi-private hospital (in a town with a population between
60,000 and 70,000) furnished a list of fiftyeight sterilizations on white women which
had been carried out during the previous two
years.* A questionnaire which was circulated to the hundred county welfare departments contained an item relating to participation in therapeutic sterilization, and
the reported number of such cases over a
five-year period was 546. (Some evidence is
available to indicate that this figure is an
understatement.) We may note that the
total number of official eugenic sterilizations
in the welfare departments during a nineteen-year period was 754. In one rural North
Carolina county where an intensive study of
mental cases was carried out during 1946,
fifty-nine sterilized women were located, of
whom only thirty-six had gone through the
official channels of the Eugenics Board. The
author of this study, a former welfare superintendent of the county in question, told me

* The total population of North Carolina is approximately 3$ million, of which 27.5 per cent is Negro. The
land area is about the same as that of England (48,480
square miles).

205
206

that it would have been possible for most of
the other twenty-three cases to be dealt with
by the Eugenics Board, since mental grounds
for operation were often present as well as
physical; but if a co-operative doctor were
available, it was more expeditious and easier
to go ahead without legal formality.

This situation, whereby a large proportion
of sterilizations are unofficially arranged on
mixed physical and socio-economic grounds,
is being paralleled in other parts of the State.
It appears to have developed as the result of
three factors: an existing but limited
sterilization law; public awareness of the
possibility ; and improved techniques of
operation. In regard to this last, we have to
consider not only the increasing safety of
female sterilization which has been derived
from accumulated experience (some hospitals in the United States have performed
long series of tubal ligations—8oo in one
centre alone—with practically no fatalities),
but the social convenience of post-partum
operation when the patient is sterilized a
few days or even a few hours after her
delivery.

Sterilization as Part of People’s Thinking

In countries such as Britain, where eugenic
sterilization is not legally recognized, its use
as a practical social measure would rarely
come to mind or even be envisaged as attainable possibility. In North Carolina, however,
where for almost twenty years the law has
provided for limitation of the reproductive
activity of certain classes of persons, health
and social workers look on sterilization as
one of the measures they can recommend in
suitable cases. It is easy to see how its
application to the mentally handicapped
would gradually be carried over in people’s
minds to other and related situations, where
the advantage of the measure would be
obvious from every social and economic point
of view, and might even be requested by the
individuals themselves.

It is a fact of considerable sociological
importance that women of all classes in the
community are aware that sterilization is
available. They know it assures them of per
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

manent protection free from the drawbacks
and uncertainties of birth control (which
tends in any case to be inconsistently practised among groups who need it most), and
they have before them the example of those
already operated on who are enthusiastic in
their praises. Revolutionary though it may
seem in terms of the established customs
and beliefs of a religiously minded Southern
culture, it appears to be fast becoming an
accepted pattern of the contemporary social
scene.

Thus, during the course of interviews with
married women who had been sterilized, it
was usual to find that the individual knew of
others in the same position, or that she hergelf had asked for the operation to be performed. One such woman, a college graduate,
induced two of her sterilized friends to
volunteer for interview and mentioned
others with whom she was less well
acquainted. She knew of women who had
‘“‘ shopped around ”’ for a doctor who would
sterilize them. The wife of a mechanic said
that her husband’s mother and sister had
both been sterilized, and that her own sister
(who had had three. children in four years)
was most anxious to be so treated. A Negro
woman said that since she had had the operation, several people had asked her about it,
and that her sister-in-law ‘‘ wanted to take
one’’ as she had had six children very
quickly. Two women in poor circumstances
spoke of sterilized neighbours, and one even
accompanied the interviewer to provide a
personal introduction.

There is no doubt about the popularity of
the operation. ‘‘ Ah’m proud of mine,” was
common vernacular approval. ‘‘ People envy
me,’ said a butcher’s wife. “It’s really
something to be able to plan and know where
you are.”’ Many wished that they could have
been sterilized years sooner, and one woman
with a record of twelve pregnancies summed
up her view in the spontaneous remark:
“Ah think it’s a great thing for poor folks
to have.”’ Relief from worry and anxiety was
everywhere expressed, not only among the .
poor but among those better-off women who
had obtained what are known to the medical
profession as sterilizations of convenience.
STERILIZATION AND SOCIAL WELFARE

Practice in Different Agencies

1. City and County Depariments of Public

Welfare* |

As with eugenic sterilization, the practice
varies from one county to another. Some reported no participation, others a single case ;
two had undertaken therapeutic sterilizations only ; one county reported sixty such
cases in the preceding five years. What
happens depends to some extent on the
interest of the superintendent, but even more
on the attitude of local doctors and on the
hospital facilities available in the district.
“The doctors are sympathetic and do very
constructive work,’’ commented one superintendent, adding that he had to fall back on
their co-operation in urgent cases which did
not meet the mental requirements of the
Eugenics Board. Another complained, ‘‘ We
need to get doctors more interested in
working with us.”’ In the questionnaire
returns several counties stressed the benefit
which therapeutic sterilization provided for
patients with large families and low incomes ;
others suggested amendment of the law to
cover those borderline cases where social
grounds for the operation were strongly in
evidence.

Illustrating this point, one superintendent
described a therapeutic sterilization then
pending in his department, where the
woman had had three husbands, various
children, and no income other than an Aid
to Dependent Children grant, but was not
recognizably defective or psychotic. She
had consented to operation, but ‘“‘ We
couldn’t get her presented to the Eugenics
Board as a mental case.”’ Another department furnished particulars of a therapeutic
sterilization arranged for a thirty-year-old
white woman, blind from birth, who was
married to a partially sighted man, and had
two children in four years, one of them
known to have defective sight. Two of her
sisters were also blind, and both were
married, with a child born to one of them

* Welfare departments, one in each of North Carolina’s 100 counties, administer public assistance, services for children, the blind and the aged ; and are also
responsible for case work in connection with the courts,

mental hospitals, correctional schools, and the preparation of sterilization petitions.

207

before she too was sterilized. In another
case record from the same department, we.
see a different type of situation :

George B., aged 30, unemployed mill worker,
and his wife of 29, have four children, aged
Io, 3, 2 and a few months. Mrs. B. attended
High School for two years and is of good intelligence. She came to the welfare department
and asked urgently for sterilization to be
arranged, stating that “‘ they didn’t know what
they were going to do with no money coming in
and so many children to feed.’’ Her husband had
signed consent for the operation.

She was told that the department would try to
arrange a sterilization as soon as possible.

2. City and County Departments of Public
Health*

Here, as might be expected, the emphasis
in therapeutic sterilization is on physical
factors. Common among the patients are
exhausted mothers who have had multiple
pregnancies, many of them in need of repair
operations ; women with neglected heart
and kidney conditions; diabetics; the
syphilitic and tubercular. Although contraceptive services are available, it is often
impossible to guarantee protection to the
mother of many children even if she could be
relied upon to practise the method consistently, and similar considerations apply
where an additional pregnancy would mean
serious danger to life. Since the women
attending the health departments are drawn
almost entirely from the lowest-income
groups, and more of them Negro than white,
it is customary to find that the home conditions are very poor and that there are good
social as well as strictly clinical grounds for
sterilization in most cases. .

Mrs. Hester G., a white woman, was sterilized.
at 39 for a combination of general poor health,

““nerves,’”’ eye trouble, an infected leg and pro
longed vomiting during pregnancies. She had

seven living children, one dead, and a miscarriage. Her husband, a cotton mill operative,
earned low wages and the family lived in three
rooms in a dilapidated slum home.

Mrs. Mattie P., age 43, Negro, is pregnant for
the fourteenth time and the health department
hopes to arrange for sterilization at confinement.

* Health departments in North Carolina include free
maternal and infant care among their general functions
(immunization, venereal disease control, contraception,
school medical service, etc.).

‘
208

She has had several miscarriages and two sets
of twins. One child is dead, one has a heart
condition, others have gonorrhea. Mrs. P. has
been treated for syphilis. She is mentally
normal. Birth-control instruction was attempted
twice, but was unsuccessful. Her husband, a
carpenter, refused to be sterilized himself, and
is very unsatisfactory over money, never
allowing her enough to manage on.

No figures are available for the number of
cases referred for sterilization by health
departments, and too few were visited to
draw conclusions about general policy, which
in any case would vary according to the
interest of the staff and, as always, the cooperation of outside surgeons. One health
officer of a large city department criticised
local doctors as being too conservative in
their view of physical indications; in
another county department it was reported
that the doctor who operated used his own
discretion, taking social and economic factors
into account. A Negro obstetrician in charge
of coloured maternity clinics in the city
department just mentioned was greatly in
favour of sterilization, and kept a supply of
consent forms on hand for the patient, and
later her husband, to sign.

“One county department in a rural area had
concentrated on securing sterilization for the
husbands of their patients, and were successful with some thirty cases during the past
five years, an unusual achievement attributable to careful “‘ ground work ”’ and explanation by doctor and nurse, and to advertisement: given the operation by one or two
satisfied men. It was pointed out that
vasectomy avoided the economic problem of
paying for hospital care for women; and
that their male patients who came to the
doctors’ office on a Friday afternoon to have
the operation performed returned to work
with no ill-effects on the following Monday.

3. General Hospitals

Only a sampling of these could be made
which covered visits to three teaching hospitals, two private hospitals and three Negro
hospitals. Supplementary information was
obtained from the questionnaire returns and
interviews with social workers. Though no
general survey is possible, it is clear that the

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

hospitals differ widely in their acceptance of
the type of socio-therapeutic sterilization in
which we are interested. Catholic-controlled
hospitals will take no part in any sterilizations, eugenic or therapeutic. Negro hospitals.appear to regard the operation with
favour, and such sterilizations as are performed (capacity is severely limited in all
these Negro institutions) are almost entirely
for reasons connected with excessive multiparity.* Ten, twelve and more pregnancies
are nothing unusual among women of lowerincome Negro groups. There is little or no
sterilization of younger women with few
children and in better circumstances as is
found among the patients from white hospitals, a racial contrast which may be
attributed to the inadequacy of medical care
available for Negroes and their small middle
and upper-class representation in the South.
“ Few Negro women could afford to pay for
an elective operation,” one Negro gynecologist explained, adding that the better-off
Negro classes made successful use of birth
control.

It seems that therapeutic sterilizations
have been more freely performed in the past, |
and that in recent years a general “ tightening up ’’ has taken place. This restriction is
common knowledge among social workers,
and was confirmed by the heads of the gynecological departments in two teaching hospitals, both of whom stated that their former
liberal policy had led to sterilization being
“abused ’’ and carried out on inadequate
grounds. One of these hospitals has now
made sterilization a consultation procedure,
in which several opinions are sought; the
other will perform no operations whatever
except for clear-cut mental or physical
reasons. In a third teaching hospital where a
good many sterilizations are carried out, the
doctors refer doubtful, i.e. non-imperative,
cases, to the social servicet department for
investigation and make their decision on the
basis of the social and psychological situation
revealed.

* North Carolina birth rates are among the highest
in the United States, being 21-3 for white and 25-8 for
Negro (1940 census).

¢t Equivalent of almoner’s department.
STERILIZATION AND SOCIAL WELFARE

The number of sterilizations performed is
apparently a matter of some concern to the
executives of professional bodies such as the
American College of Surgeons. One gynecologist stated that pressure was being
brought by this authority to stop “ sterilizations of convenience ”’ in hospitals accredited
to the College, and that admonitory letters
would be written if too many operations of
this type appeared in the records. Two other
gynecologists also mentioned a veto from
the College and a third referred to “ restrictions ”’ on sterilization, saying that word had
gone forth unofficially from the American
Medical Association warning doctors “ not
to be too free with tubal ligations.’’ It was
not possible to obtain concrete evidence
about this alleged attitude of the professional authorities, since no doctor produced any written statements and a letter
of inquiry sent to the College of Surgeons
was not acknowledged. Nevertheless, it
seems improbable that spontaneous mention
of restrictions would be made by doctors in
different areas without some factual foundation.

Gynecologists and Sterilization

In the last analysis, the fate of each
individual woman rests in the hands of the
gynecologist. Should her circumstances in
his opinion not warrant sterilization, neither
appeals to his humanity nor even official
authorization from the Eugenics Board can
make him perform the operation. It is
therefore of considerable interest to discover
what criteria are employed and whether attitudes are class-conditioned. During the
course of the study, sixteen gynecologists in
four North Carolina towns were interviewed,
two of whom were women and three Negroes.
Eight were in private practice only, six were
associated with teaching hospitals, and two
with health departments.

Among this sample, criteria for nonimperative therapeutic sterilizations ran all
the way from two children and certain social
or psychological factors to a requirement of
six or seven, and included a refusal to
operate on any but husbands of the women
concerned. One doctor will sterilize if the

209

woman is over thirty years of age with four
children ; if under thirty, with five or six:
another will sterilize after three children, and
preferably after four, plus physical indications and economic factors ; a third requires
five children and age over thirty (the foregoing refers generally to post-partum operations). One Negro gynecologist believed in
“the prophylactic rather than the therapeutic approach,’ and tried to sterilize before
the woman’s health was completely broken
down with excessive child-bearing. A white
gynecologist said he was accustomed to
offer sterilization to any patient after a
second Czsarian section. What constitutes a
sufficient ‘‘ physical indication’’ varies
according to individual outlook and degree
of social-mindedness.

The position in regard to private practice
was summed up by one informant as follows.
He said that in the last few years women
almost automatically asked for sterilization
after three children ; and since doctors want
to oblige their patients, they will perform the
operation if some physical grounds can be
found. The profession in his particular town
favoured sterilization, but he did not think
that money-making was the reason for their
enthusiasm, since in 75 per cent. of cases the
patients bring up the subject themselves.
This view was confirmed by another gynecologist who said “‘ we’re plagued all the time
by women who are having their second or
third child and want you to sterilize them.”
They won’t bother with birth control, even
those who are intelligent and could protect
themselves if they wanted. (Such a solution
of her contraceptive problem certainly does
not occur to the better-off woman in countries outside the United States.)

Fees for the operation (if an isolated procedure) range from $75 to $xo00, and in
technical difficulty it ranks—according to
one surgeon—‘* somewhere between a dilatation and curettage and an appendectomy.”’
We may note that among the series of fortyeight women who were interviewed, those who
were sterilized earliest in their reproductive
career (except where necessitated by some
pathological condition) were also those in
better social and economic circumstances.
210

Where hospital patients are concerned, the
uncertain state of the law appears to be a
restraining factor in some instances. Before
undertaking a therapeutic sterilization, it is
customary to obtain the written consent of
the patient and her husband, and one hospital has a printed form for this purpose,
which reads as follows:

I (wife), being of sound mind, do hereby give
my consent and authorize the medical staff of the
X Hospital to have a sterilization operation performed on me, realizing that as a result of this
procedure further pregnancies will not occur.

(Signature) Husband
(Signature) Wife

Date

But such consent is not felt by all surgeons
to guarantee sufficient protection in the
event of a suit being brought ; and some even
distrust a Eugenics Board authorization
despite the clear exemption from liability
which is given in Section 16 of the law.

It is true that no court statement has ever
been made as to the legality of sterilizations
of consent, and the position can only be
guessed at by analogy with the crime of
mayhem or maiming, a survival in the
statutes from medieval times.* While it is
improbable that this reasoning could to-day
be held applicable to a surgical operation
which does not involve castration and which
is performed on mentally competent persons
at their own request, many surgeons and

lawyers would be glad of a test case which.

would clarify the situation. The likelihood of
prosecution may be slight and present caution may be excessive, but it is understand
* For a clear discussion of the present situation in
the United States, see an article by Falls and Shartel,
American Practitioner, Vol. I, No. 9, May 1947,

PP. 479-88.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

able that no doctor wishes to incur the risk
of a vexatious and costly suit.

In practice, the vagueness of the law means
that there is considerable social injustice
between one class of women and another. A
contraceptive sterilization can usually be
obtained by the better-off patient, if she
searches diligently enough among the gynxcologists of her acquaintance ; whereas the
patient who is unable to pay and who comes
from a different social class than the doctor
has much less chance of assistance, although
on every ground her need is likely to be
greater. (The position in respect to the
termination of pregnancy is somewhat
similar.) To state this as a fact is in no way
to impugn professional integrity : it is rather
the reflection of a social and economic
system to which the doctor inextricably
belongs. One gynecologist who expressed
himself strongly about this inequity and who
was sympathetic towards the _ tired-out
mother from low-income groups said, however, that the responsibility for action should
not be placed on doctors since this was
asking them to step outside their field. If the
community felt (as he did) that contraceptive sterilization should be made available
for women of normal intelligence in certain
circumstances, they should endeavour to
have the law so amended that the doctor’s
position would no longer be in doubt.

To sum up, it is apparent that in North
Carolina voluntary sterilization is being extended to borderline groups outside the
existing law, although in an uneven manner
and without official recognition. It is the
writer’s view that a broadening of the statute
to include mentally normal persons, far from
preceding public opinion, would but regularize what is already the common practice.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XL, Now 4
