FAMILY ENDOWMENT

I.—The Development of the French and Belgian Systems
By HUGH H. R. VIBART, M.A.

(An Address given to the Eugenics Society, January 17th, 1933.)

HE history of the growth of the

Family Allowance system in France

and Belgium gains exceptional
interest from the clearness with which
five phases of development are distinguishable, indicating as they do the stages
through which most new ideas and institutions have to pass. Thus at first the family
allowance is regarded as a curiosity (18601913), secondly it is spoken of as a temporary device to meet an emergency (191618), next it becomes an ‘“‘ interesting
development ”’ (1919-21) ; then it proceeds to
gather weight and to gain sufficient influence to become worthy of opposition
(1922-3-4), and finally, overcoming the
opposition, it becomes something taken for
granted as part of the ordinary framework
of the national life (1925- _).

The family allowance may be defined
(uncontroversially) as a device to enable
income to be distributed more nearly in
accordance with individual family needs
than is possible under the existing economic
system in this country.

THE FRENCH SYSTEM

Now the family allowance in France is no
new thing, but apart from isolated cases,
such as that of Monsieur Harmel, it was in
the government and municipal services that
the principle of family endowment first
became of substantial importance.

It is rather interesting to note that the
French Admiralty was the first department
to introduce the principle—i.e., in 1862
(giving 10 centimes a day for each child
under ro years to seamen up to the rank of
Quartermaster). Next came the railways,
beginning with the Nord and Orleans in
1890 and followed at intervals by all the

other railways: their schemes differed in
detail but were alike in basing the allowance
on the number of children, the amount of
the basic rate of pay, and the size of the
station where the father was employed.
During the first decade of this century
various other Government departments and
regional and municipal authorities followed
the example of the Admiralty.

The outbreak of War in 1914 brought
Stage I to an end, and it was the rapid
and persistent rise of all prices in the
War years that presented the problem for
which the family allowance provided a convenient solution. Everyone was hard hit by
the mounting prices, but obviously the
extra burden fell especially heavily on the
man who was married and who had a family
to support. Direct wage increases led to
further price advances, and it was felt that
the introduction of a family allowance had
the result of putting the family man in a
relatively more favourable position in regard
to purchasing power. At the same time the
inflationary effect on prices was minimized.

The State was the first to take action, but
it was soon followed by Departmental authorities and municipalities and by increased
allowances for railway employees. It was
at this period that the Allowance system in
the mining industry developed so rapidly in
importance, encouraged as it was by the
strong approval of the joint committees of
employers and employed set up in 1918 by
the Ministry of Munitions.

Brief reference must be made to the part
played by the Rfiche de San Bruno at
Grenoble. This society for mutual help and
the study of social problems—a body analogous in some features to Toc H—was
founded in 1906 and included as members

27
28

manufacturers, merchants, workmen, and
priests, who met together periodically, on a
basis of equality, for discussion. Then in
October 1916 came the suggestion that current wages were really entirely inadequate
in the case of a family man. A careful
inquiry was decided on, and carried out.
Armed with the evidence so obtained,
Monsieur Romanet was able to convince his
employer—the head of the Joya Foundry—
that some action was necessary ; and a scale
of family allowances was at once introduced.

The practice soon spread to other firms
in Grenoble, but before long they came up
against an important difhculty—the obvious
one—that if an employer has to pay more
for men with families than for single men,
he will tend to give preference in employment to the single men, who will be cheaper
or appear so.

To meet this was evolved a simple but
highly effective device, the Compensation
Fund. This meant that employers within
an industry or within a given district joined
together in an Association, and each of
them paid into this Association or Fund
so much per person employed or so much
per cent. of their wage bills. Out of that
sum allowances on an agreed scale were paid
by the Fund to the workers, in accordance
with the size of their families and without
regard to the firms to which they belonged.
This meant, of course, that it did not matter
to the individual employer whether he
employed more married men than his neighbour or not.

This simple arrangement, capable of
infinite minor modifications, met with
immediate and sustained success. There
are various claims for priority, in the
North—Roubaix ; in the West—Lorient ; in
the East—Grenoble: the fact is that similar circumstances simultaneously brought
about the introduction of similar devices in
different parts of the country.

The four Funds founded in 1919 increased
to 16 in March 1920, to 51 by the end of
that year, to 200 by 1925, and to about 250
at the present time.

The earlier form of the fund was the
Industrial—i.e., the Fund restricted its

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

members to a particular trade or industry.
Evidently it is easier to combine with firms
in your own trade, even if geographically
some way off, than with firms in different
trades within the same area. It is clear,
however, that the Regional Fund is the
more advanced and more satisfactory form,
as it represents a higher degree of social
co-operation. It serves to impress on everyone the real mutual interdependence of the
heavy, male-employing industry and the
light or textile type of industry employing
chiefly girls and youths. It is only right
that the textile type of industry should help
to pay for the allowances to the families of
those belonging to the heavy industries to
whose proximity, in many cases, they owe
their supply of relatively cheap labour.
Interesting confirmation of this is to be
found in the fact that often this textile type
of industry will employ a much larger proportion of adult men when it happens to be
situated in an area that is rather isolated
from other industries.

RECONCILING EMPLOYERS

At first there is a natural tendency for
protest from those who pay in more than
they pay out; and hence various methods
were adopted for ‘‘ tempering the wind ’’—
e.g., lower rates of contribution in respect
of women than men; a limit to the extent
to which payments out may exceed payments in; a number of sectional funds
within the one original fund; and so on.

The assistance given by the Compensation Funds was in three forms, of which by
far the most important was the monthly
allowance given in respect of each child,
sometimes the same amount for each of a
family and sometimes on an ascending scale
so as to give extra assistance to the large
family. A similar effect is obtained in some
cases by giving no allowance in respect of
the first child—on the whole an undesirable
practice. The amount of the allowances has
varied a good deal and has been fixed either
by adopting the scale of a neighbouring
Fund or by choosing a scale high enough to
help the employees and yet not so high as to
frighten the prospective employer members.
FAMILY ENDOWMENT—FRANCE AND BELGIUM

For the _ child 20-30 francs a month is a
common figure, rising to 50-60 francs for
the third or fourth. The allowance per child
represents round about 2-3 per cent. of a
skilled worker’s earnings, so that a skilled
metal worker with a family of four might
find his earnings increased by 10 to 12 per
cent. by his family allowances. Assistance
has also been given by the Funds in two
other ways, by a lump sum payment at the
time of confinement (Prime de Naissance)
and by a special Prime d’Allaitement to
encourage mothers to nurse their own children.

SOCIAL WELFARE WORK

This leads us naturally to a brief con- 
sideration of the social welfare work
achieved by the Funds. In the matter of
infant welfare, education in methods of
hygiene, etc., the Funds have met with
much substantial and undisputed success.
In this connection, it is interesting to recall
the warm tribute paid not very long ago by
no less an authority than the late M. Albert
Thomas of the International Labour Office,
after inspecting the work done by the Lyons
Fund. In many Funds it is the custom to
pay the allowances direct to the mother, so
as to emphasize the purpose for which the
money is intended.

The Funds in France are administered by
the employer, or rather by a permanent
secretary or director of the Fund, who is
appointed, in effect, by the employers, This
is the consequence ‘of the way in which the
Funds have originated in France, but there
is no inherent reason why a system of joint
administration by Employers and Trade
Union representatives should not be evolved.
In some cases this has been done in
Holland.

Many interesting aspects of the Compensation Fund have to be left undiscussed ;
and we must now try to measure the forces
which have combined to achieve its remarkable success. As already explained, the
family allowance was introduced as a satisfactory way of mitigating the economic
hardship of the family men arising out of
the War price advances. In addition we

29

must not overlook the rising sense of social
responsibility (the reaction against latssezfaire), coupled with appreciation of the
family as the basic unit in the State. This
line of thought is, of course, exemplified in
the Papal Encyclicals, especially the famous
De Rerum Novarum of 1891, which maintained that the State is based on the family
and must protect it; and that the wage
received by a father ought, in common
justice, to be sufficient to enable him to
provide adequately for his family. This line
of thought has urdoubtedly exercised much
influence, and it may be remembered that
in the recent Papal Encyclical of 1931
reference was made to the value of the
Family Allowance principle. Not long ago
Professor Gilbert Murray said, ‘‘ If the
family as an institution is to continue, then

the wage system must be modified to suit
that institution.’’

THE FEAR OF DEPOPULATION

We come now to the third great thoughtstream, and that may be described briefly
as the fear of depopulation. As is well
known, the Family Allowance system has
been regarded in France as a_ very
important part of a ‘ politique de Natalité,’
one of a group of measures designed to
arrest the declining birth rate. How far the
family allowance either can be or need be
effective in increasing the birth rate is at
present uncertain, but the important point
here is that these three lines of thought
would probably take root and grow, each
in different spheres of French social life,
so that there would remain but few who
would not be brought in contact with one or
other of them.

The rapid expansion of the allowance
system naturally brought opposition in its
train. The Christian or Reformist Trade
Union movement in France, Belgium, Holland, and Germany hés always been favourable to the family allowance, but the larger
body, Social-Democratic and more radical,
at first opposed its introduction on the
rounds that (1) it would enable the
employer to economize in his wage bill, and,
as a result, Labour’s share of the total pro30

duct of industry might be diminished and
the basic wage lowered; that (2) the
solidarity of Labour might be affected by a
cleavage of interest as between the married
men and the single ; and (3) that the Unions
would be deprived in wage negotiations of
the argument that the wage must be made
sufficient to enable a man to support his
family—i.e., that it would mean the loss of
‘‘the family ’’ as an economic battering
ram.

At first these arguments were to some
extent effective in persuading men to refuse
proposed allowances, and to press rather for
standard wage increases. It is, however,
interesting to watch the change of attitude
as expressed in the C.G.T. Labour movement papers in the course of 1922-3. The
workmen, it was found, liked the system ;
and, opposition to a fait accompli being
clearly unsound, approval was given to the
principle and criticism directed to the
manner of administration and the undue
influence obtained by the employer.

Doubtless some employers did economize
in their wage bills when they introduced
family allowances, but that proves nothing ;
others again were liberal in adding allowances to wages. This again is not conclusive; the important point is that there is
mo necessary connection between family
allowances and Labour’s share of the product of industry—that is really a separate
question. The Family Allowance system is
essentially a matter of redistribution of
Labour’s share more nearly in accordance
with the needs of individual workers.

THE STATE SYSTEMS

The success of the family allowance
naturally soon led to a desire to generalize
its benefits by means of the powers of the
State. Employers pointed to the unfair
competition which followed when some
employers paid allowances whilst others
refrained from joining a Fund: it penalized
the generous. Then it was urged that the
administration of a Compensation Fund
gave the employer undue influence, and that
a measure of this kind for the preservation

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of the race was essentially one for State
action.

The State has, on various occasions, made
definite provision for very large families—
é.g., in 1923 (July 22nd). But leaving aside
the abortive Brenier scheme for giving
allowances to all workers, whether employed
or not, the first serious attempt to use the
powers of the State to enforce the payment
of allowances throughout industry by
industry was in 1920, when M. Bokanowski
introduced a Bill to make membership of a
Compensation Fund compulsory for all
employers : the cost to the employer was to
be 5 per cent. of his wages bill. But opposition to the Bill was so strong that it was
shelved on the ground that the elasticity
and essential spark and élan of voluntary
effort would be replaced by the cold rigidity
of State action.

It was not until 1930 that another effort
was made to invoke the power of the State.
This time an agreed measure, a combination of three separate projects, was put forward and passed through all its stages with
relatively little opposition—though it was
not finally ratified by the Senate until
January 21st, 1932. It provides that every
employer must join a Fund paying allowances at not less than minimum scales to
be fixed by the Ministry of Labour in
accordance, where possible, with existing
scales of allowances. The law is to come
into operation sectionally—i.e., by industries or localities, as the Minister shall
decide. It is not at present applicable to
agriculture, though it can be made so by a
special administrative order. It does, however, include commercial and administrative
employees (other than Civil Servants).

The attitude of the organized Compensation Funds was that of resigned acceptance,
coupled with some slight apprehension
regarding State influence. The employer,
it was said, was the father of the family
allowances system; might not the State
become its stepmother? Contracting-out
by individuals and firms is discouraged.
Foreigners are included, provided their
children reside in France. Allowances
extend to an age of 13 (school-leaving age),
FAMILY ENDOWMENT—FRANCE AND BELGIUM

or 16 in the case of apprenticeship. Allowances are paid monthly and are not to be
reduced on account of days of absence from
work through sickness.

ALLOWANCES IN BELGIUM

Turning now to Belgium, we seem to
meet with an application of the hare and
tortoise fable ; for excepting Civil Servants,
municipal employces, and workers of
individual coal mines, but little was done
up to 1923, when the first really striking
and important development in France had
already taken place—and yet the Belgian
law for generalization of the allowances was
the first to come into operation !

Going back a moment, the Verviers Fund
was started in 1920; but at the beginning
of 1923 there were still only five Funds,
increasing to 15 in 1925, 30 in 1928, and
42 in 1930—covering nearly a million
workers. In April 1928 a Bill was passed
making the payment of family allowances
compulsory for those executing public contracts. A Bill for enforcing payment of
allowances by all employers was introduced
in December 1929, was discussed the following spring, finally passed into law in July
1930, and came into operation in January
193I in stages—beginning with the large
employers.

The law provides that every employer
must either join an existing Compensation
Fund, form a new Fund with others, or join
a State Fund: this last alternative is un
31

popular and regarded as almost in the
nature of a penalty. The employer is to
pay 65 centimes in respect of every male
and 35 centimes in respect of every female
employee; and the scale of monthly allowances varies from 15 francs for the first
child, 20 for the second, 40 for the third,
70 for the 4th, and roo for the fifth.

One interesting feature of the Belgian
law is the establishment of a sort of superFund to effect compensation between the
Funds themselves: it will use a part of
any surpluses arising to assist Funds which
have to pay out more than they receive.
This super-Fund has met with a good deal
of adverse criticism, but it is too early yet
to determine definitely whether it will
operate successfully. This central Fund
will also deal with allowances to certain
special classes, such as workers who have
brothers and sisters dependent on them,
and workers who are unemployed owing to
industrial accident or disease. As regards
administration, a National Committee has
been appointed which includes representatives of the workers. It is estimated that
about two and a half million persons are
brought within the scope of the law which,
in addition to industrial workers, covers
commerce and agriculture.

Thus in Belgium, as in France, the
family allowance has taken its place as an
essential element in the national social
structure. These really very astonishing
developments have taken place in little more
than a decade.

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXV, No. 1.
