THE EUGENICS REVIEW.

Mate Selection.”
By Masor Leonarp Darwin, Sc.D.

Wonderful results have been produced, so at all events it has been
claimed, by the action of sexual selection in regard to the evolution of
all kinds of organisms which are endowed with the power of sense perception; and, if this be so, ought we not to enquire whether this same
agency cannot be utilized in our efforts to improve the human race?
In attacking this problem it may be as well to begin by giving a brief
illustrative sketch of the way in which sexual selection either has or
may have promoted evolutionary changes amongst the lower animals;
even though the only object sought to be attained is to make some of
the questions involved stand out more clearly.

The theory of sexual selection which is associated with the name
of Charles Darwin has been subject to a good deal of hostile criticism
in recent years; attacks which appear to one who may be prejudiced
to have been on the whole unsuccessful. We are still blankly ignorant concerning innumerable events which occurred in the remote past
during the evolutionary history of existing organisms; and it would
indeed be surprising if we could bring all we see around us into harmony with our evolutionary theories, however true they may be. We
should accept provisionally the explanation which best fits with known
facts; for to wait for a theory which would explain everything would,
to say the least, cause a most injurious delay. No doubt certain
experiments seem to have indicated that nothing akin to the choice of a
mate is exercised by certain birds and insects ; but is it possible to imitate
natural. conditions so exactly as to remove all elements of doubt?
The theory as originally propounded may no doubt need to be supplemented, as its author doubtless anticipated.

Sex may produce evolutionary results in two different ways. In
the first place there must often have been contests between two males
in order to secure a mate, willing or unwilling as the case might be;
and in this way qualities which make for success in combat may have
been slowly evolved. Human nature probably still shows some
relics of this evolutionary process; but as in civilized countries men
now seldom actually fight for their brides, this aspect of the effect of
sex on evolution will be entirely omitted. Here we shall only be
looking to the effects produced by the qualities possessed by members
of one sex in attracting to them the members of the other sex. Before
passing on to consider this, the second method by means of which evolution has been affected by sex, it may be as well to say a few words as
to the meanings of the words to be used.

The word ‘selection’ is apt to bring to the mind the idea of a
desire to possess something, and we therefore expect successful selection to promote progress; whereas it may be either the better or the

*Presidential address given at the Annual Meeting of the Eugenics Education
Society, on July 2nd, 1923.
460 EUGENICS REVIEW.

worse who are being chosen, and sexual selection may bring about
either improvement or deterioration. Biology tells us nothing about
ethics. Then again ‘selection’ seems to imply conscious choice;
whereas the reactions which influence an organism in the ‘choice’ of a
mate may be as little perceived as those which make our mouths water
at the sight of a good dinner in due season. Selection may be merely
an unconscious response to the unperceived stimulus of sight, hearing,
smell, or touch; and in regard to mate selection in man, it would be
well not to overlook the animal origin of the sexual impulses. The
words ‘prefer,’ ‘choose’ and ‘desire,’ if used in connection with sexual
selection, must always be held to cover the corresponding influences or
effects of these unconscious instinctive reactions.

According to the explanation which was first sugge ted. of the
evolutionary effects of sexual selection, we must assume, for example,
that the females of the species under consideration were endowed
with an instinctive preference for the more beautiful ma'e. This
being granted, and if the males were more numerous than the females,
the females must have had a choice of males and would, ex hypothesi
have chosen the more beautiful. In these circumstances all the males
could not have paired, and it would have been as a rule the less attractive who would have left no progeny behind them. The qualities of
the males who did succeed in winning a mate would have been passed
on in a measure to posterity, and this selection going on generation
after generation, the evolutionary result would have been, according
to this theory, a continued increase in the beauty of the males. The
same kind of results might also have been produced if the males, though
no more numerous than the females, had been polygamous in their
habits, or if the delays experienced by the less attractive males in
securing mates had been long enough to result either in a material
number of deaths occurring amongst these unmated males or in a
material decrease in the fertility of the finally captured females. In
refutation of this theory it has been urged that in certain species,
where the males are now adorned ina dangerously conspicuous manner,
neither an excess of males nor any of the other necessary alternative
conditions can be proved to have existed, and that in such cases
sexual selection fails, therefore, as an explanation. Moreover the
zesthetic taste of the female, if it should be so described, has merely
been assumed to exist and has also to be accounted for. Undoubtedly
there are gaps in this theory, and in filling them up the most useful

Fisher in the ‘‘EucENnics REvIEw.’’*

Taking again for purposes of illustration the case of those species
in which the males exhibit certain useless ornaments, ornaments which
therefore cannot have been evolved in the ordinary manner by natural
selection, it should first be noted that ill health with many animals as
a rule leads to a faded, dirty or bedraggled appearance ; with the result
that, in comparison with the unhealthy, the healthy have brighter
colours and more clearly defined markings. Now the male must
always somehow or other excite the female by his presence, and it is

 

See Eugenics Review vol. VII., p. 184.
MATE SELECTION. 461

rational to assume that this excitement is aroused in somewhat different
ways in different females. In the past some females may have paid
more attention than did others to the external appearance of the
males; and those who were stimulated, consciously or unconsciously,
by the brightness or clearness of the coats of their suitors would more
often have paired with males thus characterized. The females would
have been attracted whether the fine colour of the males was due to
inherited brightness of colouring or to good constitutions. They were
thus in many cases unknown to themselves selecting healthy mates,
that is those whose appearance had not been made shabby by ill] health;
with the results that their descendants inherited the good health of
their male ancestors and multiplied accordingly. But their descendants also inherited from their female ancestors a desire for a
brightly coloured mate; and this process going on generation after
generation, this desire became universal in the species. This is the
way, so it is suggested, that the rudiments of aesthetic taste first arose.

According to this theory regarding the origin of sexual preferences,
it will be noted that in the example just given, the taste for beauty
arose solely because beauty and health were in a manner associated
together. The matter can be put more generally by saying that there
is a good reason why it is likely that there will be evolved a taste for
qualities in the other sex which either are beneficial from the racial
point of view—that is which make for survival—or are frequently
associated with such beneficial qualities. Agility is obviously a useful quality in birds, and the useless wild mating antics of certain males
may have arisen because an instinctive admiration for activity had
been evolved in the females. Strength in males is another useful
quality; and an instinctive preference for a large male may have been
evolved amongst females because size and strength are in some degree
associated. Sexual selection may indeed have developed the size of
the male to an injurious extent in some cases; the disappearance of
certain gigantic mammoths possibly thus being accounted for. In any
case it is worth noting that sexual selection is capable of inflicting
great damage on a race. Moreover different qualities make for survival in the two sexes, and consequently different instinctive desires
as regards mates may have been evolved in males and females; for
example, a desire for a bold and adventurous husband amongst women
and for a beautiful and more stay-at-home wife amongst men.

We have seen how prcference for certain qualities in members of
the other sex may have been evolved, and also how when this preference
has arisen, sexual selection will certainly be operative where, for
example, there is an excess of males. But even where delay in mating
causes no diminution in fertility, sexual preferences are capable of
evolving useless characters provided that they have arisen in both
sexes. If both males and females prefer a beautiful mate, mutual
attraction will tend to make the beautiful mate with the beautiful ; and
if by thus selecting their partners they do obtain a certain guarantee
against an unhealthy mate, it will be the descendants of these beautiful
couples who will tend to survive. Moreover the less attractive, including the unhealthy, will be in a measure forced to mate together ;
and there will, therefore, be a tendency for the fit to mate with the fit
462 EUGENICS REVIEW.

and the unfit with the unfit. Now the offspring of all such unions will
receive qualities making for fitness or unfitness, as the case may be,
from both parents ; with the result that all these qualities will be accentuated. The fit will differ more from the unfit than in the preceding
generation, and fitness will in consequences be promoted and unfitness
eliminated more effectively. In fact where in both sexes a sexual preference has arisen either for a quality making for survival or for a
useless quality associated with it, the evolution of these qualities will
thus be accelerated.

The foregoing explanation of the action of sexual selection could
not, I think, account for the appearance in one sex only of remarkable
and useless features, if delay in mating had caused no diminution
whatever in fertility. But have such cases ever occurred? Did not
the male always have his chances of death before mating somewhat
increased by being rejected by afemale? If so the rejected males must
on the average always have been somewhat less fertile than those who
were accepted at their first attempt. Here Mr. Fisher’s theories.
again are of interest; for he has shown how from a very small beginning
very great results may be produced by sexual selection. We have seen
how on account of, beauty and health being in a measure associated,
there may have arisen a desire in the female for a beautiful male, and
how this instinctive desire may have tended to keep on increasing
generation after generation as long as this association lasted. More-.
over in these circumstances the more beautiful males would have been
as a rule the first to mate, and if their early success rendered them at all
more fertile, beauty would thus have been promoted in the succeeding:
generations. As long as beauty gave any guarantee of health, the
desire for beauty in the one sex and beauty itself in the other sex would
have been continually evolved; and this without any reference to the
utility of the attractive feature. This process would have gone on
at an increasing pace until the beauty of the male became positively
injurious; when natural selection would have begun to put on the
brake. It is by a run-away process of this sort that the wonderful tail
feathers of the peacock, for example, may have been evolved, and
possibly also the huge size of certain mammoths. This theory is,
therefore, of considerable importance in explaining what has occurred
in the past, though as to the future of mankind it may help us but little.

There is one conclusion which emerges clearly from the foregoing
discussion to which attention should be especially directed ; and that is
that any racial effects produced by sexual selection depend entirely
on whether or not the descendants ofthe selected mates tend to outnumber
the descendants of the rejected. This point is of such importance
that it is perhaps excusable to emphasize it in an elementary manner
by considering the effects of sexual selection amongst the members of
a small group under ideally simple conditions. Take a group of four
individuals, one of each sex being superior and one inferior in regard
to certain qualities; and let it be assumed that the two superior
individuals are as much above the mean in regard to the qualities in
question as the two inferior are below it; the group being therefore, to
some extent typical of the whole community. First let the two superior
individuals select or be selected by the two inferiors as their mates ;.
MATE SELECTION. 463

when it is evident that the qualities of the offspring to be anticipated
will on the average be the same as those of the mean of the whole
group; for the superior parents will, as it were, tend to drag up the
qualities of their offspring just as much as the inferior parents will tend
to drag them down. In other words, by such unions the average of
the qualities of the whole group will be neither raised nor lowered.
Next let it be supposed that the two superior individuals elect to mate
together, the two inferiors also pairing by choice or necessity. In
these circumstances it is evident that the qualities of the offspring of
the superior couple will on the average be as much above the mean as
the offspring of the inferior will be below it; and, assuming that an
equal number of descendants will be produced by the two couples,
here again we see that the racial qualities of the group as a whole will
neither be raised nor lowered. In short, as regards the future average
qualities of a race, tf fertility and survival are the same in all cases then
at ts of no consequence whatever how mates are selected ; and this 1s the vital
point always to be held in view, but often forgotten. If the above
conditions in regard to fertility and survival were not fulfilled, and if,
for example, the superior members of any group were to mate together
in each gencration and were always to leave more descendants behind
them than did the inferior members, then it would be the superior
stock which would prevail and would in time completely oust the
inferior stock. This would be so because death would always be at
work keeping down numbers to a certain level, and it would be the
least productive stocks which would thus be exterminated. But tt is
equally true that if the superior couples always failed to produce as
many descendants as did the inferior, then future generations would
in time come to be exclusively composed of the descendants of the
inferior couples, and to have no superior blood running in their veins.
What good would the superior individuals then have done by electing
to mate together? <A policy which may seem advisable if fertility
and survival were left out of account, might nevertheless, if fertility
and survival acted unfavourably, lead inevitably to the extermination
of the best types.

Passing on to consider mate selection amongst human beings, we
first have to enquire what are the qualities which we ought to desire
in our offspring. If this question be regarded very broadly, all will
agree that we want our descendants to possess good moral, mental and
physical qualities, whilst it will generally be admitted that we should
place character first, intellect second and physique third in order of
importance. To attempt to deal with this question in greater detail
would lead to endless discussions, and for our present purposes these
broad conclusions are perhaps sufficient. We next have to consider
whether in civilized countries mates are in fact now generally preferred
such as would be likely to pass on to posterity these desirable characteristics. This question has been investigated in America, young
people having been asked to state what were their ideals in connection
with matrimony, the results being at first sight on the whole very
satisfactory. Both sexes placed health at the top of the list of the
desirable attributes of a prospective mate, whilst disposition and
education were also rated highly. If good looks appeared to count for a
464 | EUGENICS REVIEW.

good deal, it must be remembered that pink cheeks are correlated
with a good constitution, with healthy habits, and with youth, this
last being of great importance from a biological point of view. Character and intelligence were, no doubt, insufficiently weighted; but good
qualities probably often tell in ways which are not likely to be realized
in advance. At all events, according to these enquiries, those possessing on the whole superior qualities, seem generally to be desired
now-a-days as mates*

These investigations as to the ideals now entertained by young
people are no doubt for many reasons likely to inspire certain pleasant
sensations of complacency. Many who have not studied genetics may
be inclined to believe that whatever it may be which plays a part in
carrying on from one generation to another the power of producing
good stock, that is to say the entities which have here been described
as good genes, would be damaged by being associated in any generation
with bad genes; and those who hold such views will rejoice if persons
with good qualities mate together, thus preserving their good genes
from contamination in the coming generation. But the students of
Mendelism will pay no regard to any such argument in favour of mate
selection; for it is generally held that good genes, if separating or
segregating out at any future generation from any such evil companionship, would show themselves to be quite uninjured by the bad company
which they had been keeping.t The argument which, though not
consciously realized, probably tells with most force in favour of
selective mating is, how ever, that when good mates are sought and
obtained, good progeny must on the whole be the result, and that the
race must, therefore thus be made to prosper. Unfortunately this
argument as thus stated is wholly illogical ; for it leaves out of account
all the effects which the search for good mates may have on the fertility
of both parties and on the number of their descendants. We must
regard these questions far more closely, utilizing all the knowledge
acquired by a study of sexual selection in animals; and when we do
so we shall come across many considerations which are not encouraging.

As we have seen, sexual selection under natural conditions may
act as an agency in evolution in several ways. The first explanation
offered by science of the remarkable appearance of certain male birds,
for example, was that, as the males were more numerous than the
females, many of those males who could not at once draw attention to
themselves had to go without mates, whilst it was those chosen for
their beauty who passed on their fine plumage to their descendants.
With mankind the sexes are nearly equal in numbers; but as many
persons do as a fact remain unmarried, mate selection may be exerting
a considerable influence in promoting in a somewhat similar way in the
coming generations those qualities which are now desired in a mate.
Any delay in winning a bride through want of attractiveness may result
in a man remaining a bachelor for life, and therefore in his not pacsing
on his unattractive qualities to posterity. But it must be noted

 

**< Applied Hugenics.’’ Popenoe and Johnson. p. 219.

+ I am myself a little sceptical on this point. But the injury, if any, would
only be appreciable after a great number of generations.
MATE SELECTION. 465

that if the ugly, for example, desired to mate with the ugly just as
much as the beautiful do desire to mate with the beautiful, then mate
selection would be producing no tendency to exterminate ugliness.
This is not a state of things which I have actually observed, though it
does appear to me that certain degenerate types do prefer to mate
together. In any case statistical enquiries have proved that like tends
to mate with like as regards many qualities; and as some degree of
assortive mating, as it ts called, is the rule rather than the exception,
it would be necessary to prove that the desire for any particular quality
in a mate is widely felt before we could be sure that mate selection is
now tending to promote its appearance in the coming generations to a
material extent. If like always tended to mate with like, the inferior
would experience no delay in getting a wife on account of their inferlority , and sexual selection would be inoperative in this respect. Now
the American investigations were undertaken amongst somewhat
superior types, and similar enquiries ought to be made amongst all
classes, down to the lowest, before we could form a correct forecast
of the future effects of the mate selection which is taking place to-day .
It is true that the desire for good qualities in a mate, in so far as it is
operative throughout any section of the community, must tend to
have a beneficial effect within that section; but we here find no right
to assume that mate selection is now producing any good results
amongst the more degraded types or that it is tending to stamp out
degeneracy from the nation as a whole.

We have seen that another method by means of which sex has, it
is believed, influenced the process of evolution is dependent on a
general desire having been created to mate with individuals of the
opposite sex who possess qualities directly or indirectly indicative of
fitness to survive; with the result that the fit were thus led to mate
together by choice, whilst the unfit often had to do so of necessity.
In this way natural selection may have been reinforced by the selective
action of the sexes; for the fit and the unfit would thus have become
more widely differentiated, the fit multiplying and the unfit being
eliminated more rapidly in consequence. Now reasons have been
given for believing that the possession of certain good qualities, good
health for example, does now tend to increase the chances of marriage
amongst human beings; and it might seem as if the evolution of all
these good qualities by natural selection is now being accelerated by mate
selection. But to argue thus would be to confuse fitness with superiority ; for fitness only implies the possession of such qualities as make
for survival, whilst good qualities may have no such effect. No doubt
if the ‘unfit’ are now being induced to mate together to any extent, to
that extent the elimination of ‘unfitness’ is thus being promoted. But
who are now the ‘unfit,’ amongst human beings? If the superior types
are dying out, it is they who are now the biologically unfit. May it
not be, therefore, that the extinction of the superior stocks is
being actually hastened by mate selection? Health is no doubt a
quality making for the survival of a race; but where the superior types
are now dying out, this may be because they possess other natural
qualities producing a greater effect in an opposite direction; such
qualities, for instance, as natural infecundity and all such as promote
466 EUGENICS REVIEW.

birth limitation, including forcthought and ambition. If a diminution is now taking place in the numbers of the better types on account
of the genera! effect of all those natural qualities which affect fertility
or survival, this net effect would be likely to be intensified if these
natural qualities were to be accentuated by the fit and the unfit more
frequently mating amongst themselves. Assortive mating of this
kind might, therefore, tend to increase the rate at which a nation was
deteriorating. To put it briefly, natural selection appears now to be
acting in the wrong direction; whilst mate selection, by bringing together persons with the same kind of qualities, may in some respects
now be increasing the harm thus being done.

If on balance the existing natural tendencies making for racial
deterioration are being intensified by assortive mating in the manner
above suggested, it follows that the lowest types are thus becoming
more marked and could therefore be more easily eliminated by
segregation or sterilization. Assortive mating does, therefore,
facilitate eugenic reform; for to reverse the action of natural
selection where it is harmful by the introduction of these less
cruel methods is one of the main aims of Eugenics. Here unfortunately
some of the obstacles which have to be encountered are due to the
noblest of all human sentiments, namely pity for others and solicitude
for their Jiberty. To secure human progress, the inferior types must
be eliminated; and all that should be demanded is that this process
should be made as little painful as possible and that liberty should
never be unnecessarily limited. The philanthropists of to-day, however, only look to one side of the question and entirely ignore all the
racial effects of the reforms they are advocating. Both out of work
doles to those constitutionally incapable of work and outdoor relief
generally, if given without regard to the probability of parenthood in
the future; motherhood endowment to the naturally superior and inferior alike; these and other methods of relieving distress directly
tend to promote inferiority in the race in the future. Little weight
ean, therefore, be attached to the argument that mate selection is now
facilitating the elimination of degenerate types whilst elaborate
methods of promoting the fertility of these same types are being
widely advocated.

Turning from the past to the future, the Eugenist has to consider
what would be the effect on posterity of a widespread propaganda in
favour of greater care being taken in the choice of a mate; that is of
stimulating a general desire amongst all young people to seek for
superior mates. Unfortunately there are several reasons for anticipating that the ultimate racial results would be disappointing. To
take the less important points first, if we could succeed in spreading
abroad a belief that it is a positive duty to select asa mate a person of
high character, good intelligence, and robust health, would it not be
the naturally dutiful who would listen most to this call of duty?
But the greater the zeal displayed amongst the superior types in this
respect, the greater would become their difficulty in choosing a suitable
mate, and the more often would their consciences drive them to end
their days unmarried. Would not this be an effective method of
breeding out from the race all those natural qualities which stimulate
MATE SELECTION. 467

a sense of duty? And are not these amongst the best of all human
qualities 7

In reply te what has just been said it may be urged that it would
be possible to mculcate the need for care in the selection of a mate
without creating any tendency to make marriage more improbable.
Amongst animals the selection exercised by the female, for example,
is probably only effective as between the males who present themselves
simultaneously ; for natural selection may be relied on to make the sex
impulse so overpoweringly strong that under natural conditions the
solitary male would never be rejected. And this condition of things
amongst animals is instructive; because it points ta the advisability
of giving to all superior human beings when young every opportunity
of meeting with other young people of good type, rather than to trust
to the effect of advice in regard to such matters, The point here is,
however, that as far as I can judge it would be impossible to prevent
those who pay any attention to the advocacy of care in mate selection
from becoming in conseqnence more fastidious in their choice—that is,
indeed, what is aimed a such fastidiousness must have
harmful effects in several ways. Take the case of a person endowed
with very exceptional abilities, and it is clear that he is likely to add
something to the value of the race in the form of his progeny if he
marries anyone who is not more below the mean iD natural qualities
than he is above it; for under these conditions his offspring are likely
to be above the mean. In fact a genius had better marry anyone not
an imbecile rather than not marry at all; yet it is the person of superior
stock who is most likely to be hindered in the selection of a mate by
high ideals as to the qualities considered essential. This is so because
where the standard of attainments is high, the numbers of those anywhere near on an equality is certain to be small. On the other hand,
if we look to the mediocre individual, his offspring are as likely to be
below the mean as above it; and, from a racial point of view, it is a
matter of entire indifference whether he marries or not. If he does
intend to marry he would do well to seck for a mate better than himself; for in this way he might at all events either prevent a superior
person from going unmarried or lessen the chances of an inferior person
getting a mate. Thus we arrive at the paradoxical conclusion that the
better the qualities with which a person is endowed the less care need
he take in the selection of a mate, whilst it is the advocacy of care in
mate selection amongst the mass ‘of quite ordinary individuals which
would do most good from the racial point of view. As to all belonging
to definitely inferior stock, it will be better for the race if they do not
marry at all; but if determined to seek a mate, they should be advised
either to look for one much superior to themselves, for that would
make their success more improbable, or for one much inferior, for that
might in various ways lead to the disappearance of their descendents.
But as such candid advice as this would certainly fall on deaf ears,
may we not at all events conclude that as regards a large portion of the
human race, the inculcation of the racial advantages of mate selection
would be a futile task ?

The most serious reason for entertaining doubts as to the racial
effects of a propaganda ccnceerning mate selection is one which has

           
468 EUGENICS REVIEW.

already been considered, though only from one point of view. When
two persons mate together, both well endowed as regards character,
intelligence, energy and health, they will have every reason to anticipate a successful future. They will as a rule have larger funds at their
disposal for useful purposes than those who mate less advantageously ,
and this circumstance will no doubt make the burden of family life less
onerous. On the other hand their good prospects will often make
them more ambitious for themselves or for their children, and in either
case an increase in the temptation to limit the size of the family will be
the result. Which ‘will be the stronger of these opposing influences
affecting the size of the family, the rising income or the rising ambition ?
This question cannot be answered with any assurance; but we may be
certain that if such a superior couple do rise into a distinctly higher
social stratum, their children will in consequence be likely to have
smaller families than if their parents had remained in humbler circumstances. There are exceptions to every rule, but the correlation between
fertility and socia] status is too well established to make it possible to
deny the validity of this conclusion in regard to average results. Now
whenever the mating together of two superior persons leads to smaller
families being produced by their offspring, this means that each of
them will have fewer grandchildren than if they had not mated together
and if each had been content with a less efficient mate. Doubtless
those who select good mates and who also carefully limit the size of
their families will be wise in their generation; for the comfort and
prosperity of themselves and their household will thus be best assured.
But if we look forward to more distant times when intermarriage with
other stocks will have scattered their good seed broadcast in all directions, we see that whenever mate selection tends to diminish the
number of the descendants of superior individuals, the ultimate effects.
must be dysgenic. That some harm will thus be done by careful mate
selection under existing social conditions seems to me to be probable;
this being the conclusion already reached when this matter was regarded
solely in connection with the inborn qualities of the parents.

Turning to a different subject it has been urged that those belonging to inferior stocks should seek mates likely to be endowed with
superior inborn qualities, so as to counteract any harmful tendencies of
which they may be the carriers. Looking to their own comfort and to
that of their children, all would be wise to take thought as to the inborn
tendencies of any prospective mate; but is this a precaution more
encumbent on the naturally inferior than on the naturally superior?
From whatever stock a person may spring, he is likely to have superior
progeny if married to a superior mate; and should not all pay some
attention to this undoubted truth? There is unquestionably an especial
danger to the next generation when unions take place between individuals with the same inborn tendencies. This is always probable if the
pedigrees of both parties contain many individuals with similar defects ;
for in these circumstances it is likely that harmful recessive genes will
be brought together and that evil qualities hidden in the parents will
become patent in the offspring. All would of course wish to avoid
such a catastrophy ; but it should be remembered that if the ultimate
well being of the race be the sole object held ir view, then those enMATE SELECTION. 469:

dowed with similar hidden defects had better mate together. This is
true at all events when the defects on becoming patent are sufficiently
serious to prevent those persons who exhibit them from passing on their
harmful taint to posterity ; for that is the consummation to be desired.
Taking all these somewhat contradictory considerations into account,
does it not appear that the question whether or not parenthood is
justifiable should first of all be decided in the abstract, that is without
reference to any particular mate? It is no doubt extraordinarily
difficult in some cases to assign fair weights to the competing claims of
this generation, of the next generation, and of posterity, so as to be
able to decide whether it would be right for a certain individual to
marry. When parenthood is only doubtfully justifiable, then the inborn
tendencies of the mate selected should be taken into account in regard
to the size of the family. We shall probably never arrive at conclusions
so definite that it will be possible to divide all men into two classes,
namely, those who may have large families and those who ought to
have no children whatever; and it appears to me, therefore, not
illogical to hold that the more doubtful the inheritance the smaller
should be the size of the family. It is in this direction that difficulties
in connection with doubtful stock should be met, and not by advocating
that it should mate with good stock.

As to whether or not near relatives should marry, is a question
raising much the same difficulties as those just discussed. No doubt
the fact that cousins are descended from a common and not remote
ancestor does considerably increase the probability that they are the
carriers of the hidden seeds of the same kind of defects, defects which
would become patent in all those children whom they endowed with a.
double dose of these hereditary influences. Here it may be interesting:
to note that if recessive genes were often the basis of good qualities,
cousin marriages would be held to be especially desirable. But so far
as is now known, it is only neutral or bad qualities which come to the
surface when recessive genes are brought together, and prudence in
regard to the next generation does, therefore, dictate the avoidance of
cousin marraiges where the common pedigree shows definite signs of
heritable defects; whilst here again purely racial considerations point
in the opposite direction. We could never actually advocate cousin
marriages on the ground that such unions would increase the number of
patently defective children and would thus facilitate the elimination
of certain hidden racial defects; but we might go so far as not to blame
those who take the risk involved in marrying a relative, a risk from
which they may suffer and the race gain. Ii the stock is good, the
chances of any harm arising from cousin marriages are very small;
whilst those who have reason to fear marriage with any near relation
should think twice before marrying at all, or should at all events take
the risks involved into consideration in regard to the size of their
families.

Probably the objection most often raised against the belief that
care in mate selection could be made to produce racial effects is that no.
attention would be paid to any precepts as regards matrimony; for
love always laughs at locksmiths. Sir Francis Galton answered this
objection by showing how extraordinarily powerful custom has often
470 EUGENICS REVIEW.

been in the regulation of marraiges, notably amongst certain savage
tribes; and as in regard to our primary instincts, human nature is
much alike everywhere, we may assume that ideals, if firmly implanted,
would not be without influence in all that concerns mate selection. It
is true that after the passion of love has once been aroused, reason
counts for little; and it follows that ideals will hardly be effective after
friendship has ripened into love. On this account youth is the season
in which to sow the right seeds, and at that season indirect methods of
attack are often the best. Precepts in regard to mate selection alone
might affect the young but little, whilst ideals accepted in regard to
every department of life would automatically affect the choice of
friends and therefore of lovers. Propinquity is, moreover, a circumstance sufficiently powerful in arousing love often to obliterate all
previously formed ideals; and great care should be taken to give to all
young people of good stock ample opportunities of making friends with
others of suitable age who are well endowed as regards character and
health. Example being better than precept, those parents who put
aside both social ambition and all useless display of wealth, and who
follow the sound rule of never making friends with persons they cannot
respect, will be making households where their children when young
will naturally absorb high ideals and when grown up will be likely to
meet with youth of good stock. This is the way in which the cause of
eugenics can now, I believe, best be served in the matter of mate selection. Thus to promote racial progress could do nothing but good, for
it would not tend to divorce marriage from romance.

Summary. It has just been seen that the question whether
parenthood is or is not justifiable in the case of any individual ought to
be decided without reference to any particular mate, and that those
who may marry should not be condemned for marrying a relative.
The main practical question for the Eugenist is whether such individuals as are held to be fit for parenthood should be pressed to consider
carefully the natural qualities of any prospective mate. If looking
only to the comfort of the individuals themselves and of their children,
undoubtedly much would be gained by exercising a wise discretion
before making the plunge; but looking only to the ultimate effects on
the race, the results of a propaganda in favour of great care in mate
selection cannot be foretold with any assurance. An examination of
the theories of sexual selection shows that all the evolutionary effects
thus produced were due to the rejected animals, because of their
rejection, having left fewer descendants behind them. Amongst
civilised men the racial effects of mate selection in like manner turn on
questions of fertility and survivial ; for the mere fact that good progeny
will come of unions between superior individuals tells us nothing as to
the future of the race. The main argument in favour of the advocacy
of care in mate selection is that, in so far as succes: ful, it would lead
to the rejection of inferior suitors, with the result that they would on
the average have fewer offspring and that their inferior qualities would
thu; be in some degree lessened in future generations. It is also true
that this advocacy would result in inferior stocks being more
often led to mate amongst themselves and that their elimination
by segregation, &c., would thus be facilitated. Lastly such
MATE SELECTION. 47T

an advocacy would bring eugenic problems to the minds of young
people with beneficial effects. The racial disadvantages of such
a propaganda would be as follows. The conscientious would
listen most to this call of duty and would thus more often be:
prevented from marrying. If superior stocks are now decreasing in

numbers, this deterioration in the race would be hastened by the
superior being led to mate together; because all those natural
qualities which on balance tend to diminish the size of the family
amongst the better types would thus be accentuated; and because:
ambition would be aroused by the superior opportunities thus offered,
and family limitation thus promoted. Lastly the inferior stocks being
also thus induced to mate together, their high fertility would thus be
relatively increased in so far as dependent on natural qualities. _It is.
true that for persons of great ability to seek for mates of great promise
is the right course to pursue if the appearance of genius in the next
generation be the object in view; but this object may be attained at the
cost of a lowering of the average qualities of the race. Thus we see
that opposing racial tendencies would be stimulated by any propaganda.
in favour of mate selection; the most important being the beneficial
tendency due to greater delays in the mating of the inferior, and the
harmful tendency due to a relative reduction in the size of the families
of the superior. Which tendency would prevail cannot be foretold
with any certainty; yet on the whole I judge that greater care in mate
selection would be beneficial to the race, and ought, therefore, to be
inculeated. But the fact to which I desire to call especial attention
is that the strongest objection to the advocacy of care in mate selection.
would no longer hold good if in the future, by some method less cruel.
than that of natural selection, the inferior stocks could be made to

multiply less quickly than the superior. Then, but not till then,

mate selection might become a powerful agency for racial advance
ment. From whatever direction racial problems are approached, the
conclusion we arrive at is that the main aim of eugenic reform should

be to promote such measures or tendencies as would increase the
number of the descendants of the superior types—not merely of the
very superior types, but of the great mass of useful citizens—or would
decrease the number of the descendants of the inferior types—not only

of defectives or degenerates, but of all undesirable citizens. This

must be our main effort. In the meantime the best line of action in
regard to mate selection is to adopt an indirect method of attack; that
is to strive to make parents see how harmful is a useless display of
wealth or a desire merely to rise in social status as leading to unjusti
fiable family limitation; whilst young people should be given every
opportunity of making friends with other young people of good
character and health. Where high ideals have been slowly and

naturally ingrained at home and where a wide and suitable field of
choice is available, worthy friendships will quickly enough fipen into.
love.
