D. V. GLASS

B.Sc.(Econ.), Ph.D., Professor of Sociology at the London School of Economics,
University of London

C. D. DARLINGTON
M.A., Ph.D., D.Sc., F.R.S., Sherardian Professor of Botany in the University of Oxford

C. H. WADDINGTON

C.B.E., Sc.D., F.R.S., Buchanan Professor of Animal Genetics at the University of Edinburgh

The Control of Evolution in Man’

CHAIRMAN: Professor David Glass: You
have no doubt already seen a good number of
reports on the celebrations of the Darwin
centenary. There has been at least one book
already and there will certainly be many more
books and articles on the subject.

Darwin himself surveyed the whole field of
evolution but since Darwin’s day work has
proceeded in rather specific fields of evolution.
In particular, in the human field the whole study
of human genetics is of relatively recent development and in the last twenty or thirty years great
strides have been made in this study. I wonder
whether now we ought not to pay special
attention to the human aspect of evolution,
whether we ought not to look at what have been
the contributions in the last fifty years or so and
how far these would enable us to say something
more about man and his evolution and his
prospects for the future than has been said—
in a general way, at least—by many people in the
past. Darlington, I wonder whether you would
mind beginning by saying something about man’s
evolution—what is the history of man in genetic
terms, and what are his prospects.

Professor C. D. Darlington: Well, I suppose
the two important ideas that Darwin introduced
to the world at large were the ideas that man
can be considered as an animal and that his
peculiarly human characteristics have arisen
during his evolution from an animal. And that
means, of course, that when we consider his

* The transcript of a discussion broadcast in the Third
Programme of the B.B.C. in January 1959.

It is here reproduced by kind permission of the
Corporation and the three discussants.

4—ER

physical properties on the one hand, and on the
other hand all his mental characteristics, they
are all capable of being understood in the first
instance by analogy with what we observe in
animals, and particularly by the study of human
heredity and human variation: natural selection,
sexual selection, geographical isolation and all
these ideas. And I think there are two very
important advances that genetics has made in
studying these ideas. They are the understanding
of the importance for evolution of the systems of
inbreeding and outbreeding that occur in plants
and in animals and in man. In man they have
been developed to an extraordinary extent, and
in some respects a unique extent, by his own
intelligence. As he has grown more and more
intelligent he has become more and more
discriminating in his choice of his mate.

Glass: May I interrupt you here? How do you
mean that he’s become more discriminating—
what kind of discrimination?

Darlington: I mean that he has avoided breeding with his relatively near neighbours by a
principle of what is called exogamy, outbreeding,
and at the same time, of course, he has developed
a very fine discrimination in regard to the
avoidance of inbreeding: in nearly all civilized
and uncivilized societies he specifically avoids
inbreeding with members of his own family.
And those two conditions are, on the grounds of
genetics, likely to be extraordinarily important
in determining evolutionary processes.

Glass: Waddington, do you think these are
the two most important aspects?

Professor C. H. Waddington: I feel that in
man we have to take into account the fact that

25

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, April 1959, 51, 1.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

he has produced a second way of transmitting
things from one generation to the next—he has
a second system, which is the system of social
teaching and learning—transmission through
books or writing or speaking. This is extremely
rapid compared to the biological system. And
if one is thinking in terms of a few generations—
a century, or times of that order—my own feeling is that this second human mechanism is the
one which really decides things in the shortterm. It’s based, I think, as Darlington has said,
on a long-term biological animal background
mechanism. But to a considerable extent the
short-term overshadows the biological mechanism, in my view. So that in considering questions
of breeding between different classes, between
different races—if we’re thinking in terms of
only a hundred years—I believe the social
factors are probably more important than the
animal genetical ones.

Glass: I wonder—now, I’d like to take up
this question with Darlington; it derives from
what you said, Waddington—whether you don’t
think that the social factors themselves have not
in a sense revolutionized the biological factors
in, say, the last hundred years. Haven’t the
social factors changed so much since, say, the
middle of the nineteenth century that breeding
habits are radically different now from what they
were a hundred years ago.

Darlington: Oh, no, I absolutely disagree. I
think the social discrimination in breeding is as
strong now as it ever was; the genetic differentiation—the social classes in England—is probably
increasing in intensity. It’s increasing as a result
of education, that is to say, ability is being drawn
out of the working-class into the middle-classes,
and out of the middle-classes into the governingclass, and those classes are becoming probably
more differentiated than they ever have been
before.

Glass: Do you agree with that, Waddington?

Waddington: I should say it’s questionable
whether some classes or other are becoming
more sharply distinguished. But if they are,
they’re not the same classes as were being
distinguished a hundred years ago.

Darlington: No. Evolution is taking place.

Waddington: But evolution of the mechanism
is also taking place. A hundred years ago, say, we

26

had classes defined in ways originally based on
the ownership of land or on the accumulation
of capital. Now, from what you’re saying yourself, if we have classes they are going to be
much more determined by intellectual ability as
exhibited in school tests.

Glass: More and more assortative mating—
for example, in terms of educational background——

Waddington: Well it was assortative mating in
the days when the landed gentry married the
landed gentry. Now it may be assortative mating
on the basis that people with a high I.Q. marry
each other or the class structure will be based on
the eleven-plus exam——

Glass: The grammar-school boy marrying the
grammar-school girl.

Darlington: Oh, I’m glad you both agree there
is assortative mating and that that is going to
have a very important effect because it means
that society is in genetically differentiated groups
—differentiated in their abilities so far as they
can be tested by all the mechanisms of schools
and universities——

Waddington: May I burst in on——?

Glass: Do. I can see that you don’t really
agree with this.

Waddington: If it went on for tens of generations without any change it would have important
effects on the biological level by selection of
certain hereditary characters, and so on. It’s
very unlikely to go on—it’s only gone on for
two generations since we invented the I.Q. system
or whatever it is, or not even that—one
generation——

Glass: One half of one generation——

Waddington: It will have important effects,
but not biological ones—it will have important
effects through the sociological and not biological
transmission of characters within families.

Darlington: But do you think that the people
who pass an examination and the people who
don’t pass it are genetically not to be distinguished ?

Glass: It would be a little difficult to be hard
and fast as to whether those who pass the
eleven-plus exam or those who don’t are
biologically distinct. But quite apart from that,
you seem to have forgotten, Professor Darlington,
the whole question of the breaking up of terriTHE CONTROL OF EVOLUTION IN MAN

torial assortative mating, the fact that people
in villages married each other a hundred years
ago and that now the area in which they choose
a mate has been greatly increased. I’ve heard it
said, for example, by geneticists, that the
motor-bicycle has been the greatest reshuffler
of genes the world has ever known! This is not
the same assortative mating—this is a sort of
alternative to the earlier assortative mating. How
does this fit in with your scheme?

Darlington: Oh, I don’t agree with you that
it’s not assortative—I think it is still assortative:
I think that it’s more assortative now than it
was unfortunately before because now we have
less illegitimacy in this country than ever before,
and illegitimacy, of course, was the only means
that existed for a real breakdown of assortative
mating in former days. It produced, of course,
very important and valuable results. But all these
changes in the system of assortative mating are
themselves bound to give rise to genetic changes
—genetic changes in class structure, and evolutionary changes.

Waddington: Well, again you are thinking in
terms of tens of generations—they are bound, if
they go on long enough, to give changes of a
biological nature, but if they go on quite a
short time—two or three generations—they may
give rise to changes, but they will be changes on
the sociological level, due to the transmission of
family traditions in the family, and so on, rather
than of biological factors.

Glass: Yes, I should think that human breeding habits are habits which may change fairly
radically over the short run—I mean, the fact,
for example, at the present time that the age of
marriage is probably lower than it’s been for the
last three hundred years is an important
sociological phenomenon, rather than a biological——

Darlington: Not so important as the genetic
one—it has no consequences, therefore, in
evolution. It’s not a question, surely, of what
will happen in two hundred years—we are discussing evolution. In a thousand years, the
British system of class structure of society has
developed—in thirty generations—and that is an
evolutionary change which has happened in the
past, and it is very likely, therefore, that Simulate
changes will happen in the future.

Waddington: But the American system of class
structure, which is as definite—[No|—or perhaps not quite as definite as the British. They
pretend it isn’t, but it’s jolly nearly as definite
as the British—has developed in two or three
generations in an immigrant population, presumably of violently different heredity—but it’s
been developed, not on a basis of hereditary
differences, but of social differences.

Darlington: The American system of class
differentiation has developed in precisely three
hundred and fifty years, as a result of genetic
differences amongst the people who arrived in
America originally and have been arriving ever
since.

Glass: Well, I think there is a very wide margin
of disagreement—not only between you and me
on this subject but between the three of us and
many other people. I wonder whether, even so,
we could go on to another question, which is
really very relevant to the discussion here—
namely: taking this general background of
man’s own evolution, how far in the past have
there been deliberate efforts to control it? How
far has man, with what intelligence he has, tried
—either on the basis of actual knowledge or
assumed knowledge—deliberately to alter breeding habits in order to create particular types of
human being or of human groups, Professor
Darlington: what do you think?

Darlington: Well, I feel the most important
evidence we have is, first of all with regard to the
origin of caste in India, and secondly with regard
to the origin of social structure in Greece and
Rome in early historic times, and the evidence is,
I believe, that in both these cases there has been
a strict rejection of breeding between what we
should call social classes; this rejection of
breeding between social classes has of course,
never been a hundred per cent effective, but as
far as it has been effective, it has kept those
classes in a character for—usually—three or
four hundred years, sometimes, in the case of
India, for much longer periods—kept them in a
character which has given them a special social
value. The distinction between the Brahmins,
for example, and other castes in India is very
obvious; the distinction between the patricians
and the plebs in Rome was very marked, and led
to the most bitter revolutions, and exactly the

27
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

same kind of distinctions have been described
in more primitive cultures. All those systems of
restrictions of mating have a profound evolutionary effect, because if we all mated at random
it’s perfectly certain, on our knowledge of animal
genetics, that the results of breeding would be
quite different.

Glass: Yes, but you yourself have said that
the system of breeding within the patrician
category in Rome gave rise to great unrest—it
gave rise to revolutions; it gave rise to a reshuffling of the breeding systems. Aren’t you
over-simplying the history of man in saying that
these breeding systems have been so consistent
and so self-contained: Waddington, what do
you think about this claim?

Waddington: In the majority of cases, I think
that these distinctions between classes that don’t
marry each other, or castes that don’t marry each
other, are probably primarily sociological and
transmitted by sociology. If we all married
at random and if, in a caste system, everyone
married across the castes, of course the caste
system would break down, because you would
be bringing wives of one caste into a father’s
house of a different caste, and the family traditions would break down—and I think that that is
much more generally important in the historical
periods when we think in terms of one or two
centuries. Again, I feel all the time we are
talking about evolution in man and, for the
biologist, evolution is something that takes place
in fifty thousand years, or more.

- Darlington: That’s what I’ve been saying,
you see—that you have no right to say that
evolution proceeds slowly in man because it
proceeds slowly in animals, and in my opinion
it’s quite the reverse—man’s evolution is
proceeding rapidly——

Waddington: It’s proceeding rapidly because
of the social mechanism, not because of the
biological mechanism.

Glass: Yes, but if these breeding systems are
continuously interrupted—is there really any
kind of class system which is completely
endogamous or even so endogamous in the
general sense as to be really an inbred system?
Every class system, even an Estate system
accepts people from below. It may take a
generation, but they do move up.

28

Darlington: It took far more than a generation
in Rome to introduce the Plebs.

Waddington: The old statement in Britain in
the last century: it took three generations to
make a gentleman, wasn’t it? That was when we
had a definite class system in which “‘gentleman”’
was a definite position in the class structure. If
you could make a gentleman in three generations,
you could do very little genetically in three
generations. A cattle-breeder, with absolute
control over breeding, may be able to make some
difference in three generations, but in an
ordinary society, where mating is by personal
choice, three generations is a negligible time
genetically. If you’ve changed a lower-class into
a gentleman in three generations—you’ve
changed him socially, but not genetically.

Glass: Yes, and I think you exaggerate the
time-scale, for the great role of the public
school in the nineteenth century was to make a
gentleman in one generation.

Darlington: Yes, but a man couldn’t get into
a public school—a working-man get into a
public school—by saying “I wish to go into a
public school’’—he couldn’t. His parents had
to have money. His parents had therefore to
have had a definite character distinct from the
other people; other members of the class from
which they arose. Now those classes, with those
distinctions, I’m not saying that they were good or
bad but they were different. They may have been
outstanding gangsters; undoubtedly some were,
but they were different and——

Waddington: Different socially.

Darlington: Genetically, certainly genetically.

Glass: Well, that’s exactly the problem—at
this point we are unable to distinguish the relative
weight of the genetic and the social components.

Waddington: I think really I ought to say
here that I have been acting a bit as the Devil’s
Advocate on the social side and Darlington—I
doubt whether he would admit to it—acting as
the Devil’s Advocate on the genetical side. My
personal feeling is that really we don’t know.

Darlington: You think you can make a silk
purse out of a sow’s ear then? With a little care?
- Waddington: In man I think you can.

Glass: I’m afraid we must leave that point
here. We haven’t really said a great deal about
the deliberate control of man’s evolution in the
THE CONTROL OF EVOLUTION IN MAN

past. We haven’t, for example, mentioned the
kind of schemes of so-called race control which
were put into force or which were attempted in
various regimes of the past, like those of the
Nazis, for example. But perhaps we'd better
leave those topics now and reconsider our present situation. Here we are with all of this new
work on human genetics. Knowing what we do
know at the present time about human genetics,
what kind of basis do we have for making suggestions for measures of political policy—either
positive measures, or negative measures, of
giving advice to people to discourage them or
introducing measures to encourage them to have
children. Professor Darlington, what do you
think?

Darlington: Well, I don’t think we know very
much more in human genetics than was known
by Galton seventy years ago when he first
investigated these problems and I think what
Galton would have said, and what I certainly am
prepared to say, is that every important administrative act of governments affects the evolutionary prospects of the people they govern; education affects the migration of people from one
social class to another. It affects, in fact, the
kind of social classes you have. The Welfare
State, by introducing medicine to the whole
nation affects the survival of individuals who
would not otherwise survive and consequently
their propagation. Family allowances favour
one race against another and they also favour one
class against another and the way in which you
administer them will therefore have evolutionary effects. Imprisonment affects the reproductive
capacities of the people who are imprisoned, it
effects the propagation of the criminal class for
example, which is so noticeable at the present
day. The control of migration affects of course
the distribution of different kinds of people in
different countries because migration is always
selective. That is to say the less intelligent people
stay cultivating the worse land and the more
intelligent people always move on to the better
land. That kind of principle has been operating
in the past and it can be controlled and is controlled now by different kinds of administrative
action. And finally of course you come to the
question of artificial insemination.

Glass: May I just take up that point? You

have been talking about the unconsidered, the
unanticipated consequences of various kinds
of administrative action and of course this is
the kind of problem which occurs in every field.
There are the unanticipated demographic consequences of social action and the unanticipated
social consequences of economic activity and so
on. But what about deliberate action? What do
you think, Waddington, about our knowledge
of human genetics to-day? How far would it
enable us, for example, to make suggestions
about negative eugenics? How far should we
be justified scientifically in saying to given
prospective parents for example, that they should
or they should not have families or they should
not have large families? Are we in a position to
give sound advice of that kind at the present
time?

Waddington: I think in certain situations we
are. We know something about the heredity of
certain definite conditions, diabetes for instance.
We know something about the genetics of
quite a number of human characters and I think
we probably should provide a service by which
parents could discover what the scientific
information is about any transmissible, biological
character they may have. My personal view is
that it should then be entirely a matter for them
to decide what they do about the information,
whether this information is such that they
would prefer not to have children or whether in
spite of it they would rather go ahead and have
them. But I really think this whole problem
ought to be considered, not in a parochial sense
of what we are doing to the population of Great
Britain and its future. The major problems of the
world to-day, it seems to me, are the problems
of the relations between races throughout the
whole world. And the major genetical problem
facing mankind is the question of relations
between Africans, Indians, Chinese, Western
Europeans and so on. [ feel that this problem
should not be left out in any consideration of
human evolution.

Glass: But if we do turn to that problem, if
we cease to be parochial, how much do we really
know on that more general problem?

Waddington: I’m afraid that’s what I was
going to say, we know remarkably little.

Darlington: I think we do know something

29
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

very important, we have every kind of evidence
that all class structure in all civilized nations is
the result of the mingling without inter-breeding
of genetically different groups, sometimes, of
course, different races. And that it is by the
co-operation of different races which have now
become different social classes that society has
in fact developed to its present level, so that I
think there is in history, in the genetic history of
mankind, the most powerful evidence in favour
of the understanding of genetics and the genetic
interpretation of our social history.
Waddington: There are many cases, certainly,
where one country, one nation, or one race, has
conquered another and set itself up as the
aristocracy and the other nation has been a
lower class and then when they started to cooperate the whole society has done very well. I
don’t think there is any evidence that the class
that happens in one case to have been conquered by the other is in any sense inferior.

Darlington: Why say inferior? The whole idea

of inferiority it seems to me is a wrong notion to
bring into this discussion. We are not concerned
with inferiority when we talk about the cooperation in one society of different groups, each
being necessary to the other.

Waddington: My saying that doesn’t necessarily mean that they are inherently inferior at all.

Glass: I’d like to come back to one other point
about which Darlington has talked. He was
talking about the unanticipated consequences of
administrative action—not only of explicitly
administrative but also of general historical
action—of uncontrolled historical action. I
wonder whether some of this action has quite the
same genetic consequences as it had say fifty
or a hundred or two hundred years ago. For
example, you mentioned the selective aspects of
migration. Well, if you remember the inquiry
conducted by the Scottish Council for Research
in Education, they found that although there
was evidence of selection in internal migration
in Scotland, the I.Q. differences between people
who moved and those who did not move were
statistically very small. May it not be the case
that when you build up to something more than
a rather parochial system, you are in fact
absorbing people so much in a wider society
that some of the differences, the genetic differ
30

ences that you emphasized as existing in the past,
do not play the same role as they did a hundred
years ago?

Darlington: Oh I think they do and I think
they always have done. I would go much further
than I have done and say that the whole difference in temperamental character between the
peoples, for example, of the New World, people
of the United States in particular, and those of
Europe is that you have the difference between
people who are genetically more restless, more
energetic, in some ways, than the people of
Europe and it is to that they owe their peculiar
character.

Glass: I think that there will be a great deal of
dispute on what you have said.

Waddington: I should hesitate to accept it; I
feel that we probably don’t know. There are so
many other factors that could account for this
restlessness. For example when they got to
America it was an empty continent to all intents
and purposes.

Glass: I’d go further than that. I’d say one of
the great unifying and distinguishing characteristics of the American population, whatever
their origin, is their attitude to political
philosophy—that in this attitude they forget their
origins and their historical experience and tend
to adopt a single-minded approach to the nature
of society. This is one aspect—and not a
biological one—of creating a new society.
However, apart from these historical developments and the unanticipated consequences of
administrative action, what about direct action?
For example there’s a great deal of discussion
and a certain amount of recourse to artificial
insemination at the present time. How far is this
likely to affect human evolution in the societies
which are practising it?

Waddington: In my view it’s not likely to
affect it very much. Artificial insemination can be
very effective in changing the genetical situation
in a population if you use it in the sense of using
one sire for a large number of cows as in artificial
insemination of cattle. There you spread the
heredity of one selected male over a large
number of females and you can make considerable change in four, five or six generations. In
human situations, there is no particular reason
or even likelihood that a father in artificial
THE CONTROL OF EVOLUTION IN MAN

insemination by donor will be genetically very
unlike the person the woman might have married
in any case.

Glass: And it is most unlikely that there would
be one sire for many wives. This would in fact
be the great argument against using artificial
insemination at all. I mean, on moral grounds
wouldn’t it?

Darlington: Well, if you’re assuming that
artificial insemination is going to be used on a
very small scale, obviously, of course, artificial
insemination doesn’t matter very much. But it
could be used on a large scale. It might be used
on a large scale and the important thing is to
discover from artificial insemination what its
own results are likely to be. It so happens that
artificial insemination is the only method of
breeding in man which corresponds with the
method of experimental breeding in animals.
That is to say that you can know the results—
in the terms of large families—of the breeding of
a particular individual and it’s going to be a very
unfortunate thing if artificial insemination is
carried out by people who don’t understand
human genetics, and don’t record, and don’t
make available for anyone who does understand
human genetics, the results of their operations:
artificial insemination, if it is secret, could be most
deleterious.

Glass: What you’re arguing is that, whatever
else is done, there should be statistical records.
These records would not identify an individual
or the progeny of a particular father, but they
would be statistical and genetic records which
would enable us to see what happens as a result
of particular types of breeding.

Darlington: Yes, certainly.

Waddington: Yes, I think that it is certainly a
potential source of a great deal of information
about the human biological make-up, which it
would be a great pity to lose.

Glass: Are there any other forms of deliberate
control of evolution which you think are
relevant, but which, for example, might not be
accepted by the kind of society in which we live,
or to which we aspire?

Waddington: I think the great problem in this
connection is the problem of the numbers of
human beings in the world. I think there are too
many people in this country, and I think that

the population seems to be growing much too
fast in almost all countries. It’s possible that we
can keep pace with it, with our reproduction rate,
by the full application of science to agriculture,
producing foodstuffs and so on. I think it’s
unlikely we shall, in point of fact—I think we
shall have enormous population pressures—
famines, or half-famines, and so on. But I think
one of the problems the world has certainly got
to face is that, having got a respectable medical
science and thus reduced the enormous wastage
of young children which has been characteristic
of the whole of human history up to the present,
we have got to take some compensating steps to
keep human reproduction in balance with the
much reduced infantile mortality. That’s where,
I think, measures controlling human reproduction are going to be urgently called for, and
they will have evolutionary consequences.

Glass: But these might well be general
measures—one might well argue that, in general,
it’s undesirable for anybody to have, say, more
than three children, because on the average this
is all that the world can take in future.

Darlington: I should say it’s very undesirable
that some people should have three children!

Glass: Well that is the basic question, you see.
There have been societies—like Nazi Germany,
for example—which have said that there are
certain categories of people whose further
breeding should be discouraged—not only discouraged in a mild sense, but discouraged in a
very positive sense, by sterilization, for example.

Darlington: Well, sterilization is practised
now on a large scale in the United States and
Denmark and other countries, sterilization of the
mentally deficient, and I think that one cannot
doubt that the population of the lunatic asylums
is greatly reduced by that restriction on
multiplication.

Waddington: A higher proportion of the
American population is in lunatic asylums than
any other population we know of.

Glass: Yes. I’m just wondering, d’you see—
the mental defectives sterilized may, in many
cases, in other societies be those whom you would
keep in institutions, who therefore couldn’t breed
to any significant extent. I’m not sure whether
that type of sterilization is really effective.

Darlington: I should not have thought that

31
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

was true in Denmark. I don’t think their system
is very different from ours.

Waddington: No, the point I was trying to
make was that, if you are talking about legislative measures concerned with human reproduction, which measures are going to be difficult
for a democratic society to understand and
accept, I think they are going to be called for in
relation to the pressure of population much
more than by any attempt to direct reproduction
into one channel or another. I think that there is
going to be a pressure for the overall quantity
of reproduction, which is going to call for steps
which will be very difficult for people to’ swallow.

Glass: But this is non-selective ?

Waddington: I feel, as Darlington pointed out,
that anything that is done will be done by some
general administrative mechanism. This will, in
fact, be selective, but it may be done not for
selective purposes—for example, say you changed
the system of family allowances and cut them off
after two children or did something else to try to
reduce the total number of children, this would
have selective consequences though it was done
with an unselective aim in view.

Darlington: I suggest that the important thing
is that the Government should understand the
selective effects that their administrative acts
are likely to have, of which they are at present
entirely unaware. Whether they have any
intentions in that direction it’s impossible to discover.

Glass: I’m sure that they could be made more
aware, or they could become more aware than
they are at present. But are the experts so
much more aware of the unanticipated consequences of administrative action that they could
give firm guiding lines to Governments?

Waddington: You're looking at me, and I
should say that the experts are not at all confident as to what the unanticipated consequences would be. I think we are confident that
there will be some but we can only give guesses
of what they will be. You spoke of the great
advances of human genetics in Darwin’s day, but
you were really being rather optimistic: it’s a
branch of science which is remarkably little
supported—there’s very little work in it actually,
compared to its potential importance, and I think
that until we have very much further knowledge

32

about it, we are really hardly at all in a position
to give anything firm in the way of estimates of
what consequences are likely to happen. But I
should like to make one further, I think rather
optimistic, point. In the study of animal evolution, where we are definitely dealing with
genetic transmission and not social transmission,
a lot of work recently has emphasized the
extreme resistance of animal populations to
evolutionary change. Admittedly they do evolve,
but they do it jolly slowly, and anything you do
to an animal population to change its hereditary
make-up—you’re likely to find it does something
on its own to annul what you've tried to do.
They have a great self-balancing property: you
select all the parents which have got such and
such a character—you find only about a quarter
of their children will have the character, and the
thing goes back to the norm.

Darlington: And the reason why human
evolution is so much more rapid and so much
more dangerous, and also so much more hopeful
than animal evolution is, of course, that man is
infinitely more diverse. Even within this one
country of England, you have more human variation than you have in any species that you would
call a species of any animal. And so the possibilities of selection and selective propagation
within men are vastly greater, and they are going
to be vastly more rapid than they can be in any
animal species.

Glass: But, at the same time—aren’t you
anxious to encourage the persistence of variation
and adaptability in man?

Waddington: Oh yes—very much so. But this
point of Darlington’s—it may have something
in it—I think it has, but it has also a caveat—
I mean, to you and me all sheep look alike, but
I know a chap who is a sheep breeder, and he
could look at a flock of a couple of hundred and
recognize them all by their faces—by their first
names. To some extent, the reason we think the
human population so diverse, is that we're
adjusted to spotting the differences. If you look
at a whole population, say, of fruit flies, you can’t
tell Tom, Dick or Harry apart.

Glass: Would it be fair to say, in summing up
the position, that although there have been
advances since the days of Darwin, the advances
have been of a kind which perhaps make some of
THE CONTROL OF EVOLUTION IN MAN

us rather more cautious than the people of
Darwin’s period would be, in that we’re rather
more aware of the problems which haven’t
been solved and the questions which need to be
answered than would have been the case a
hundred years ago. There are many relevant lines
of work which have opened up—work which
may have quite significant general social implications in the future, but we just haven’t got far
enough at the moment to give really firm answers
to some of the questions which we believe are
likely to be very important in the future.

Darlington: I think one could say a great deal
more. Darwin, of course, said very little about
these things. He restricted his remarks on the
future of the human race to two pages, I think,
at the end of the Descent of Man. It was Galton
who talked so much about the future. But I believe
we can go now a great deal further than Galton
did. Although we don’t know much more that is
helpful in human heredity, we do know more, for
example, about identical twins than Galton did.
He invented the study of identical twins, and
we can say with much greater confidence than he
could that the conclusions he reached were right
—that heredity was over-poweringly important.

Glass: Would you agree about that, Waddington?

Waddington: Well I should say the real differ
ence this hundred years has made is this. When
Darwin first wrote about it he was propounding
the revolutionary idea that you could consider
the future of man in terms of his genetic evolution, his evolution as an animal of a very
peculiar kind. I should say, within this hundred
years we have realized that was absolutely right
—this is a way in which the future of man has
got to be considered. We have entirely accepted
Darwin’s opening the door, and though we
haven’t got very far through the door yet,
we do realize that it does open on to an enormous
field of the most fundamental scientific knowledge that man can have, because it is the scientific
knowledge about his own future.

Glass: Yes, I agree with that, but I should like
to add a caveat from the sociological side. I
think that we are only beginning to understand
those aspects of the environment which are
relevant to the study of heredity, and I’m thinking of this particularly in relation to what
Darlington said about identical twins. We’re
only just beginning to understand the complexity
of environmental differences between individuals
and groups. There is along way for social research
to go beforeitcan makearealcontributiontowards
genetic research, and I don’t think that without
the double combination of genetics and social
research we can give firm answers in either field.

33
