O. G. EDHOLM

Division of Human Physiology, National Institute for Medical Research, London

The Physiology of Adaptation’

THE TITLE OF this lecture is misleading; a more
accurate description of the subject matter would
be “Some random remarks on physiological
adaptation in man, illustrated by a description
of personal experiences of studies on the effects
of hot climates”. Even this cumbersome subtitle
is probably inadequate; adaptation is throughout
limited to physiological adaptation.

The definition of adaptation can be attempted
by considering its characteristics. There is a
delay in the development of adaptation which
distinguishes it from the immediate physiological
response. If a man is put into a hot and humid
environment, his skin blood flow will increase
and he will sweat. If the environment is sufficiently
severe his body temperature will rise and the
sweat rate increase. If he leaves this environment
and has a cold shower, he will rapidly return to
his pre-exposure condition. The responses are
those evoked by stimulation of the temperature
regulating mechanisms. But, in addition, adaptative processes have been initiated and a subsequent exposure, provided it is not unduly
delayed, will evoke qualitatively similar physiological responses, but they will be quantitatively
altered. Reinforcement and time are needed to
establish an adaptation, and the various
modifications of physiological response do not
necessarily follow the same time course. One
modification may be easily aroused, another
may need more stimulation before it becomes
apparent. And so, in Adolph’s phrase (Adolph,
1964), adaptation is a syndrome. Since for
physiologists adaptation is environmentally
determined, a definition could be that adaptation
is any property of an organism which favours
survival in a specific environment, particularly
a stressful one (Prosser, 1964). The environments
and conditions which have been studied particu
* The Darwin Lecture delivered in London on
4th May 1966.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, September 1966, 58, 3.

larly as far as man is concerned are: high altitude,
high pressure, heat, cold, high gravitational force,
low calorie intake, and muscular work. It appears
to be true that all mankind has the capacity to
adapt, as indeed Darwin (1859) himself stated:

Hence I am inclined to look at adaptation to any
special climate as a quality readily grafted on an
innate wide flexibility of constitution, which is
common to most animals.

But when we consider the diversity of man, it
might be expected that marked differences of
adaptation could be demonstrated. However,
present evidence is inadequate to establish
unequivocal differences. And where there is
suggestive evidence we are unable to state with
confidence the reason for such differences. The
position to-day is not very different from that
stated by Darwin (1859):

How much of the acclimatization of species to
any peculiar climate is due to mere habit, and how
much to the natural selection of varieties having
different innate constitutions, and how much to
both means combined, is a very obscure question.

If evidence is to be obtained, then relatively
large numbers of human beings have to be
studied, and their responses to carefully standardized conditions compared with some precision.
This is, of course, far easier to say than to do.
The techniques involved in studying human
physiology have become increasingly elaborate,
as in all fields of research, and so have tended to
be less applicable on a large scale in the field.

However, this very elaboration has now begun
to make it possible to conceive of relatively
large scale studies, due mainly to the development of miniature equipment which can be used.
by subjects without undue interference. My
colleague, Mr. H. S. Wolff, has played a large
part in this development, in which he has
deliberately aimed to produce—in his phrase—
“socially acceptable instruments’’.

136
THE PHYSIOLOGY OF ADAPTATION

There has been so much work necessary
within the fields of physiology that we have
deliberately or perhaps, in some cases, acting in
ignorance, confined ourselves to physiology
without looking at the contributions from other
disciplines.

Over the years, perhaps rather slowly, the
many factors which can affect physiological
responses have become clearer, not necessarily as
subjects for study but rather for conditions to be
controlled. Although this has meant an improvement in the results obtained, in the sense of
isolating and controlling unwanted factors, it
has also led to an awareness that physiology is
not enough. We cannot ignore psychological
effects, even if only for the reason that they are
such a nuisance in spoiling one’s results.
Sometimes, of course, unexpected psychological
or emotional responses are of great interest to
physiologists. During the war, Henry Barcroft,
McMichael, Sharpey Schafer and I planned
some joint work on haemorrhage, combining
plethysmography and the then new technique
of cardiac catheterization. Our subjects were
volunteers from the Friends Ambulance Unit,
and were understandably apprehensive as
apparently they gathered that a steel tube was
to be pushed into the heart. All went well in
the first experiment until we started to bleed the
subject, when he fainted. Quite an unplanned
event, but the results were dramatic. To our
immense surprise, during the fall of blood
pressure which accompanies fainting, the blood
flow in the forearm went up, not down. So we
happily set off to investigate this remarkable
event, with to us most satisfactory results. Since
then a number of emotional effects have been
captured by the physiologists and studied by
purely physiological techniques. As far as the
circulation is concerned, emotions such as anger
and fear have such obvious effects that they can
be easily recognized and then studied. It has
taken longer to realize what important effects
they can have on other systems, such as those
involved in temperature regulation.

What I am attempting to show, without over
elaboration, are the profound effects of psychological events on physiological processes.
Although these have certainly been recognized
for a ‘very long time by physiologists,

undoubtedly in many cases—and particularly
in human physiology—these have tended to be
regarded as unwanted effects and our conduct
and design of experiments have been carefully
planned in attempts to exclude these effects.
But if we are concerned as physiologists with
studying man as he ordinarily exists and lives,
as opposed to the highly artificial and abstract
conditions we impose in the laboratory, then
we must not only be aware of these disturbing
influences, we must also include them in our
studies. This is certainly the case if we wish, as
we do, to bring in physiology to the study of
human populations.

I may seem to be straying a long way from the
physiology of adaptation in man, but if we want
to examine the process of adaptation, even to
such impressive changes in the environment as
may be produced by ascending the highest
mountains or travelling to the polar regions,
or to the hottest climates, then also our study will
be incomplete or inadequate to the degree that
we fail to take into account all the factors in the
situation. And a formidable list it is: age, sex,
body form and composition, nutritional state,
habitual activity, physical work capacity, climatic
experience, genetic factors, cultural patterns
and behaviour. No doubt this list is far from
complete, but there is certainly enough to keep
physiologists busy for a long time to come.

Effects of Hot Environments

As an illustration of the distance we have to
travel, I propose to describe some of the work
on the effects of hot environments on man. It
would have been equally possible to look at
studies of cold climates, or high altitudes, but
not to discuss all three in the compass of a
single lecture.

The problem of heat is chosen for several
reasons, one of which is the obvious fact that a
high proportion of the human race lives in
regions which are hot, i.e. have a mean air
temperature of 20°C or more during the daylight
hours throughout the year. Very roughly, some
two thousand millions, or two-thirds of the
world’s inhabitants, live in such climates. So the
effects of heat on man and the way he adapts to
these may be said to have wide application and

137
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

be of some practical importance, as well as of
considerable scientific interest.

The history of scientific investigations on the
effects of hot climates has been sketched by
several writers, and will not be repeated here.
Although there were many important contributions during the earlier part of the century,
one can date the period of intensive study to the
Second World War, when the subject became
a critical one to the armies and navies involved.
Millions of men were moved to and from hot
jungles and deserts back to temperate and frigid
zones, and it was sufficiently evident that
climatic factors could be of decisive military
importance. Because of the difficulties involved
in making detailed studies in the field, climatic
chambers were constructed in which the various
environments could be more or less reproduced
and controlled. Very important field work was
done, in spite of great difficulties, but.the success
of experiments in climatic chambers undoubtedly
emphasized this mode of study, so they were
continued after the war was over and, of course,
continue still. The military emphasis made it
inevitable that the subjects of these experiments
were young, healthy, male adults and this also
has continued. By far the largest number of
experiments has been made on this particular
group of the population.

Amongst the many important findings from
chamber experiments are that men can develop
heat adaptation or acclimatization (the terms are,
to some extent, synonymous) even if they are
only exposed for a short period each day, the
rest of the time being spent in cool or temperate
conditions. Originally the time required was
thought to be four hours a day in a hot and
humid environment in which the subject worked.
More recently, Dr. R. H. Fox and his colleagues
have shown that as short a time as one hour a
day, provided the body temperature is significantly raised, can still produce adaptation (Fox,
1965). The second significant point is that all
subjects tested, and there must be several
thousands, have developed acclimatization to
heat although they were all native to temperate
climates and their ancestors were also. Implied
is the third point, that the physiological changes
‘which characterize heat adaptation are unequivocal and striking, with large alterations.

138

The effective stimulus appears to be an increase
in body temperature. But, surprisingly, man does
not appear to adapt to a raised body temperature
itself.

Studies in the Field

Since acclimatization to heat can be developed
by short daily exposures, it might be predicted
that performance in a hot climate would be
similar in groups of men artificially or naturally
acclimatized, and that both would have better
performances than unacclimatized subjects.
These predictions have been tested in a large
scale field experiment but only partially verified.

The plan was initially to measure the responses
of a group of sixty soldiers exposed to a hot
and humid environment in which carefully
standardized work was done. On the basis of
their body temperature and pulse rate at the
end of the four hours exposure, and their sweat
rate, six men were rejected and the remaining
fifty-four were divided into three matched groups
whose average responses were similar. Subsequently, one group was sent to Aden for six
weeks to become naturally acclimatized to a hot
climate, a second group was exposed daily
over four weeks in climatic chambers in London,
to be artificially acclimatized, and the third
group was sent to Scotland to act as controls.
At the end of the treatment period all the
subjects were re-assembled in London and were
again tested in the climatic chambers. The
physiological performance of the artificially
acclimatized group was slightly better than that
of the naturally acclimatized group; both
groups were now significantly superior to the
control group. All three groups were flown to
Aden, where an arduous military exercise
was carried out for twelve days. Measurements
were made of body temperature and pulse rate
on all subjects at approximately hourly intervals
during the working day. In addition, body
weight, fluid intake and urine output were
measured, and some measurements of food
intake were made. Cases of heat illness and
other medical conditions were carefully recorded
and military performance was assessed by a
team of experienced officers.

Body temperatures were significantly higher
THE PHYSIOLOGY OF ADAPTATION

in the control group than in the other two groups.
The smallest rise was observed in the artificially
acclimatized group, but there was relatively
little difference between this group and the
naturally acclimatized group. There were no
significant differences between the three groups
in water intake, food intake, urine output or
loss of body weight. It would be expected that
the group with the lowest mean body temperature
had an important physiological advantage over
the other two groups and particularly over the
control group, and that this demonstrated the
efficacy of artificial acclimatization. However,
the casualty rates were much the lowest in the
naturally acclimatized group, and although the
control group during the first five days were
significantly worse than the artificially acclimatized subjects, in the last part of the trial there
was little difference between these two groups.

Furthermore, the military performance followed a similar pattern, with the naturally
acclimatized group the best, the control group
initially the worst, and the artificially acclimatized group rather better than the controls for
the first five days but no different in the last part
of the trial. In spite of a real physiological
advantage, the artificially acclimatized group
were, in terms of performance and liability to
illness, only slightly more effective than the
control group.

This unexpected result can, to a considerable
extent, be explained by additional observations
made during the trial and by further information.
It was hoped, for example, that in matching the
three groups on the basis of their physiological
responses to heat, other factors would be
randomly distributed. Such was not the case.
Intelligence scores were significantly lower in the
artificially acclimatized group than in the other
two and their military experience was also the
shortest, both factors which would have affected
military performance. The morale of this group
also appeared to be low as compared to the other
two groups. The incidence of gastro-intestinal
disorders was markedly higher in the artificially
acclimatized and control groups, as compared
with the naturally acclimatized group.

It was concluded that the natural situation is
more complex than in the laboratory. In
addition to acclimatization to heat, the group

sent to Aden in the treatment phase had also
acquired an adaptation to local micro-organisms
as well as becoming familiar with the actual
place. It would appear that the factors which

can affect man’s performance in the heat are

not only those of acclimatization but also
include (a) intelligence, (b) experience, (c)
personality, (d) morale or discipline, and no
doubt many others, including genetic constitution.

Accounts of this experiment have already been
published (Edholm et al., 1963; Edholm et al.,
1962), but it has been mentioned here in some
detail as it illustrates the general theme that
physiology is not enough. However, it also
shows the feasibility of carrying out relatively
large-scale studies in the field, and in subsequent
experiments considerably more elaborate investigations have been completed successfully
(Edholm et al., 1964). |

Although there have been extensive studies
in climatic chambers and also in the field, these
have been mainly on young, healthy, adult
Caucasian males. But there have also been
important studies of other ethnic groups,
notably by Ladell amongst West Africans,
Wyndham in South Africa, as well as some
work on the American Negro and the Australian
Aborigine. The main finding is the remarkable
degree of similarity between apparently markedly
different peoples. The chief difference is that
peoples such as the West Africans, living in an
essentially hot wet climate, regulate body
temperature with a rather lower sweat rate than
Europeans acclimatized to the heat (Ladell,
1964).

Among the difficulties of comparing groups
from different peoples are body size and shape,
and nutritional differences, as the most obvious.
In many cases, a considerable number of subjects
are needed before there can be any certainty
of establishing differences.

Investigation on Indian Subjects

In one investigation carried out on Indian
subjects, a comparison was made with British
white subjects in which a deliberate attempt was
made to select the Indians to match the British
subjects in body size. These studies were made in

139
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

London, and the Indians were flown over at the
end of September, having spent the hot season
in Lucknow carrying out a moderately arduous
training programme. They spent the winter in
England, eating the same food as their British
counterparts. It was thought that the Indians
would on arrival be fully, or nearly fully,
acclimatized to heat, and this could be demonstrated by high sweat rates, small or moderate
increases in body temperature and pulse rate
in the climatic room, and that there would be
large differences with unacclimatized British
subjects. It was also predicted that at the end of
their four months stay in Britain their adaptation
to heat, as judged by responses in the climatic
chamber, would have decreased and might be
more similar to unacclimatized British, but if
they were re-acclimatized by daily exposure it
was believed that they would re-adapt more
quickly than the British. Only some of these
predictions were realized. On the first test in
the heat the Indians were, on the average, better
than the British, but not much. Their sweat
rates were a little higher, body temperature just
significantly lower, and pulse rate was about the
same. The difference was, to us, really surprisingly small. So the first prediction was not
entirely confirmed.

The second prediction, about loss of acclimatization, was confirmed by the results of the
second test after four months spent in England,
when sweat rates were lower, body temperature
and pulse rate higher than on their original
test, and they were perhaps rather worse than the
unacclimatized British. Incidentally, their health
during the four months was remarkably good
and there was little change in body weight. Then
the two groups were acclimatized by daily
exposure in the hot room for two weeks. We
expected now, in spite of previous disappointment, that there would be a marked difference
between the two groups in the rate of development of acclimatization, with the Indians
winning. To our surprise, the Indians lost.
The differences at the end of two weeks were
highly significant, with the British having the
better physiological performance (Edholm et al.,
1965).

These results certainly indicate the need for
more detailed studies of different populations.

140

They are difficult to explain and the very point
of picking Indians with large body size may have
been partly the reason. These subjects could not
be said to be a representative or a random sample
of the Indian population. They came from many
different regions, but had all served for a number
of years (five or more) in the Indian Army and
led reasonably similar lives. But in the distribution of body size they came from the top end
of the scale and conceivably they could be
relatively poorly adapted compared with smaller
Indian subjects.

The factors which might affect adaptation to
heat have been listed above. Although some
information is available about some of these
factors, in most cases it is inadequate and as
regards genetic constitution there is virtually
no information at all.

There are other gaps, such as the effects of
previous or existing disease states.

In the first part of this lecture I indicated my
belief that physiology is not enough, but it is
painfully clear that even now we do not have
enough physiology. So it might seem that the
proper way to proceed would be to extend
carefully controlled physiological studies to
begin to cover the glaring gaps. I want to argue
an opposite, but not necessarily opposing, view.
I feel that the opportunity to take part in
population studies provides an essential stage
in the evolution of investigations of human
physiology. It was for this reason that, personally,
I found the concept of the International Biological Programme so exciting. In this programme
the objectives of the section devoted to Human
Adaptability include joint work by geneticists,
anthropometrists and physiologists in the study
of populations, by the development of multidisciplinary teams. Selected populations would
be examined to establish demographic features,
genetic and anthropometric characteristics, as
well as the pattern of disease. Cultural and
sociological features would also be determined.
The numbers involved in such studies would be
relatively large, attempting a virtually complete
cover of the selected population. Absolute
numbers would clearly depend upon the particular population concerned, but could be 1,000
or considerably more.

It is perfectly feasible for such large-scale
THE PHYSIOLOGY

studies to be made in respect of genetics and
anthropometry, but as far as the physiological
side is concerned it is at present impracticable.
Instead, we must work on samples of the defined
population, and for some of the more elaborate
tests we must use sub-samples.

Investigation in Israel

In these population studies, an essential
objective is, wherever possible, to examine
similar populations, i.e. genetically and preferably culturally similar people living in adjacent
but contrasting environments, and for dissimilar
peoples living in the same environment. Such
situations do exist, and I have explored the
possibility of one such situation, in Israel
(Edholm, 1966). Here is a country which is
geographically small; the greatest distance is
rather more than Dan to Bathsheba, it is now
Metullah to Eilat, but even this is not more than
250 miles, and in places it is not more than
ten miles wide. Although it is so small, one can
distinguish three climatic zones, apart from the
coastal area. These are the desert area of the
Negev, the mountain region of Judaea with an
altitude of 1,000 metres, and the semi-tropical
part of the upper Jordan area, including the
region round the sea of Galilee.

Into this tiny area has poured a flood of
peoples from all over the world. Although they
are all Jews, this is a term which has proved
remarkably difficult to define. This may not seem
relevant either, but it is important to emphasize
that these various groups coming from so many
contrasting environments appear to be startlingly
different from each other; certainly, as regards
body size, the tiny Yemenites and the large hefty
Kurds, for example; dark Cochin Jews from
India and blonds from Russia.

What is more, there are many villages populated by one particular group; as, for example,
a village group from Kurdistan remains as the
same village group in Israel. So we have the
position that in all the climatic zones mentioned
there will be a Yemenite village next door to a
Kurdish village, and in the next one all the
habitants may be Cochin Jews.

Such a situation is enough to excite any

OF ADAPTATION

climatic physiologist. Here we have the opportunity of studying contrasting, dissimilar people
in the same environmental conditions, and in
three contrasting environments. When it is added
that in Israel demographic and medical data are
available throughout the country and that there
is a wealth of scientific talent and facilities, you
may not be surprised at my eagerness to exploit
the situation. Moreover, such opportunities
do not necessarily persist, and intermarriage
between the different communities will soon blur
the distinctions which may exist.

Further Studies

I have described Israel because the problem
of adaptation can so obviously be profitably
looked at, but there are, of course, other
populations and other localities where multidisciplinary studies can and will be carried out.

The final point I want to make is that extensive
physiological field work is now practicable. The
methods which are already available ensure
this, and I have no doubt whatever that there
will be rapid advances from now on which will
extend our powers considerably. The great need
is to develop a methodology which can be used
in the field with many subjects, with the minimum
of interference and a high order of accuracy.
As one example, Wolff (1965) has developed a
heart rate integrator which can provide us with
information relevant to habitual physical activity.
This can be used on a reasonably large scale,
does not inconvenience the wearer or interfere
with his activities. A basically similar device
can be used to integrate other variables such as
skin temperature. As physiologists, we have to
learn the value of such devices in terms of the
kind of information provided.

In conclusion, there is, I hope, another possible
dividend from these population studies. We
suffer from a shortage of physiologists interested
in the whole animal or man. I believe, and I am
of course biased, that the comparative neglect
which this implies of work on the whole animal
is unsatisfactory in terms of biology. The whole
animal is more than an assemblage of parts; the
study of the physiology of the whole man is
certainly essential for an understanding of
clinical problems, but it is also necessary to have

141
THE EUGENICS

a proportion of physiologists who are experienced investigators in these fields, otherwise we
are in serious danger of becoming completely
unbalanced. It would appear that the work that
climatic physiologists are pursuing is not of
sufficient interest to attract the recruits we need.
Now, with the International Biological Programme developing, we can surely offer some
exciting prospects, such as the possibility that
we can hope to advance from the position that
Darwin described over 100 years ago.

REFERENCES

1. Adolph, E. F. 1964. Perspective of adaptation: some
general properties. In Handbook of Physiology,
Section 4: Adaptation to the environment. Pp. 27-35.
Washington, D.C., American Physiological Society.

. Darwin, C. 1859. On the Origin of Species.

. Edholm, O. G. 1966. South-west Asia, with special
reference to Israel. In The Biology of Human
Adaptability. Ed. P. T. Baker and J. S. Weiner.
Pp. 357-94. Oxford, Clarendon Press.

4. Edholm, O. G., Adam, J. M., Cannon, P., Fox, R. H.,

Goldsmith, R., Shepherd, R. D., and Underwood,
C.R. 1962. Study of artificially acclimatized, naturally

Ww No

142

10.

REVIEW

acclimatized and non-acclimatized troops on exposure
to heat. Army Personnel Research Committee, Med.
Res. Coun., Lond., Rep. No. APRC 61/25.

. Edholm, O. G., Fox, R. H., Adam, J. M., and

Goldsmith, R. 1963. Comparison of artificial and
natural acclimatization. Fed. Proc. 22, Pt. I, 709.

. Edholm, O. G., Fox, R. H., Goldsmith, R., Hampton,

I. F. G., Underwood, C. R., Ward, E. J., Wolff, H. S.,
Adam, J. M., and Allan, J. R., 1964. The effect of
heat on food and water intake on acclimatized and
unacclimatized men. Army Personnel Research
Committee, Med. Res. Coun., Lond., Rep. No.
APRC 64/16.

. Fox, R. H. 1965. Heat. In The Physiology of Human

Survival, Ed. O. G. Edholm and A. L. Bacharach.
Pp. 53-79. London and New York, Academic
Press.

. Ladell, W. S. S. 1964. Terrestrial animals in humid

heat: man. In Handbook of Physiology, Section 4:
Adaptation to the environment. Pp. 625-59. Washington, D.C., American Physiological Society.

. Prosser, C. L. 1964. Perspectives of adaptation:

theoretical aspects. In Handbook of Physiology,
Section 4: Adaptation to the environment. Pp. 11-25.
Washington, D. C., American Physiological Society.
Wolff, H. S. 1965. Instruments for the investigation
of the physiological and environmental patterns of
normal life. In Digest of the 6th International
Conference on Medical Electronics and Biological
Engineering, 1965, Tokyo. Pp. 309-12. Tokyo,
Japanese Physiological Society.
