REVIEWS OF BOOKS

to be reminded just how wrong intelligent
people can be in reading their preconceptions
into the behaviour of these animals. Even the
discovery of evolution by the agency of natural
selection has contributed sometimes to obscure
the picture. People in search of biological analogies and missing links have over-simplified the
distinctive and idiosyncratic qualities of the primates, both in a specific and an individual sense.
In helping to correct the picture, this book may
be regarded as a valuable introduction to the
study of ethology in relation to the non-human
primates. The really scientific study of the
behaviour of these animals may be considered
as dating from Sir Solly Zuckerman’s study of
baboons, The Social Life of Apes and Monkeys,
published in 1932. This work evoked a great
interest, but tended in some respects to distort
the true image of the non-human primate, in
that the characteristics of the baboon were
sometimes extrapolated to other primates whose
closer study revealed them to exhibit different
patterns. The phenomena of dominance, for
example, so markedly shown in the baboon are
relatively weak or even absent in some other
primates. The picture of the gorilla conjured
up by the script writers of Hollywood was
perhaps partly built on the basis of such
unwarranted extrapolation. In real life, the
gorilla, far from being a brutal and pugnacious
aggressor, whose diabolical nature might lead
him to ravish beautiful women, is a creature
who would rather flee than fight and who is
quite disappointing from a Hollywood point of
view, when placed in a potentially piquant
situation. It seems that once a gorilla did by
accident get shut up all night with an attractive
young woman, but it displayed no attempt to
do the things which provide headlines for the
more popular Sunday newspapers. In fact it
showed itself to be a little frightened, a little
lonely and snuggled up to the young lady, not
for any unbecoming purpose, but merely for
warmth and comfort. Clearly it is much safer
for a young woman to pass the night in the cage
of a gorilla than in Central Park, New York.
There is an informative account here of the
studies being prosecuted in primate life and
behaviour and from the fact of it being unmentioned it may be assumed that experimental

work in breeding apes and monkeys in order to
elucidate problems of genetics has yet to be
embarked upon. Surely this is a field where
there are immensely instructive lessons to be
learned. The idea of a selective grading up of
human beings in respect of intelligence and other
qualities of positive biological value, suggested
by Professor H. J. Muller and the present writer
as being feasible through the employment of
artificial insemination, might be carried out in
apes without encountering many of the objections which have been raised regarding donor
insemination in the human subject. Breeding
apes by AID need excite no more moral
objections than breeding cattle in the same way.
But it might throw immense light on what might
be accomplished in the genetic ennoblement of
the human species by voluntary choice of
germinal material, whose general image and
acceptability is likely to be very different in
AD2000 from what it is to-day. The same idea
might be applied to canines and breeding them
for intelligence, longevity and other qualities
combining benefits for the dog with instruction
for its master should be far more rewarding than
the senseless sort of genetic debasement which
now goes on in selecting for arbitrary show points
of negative biological value. One cannot help
thinking that a chimpanzee with a pongid IQ of
160 plus might bea quite entertainingcompanion.

The authors of this work have happily
summarized its spirit and content in these words:
‘The real lives of monkeys and apes are quite as
odd, and in many respects are still as mystifying
as the fanciful tales of yesterday. The truth may
not be stranger than fiction, but it is just as
exciting’. This indeed merits the verdict of an
exciting book.

HERBERT BREWER

WORLD RESOURCES
Smith, G. H. (Editor). Conservation and Natural

Resources. New York and London, 1965. Wiley.
Pp. xi+533. Price 75s.

Fisher, Joseph L. and Potter, Neal. World
Prospects for Natural Resources. Baltimore,
1964. Johns Hopkins Press (London, 1965.
Oxford University Press). Pp. vi-+-73. Price 12s.

163
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

PLATO CONTENDED THAT tree-covered and
well-watered land had been turned into the
arid area around Athens by human improvidence. Other thoughtful people have both
pointed out past mistakes and warned against
the continuation of present policies. The
warnings have generally gone unheeded until
much of the damage was done. A few months
ago, in spite of the unanimity of experts, the
whale fishing industry decided to go on killing
whales at a rate that will exterminate the whale—
and the industry.

The picture is not however all gloomy. At
the end of the last century, far-sighted scientists,
mainly in the USA, caught the imagination of a
few governments and, with the valuable but
accidental support of people such as Theodore
Roosevelt who were primarily interested in
hunting and scenery, introduced legislation
setting aside large tracts as Nature Reserves and
controlling the exploitation of other tracts. The
idea spread and a distinction was made between
mere preservation, and conservation, in which
the tract is used in a manner that preserves most
of the amenities and gives a maximal return of
useful products. This is a matter of good
housekeeping and the idea has been extended
to other renewable resources, such as water, and
to non-renewable resources such as minerals.

The twenty-three essays (by eighteen authors)
that make up Conservation and Natural Resources
survey the progress that has been made in the
USA. A third of it deals with water and minerals.
Much useful information is assembled here but
it is not particularly relevant in the present
context. The history of farming and landownership in America is extremely interesting
for, in that country, Europeans moved into
land that had been used for hunting only. We
can thus trace the whole effect that man, by
deforestation, ploughing, draining and irrigation,
has had. The history of the chicanery of would-be
exploiters trying to defeat conservation is set
out fully and depressingly.

Two articles deal with wild-life and fisheries.
In accordance with the practical objectives of
the book, much quantitative information is
given :— thus birds are credited with preventing
500 million dollars’ worth of insect damage while
rodents do twice that amount of damage;

164

hunters and fishermen spend 3,000 million
dollars on their sport each year.

People do not seem to handle their own affairs
as well as those of their plants and animals. The
chapter dealing with human conservation is brief
and inadequately documented, but it contains
six maps showing such things as natural increase,
income, and expenditure on schools and medical
services. Alaska now seems to be the “boom”
region. It would have been interesting to have
had more explanation of the surprising statements that death at forty is an economic
advantage to the community and that “only
10-15 per cent of the seventeen million Americans
needing some sort of mental care are getting it’’.
There are some sensible comments on race
prejudice. One point is made that cannot be too
often restated; although the position of Negroes
is improving, their relative position is deteriorating.

The booklet World Prospects for Natural
Resources is a useful survey of statistics published
by FAO and UNO up to 1962. Its optimistic
tone could then have been justified for it looked
as if world food production was keeping pace
with population. In 1966 one wonders; population is now increasing faster than food production. Furthermore, figures are given showing
that in 1930 the USA moved from its old position
of exporter and became an importer of both
food and minerals. As standards of living
increase, several other countries are likely to
follow the same trend however much they may
long all to be net exporters. Part of the optimism
is based on the steady fall in the prices of such
commodities as sugar and cotton during the
past fifteen years. It is surely carrying respect
for “the market” too far to assume that this
shows that supply is equalling need rather than
that consumers rings are forcing down the
price the primary producer gets and so increasing.
the disparity in standard of living between the
well- and ill-fed countries. It would be interesting
to have authoritative figures showing the ratio
between “‘aid”’ given to underdeveloped countries
during the past twenty years, and what they have
lost because of the diminution in the prices they
get for their products.

N. W. PIRIE
