CORRESPONDENCE

Milbank Memorial Fund Quarterly

April 1943, Vol. 21, No. 2.—Life Tables for Social
Classes in England.—-Dr. Christopher Tietze gives
an analysis of the class differences in mortality in
England based on the Registrar-General’s Decennial Supplement, 1931. Particular interest is
attached to these findings in view of the fact that,
as far as is known at present, the next census will
not be taken until 1951. Expectation of life at
birth is approximately 63 years for the professional
group and for agricultural workers ; 60 years for

47

employérs and clerical workers and for skilled
workers; 57 years for the intermediate class
between skilled and unskilled workers, and less
than 56 years for unskilled workers and for coal
miners.

This journal also contains articles on the nutritional status of aircraft workers in Southern California, recent changes in income and food expenditure, and a study of food habits of tuberculous
families in Harlem, and the variation in nursing
service with family income.

K. H.

 

CORRESPONDENCE

Family Allowances
To the Editor, Eugenics Review

Str,—The only State system of children’s
allowances which the Eugenics Society should
support is mine—fourteen or more shillings a week
to married couples for each child of the first two
confinements, with nothing for subsequent offspring. It would raise the marriage rate and birth
rate of the richer two-thirds of the population and
yet help the overburdened parents of the poorest
third about as much as would the Beveridge scheme,
and it would be preferred by a big majority of the
adults under forty.

If anything like the Beveridge scheme becomes
law, the Eugenics Society should urge abortion and
sterilization being made available to any parent
desiring one or both of these.

B. Duntop, M.B.
Binfield, Berks.

The Span of Life

To the Editor, Eugenics Review

Sir,—As bearing on the question of The Span
of Life, which was discussed in Mr. Bramwell’s
interesting article in the April number of the
Eucenics Review, the following may, perhaps,
be worth noting :
MEAN AGE AT DEATH OF HYMN-WRITERS, THE
AGES BEING TAKEN FROM The English Hymnal:

37 writers of the sixteenth and

seventeenth centuries ... 61°7 years

49 writers of the _ eighteenth
century wes wee ... 68-1 years

106 writers of- the nineteenth
century 68-6 years

C. F, ‘ARDEN-CLOSE.
Mayfield, 22 Christchurch Road,
Winchester.

Deterrents to Parenthood
To the Editor, Eugenics Review

S1r,—I feel obliged to comment on some of the
remarks made by one of your correspondents in
the January issue.

First, as to the suggestion that the fall in the
birth rate of intelligent children is due to apathy
on the part of intelligent women. This may in
part be true, but one certainly cannot generalize.
In my experience and that of women friends, the
fault would appear to be rather on the part of the
men than the women. Most men tend to regard women as of inferior intelligence, and it may be
for this reason that they also tend to treat those
intelligent women whom they do meet as if they
had no sex instincts. I wonder how many of these
intelligent but sexless women your correspondent
has met. I have yet to meet one who does not hope
to marry one day and have children.

One possible deterrent to the woman is the lack
of available men. Naturally she wants to marry a

-man of equal intelligence if only to secure a happy

relationship. Unfortunately, however, intelligent
men seem to be elusive and many prefer to marry
women of less intelligence than themselves. This
obviously results in a preponderance of unmarried
women among those of higher intelligence.

As to the intelligent woman being the cause of
unhappy marriages, this is an extraordinary statement to make. Unhappiness occurs in all types of
home, though perhaps there are more separations
and divorces among the intelligent because they
are better judges of their own limitations and have
more opportunity, for economic reasons. I cannot
give first-hand evidence of happy marriages
between equally intelligent people, as none of my
friends have yet been married long enough for me
to judge, but the Curies are a classical example. I
can imagine nothing more conducive to happiness
