250 EUGENICS REVIEW.

to the volume, was in any degree the result of Irish immigration. Some
such origin seems indicated in his treatment of race mixture, when he
recommends that marriages like those between whites and negroes should
be prohibited until we know more definitely what sort of results they give.
EDGAR SCHUSTER.

Garofalo, BARON R. Criminology (translated by R. W. Millar).
London. Heinemann; 1914; price 16s. net; pp. 478.

THIS well-known work was first published at Naples in 1885. A French
version which was prepared under the auspices of the author went through
five editions. Of these, the most recent, which appeared in 1905, was
completely recast by him and forms the original of the present version.
Baron Garofalo is primarily a lawyer, and the legal aspects of the treatment of criminals rightly receives a full share of attention, but it is
owing to the fact that he realizes the necessity for basing the reform of
the criminal and the protection of society on a thorough knowledge of
the natural history of the crime, that his great work has been written.
The translator has done his work adequately, and the get up of the book
is a credit to the publishers.

Creighton, Louise. The Social Disease and How to Fight It. A
Rejoinder. London. Longmans, Green and Co.; 1914; price IS. ;
Pp. 7.
AFTER the recently published literature dealing with the problems of
prostitution and venereal disease from the pens of various writers both
at home and abroad, it is indeed a relief to have this calm and reasoned
statement of the case by one who has had far-reaching experience of
the special problems under discussion. After the recommendations
of extremists—ranging from the segregation under conditions approximating to slavery of a group of women who, it is argued, must be so
maintained owing to the inherent polygamous character of the race, to an
extension of the Franchise to women as a means of abolishing prostitution
—it is a relief to turn to the dignified recognition of mutual responsibility
of both men and women for the existing state of affairs, and the possibility that their joint efforts to solve the problem may lead to a measure
of success in the near future.

Mrs. Creighton fully realises the racial effect of the diseases, and
advocates as the immediate policy careful education of the public, and the
provision of free treatment, as being the only sure method of reducing the
disease and the direct road to the formation of a standard of public
opinion which will recognise both the ethically and socially injurious
nature of prostitution. The origin of the problem lies in the social
custom of prostitution and a uniform standard of morality for both sexes
is recognised as its only true and final solution.

The recent tendency to use the social evil as a ground for sex
antagonism has been deeply deplored by many men and women
concerned in the attempt to improve conditions. It is only by
co-operation between the sexes ‘that any real progress can be made.
It is the recognition of this principle that is so warmly welcomed. The
race is composed of men and women, and neither part can make real
progress without the other. Mrs. Creighton urges care in the dissemination of knowledge, but emphasises the need of right instruction, education during childhood in the simple physiological laws of life, clear
warnings as to the prevalence and danger of disease for those going into
the world, the need of medical co-operation in supporting the principle of
chastity before marriage as a hygienic as well as a moral duty, the
provision of free and adequate treatment of disease, public recognition of
the danger of marriage until treatment is completed, an extension of the
feeling of parental responsibility, and above all the cultivation by women
and men together of a healthy public opinion. S. G.
