THE INHERITANCE OF MENTAL DISORDER’
By ELIOT SLATER, 3.

BOUT five years ago Dr. Lewis was
addressing this Soctety on almost the
same subject as my present one. On

that occasion he directed your attention to
the wide horizons, the principles of research
and the general sum of our knowledge. I
have reread his papert recently and it
remains almost as accurate a summary now
as it was then, so that I have been surprised
to see how little our general position has
altered in the last five years. To allow our
increase in knowledge to make any impression on you, I must direct your attention away from the horizon to the ground
under our feet, where every step, however
small or difficult, makes its impression of
space and speed.

It is my aim this afternoon to present a
short account of some of the recent work on
the mbheritance of the individual mental
disorders. In this field the last five years
have been very fruitful. Of the comparatively small amount of work, in relation to its
enormous total mass, that I have had the
occasion, the time and the inclination to
examine with any closeness, I shall make
mention only of those few pieces of work
that seem to me of especial interest. In this
way much excellent and important work
will inevitably remain neglected. For this
inadequacy I must ask your indulgence.

For the sake of the clarity and comprehensibility of what follows I should like to remind
you of the three factors that play a part in
the appearance of any inheritable anomaly.
First there is the mutant gene itself, without
which the condition does not appear. This
is more in the nature of a working hypothesis
than a statement of fact, as purely exogenous
conditions may be clinically indistinguishable from hereditary ones. Then there is the
furthering or inhibiting influence of the rest

—

 

 

* A lecture delivered before the Eugentcs Society on
October 20th, 1936.

Lewis, A. J.: Eucenics REVIEW, 25, 79, 1933.

of the constitutional make-up, the genotypic
milieu as it is called. And finally there is the
influence of the environment. Different
genes differ in their capacity for being
influenced by these other two factors. Some
show their presence fully and at once under
practically all circumstances, others only
in time, with varying degrees of completeness and in varying percentages of. their
carriers. The extent to which a gene does
eventually show itself is called its manifestation rate. It seems probable that in most
psychiatric conditions where heredity is
important this manifestation rate is far
from 100 per cent., ie. that quite a high
proportion of the carriers of the abnormal
gene never develop the abnormal condition.

Huntington's Chorea

Let us turn now to the individual mental
disorders. Huntington’s chorea is an interesting example showing that establishing the
method of inheritance does not mean the
end of all interest in the subject. Huntington
himself, when he first described the disease,
laid stress on its direct inheritance. For
many years subsequently this view was
attacked. A polymorphic theory of inheritance, which still seems to linger on in a
dead-alive state to the present time, was
then the order of the day. It was insisted
that the direct inheritance of Huntington’s
chorea was by no means the rule, that it
showed family relationships to other forms
of chorea, athetosis, epilepsy, and even to
insanity and psychopathy in general. Only
a general tendency to all forms of neurological and psychiatric abnormality, it was
held, could be inherited. It was the great
service of Entres* in 1921 to clear the deadwood away from the subject, and to show
that in practically every true case of Huntington’s chorea, one or other of the parents,

*Entres, J. L.: Zuy Klinik und Vevrerbung der
Huntingtonschen Chovea, Berlin, 1921.

277
278

if they had lived long enough, had shown,
not epilepsy or insanity or other neuropathic condition, but Huntington’s chorea
itself. In an exhaustive collection of the
literature in 1934, Julia Bell* in a series of
744 cases was only able to find six in which
both parents had reached old age without
one developing the disease. Inheritance is
then direct, dominant, entirely specific and
due to the presence of a single mutant
autosomal gene.

Since then Sjégrenf in Sweden in 1935 has
published an analysis of forty Huntington
families, embracing eighty-eight cases of the
disease and involving the investigation of
600 persons. All these families, it seems,
were related in the recent or remote past, so
that it is quite likely that the point of origin
of all these cases was one single person in
whom the mutation originally occurred.
SjOgren shows by mathematical analysis
that the Mendelian relations of normal to
abnormal follow closely the figure expected
on a theory of simple dominance. He
calculates the expectation of developing the
disease for a child of a Huntington case to
be 35 per cent., which is certainly not the
same as the 50 per cent. demanded by
theory. The difference, he shows, is not to
be explained by more complicated theories
of inheritance, but by an incomplete manifestation. It seems that even here, where
everything seems so simple, the environment
and the genotypic milieu play a part. The
establishment of the relative importance of
these will require the collection of a series
of Huntington twins, a work that is not
likely to be accomplished in the near future.

At the present time Drs. Guttmann and
Minski are doing some work that may prove
of the greatest interest. A special difficulty
of practical eugenics when concerned with
Huntington’s chorea is that the affected
persons seldom show any morbid change
much before the age of thirty, often not
until well on into the fifties. It would be of
the greatest value to be able to recognize

* Bell, J.: Treasury of Human Inheritance, Vol. IV,
Pt. I, Huntington’s Chorea, Cambridge, 1934.

+ Sjogren, T.: Z. f. menschl. Vererb. u. Konsistutionsdehve, 19, 131, 1935.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

these carriers as early as possible in life ;
but from work done hitherto these persons
do not show any particular abnormality
before the onset of the illness. Drs. Guttmann and Minski have found in ‘a close
neurological and psychiatric examination of
a series of children of Huntington cases a
considerable frequency of certain disturbances of movement. It is possible that it is
the children who show these abnormalities
who are the ones subsequently doomed to
the illness. By an investigation of the
Mendelian ratios and by careful history
taking in the case of the original propositi,
these workers are attempting to discover the
real significance of their interesting finding.

Schizophrema

Of all mental disorders schizophrenia has
undergone the most intensive investigation
from the hereditary point of view, but in this
as in other fields has offered the thorniest
problems to solve. One of the most fundamental is the question whether schizophrenia is to be regarded as a single biological entity or not. Till recently all attacks
on its unity have failed. Kolle, indeed, has
brought evidence to show that paranoia,*
usually considered a quite separate disease,
and paranoid psychopathst are not really
separate entities but are hereditarily at
least related to schizophrenia. The attempt
of M. Bleuler in 1931] to single out a group
of rapidly dementing schizophrenics as
biologically different and probably of exogenous causation has not been confirmed by
recent work of Smith.§ Brugger in 1927
made a family investigation of Pfropfschizophrenia—that is, schizophrenia appearing
in mental defectives. Many authors, including Kraepelin, regarded this as a special and
very early form of schizophrenia, appearing
in early infancy or even embryonic life and
producing at first a picture of mental
defect. The work of Brugger has shown that
in the sibs of Pfropfschizophrenics there were

* Kolle, K.: Die Primdare Verricktheit, Leipzig,
1931.
t Kolle, K.: Z. Neurol., 136, 97, 1931.
* Bleuler, M.: J. Nerv. and Ment, Dis., 74, 393, 1931.
§ Smith, J. C.: Hosp. ttd., 437, 1934.
q Brugger, C.: Z. Neur., 113, 348, 1928.
THE INHERITANCE OF MENTAL DISORDER

as many mental defectives to be found as if
the propositi had been merely mentally
defective, as many schizophrenics as if the
propositi had been only schizophrenic, and
tthe number of Pfropfschizophrenics found
was explicable if the combination were only
a matter of chance. It cannot be assumed
from this that there is mo connection between
mental defect and schizophrenia. Kallmann
in the relatives of his schizophrenics found
a considerably raised frequency of mental
defect.

Four years ago Schulz* published an
important work on schizophrenia. He examined the families of 660 cases whose whole
life history was known in great detail. He
divided his material up, according to the old
Kraepelinian classification, into hebephrenic, catatonic and paranoid types, with
the four possible varieties of mixed cases,
seven in all. Firstly, he found a striking
difference in the sex ratios in the different
clinical groups. Of the hebephrenic type
there were three males to one female; the
catatonics were about evenly divided ; and
there were about two paranoid females to
every male. This confirms a similar finding
of Bumke, based on smaller material. There
was a different social distribution, the hebephrenics tending to come more than the
others from the upper classes. The hebephrenics showed the lowest age of onset and
the highest percentage of complete or nearly
complete recovery (22-6 per cent.). Among
the sibs of the hebephrenics there was a
much higher percentage of schizophrenia
than in those of the other groups, 18-20 per
cent. as compared with 5-7°5 per cent.
Finally, the type of illness shown by a sib
tended to some extent to be of the same type
as that of the propositus. This was to a
greater extent true of the pure than of the
mixed groups. Schulz is inclined to regard
these interesting and important findings with
the greatest caution. He is far from suggesting that the concept of the unity of schizophrenia has suffered any serious blow.
Indeed, the fact that practically all forms of
schizophrenia were represented in the sibs of

* Schulz, B.: Z. Neur., 143, 175, 1932.

279

propositi of practically all types, and of the
forty-nine possible combinations of illness
of propositus and illness of sib only five were
not represented, speaks with considerable
force against the assumption that these
different types of clinical picture are so
many different biological unities. It seems
more probable that the differences are
caused by differences in the internal environment, the genotypic milieu, which would, of
course, also show hereditary relations.

This does not exhaust the interest of
Schulz’s work. Out of his total of 660 cases
he separated out fifty-five where there was
a history of head injury before the onset of
the psychosis. These cases showed a much
lower percentage, 2:9 per cent., of schizophrenia among their sibs than did the cases
where there was no suggestion of any
“cause”’ for the illness (8:3 per cent.).
Among these fifty-five cases were thirtythree where the head injury seems a somewhat more plausible precipitating factor than
in the rest. Among their sibs the frequency
of schizophrenia was less than 2 per cent.
Clinically these cases showed no striking
difference from the others. There are two
possible explanations for this. First, that
some of these cases were truly exogenous,
i.e. without possessing the gene or genes for
schizophrenia they developed a clinically
indistinguishable symptomatic psychosis ;
secondly, that in these cases there was a
comparatively unfavourable genotypic
milieu, which tended to reduce the amount
of schizophrenia among their sibs, but in the
propositi themselves was negatived by the
favourable environment, i.e. that resulting
in a head injury.

In a subsequent paper,* Schulz examines
his material with more complicated statistical methods. Although his clinical material
was extremely typical and carefully controlled by follow-up histories, the results of
this examination are to show its genetic
heterogeneity. Using the assumption of
simple recessive inheritance, he finds that
his material includes an unduly large
number of families with only one case, that

* Schulz, B.: Z. Neur., 151, 145, 1934.
280

of the propositus. Again the competitive
explanations of contamination with exogenous psychoses or important variations in
the effect of the genotypic milieu suggest
themselves. Schulz, however, is now able
to show that the first is unsatisfactory, as
even if it were true the second hypothesis
would have to be called in, which by itself
is capable of explaining all the facts.

The rest of the genetic constitution may
then be taken as having an important
influence on the penetrative power of the
schizophrenic gene. Further evidence on
this point has been brought in recent papers
of Luxenburger* and Kallmann.t Kallmann’s findings are of especial interest to
eugenists, and have the advantage of being
worked out on the very large material of
1,087 propositi. He shows that 62 per cent.
of the children of his schizophrenics were
born before the onset of the illness, 70 per
cent. before the first admission to hospital.
Sterilization of schizophrenics is, then, likely
to have little positive effect in any measurable space of time. They do, however, tend
of their own accord to have fewer children
than the average, the more severe types
averaging little more than one child per
patient. Kallmann divides his material into
a central group (I) of hebephrenics and
catatonics and a peripheral group (II) of
paranoid cases and cases of recurrent
schizophrenia with little permanent damage
to the personality. The former show a
higher percentage of schizophrenia both in
children and sibs, confirming Schulz’s finding (sibs: Group I 12-9 per cent, Group II
8-9 per cent.; children: Group I 20-9 per
cent., Group II 10-4 per cent.). The very
high tuberculosis rate in all the groups of
propositi, children and sibs, ran parallel to
the schizophrenia figures, a very remarkable
finding. That there is a relation between
schizophrenia and tuberculosis seems clear.
Its exact nature is, however, not clear.
Bleuler and Rappaport{ found no special

* Luxenburger, H.: Allg. Z. Psychtaty., 104, 107,
1936.
+ Kallmann, F.: Allg. Z. Psychtatr., 104, 119, 1936.
{ Bleuler, M., and Rappaport, L.: Z. Neur., 153,
649, 1935.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

frequency of mental disorders in the families
of tuberculous propositi. Kallmann also
gives interesting figures of the frequency of
schizophrenia in families according to the
constitution of the parents. The children of
two schizophrenics in his material developed
schizophrenia in 63 per cent. of cases, a
higher finding than that of Luxenburger and
Schulz, which was 53 per cent. Kallmann
comes to the conclusion that a dimeric or
polymeric inheritance of schizophrenia can
be excluded, although the numerical relations to be expected on a theory of simple
recessivity are not exactly filled.
Luxenburger comes to exactly the same
conclusion. Clear evidence of the effect of
the genotypic milieu is found in the much
greater concordance in point of age of onset
in the concordant uniovular as compared
with the concordant binovular twins. On
the basis of combined twin and family
research Luxenburger estimates that only
63°4 per cent. of the carriers of a homozygotic schizophrenic gene may actually
develop the disease. The effect of the genotypic milieu is to be estimated as 17-6 per
cent., that of the environment at Ig per
cent. He says that taking into consideration
all the disturbing factors, which are shown
to be so important, and a margin for statistical error, the proportion of abnormals
among the children of a heterozygotic
crossing is calculated as 22 per cent., which
is very little removed from the 25 per cent.
of theory. He, too, comes to the conclusion
that a theory of inheritance by simple
recessivity is at present the most likely.

Epilepsy

In the past year important work has been
published by Conrad* on the inheritance of
epilepsy, attacking the subject by means of
twin research. The difficulty and expense
of this method of attack is well brought out
by Conrad’s attempt to investigate all the
institutionalized epileptic twins in Germany.
Starting with an epileptic population of some
17,000 persons, he was able to find 253 pairs
of twins, but of these only twenty-five pairs

* Conrad, K.: Z. Neur., 153, 271, 1935; tbtd., 155,
254 and 509, 1936.
THE INHERITANCE OF MENTAL DISORDER

of uniovular ones of a useful age, who are
the crucial part of the experiment. The
material must be of great value to justify
such a large expense of energy to obtain
such a quantitatively meagre result. The
method is, indeed, of great value, but its
importance may be overestimated, as Conrad
does when he says: “‘ In the comparison of
the concordance as regards phenotypic
character in binovular and uniovular twins
we have a direct measure of the degree to
which it is hereditarily determined.” This is
not true. The concordance in binovular
twins is very largely dependent on the
method of inheritance, dominant or recessive, mono- or polymeric. The concordance
in uniovular twins is independent of this.
The finding of a very low concordance in
both sets of twins is not proof that the
character is not determined by a hereditary
factor, if the manifestation rate of this
factor is low enough. Further, the finding of
a high concordance in uniovular twins and
of a low concordance in binovular ones is
not final proof of hereditary transmission.
In epilepsy, for instance, it is possible that
there is no hereditary factor for epilepsy,
but that all mankind are equally liable under
favourable circumstances to develop the
disease.

Let us suppose that the majority of cases
of so-called idiopathic epilepsy are caused
by encephalitic processes accompanying the
infections of childhood. Then, if there are
hereditary factors governing the liability of
the individual, given the infection, to develop
a suitable encephalitic process, uniovular
twins would show a much higher percentage
of concordance in regard to epilepsy than
binovular. This is not mere quibbling, as a
consideration of the eugenic problem presented under these different circumstances
shows. In the case of epilepsy, however, I
think Conrad has brought sufficient evidence
to prove his point.

Five of his twenty-five uniovular twins
had to be counted twice, for statistical
reasons, making thirty pairs. Of these
twenty were concordant. Excluding eight
symptomatic epilepsies, Conrad finds nineteen of twenty-two pairs concordant—a

281

concordance figure of 86 per cent. As the
result of calculations of whose validity I am
doubtful, Conrad increases this figure to
g6 per cent. As he, however, himself points
out, by this proceeding he is excluding the
cases where environment is important, a
procedure calculated to put the manifestation rate at its highest possible level. Conrad’s figures are to some extent in conflict
with those of previous authors. Rosanoff*
found only 61 per cent. concordance in
uniovular epileptic twins. As Conrad points
out, however, there are many criticisms to
be made of Rosanoff’s work. The work of
Schulte, however, seems to me sounder, and
a possible selective bias for uniovularity, and
concordance does not affect the value of his
very high discordance—he found only two
concordant twins in ten uniovulars. Schulte’s
cases were from an out-patient department,
and it seems possible that the hereditary
element may not be so important in these
milder cases.

Conrad’s most striking evidence in proof
of a hereditary form of epilepsy is given in
his clinical section. Among the concordant
uniovular twins, the degree of concordance
in respect of clinical form, course and age of
onset of the illness is in the majority of
cases extremely striking. For instance, the
age of onset of propositus and twin shows
a correlation coefficient of 0-91, and itself
must be regarded in these cases as principally
dependent on the hereditary factor. It must,
then, be regarded as practically proved that
there is a form of epilepsy which is to a great
extent determined by the hereditary constitution. How large this group is is not so
easy to determine. Of his material Conrad
calculates that almost three-fourths were
idiopathic. Nor is it easy to say whether
the so-called symptomatic epilepsies are to
any extent also hereditarily determined or
whether they are of purely environmental
origin.

Among other problems Conrad deals in
detail with the possibility of birth trauma as

* Rosanoff, A. I., Handy, L. M., and Rosanoff, I. A. :
Arch. Neur. and Psychiatr., 31, 1165, 1934.
+ Schulte, H.: Ref. Zbl. Neur., 73, 251, 1934.
282

a cause of epilepsy. Unlike Russell Brain*
he finds no preponderance of first and early
births in epileptics. Instead he finds a slight
preponderance of last births, which is to be
associated with the tendency of twins to
occur late in a series of pregnancies, and has
apparently nothing to do with epilepsy.
Conrad’s epileptics show a considerable
excess of twins, according to his calculations,
however, of the binovular type only. This
would point to a tendency of persons with
the epileptic gene also having a tendency to
polyovularity. This conclusion must, I think,
be regarded with the greatest caution for the
present.

Psychopathic Personality

Let us now leave the mental disorders
proper for a short review of the work that
has been done on the psychopathic personality. This is a subject of especial difficulty. How are we to analyse the concept of
personality, when we may guess that it is
controlled by some thousands or tens of
thousands of different genes? The infant
science of psychology can give us at present
little help. The only method of attack is by
the analysis of what is recognizably abnormal.
Even here the greatest caution is necessary.
It seems possible that in schizophrenia or
manic-depressive insanity we have unitary
abnormalities like Huntington’s chorea.
Even here we are faced with difficult
problems of relation of illness to personality.
In the families of manic-depressives we find
with great frequency the so-called syntonic
or cycloid type of personality,'whose structure
is strongly reminiscent of the psychosis
itself. It seems very possible that many of
these cyclic personalities are born manicdepressives that never develop a degree of
abnormality sufficient to secure their isolation and diagnosis. In the families of schizophrenics we find with unusual frequency
types of personality from the faintly to the
strikingly abnormal often labelled schizoid.
On the other hand, while manic-depressives
who do not show the syntonic personality
practically do not exist, cases of schizophrenia who before the onset of the psychosis

* Brain, R.: Quart. J. Med., 19, 299, 1926.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

have never shown any particular “ schizoid ’’ traits are a commonplace of clinical
practice. In Schulz’s series the patients with
a normal prepsychotic personality showed no
difference from the others in clinical outcome or hereditary relationships.

Out of the kaleidoscopic variety of psychopathic personalities two types distinguish
themselves by being related to different
types of illness—the obsessional and the
hysterical. In both it is uncertain whether
we have the accumulation of characteristics
of the normal individual to an abnormal
degree or whether there is something
peculiar and specific. Luxenburger in 1930
found in the sibs of obsessional neurotics
46 per cent. of abnormal personalities. Dr.
Lewis,* in a paper published this year, found
among the parents of his fifty obsessionals
37 per cent. of personalities showing marked
obsessional traits, in the sibs something
over 20 per cent. of mildly or severely
obsessional characters. I am looking forward
very much to seeing this part of his paper
published in full, as he has promised. His
results at first glance suggest that there is
something specific, that it is in large part
hereditarily determined, and that some
dominant factor is at work. Dr. Lewis,
however, may find that other explanations
are better.

The results of investigations into the
hysterical type of personality are more
difficult to estimate. Kraulist investigated
two groups; the first consisted of socially
abnormal personalities showing the hysterical
type of reaction, the second of persons unremarkable in ordinary circumstances but
having episodic hysterical reactions. Of the
first group 28 per cent. were to a slight or
severe degree mentally defective, 63 per
cent. had come into conflict with the law,

.86 per cent. had shown abnormal character

traits from childhood. They were of a lower
social level than the average, showed a
definite tendency towards preferential mating
with psychopathic partners, and married
life was unhappy or disastrous in the

‘majority of cases. The second group showed

* Lewis, A. J.: Proc. R.S.M., 29, 325, 1936.
+ Kraulis, W.: Z. Neur,, 136, 174, 1931.
THE INHERITANCE OF MENTAL DISORDER

the same features, but in less marked degree.
Of the sibs 35-5 per cent. were abnormal,
numbering 12:5 per cent. of hysterical
personalities. Pure hyperthymic, depressive
or obsessional personalities were not found.
No significant increase in the frequency of
manic-depressive or schizophrenic psychoses
was noted, but there was a raised percentage
of epileptics, 1-5 per cent. While this investigation does not take us very far, it seems
to indicate that hereditary factors play a
part in the development of the hysteric and
that these factors are of some degree of
specificity.

A psychopathic personality may call
attention to itself not only by falling into
ilness but into another form of social
abnormality—crime. It is from this latter
angle that the remaining investigations I
wish to discuss have been directed. Von
Baeyer* investigated the families of psychopathic swindlers and liars. His attention
was particularly directed to the psychiatric
type known as pseudologia phantastica.
These are the natural actors and actresses
who go to remarkable lengths in the fabrication of often complicated deceptions, who
display a surprising wealth of fantasy, often
with a play-like quality, like that of the
day-dreams of a child, whose suggestibility
is such that they deceive not only their
natural victims, but often to a considerable
extent themselves. Von Baeyer’s investigations disclose no relation of this group to
any of the psychoses. Among the sibs the
percentage of psychopathy was very high,
35 per cent., leading, as in the propositi, to a
high degree of criminality, 23 per cent. The
psychopathic personalities among the sibs
showed, as might be expected, strong family
resemblances to the propositi, but were
seldom exactly of the same type. A particularly interesting finding was the high
proportion of personalities of the hyperthymic and cyclothymic type. These are
usually considered to belong to the same
family group as manic-depressive insanity,
but there was no increased incidence of the
psychosis. Nevertheless von Baeyer is of

*von Baeyer, W.: Zur Genealogie psychopathtscher
Schwindler und Liigner, Leipzig, 1935.

283

the opinion that “ probably in every true
psychopathic swindler a constitutional hyperthymic or cyclothymic factor lies hid.”
The majority of the psychopathic personalities were of the hysterical type. Von
Baeyer tries to separate out a quality of
“ Ungebundenheit,” or irresponsibility and
lack of control by sense of reality or ordinary
social values, and to show that this tends to
recur in the relatives of his propositi, and to
be specially frequent among the children
of parents of the same type. He very
sensibly makes the point that this quality
and others shown by his propositi are not of
solely evil social significance. They represent
tendencies which may in certain circumstances be of the greatest value—as a part
of the artistic equipment of the actor or
writer, for instance.

Two important recent studies of criminal
twins have disclosed the necessity for a
modification of Lange’s views expressed in
his famous book, Crime as Destiny. Both
based on larger material than Lange’s, the
work of Kranz* and Stumpfilft shows that
Lange overestimated the importance of the
hereditary component as the main cause of
criminal behaviour. While they agree with
him in finding a high concordance in uniovular twins, it is in both cases less than the
very high figure of 77 per cent. found by
Lange. Kranz finds 66 per cent., Stumpfl
only 60 per cent. But the striking difference
is in the findings in the same-sexed binovular
twins. In these Lange found only 12 per
cent. concordance, Stumpfi the much higher
figure of 41 per cent., and Kranz a still
higher concordance of 54 per cent. In these
more recent works, the difference between
uniovular and binovular twins sinks from a
very high figure to a comparatively low one.
This finding is very suggestive of the importance of early environmental influences
in leading to criminal behaviour. On closer
clinical examination the picture becomes
clarified. The studies in personality and

* Kranz, H.: Lebensschicksale krimineller Zwillinge,

Berlin, 1936.
tT Stumpf, F.: Die Urspriinge des Verbrechens

dargestellt am Lebenslauf von Zwillingen, Leipzig, 1936.
284

heredity in criminals made by Riedl,*
Stumpfif and others have shown that a
fundamental distinction must be drawn between two types, the type that shows
abnormal tendencies early in life and develops in time into a recidivist and habitual
criminal and the type that under environmental stress in later life falls once, and with
great frequency once only, to a single
criminal act. Of Stumpfl’s uniovular twins,
the recidivists and habitual criminals showed
almost complete concordance. The nonhabitual uniovular twins were five times as
often discordant as concordant. All of the
same-sexed binovular twins of the habitual
criminals were concordant in having come
into conflict with the law, but showed
striking differences in their criminal careers,
the type of crime, frequency and length of
punishment being very different, as well as
the underlying personalities. Further clinical
analysis leads Stumpfl to a series of conclusions. He considers that there are forms of
criminality largely determined by environmental circumstances and arising under the
influence of internal conflict. They are associated usually with comparatively normal
type of personality, and are not of bad prognostic omen. There are, on the other hand,
types of criminals in whom the criminality
is the expression of a hereditarily determined
abnormal personality, recognizable in early

* Riedl, M.: Arch. Kriminol, 93, 1933, quoted by
Stumpfi.

¢ Stumpfi, F.:
1935
Evrbanlage und Verbrechen, Berlin,

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

years, and of a most refractory nature to
treatment or punishment. Analysis of the
uniovular twins of all kinds shows a concordance of personality make-up extending
down to the finest details of character.
Stumpfl emphasizes the fact that the environment of twins, as far as it concerns
their education and development, is much
more alike in the case of uniovular than
binovular twins. Having the same constitution, and starting from the same starting
point, they find or make for themselves,
apart from the operations of chance, a
similar environment in later life. Further,
they frequently remain bound to one another
by emotional ties, and, as Kranz points out,
tend to identify their twin with themselves,
their actions with his. The conclusion to be
drawn is that some forms of criminality are
the expression of an abnormal personality,
whose character is determined almost solely
by heredity. Others are the result of environmental stress. The rdéle of the environment
is in the translation of a tendency into an
accomplished act, of “ Fahigkeit’”’ into
“ Fertigkeit.”” Though the importance of
heredity in determining the make-up of the
personality may be regarded as established,
the analysis of its method of operation is
likely to prove a thorny problem for many
generations. So far we may agree with von
Baeyer, that it is indeed not the psychopathic personalities as such that are inherited, but at most particular characteristics, which in certain combinations dispose
to psychopathic behaviour.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVIII, No. 4.
