CHRISTOPHER TIETZE

M.D., Director of Research, National Committee on Maternal Health, Inc.

Differential Fecundity and
Effectiveness of Contraception’

F. Guttmacher, and his associate, Samuel

Rubin, collected from their private practice
in Baltimore a series of 1,727 pregnancies which
occurred after birth control had been discontinued with the purpose of achieving conception. It was my privilege to make a statistical
analysis of this material. In our report,
published in 1950, we stated “‘that the chance of
conception was greatest immediately after the
discontinuance of contraceptive measures .. .
After the first month the chance of conception
declined steadily and rather rapidly . . . The
explanation ... is ... that couples differ considerably in their ability to achieve pregnancy.
Those who conceive most easily do so during
the first few months after birth control has been
given up. As time progresses, the relatively
fecund couples have eliminated themselves and
only the less fecund and sterile remain.” It was
further pointed out that “‘a group of couples
practicing contraception successfully is not
subjected to the selective process by which the
more fecund couples are eliminated . . . Such
a population, therefore, retains its high
fecundity ...”

Our contribution of 1950 attracted little
attention in medical and demographic literature,
possibly because the statistical argument had
been too concise. The purpose of the present
paper is to restate the case and to illustrate the
argument by the use of a model or hypothetical
population. This model is based on one set of
possible assumptions out of an infinite number
the results of which could have served equally
well.

The distribution of the Baltimore series of
planned pregnancies by time required for conception is repeated in the first column of Table 1.

SE YEARS AGO my good friend, Alan

* A paper read at a members’ meeting of the Eugenics
Society on October 15th, 1958.

TABLE 1
PLANNED PREGNANCIES*
BY TIME REQUIRED FOR CONCEPTION

 

 
   
   
 

     

      
 
      

Time required Per cent
for conception| NUMBER OF PREGNANCIES | distribution
(unweighted

; ; . average)

(months) Baltimore | Indianapolis

356 34-05

235 27-71

140 16°31

10-73

5-45

5-75

100-00

 

*Observed data

Next to it appears a comparable series of 950
planned pregnancies, communicated by C. F.
Westoff from the records of the Indianapolis
Study.?, These pregnancies were reported by a
sample of nearly 2,000 white Protestant couples
interviewed in 1941 and early 1942. The period
of married life covered by the histories ranged
from twelve to fifteen years; the median age
at marriage of the wives was about twenty-one
years. The percentage distributions of the two
series of pregnancies are quite similar and have,
therefore, been averaged in the third column.
In the combined distribution 34 per cent of all
pregnancies occurred during the first month
after contraception had been discontinued,
78 per cent during the first six months, and
94 per cent during the first two years.*

A hypothetical population

We are now ready to start with the construction
of our model. Table 2 shows the percent distributions of planned pregnancies, by time

 

* No attempt has been made to distinguish menstrual
periods and calendar months. It is believed that time
required for conception tends to be reported in terms of
menstrual periods for short durations and in terms of
calendar months for longer durations.

231

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, January 1959, 50, 4.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

TABLE 2

PLANNED PREGNANCIES IN THREE HYPOTHETICAL
GROUPS OF COUPLES
PER CENT DISTRIBUTION BY TIME INTERVALS

Time interval
(months)

    

* Assumed pregnancy rates per couple-month of
exposure: Group A = ‘50, Group B = :10, Group C = ‘01

intervals, for three hypothetical groups of
couples, identified as Group A, Group B, and
Group C, each group homogeneous in regard to
fecundity.* Of these, Group A represents the
highly fecund with an assumed probability of
conception or pregnancy rate of -50 per couplemonth; Group B is moderately fecund with a
pregnancy rate of -10 per couple-month; and
Group C is sub-fecund with a pregnancy rate of
only -01 per couple-month.

In the highly fecund Group A one-half of the
pregnancies occur during the first month of
exposure. Within six months more than 98
per cent of all couples have achieved pregnancy
and most of the remaining couples, within the
next six months. In the moderately fecund
Group B the process of impregnation is far
slower. According to the assumption made,
10 per cent of the wives conceive during the
first month after contraception has been discontinued. About 62 per cent of the pregnancies
fall into the remainder of the first year and
20 per cent into the second year. In 8 per cent
more than two years are required for conception.
In the sub-fecund Group C only 1 per cent of
the wives conceive during the first month and
only 11 per cent during the entire first year.
Another 10 per cent conceive during the second

* Throughout this paper, the terms ‘‘fecund’’ and “‘fertile”’
and their derivatives are employed according to the
usage of demographers; the former denoting reproductive capacity; the latter, reproductive performance. In
medical terminology, reproductive capacity is called
“fertility”? and reproductive performance, “‘parity’’.

232

year and almost four-fifths require more than
two years.*

Table 3 presents the per cent distribution of
planned pregnancies, by time intervals, in a
hypothetical population composed of 60 per
cent highly fecund couples, 38 per cent moderately fecund couples, and 2 per cent subfecund couples. The numbers of pregnancies

TABLE 3
PLANNED PREGNANCIES IN A
POPULATION*

HYPOTHETICAL

PER CENT. DISTRIBUTION BY TIME INTERVALS

 

* Composition of hypothetical population: Group A =
60%, Group B = 38%, Group C = 2%

produced by each of the three groups of couples
appear in the first three columns and the total
for the entire population, in the last column.
These percentages and the assumed pregnancy
rates in Groups A, B, and C were determined bya
process of trial and error until the resulting
distribution was very similar to the combined
distribution of the observed Baltimore and
Indianapolis data. About 34 per cent of pregnancies occur in the first month, 77 per cent in
the first six months, and 95 per cent in the first
two years. |

* The distributions shown in Table 2 were derived in
the following manner: First, the monthly probability of
conception (p) was converted into the probability of
non-conception (¢ = 1 — p). By raising g to the appropriate powers, the probability was then computed of
pregnancy not having occurred, 2, 3, 6 12, and 24
myonts alter contraception was discontinued; e.g., for

roup B:

q -9000
q? -8100
g *7290
q° 5314
q?? 2824
q** 0798

Finally, g was subtracted from 1-0000, g? from gq, etc.,
and the differences multiplied by 100, with the terminal
0798 x 100 representing the percentage of pregnancies
occurring after more than 24 months.
DIFFERENTIAL FECUNDITY AND EFFECTIVENESS OF CONTRACEPTION

We may now proceed to the computation of
pregnancy rates in our hypothetical population,
again assuming no permanently sterile couples.
The first column of Table 4 shows the number

TABLE 4
COUPLE-MONTHS OF EXPOSURE, NUMBER OF PREGNANCIES, AND PREGNANCY RATES IN HYPOTHETICAL
POPULATION* BY TIME INTERVALS

Couplemonths

PREGNANCY RATE

Time
interval
(months)

per 100

couples couples

 

* Assuming no permanently sterile couples.

of months of exposure* experienced by 100
couples during successive time intervals after
contraception has been discontinued. For the
first month the number equals 100 by definition.
During the second month after discontinuation
only sixty-six couple-months appear because
thirty-four wives have already conceived in the
first month and are not any longer exposed to
the risk of pregnancy. For the same reason,
only forty-eight couple-months of exposure are
experienced by 100 couples during the third
month, ninety-four during the second trimester,
108 during the second half year, and only
ninety-seven couple-months during the second
full year.

The total number of couple-months of exposure corresponding to the 100 pregnancies of
the 100 couples in the hypothetical population is
700. The average exposure or number of months
required for conception in our model is exactly
seven. We shall return to this figure later on.

The distribution of pregnancies by time
* Couple-months of exposure were computed by multiplying the numbers of conceptions per 100 couples during
the time interval (Table 3) by the reciprocals for the
probability of conception for each component group,
e.g., for the interval 4-6 months:

Group A 657 xX2 = 13°14
Group B_ 7°52 x 10 = 75:20
GroupC -06 x 100= 6:00

94-34

2—ER

intervals, in the second column, is the one
developed in the preceding table. Pregnancy
rates per couple-month of exposure appear in
the third column and are finally converted into
the more conventional rates per 100 couple-years.

During the first month after the stopping of
birth control the pregnancy rate of the hypothetical population reaches the extremely high
values of -338 per couple-month or 406 per
100 couple-years. Subsequently, as we had
concluded in our study in 1950, “‘the chance of
conception declines steadily and rather rapidly”
until a pregnancy rate of 98 per 100 coupleyears prevails during the second year and a
rate of only thirty thereafter.

In mathematical terms, the pregnancy rate of
the hypothetical population during the first
month of exposure is the arithmetic mean of the
probabilities of conception assumed for the
three component groups of couples. The pregnancy rate for the total period of exposure, until
all couples have achieved pregnancy, is the
harmonic mean of the component probabilities.

It is now necessary to introduce the factor of
permanent sterility into the hypothetical population. For purposes of illustration it was
assumed that 5 per cent of the couples discontinuing contraception are unable to achieve
pregnancy at any time. The effect of this assumption which would seem to be more applicable
to women in their late twenties or early thirties
than to younger women? is illustrated in Table 5.

TABLE 5
COUPLE-MONTHS OF EXPOSURE, NUMBER OF PREGNANCIES, AND PREGNANCY IN HYPOTHETICAL
POPULATION* BY TIME INTERVALS

 
    
  
   

  
  

Apparent

 
  
   
   
 
    
 

Time couple Pregnancies| PREGNANCY RATE
interval bf exposure per 100
(months) per 100 couples
couples

* Assuming 5% of couples permanently sterile.

233
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

The apparent number of couple-months of
exposure per 100 couples in each time interval
is larger than in the absence of permanent
sterility because fewer couples are eliminated by
pregnancy. Permanently sterile couples are, of
course, not exposed to pregnancy, but since they
cannot be identified, they must be included.
The number of pregnancies in each interval is
5 per cent smaller. The pregnancy rates are
5 per cent lower in the first month and this
difference increases to 40 per cent during the
second year after the discontinuation of birth
control. The computation ends at this point as it
cannot be carried into an open-ended interval.

Effectiveness of contraception
So far, we have been concerned with planned
pregnancies, assuming tacitly that birth control
was practiced with complete success prior to its
discontinuation. Our next objective is to
compute pregnancy rates with use of contraception, assuming various degrees of incomplete
protection. The starting point is the hypothetical population previously constructed, with
5 per cent of the couples permanently sterile,
and the first assumption as to the effectiveness of
control is a reduction of 90 per cent in probability of conception for every couple in the
population.

The results of this computation are summarized in Table 6. The apparent number of

TABLE 6
COUPLE-MONTHS OF EXPOSURE, NUMBER OF PREGNANCIES, AND PREGNANCY RATES IN HYPOTHETICAL
POPULATION, BY TIME INTERVALS, WITH USE OF
CONTRACEPTION*

PREGNANCY RATE

 

* Assuming 90% reduction of pregnancy rates.

couple-months of exposure, shown in the first
column, is much larger than in Table 5 without

234

contraception because far fewer couples are
eliminated by pregnancy. The number of
pregnancies is reduced by nine-tenths in the
first month and by about two-thirds for the
period of 2-6 months. From the second half
year onward, the number of pregnancies per
100 couples is larger than without contraception,
reflecting the larger number of couple-months of
exposure. The pregnancy rate in the first
month is likewise reduced by nine-tenths, from
385 to 38-5 per 100 couple-years of exposure.
As in the previous model, the pregnancy rates
decline in successive time intervals, in this
instance, to 29-3 per 100 couple-years during the
second year. This decline is far less steep than
the corresponding decline without contraception
from a rate of 385 to one of 59 per 100 coupleyears.

Other assumptions as to the effectiveness of
contraceptive practice are illustrated in Table 7

TABLE 7

COUPLE-MONTHS OF EXPOSURE, NUMBER OF PREG
NANCIES, PREGNANCY RATE, AND PREGNANCY

POTENTIAL IN HYPOTHETICAL POPULATION, WITH
CONTRACEPTION*

   
 
  
  
  

 
 

Reduc
 
   

   
 
 
   

   
 
 

tion of Apparent Pregnancy | Pregnancy
preg- onthe Pregnancies| _ rate potential
nancy | Mont. per 100 per 100
rate couples couple
   

    

   

couples

  

* Assuming 90%, 95%, 98% and 99% reduction of
pregnancy rates and a time interval of 1-24 months.

for a time interval of two years. The additional
levels of reduction in probability of conception
are 95 per cent, 98 per cent, and 99 per cent
The number of couple-months of exposure
during two years increases with effectiveness of
contraception, approaching a maximum of
2,400 if no pregnancy were to occur. The
number of pregnancies per 100 couples during
two years ranges from 48-1 at the 90 per cent
level of effectiveness to 7:3 pregnancies at the
99 per cent level. Compared with the 90-6
DIFFERENTIAL FECUNDITY AND EFFECTIVENESS OF CONTRACEPTION

pregnancies during two years in the hypothetical
population without contraception, as shown in
Table 5, the differences are 47 per cent and
92 per cent, respectively. The percentage
reduction in the number of pregnancies over a
given period is thus far smaller than the corresponding assumed reduction in probability of
conception for each couple. The gamut of
pregnancy rates from a high of 33-0 per 100
couple-years of exposure at the 90 per cent
level of contraceptive effectiveness to a low of
only 3-8 at the 99 per cent level encompasses
most of the rates reported in the literature for
real populations using various contraceptive
methods.

The last column of Table 7 shows the pregnancy potential per 100 couple-yearsas a measure
of the fecundity retained by the hypothetical
population at each assumed level of contraceptive effectiveness. The pregnancy potential is
ten times the pregnancy rate at the 90 per cent
level of effectiveness, twenty times at the 95
per cent level, fifty times at the 98 per cent
level and 100 times at the 99 per cent level.
The pregnancy potential increases with the
effectiveness of contraceptive practice, but the
range is comparatively narrow from 330 at the
90 per cent level to 380 at the 99 per cent level
and 385 at the theoretical maximum with completely successful contraception. If the couples
practising birth control were to abandon it,
their uncontrolled pregnancy rate during the
first month would equal their pregnancy potential. In subsequent months the rate would
decline rapidly, following a pattern similar to
that shown in Table 5.

Post-partum sterility

It is now time to abandon the comparatively
firm ground of our hypothetical population to
carry the exploration forward into new and
inadequately known territory. It has long been
known that the average interval between two
pregnancies, in the absence of contraception, is
substantially longer than the average time
required for conception after the discontinuation of birth control or between marriage and the
first conception without attempts to postpone the

latter.* It is possible to estimate the order: of
magnitude of this delay. In the classic study by
Stix and Notestein* of 991 women who had
attended a birth control clinic in New York
City, the average interval between pregnancies
was about twelve months, including the allowance of one month for the puerperal period.
The average time required for planned conceptions was 3-3 months. The delay of conception
following a preceding pregnancy was, therefore,
on the order of nine months. Among the 1,444
“relatively fecund” couples of the Indianapolis
Study the average time between pregnancies
was about thirteen months; the average time
required for planned conception, 4-2 months;
and the delay following a preceding pregnancy,
again nine months. Similar estimates of the
delay of conception after a pregnancy can also
be derived from data on intervals between
successive live births, as compared with the
time between marriage and first birth, in highly
fertile populations that did not or do not
practice family limitation, such as the French
Canadians® of the eighteenth century and the
Hutterites® of the Western plains in our own
times.

By adding nine couple-months of post-partum
inability to conceive to the seven months computed from Table 4, one arrives at an average
uncontrolled interval between pregnancies of
sixteen months. If one month is deducted for the
puerperium, as is customary among American
authors in this field, the corresponding pregnancy
rate for the hypothetical population without any
use of contraception is 80 per 100 apparent
couple-years of exposure (1,200 + 15 = 80).
This rate, based on the experience of couples of
continuing fertility (excluding exposure prior to
the first pregnancy), corresponds to the rate of
171 shown in Table 4 based on planned pregnancies after discontinuation of contraception.

A normal period of post-partum sterility

 

* Time required for conception tends to average longer
for first marital pregnancies not preceded by contraception than for planned pregnancies. The difference is,
however, small (1-2 months) in relatively homogeneous
populations such as those cited here. One reason for the
longer average time required for the first marital pregnancy is premarital conception, since among those with
premarital coitus the more fecund couples are more
likely to achieve pregnancy prior to marriage than the
less fecund couples.

235
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

averaging nine months is not fully explained by
the information now available on the physiological factors that are involved. Guttmacher,’
who reviewed this subject a few years ago,
estimated the average duration of post-partum
amenorrhea in the absence of lactation at
about two months, followed by two anovulatory
cycles to a total of four months. If the child is
suckled, the corresponding period may well be
nine months or even more, but prolonged
breast feeding has not been the common practice
among the urban populations in the United
States from which our rough estimate of the
duration of post-partum sterility has been
derived. While the uncertainty as to average
duration of post-partum sterility does not affect
the argument which follows, it is to be hoped
that further research in this area will have high

priority.

Clinical implications

The extended average period of post-partum
sterility has important implications for the
computation and evaluation of pregnancy rates
with use of contraception. A group of couples,
studied as users of a particular method of birth
control, may include any or all of the following
components: (1) couples starting to use the
method at marriage or after a period of separation during which coitus did not occur; (2)
couples starting after a preceding pregnancy
just before the first post-partum ovulation;
(3) couples starting one or several months before
the first ovulation; (4) couples starting one or
several months after the first ovulation; and (5)
couples switching from another method of
contraception to the one which is being studied.

Couples in categories 1 and 2 find themselves
exactly in the situation illustrated in Tables 6
and 7. At the onset of contraceptive practice,
their fecundity is at the maximum, represented
in our model by a pregnancy potential of 385
per 100 couple-years. In subsequent months the
fecundity is slowly dissipated. Category 5 may
be assimilated to 1 and 2 since the loss of
fecundity is quite slow even at a comparatively
low level of contraceptive effectiveness.

The situation is different in regard to category
3, comprising those starting contraceptive
practice some time prior to the first post-partum

236

ovulation. For these couples, the pregnancy
potential is zero during the early part of their
contraceptive practice. The average pregnancy
potential for the entire period of use may be
substantially reduced, especially if contraception is initiated soon after delivery and if the
follow-up period is short.

Category 4, on the other hand, comprises
couples starting birth control some time after
the first post-partum ovulation and has, therefore, been subject to the rapid process of attrition illustrated in Table 5. Many of the more
highly fecund couples achieve pregnancy early
and by the time contraception has begun, a
large proportion of the remaining couples is
only moderately fecund or sub-fecund. While
later losses of pregnancy potential, during contraceptive exposure, are slow, the average
potential may be substantially below the maximum represented by categories 1, 2 and 5.

Previous studies of the effectiveness of contraceptive methods have, as a rule, paid little
attention to the interval since a preceding
pregnancy and to the use of other contraception during that period. Months of postpartum amenorrhea have generally been included
in the computation of pregnancy rates. It
would appear, therefore, that most of the
published rates are below the levels that would
have been obtained if all couples had started
birth control at the time of maximum fecundity.

To ensure a high degree of comparability it
would be most desirable that studies of the
effectiveness of contraception should be based on
groups entering observation at the point of
maximum fecundity. This is not practicable
since the proportions of couples in categories
2, 3 and 4 cannot be readily determined owing
to the fact that the reappearance of menstruation may precede the first post-partum ovulation
by a number of months. To be sure, the occurrence of ovulation can be determined by various
tests, such as endometrial biopsy or temperature
charting. However, these procedures can hardly
be incorporated into the design of contraceptive research, especially since repeated tests
over several months would be required.

As a substitute for an impracticable determination of the first post-partum ovulation,
the National Committee on Maternal Health
DIFFERENTIAL FECUNDITY AND EFFECTIVENESS OF CONTRACEPTION

has recommended in a recent publication®
statistical procedures designed to minimize the
reduction of fecundity resulting from the early
or late starting of contraceptive practice.
Setting up criteria for the inclusion of couples
in studies of the effectiveness of contraceptive
methods, the Committee recommends that “at
the time of prescription, the interval since the
most recent pregnancy should not exceed six
months without contraception or five years with
contraception” and further that periods of
‘post-partum amenorrhea should .. . be
omitted” from the computation of pregnancy
rates. Application of these rules would result
in an approximation of the maximum pregnancy
potential, especially if the average period of use
of contraception is sufficiently long. The
Committee recommends that it should be at
least one year.

REFERENCES

Tietze, Christopher et a/. Time required for conception in 1,727 planned pregnancies. 1950. Fertility and
Sterility 1, 4. 338-346.

Whelpton, P. K. and Kiser, Clyde V. Social and
Psychological Factors Affecting Fertility. 1946-1958.
New York. Milbank Memorial Fund.

. Henry, Louis. Fécondité des mariages. 1953. Paris:

Presses Universitaires de France.

Stix, Regine K. and Notestein, Frank W. Controlled
Fertility. 1940. Baltimore. Williams and Wilkins.

Henripin, Jacques. La population Canadienne au début
di x VIlle siécle. 1954. Paris: Presses Universitaires
e France.

Tietze, Christopher. Reproductive span and rate of
reproduction among Hutterite women. 1957. Fertility
and Sterility, 8, 1. 89-97.

Guttmacher, Alan F. Fertility of man. 1952. Fertility
and Sterility, 3, 4. 281-289.

Tietze, Christopher. Recommended Procedure for the.
Study of the Clinical Effectiveness of Contraceptive
Methods. 1958. New York. National Committee on
Maternal Health.

 

 

IN THE APRIL 1958 NUMBER OF

PHYSIOLOGICAL ZOOLOGY

Edited by Thomas Park, University of Chicago

A “Fetal-Maternal Shift” in the Ovoviviparous Spiny Dogfish Squalus suckleyi (Girard),

CLYDE MANWELL

Metabolic and Cardiac Responses to Temperature in the eae Dipsosaurus dorsalis.

The Growth Rate of Tetrahymena geleii HS under Optimal Conditions.

The Anaerobic Metabolism of Fish.

ILLIAM R. Dawson and GEORGE A. BARTHOLOMEW

Davip M. PRESCOTT

P. BLAZKA

Digestion and Absorption of Carbohydrates in the Alimentary Canal of the Red Cotton Bug, Dysdercus peewee Fabr.

(Heteroptera: Pyrrhocoridae).

The Inhibition of Growth in Crowded Rana pipiens Tadpoles.

SAXENA

CHRISTINA MACGREGOR RICHARDS

The Relation of X-Irradiation to the Fecundity and Fertility of Two Species of Flour Beetles.
THoMAsS Park, PETER P. H. DEBRuyN, and JAMES A. BOND

PHYSIOLOGICAL ZOOLOGY is published quarterly in J anuary, April, July and October.
Subscription 82s. 6d. per volume. Single copies 24s., including postage.

THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS, 5750 Ellis Avenue, CHICAGO

Agents in Great Britain: CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS, Bentiey House, 200 Euston Road, London, N.W.!

237
