FAMILY PLANNING:

THE PAST AND THE

FUTURE"
By MRS. MARGARET A. PYKE

LTHOUGH my lecture is called
A: Family Planning—The Past and
the Future,” I do not intend to bore
you with long accounts of the past—telling
stories about your past is always much more

amusing for the teller than for the listeners—
so my history will be brief and sketchy and

I shall use the past mainly as a yardstick .

for the present.

It is well known that the credit for
opening the first birth-control clinic in this
country belongs to Dr. Marie Stopes. That
was in 192I,and Walworth started in the
same year. There were, I think, fewer than
twenty clinics when the Family Planning
Association (under the title of the National
‘Birth Control Association) was started in
1930 to co-ordinate the work of the five
separate organizations which then concerned
themselves with problems of birth control.
All these, with the exception of the Constructive Birth Control Society, of which Dr.
Marie Stopes is president, are now fully
absorbed in the Family Planning Association.

The National Birth Control Association
had one object—te advocate and promote
the provision of facilities for scientific contraception. During its twenty-two years of
life the Association has changed its name and
its objects from birth control to family
planning. The main result has been the
development of work in the field of involun
tary sterility. Nearly all F.P.A. branch |

clinics tackle this problem to a greater or less
extent and Dr. Davidson will tell you of his
work, particularly on male infertility.

Postwar Growth

The postwar growth of the Association
has been very rapid. In 1949 we were, owing
to the generosity of the Eugenics Society,
still occupying the three rooms at 69

*A paper read at a Members’ Meeting of the Eugenics

Socsety on October 21st, 1952.

Eccleston Square which were first kindly
lent to us in 1934—and Dr. Davidson's
laboratory was in Wimpole Street. I think
our staff then numbered about ten, with two
or three outside organizers. Now we occupy
four floors at 64 Sloane Street (and are hardly
contained therein) and have a staff of
twenty-five, with eight part-time outside
organizers. Our expenditure in the 1949
financial year was just under £7,000—
last year it was nearly {16,000. We had
then sixty-four branches, running seventyeight clinics between them. Now we have
110 branches, with 130 clinics—and last year
these clinics saw about 50,000 new patients.
Letters to Headquarters asking for help and
advice have gone up from 4,800 to between
eight and nine thousand a year.

Work with Hospital Boards and Health
Authorities

An interesting feature of the extension of
the organization side of the work is the
co-operation established with local health
authorities and regional ‘hospital boards. In
1930, we thought our main tasks would be to
induce the Ministry to widen the terms of its
original memorandum (allowing local health
authorities to provide contraceptive advice
for nursing or expectant mothers who needed
it on medical grounds) and to persuade
local health authorities to make the fullest
possible use of their powers. Now, it is often
the local health authority which asks us
to start a clinic and a type of joint action
prevails in many places today. The local
authority or regional hospital board hires
or lends to us premises (with equipment) on
which a branch of the F.P.A. can run a
clinic. Frequently it also makes a grant or
pays fees for cases which it refers to the clinic
and sometimes even its staff is employed at
the clinic. This arrangement greatly facilitates the formation of an F.P.A. clinic to
which all married couples can come, and, at

197
198

the same time, the local health authority
ensures that its own patients are treated at
far less cost than if it had to set up a clinic
of its own. At the present moment, of our
130 clinics, eighty-nine are held on local
health authority premises and nine on
hospital board premises. Sixty-one local
health authorities make direct payments to
our branches and 107 refer cases to us.
Sixty-two have their own clinics and out of
the total of 200 authorities there are only
six in England, twelve in Scotland and one
in Wales which have taken no action to
implement the various memoranda issued
by the Ministry of Health. I think we may
claim that this position is largely due to
twenty years’ steady concentration of effort
by the F.P.A.

Training at Clinics

F.P.A. clinics have also been pioneers
in providing training in contraceptive technique. Training facilities in medical schools
are improving but our clinics are almost the
only opportunity for doctors, medical
students and nurses to acquire practical
experience. The F.P.A. has drawn up
requirements for training clinics and an
increasing number of our branches is reaching
the standard necessary for recognition as a
training centre. Trainees include many
overseas visitors who are frequently sent to us
by the Ministry of Health and other official
bodies. At some medical schools F.P.A.
doctors lecture to students and, in at least
one medical school, attendance at an F.P.A.
clinic is an essential part of the students’
curriculum.

Approved List

One of the most important achievements
of the Association is the approved list of
contraceptives. This is a list of those contraceptives which have passed certain tests,
some of which were originally devised by
Dr. J. R. Baker when he was working for
the Birth Control Investigation Committee
under the egis of Dr. Blacker and the
Eugenics Society. Tests of any product
(whether chemical or rubber) are carried
out on samples bought at random and are

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

repeated every year. The manufacturer
must produce the formula and must agree
to abide by certain conditions which are
designed to secure ethical behaviour by firms
and to prevent the advertisement of
unjustified claims. All literature produced
by a firm is examined and any advertisement or leaflet or other statement about a
product on, the list must be submitted to us
for approval before it is published. The
British Medical Journal, the Lancet and the
Pharmaceutical Journal consult us_ before
accepting any advertisement of a contraceptive. Our biggest fight has been to get
one phrase included in all advertisements of
chemical contraceptives. It is natural for
manufacturers to wish to advertise their
products for use alone but it is the opinion
of the F.P.A. Medical Sub-Committee that
for maximum safety a chemical contraceptive should be used with a barrier. We
all hope very much indeed that this will not
always be so and that the perfect contraceptive may not be far away, but that has
not happened yet. There may be many
people who prefer to use a chemical alone
and we naturally do not wish to interfere
with individual choice but we want to ensure

that this course shall not be adopted in the

belief that it is the safest possible method.
Hence our insistence on the phrase about
maximum safety. The only exception could
be in the case of a product which appears
to offer greater possibilities, and has passed
our tests, and which is described as experimental.

The F.P.A. approved list is, I think, the
only means by which medical practitioners
(and others) can discriminate between the
many contraceptive preparations now upon
the market and it is accepted as a guide by
other bodies—we were told recently of a
manufacturer who was refused a licence to
export his goods because they were not on the
F.P.A. approved list.

Publications

A greatly increased activity since the war
has been the production and sale of literature. Problems of Fertility, by several authors
and intended for the medical profession, was
FAMILY PLANNING

published under the auspices of the F.P.A.
and, apart from reports of various conferences, we have published seven of our own
booklets for sale in branch clinics and to the
general public. We also now have our own
quarterly journal Family Planning, not yet
so large or imposing as the EUGENICS
‘REVIEW, but we nope its growth will be rapid
and lusty.

Conduct of Affairs

The policy of the Association is laid down
by its members and branch delegates at the
annual general meeting and its business is
conducted by the executive committee and
appointed sub-committees. The executive
is composed of elected members, members
appointed by the ten federations into which
branches are grouped and co-opted members.
The sub-committees are finance, organization, general medical, clinics medical, subfertility, ethical, statistics and public
relations. We are proud that many distinguished people have consented to serve
on one or other of our sub-committees.

Federations of branches hold meetings at
which they can discuss many clinic problems
and receive reports from members of the
executive committee. The impulse given by
the branches to the extension of the Association’s work has increased enormously since
the war and all now aid the finances of their
Headquarters office by annual payment of
15s. per head for every new patient seen.
We are now welded into a solid organization
with a unity of purpose which greatly
increases both our momentum and our
weight.

Finances

Our finances reflect the changes of our
times. In 1939, four-sevenths of our income
came from charitable subscriptions and
donations and one-tenth from the Eugenics
Society. A theatrical gala performance and
bridge tournament raised about half the

latter amount and the total contribution.

from branch clinics was {13. Last year, oneeighth of our income was_ subscribed
{curiously enough the actual sum, £2,000, was
almost exactly the same as in 1939), and

199

nearly one-sixth, £2,500, came from branches.
Apart from {200 from the L.C.C. Sunday
Cinema Fund, the rest of our income, which
was seven-tenths of the whole and amounted
to over {11,000, was earned.

Need for the Work

_I would like to devote a few words to the
need for the work of the F.P.A. Apart from
opposition to the whole idea of birth control
there are, I think, a good many people who
are, at best, indifferent. Two reasons are
given for this indifference. The first is that
the battle is won, particularly since the
publication of the Report of the Royal
Commission on Population; the second is
that clinics are superfluous because everyone
knows what to do and anyone can go toa
chemist. Tied up with this is the suspicion,
I think, that the movement is largely
feminist, even sometimes that women, doctors
want to cash in on giving birth-control
advice to women patients.

With regard to the first of these reasons,
the Report of the Royal Commission made
recommendations which could have been
drafted by any of us. They were excellent
and they were comprehensive but no attempt
has been made to discuss the Report in
Parliament, let alone implement any of its
recommendations. I think the Report has
had an effect—but mainly because the F.P.A.
has quoted it far and wide to medical officers
of health, chairmen of regional hospital
boards and organizations up and down the
country. Ever since it came out we have
made it our business to publicize it. The
Roman Catholic hierarchy condemned the
recommendations relating to the provision
of contraceptive advice within the National
Health Service and directed Roman Catholics
“to do all in their power by lawful means

to prevent the implementation of these

proposals.’’ No, I do not think anyone can
fairly say that the battle has been won.

As regards the proposition that ‘‘ everyone
knows what to do” I think that the data,
even though not statistically compiled, are
in this case unassailable. One small paragraph in a Sunday paper during the last war
brought over 5,000 requests for our
200

booklet Practical Advice on Birth Control.
As a result of a short article in the Daily
Mirror last year saying that for a fee of 2s.
the F.P.A. would answer individual inquiries,
more than 3,000 letters arrived at Headquarters. And we cannot possibly keep
pace with the demand made upon us to start
new clinics. These come from the areas
themselves, they are not initiated by us,
and we cannot meet them because we cannot
afford more organizers.

It is true, of course, that patients at
clinics are mostly women and that they are
usually fitted with caps, although instruction
in the safe period and the best use of condoms
and sheaths is also given. It is our opinion
that married people should be in a position
to choose which method of contraception
they prefer and that medical advice ought to
be available for those who decide that the wife
should take the precautions. Undoubtedly
this method is preferred by a great many
husbands as well as. wives and, in our
opinion, it should be as widely accessible as
the chemist’s shop. It is not a matter of
urging one method rather than another but
of making all available.

I think that there are some who do not
grasp the wide ramifications of family
planning. Those who have no problem and
those who are capable of solving their own
difficulties do not perhaps realize the helplessness and the ignorance of a very large
number of our fellow human beings. When
preparing a memorandum for the Royal
Commission on Marriage and Divorce, I read
the section of letters received at the office
asking for birth-control advice because the
writer felt that fear of pregnancy was
threatening the marriage. Both husbands
and wives had written. On one day alone
three such letters had arrived ; the purport
of all was summed up by one writer: ‘‘ My
husband and I are very much in love and
long to carry on as normal as possible but
we are so afraid of having any more babies.”
And in the sub-fertile marriage, too, there is
often an underlying or even open fear that
the lack of children will ultimately break up
the marriage.

Family planning clinics are also familiar

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

with unhappiness and disharmony caused
by an ignorance of sex matters which some:
members of this audience might find it hard
to credit. One instance was that of a couple
who came for sub-fertility advice and whosemarriage had never been consummated. The
field of sex difficulties in marriage was not
one the F.P.A. sought to enter, but we have
had to because married couples who come
for advice on family planning are so often
then in the mood to tell their personal sex
troubles and to ask for help in those also.

Our Limitations

I have told you some of what I regard as
our achievements but that does not mean.
we are not well aware of our limitations. I
think most of these are due to pressure of
work and lack of money. Apart from
medical and nursing staff, most of our branch
clinics are largely staffed by voluntary
workers and they are all run by voluntary
committees. I think this has been a big
factor in their success, not only because in
this work keen interest and warmth of
sympathy are essential but also because a
voluntary committee does not lose interest
or depart from its principles and standards.
The policy of a local health authority can
(and sometimes does) change with its staff.
Clinics have been discontinued and follow-up
visits on, behalf of an F.P.A. clinic by a health
visitor have been stopped because a sympathetic medical officer of health moved elsewhere or an unsympathetic one was
appointed. And there is no uniformity
about a local health authority clinic unless,
of course, its staff have been trained by one
of our branches, as they frequently are. We
have found throughout our history that
experienced voluntary committeesand trained
voluntary workers are invaluable. But we
are the first to admit that such a system
has its weaknesses. Over 50,000 new
patients each year should be a valuable
source of data probably unobtainable elsewhere, but data, to be of any value, must be
statistically sound. There zs the rare clinic
worker whose eye lights up when the word
statistics is mentioned but usually it seems
to induce either the most acute distaste or a
FAMILY PLANNING

puzzled bewilderment. Now I do not want
to suggest that it is essential always to be as
thorough as one report in which it was
thought necessary to state that “ the failure
to maintain conjugal relations while living
together will also result in a falling off in the
average pregnancy rates,’’ but it is rare that
the figures of an amateur inquiry are
unassailable.

Recently we carried out a study of the
rate of persistence of our patients in
attending clinics. Thirty clinics co-operated
and thanks to the most patient, careful and
tactful work by Mrs. Rachel Conrad and her
helpers a very interesting and useful report
was compiled. However, this one simple
question necessitated an immense amount of
work and when we recently consulted a
medical statistician as to the possibility of
carrying out clinical trials, it was reckoned
that it was useless to attempt the inquiry
unless we could have the services of a trained
statistician and probably two assistants for
clerical work. The cost was reckoned at
something like {£1,500 a year for two or
three years.

What of the Future ?

And now what of the future? The most
obvious need is to start new clinics since
there are still large tracts of country where
there are none at all. There is also much to
be done to secure implementation of the
Royal Commission on Population’s Report
and we are well aware of the need to examine
our own work and data, to improve its
quality and to estimate its results.

But the most urgent need of all is a simpler
and cheaper method of contraception. For
this, research on an infinitely wider scale
than any in existence at present will probably
be required. We must find out how to make
the best use of existing facilities, how to
extend these and how to enlist the services

201
of those who are working in what might
become related fields. This is again, of
course, largely a matter of finance and I
think that it is Incumbent on all those who
are concerned about problem families,
juvenile delinquency and the possible dysgenic effects of a differential birth-rate to
combine with the family planners in exploring
every possible source from which grants or
other assistance might be forthcoming.

The need to solve our own problems and
perfect our organization in this country is
the more urgent since the world population
problem is one that will surely have to be
solved within the next fifty years or so.
However much the supply of food and other
necessities may be increased, ultimately the
dilemma remains. Without family planning
and with social service and modern medicine,
numbers must sooner or later catch up with
supplies. !

Great Britain has lost the lead she once
held in many international fields, but in the
field of family planning she is probably the
most advanced of all the big countries. Here
we have no laws against birth control and
we have only a small proportion of the population (between 6 and 7 per cent) pledged
to opposition on religious grounds. Though
our clinic service is not adequate it is far
more nearly so than in any other country,
and I do not think that any other country,
except Sweden, could have produced the
Report of our Royal Commission on Population or could marshal such strong and distinguished support for a national policy of
family planning.

But our potentiality creates our duty and
we must hasten to perfect our knowledge
and experience so that we may have something worthy to offer to the world when at
last it faces the fact that man’s power to
lower his death-rate will destroy him unless
he learns also to control His birth-rate.

Eugenies Review, Vol. XLIV, No. 4
