EUGENICS WITHOUT MENDELISM

Some Criticisms of Current Points of View

By J. A. FRASER ROBERTS, M.A., B.Se., F.R.S.E.

HE science of genetics still possesses

much of the glamour of novelty, and

for that reason the place of Mendelian
discovery in eugenics is perhaps sometimes
accepted a little uncritically. It is because
I believe that the application to human
affairs of some of the deductions drawn from
Mendelian discovery is difficult to justify or
rather may not be particularly useful, and
because I believe that some possible contributions of value do not receive the emphasis
that they should, that I venture to offer
some criticisms.

Let us, then, in the first place analyze
the case of a difference in characterization
that depends upon a single Mendelian factor
difference; in the second place consider
whether in fact many important differences
are inherited in this simple fashion; and
finally what useful contributions can be
made in the common case of complicated and
therefore unanalyzable inheritance.

Probably no typé of inheritance has so
profoundly coloured eugenic thought as the
case of the single-factor difference with
dominance, in which the dominant type is
regarded as the normal and the recessive
type as defective. It is impossible to read
much eugenic literature before coming
across the words ‘‘ defectives’? and ‘“‘ carriers.”’ It is urged that defectives should
not produce offspring, because they will
spread defect in a heterozygous form
throughout the normal population, and it is
also stated that the problem of the carrier
is all-important. In this connection there
are some very well-known calculations of
Dr. R. A. Fisher that repay careful examination.* Dr. Fisher takes the case of a

* The Elimination of Mental Defect. EUGENICS
REvIEW, Vol. XVI, p. 114.

defect inherited as a simple Mendelian recessive, the defectives being allowed to reproduce, and, assuming certain proportions, he
shows what the effect will be in the first few
generations of preventing the breeding of
such defectives. For purposes of illustration he applies the calculation to the problem of inherited amentia, though, of course,
as he points out, the inheritance of.
amentia cannot possibly be as simple as
this. If it is assumed that mating is at
random, that there is no differential survival
value as between normals and defectives,
and that the incidence of the defect be taken
as roo per 10,000 of the population, the result of preventing the breeding of defectives
would be to reduce the proportion from 100
per 10,000 to 82.6 in one generation, to 69.4
in two generations, and to 59.2 in three
generations. In successive generations the
rate of elimination falls off—for example, the
proportion is still 25.0 after ten generations.
Dr. Fisher also pointed out that the mating
of defectives was-certainly not at random,
and on that account the rate of elimination
would be considerably higher than these
theoretical figures indicate.

One doubts whether it is generally realized
that a calculation such as this involves the
assumption of a fixed ratio between the
number of defectives appearing and the
number of carriers in the general population. In this particular example the assumption has to be made that no less than
1,800 per 10,000 are carriers, and it also
follows that although the reduction in the
proportion of defectives appearing is rapid
during the first few generations the reduction in the number of carriers is not so
rapid. If the figures are more fully set out
they appear as follows:

187
188

No. of Normals per Carriers per Defectives per

Generation. 10,000 10,000 10,000
— 8,100 1,800 100

I 8,264 1,653 82.6

2 8,403 1,528 69.4

3 8,520 1,420 59.2

6 8,789 1,172 39.0

Io 9,025 950 25.0

On the assumption of random mating the
proportion of carriers to defectives must always be very high. If it is assumed that
the population is reproducing itself in each
generation, that is, that the proportion of
carriers and defectives remains unchanged,
there is a very simple relation between the
two figures.

Let m=the percentage of carriers,
and let x=the percentage of defectives.
Then m= 20 «/x- 2x.

In the case already given x=1 and m=18.
If the population contains 5 per cent. of
homozygous recessives the percentage of
carriers is approximately 35. If the population contains 0.25 per cent. the percentage
of carriers is 9.5.

There are two ways of regarding a population of this kind. One is to consider the
proportion of the homozygous defective
type, which we can write shortly aa. ‘The
other is to consider the proportion of genes
a in the whole population irrespective of
whether they occur in the combination Aa
or as aa. If the survival value (viability
+fertility) of aa is not the same as that of
the rest of the population, as we have
hitherto assumed, the population will not
remain constant. If the survival value of
aa is greater there will be an increase
in the number of a’s with each generation; there will be a fall if the survival
value is lower. Any such change, however,
is necessarily very slow, and an observed
rapid change could not conceivably be ascribed to this cause. This is clearly shown
by the continual occurrence of recessive
lethals, although the survival value of aa
in such a case is zero. On the other hand,
if mating is not at random the effect is to

THE EUGENICS REVIEW.

alter the proportion of Aa to aa. It should
be noted that if there is no difference in survival value selective mating will not alter
the total number of a’s in the population,
but will simply affect the combination in
which they occur.

THE PRACTICAL POLICY TO ADOPT

It remains to consider what practical
policy can be adopted if it is in fact found
that some important difference does depend
upon a corresponding simple Mendelian factor difference. T'wo courses are open. First,
to attempt to reduce the number of a’s in
the whole population, or, on the other hand,
to ensure, as far as possible, that they do
not occur in the combination aa. I would
suggest that in any conceivable case the
number of carriers must be so large that it
is impracticable to attempt their elimination.

It has been said that one birth in every
six is a still-birth. Whether this figure is
accepted or not it will be agreed that the
proportion is high. In addition, experimental data obtained from domesticated animals suggest that the death of the zygote is
a frequent occurrence at too early a stage
during pregnancy to be recognised as abortion. There can be little doubt that much
of this mortality is genetic, and its amount
gives some indication of the extent to which
lethal and sub-lethal factors are distributed
throughout the human population. ‘This
conclusion is amply confirmed by the frequently undesirable results of the marriage
of relatives who in stock-breeding practice
would not be regarded as closely related at
all from the point of view of inbreeding.
If the carriers of recessive lethals and defects were eliminated one wonders how many
human beings would be left.

If a defective type is quite capable of
breeding and does breed freely under present conditions, is it justifiable to attempt to
prevent such breeding? We have seen that
such an attempt would only have a comparatively small effect upon the total number of
carriers in the general population that must
be assumed to exist. It seems unfair to draw
EUGENICS WITHOUT MENDELISM

such a sharp distinction between the defective and the carrier.

There is another consideration too. It
is sometimes suggested that if a defect
depended simply upon a Mendelian recessive it might well be that apart from
that single defect the individual possessed very valuable hereditary characteristics that should not be lost. It is very difficult to deny the cogency of this view. If
the ‘‘ village Hampden ”’ or the ‘‘ mute inglorious Milton ’’ is denied the opportunity
of expressing his potentialities through the
accidents of environment, he can equally be
prevented from doing so because he is unfortunate enough to be homozygous for some
recessive defect. I would suggest that
there is a great deal to be said for the policy
that would aim simply at ensuring that the
unwanted a’s appear as seldom as possible
in combination with each other, that is, that
defective or carrier should mate only with
normal as far as this can be ensured.

If dominance is complete it is perhaps
difficult to realize this ideal in practice,
though the growing knowledge of the inheritance of defects and the study of pedigree would be of some value. It may be
that at some future time—and one hopes
that for many defects that time will not
be too far distant—science will come
powerfully to the aid of eugenic endeavour in this matter. Every eugenist must
necessarily be profoundly interested in the
recent work which tends to show that true
complete dominance may after all be a rare
phenomenon, and that a difference between
carrier and normal can be discovered if only
tests can be devised that are sufficiently
delicate. The work on the differential
response of homozygous and heterozygous
agouti mice to X-rays, the work on the
differential blood-counts of normals and carriers in the case of ‘‘ bull-dog ’’ or chondrodystrophic calves, the work on differences in
coagulation time between normal individuals
and carriers of hemophilia, all point the way.
No effort should be spared to encourage
research which will lead to the recognition
of the carrier. With that knowledge it would
be possible to eliminate a defect in one

189

generation simply by ensuring that recessive homozygote or carrier mates only with
normal. It should be noted that once this
is done differential survival value will no
longer play a part, so that there will be no
need to fear an increase in the number of
those particular recessive genes in the population.

SIMPLE CASES OCCUR SPORADICALLY

We have so far considered the problem of
the recessive defective on the assumption
that this type of inheritance can be deduced
in the case of important characteristics.
Now we have to ask whether defects are
often inherited in this way, or whether this
is the type of defect that presents immediate, urgent problems to those who are
keenly interested in the betterment of the
human race. ‘That recessive lethals, sublethals, and undesirable factors generally
are widely spread throughout the human
population can hardly be doubted. But one
has a strong suspicion that these are the
defects whose individual incidence is very
low, that they are the type that occur just
once with all the horror of the unexpected,
and then sink into obscurity, not to reappear until perhaps generations have
elapsed. They appear as a’ bolt from a
blue and unclouded sky, and one cannot feel
surprised that our forefathers saw in these
occurrences the chastising hand of God.

It is easy to be misled by false analogies
with cases occurring in farm livestock. In
farm livestock a single recessive lethal or
defect may appear in a particular herd or
strain and may assume considerable, though
of course never overwhelming, proportions ;
but this is due to circumstances that could
never arise in a modern human community.
In stock-breeding practice a sire of outstanding merit will be used to the limit of his
capacity, his descendants will be inbred, and
in those cases where such a sire happened to
be heterozygous for a lethal or defect, numerous cases would occur amongst his descendants. On the other hand it seems probable that with regard to such lethals and
defects human mating is as truly random as
it well could be.
190

A word must be said on those cases where
a departure from the normal might depend
upon a Mendelian dominant or upon a sexlinked factor, or where it might show intermediate inheritance with absence of dominance. ‘The simple dominant can present
little practical difficulty as regards its recognition and as regards prediction. It is also
clear that the case of the simple dominant
will seldom be of urgent practical importance. Simple single-factor intermediate inheritance falls into much the same category.
One would only point out that the lines of
experimental work mentioned in connection
with the simple recessive would aim at
transferring in principle that type of inheritance into the category of inheritance
without dominance. It is unnecessary to
say much about sex-linked inheritance. It
is comparatively easy to recognize, and
many of the problems raised are similar,
though perhaps simpler than in the case of
the recessive defect. I would only suggest
that those who are of the opinion that complete Mendelian analysis will provide a certain basis for practice should consider
whether they can form a confident, certain
opinion as to whether the sisters of hzemophilics should marry, This is the simplest
possible case, and the full data are available.

THE DIFFICULTY OF ANALYSIS

Most of the differences that distinguish
normal from defective and desirable from
less desirable defy Mendelian analysis.
This is not surprising when one realizes
that in practice any problem involving the
simultaneous expression of more than a
single factor pair will ordinarily be insoluble. There is of course no reason
to assume that inheritance can be of any
type other than Mendelian as far as man
and the higher animals are concerned. Certainly any other type of organic inheritance
has yet to be demonstrated.

How then can the complicated problem be
attacked? ‘The very first consideration is
whether a difference is inherited at all. It is
remarkable how frequently in human biology controversy turns on this basic point.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW,

One cannot escape the suspicion that Mendelian results are sometimes accepted with
satisfaction by the eugenist, not because of
their innate value as Mendelian results, but
simply as a demonstration that in yet one
more instance we are indeed dealing with
organic inheritance. It may even be that
by thinking too much in simple Mendelian
terms, factors, segregation, and the rest, this
essential first step is not receiving the attention it deserves. Js the inheritance of mental characteristics organic or social? Or is
the hereditary basis of any great importance
compared with the environmental? Possibly
we think we know, but our judgment
savours too much of an opinion and is too
little a deduction from observed fact. There
is still wide scope for legitimate controversy.
The same remarks apply to many observed
race differences. There are many lines of
approach, but I will only suggest one instance to show the sort of service that the
science of genetics can render in this connection.

A LESSON FROM CATTLE BREEDING

Mr. Buchanan Smith has recently carried
out an important piece of work on the inheritance of milk yield in dairy cows. He
argued that if the inheritance of milk yield
is complicated many factors are likely to be
involved, and that some of these might be
sex-linked. A sire could not transmit sexlinked factors to his sons, but only to his
daughters, therefore if grand-parental correlations are measured they will not be of the
same size, and the order of magnitude can
be predicted. This hypothesis was confirmed.

The immediate value of this work lies, of
course, in the light it sheds on the inheritance of milk yields and the deductions that
can be drawn as to the best type of selection
to be practised in dairy herds; but for the
human biologist this highly ingenious
method possesses a different interest. If
there is doubt as to whether inheritance
plays any part, or any but the smallest part,
with reference to some important characteristic, and if a classification is adopted
EUGENICS WITHOUT MENDELISM

that is wide enough, it may well be that sexlinkage would be involved in such a case.
The problem would be simpler than that of
milk yield in cows, because instead of having to deduce the characteristics of the
males indirectly, all individuals could be
directly measured. The correlations
mother-son and mother-daughter should be
the same; the correlation father-son should
be lower, and the correlation mother-son
higher than these. A negative result would
not prove anything, but a positive result
would be conclusive.

A REALLY PRACTICAL CRITERION

The next step, having demonstrated that
inheritance is playing a part, is to attempt
to discover as much as possible about the
type of inheritance involved and about the
respective roles of heredity and environment. If a difference depends upon the
simultaneous expression of several factors
it will usually fall into one of two categories, or may fall into both. The first
category is that of multiple-factor inheritance, and it should be noted that in multiplefactor inheritance, in cases where we recognize a normal type and an abnormal type,
the departure from normality will tend to
depend upon the expression of dominant factors or of factor pairs which do not show
complete dominance. It is easy to show
that if a defect were to depend upon the
simultaneous expression of a number of
recessive factors its occurrence would be
almost inconceivably rare, and that it would
be almost impossible to visualize any type
of selective mating that could perpetuate
the occurrence of such a defect in any considerable numbers. The only exception
would be if the great majority of the population carried the recessive factors and these
not only in the heterozygous state; but in
such a case the true distinction would be,
not that there were a large number of recessive factors that together produced a defect,
but that there were beneficial dominant factors that prevented the expression of recessives almost universal in the ordinary population. Actually experiments on multiple
IQI

factor inheritance in animals and plants
have shown that dominance may after all not
be at all common in such cases, and that the
F, is more or less intermediate between the
parental types.

The great importance of such a type of
inheritance in man is two-fold. In the first
place the genotype can be deduced with considerable accuracy for practical purposes
from observation of the phenotype. This is
an intensely important point. The first
criterion in breeding is the appearance of
the animals themselves, and in the case of
man it is the only criterion that can be
readily and simply applied. In the second
place in multiple-factor inheritance a characteristic depends upon the simultaneous expression of a large number of factors. Consequently, if an undesirable type is recognized this type will possess, not merely one
undesirable factor, but many, perhaps very
many. No longer is it a question of condemning a type on account of one undesirable gene out of thousands, and the phrase
““ bad heredity ’’ acquires a very real meaning. And so we come to the conclusion that
when inheritance is particularly complicated, so is the problem likely to be hopeful
to the eugenist. There is little fear of
losing what is desirable because so much is
present that is undesirable. There is little
difficulty in recognizing the undesirable
type from the breeding point of view because the breeding result can be so readily
deduced from the appearance of the indi
vidual.

The other general type of complicated inheritance depends upon the simultaneous
expression of factors which are complementary to each other. Jt is possible, though
hardly likely, that if such a case is not too
complicated it can ultimately be analyzed
in Mendelian terms, but the eugenist should
hope that in any important case this type of
inheritance is not involved. If it is difficult to draw up a practical policy, if only
one single Mendelian factor pair is involved,
it is almost inconceivable that a just and
useful procedure could be based on a knowledge of the interaction of two or three
factors.
192
HEREDITY AND ENVIRONMENT

It has often been pointed out and is now
clearly recognized, that the separation in
principle of the effects of heredity and environment is difficult, and that in every case
there is an unfolding of hereditary potentiality under the impact of environmental
conditions; but in practice distinctions can
be drawn. If a difference is expressed
purely with relation to an underlying genetic difference, and that without modification
throughout the whole range of possible environmental conditions, then we can say that
for practical purposes the case is one purely
of heredity. Similarly if with regard to
any characteristic the maximum range of
variability can be found as a response to
environment in animals of identical genetic
constitution, then we can say that the difference is purely environmental. The great
majority of cases will fall somewhere between these two extremes, and it must be
the task of the human biologist at this stage
to evaluate the parts played by variations in
heredity and environment.

With regard to this problem and to the
problem of the general type of inheritance
involved, deductions drawn from genetical
hypothesis and applied to biometry can produce results of great value. In this connection I should like to mention the work of
Dr. Fisher and the work that is being carried out on similar lines by others. It is
perhaps unfortunate that so much of this
work has to be expressed in terms of abstruse mathematics, and so cannot be easily
comprehended by the non-mathematical
student. One feels confident that this is
the reason why too much stress is laid upon
simple single-factor inheritance and _ too
little upon general genetical biometry.

Very great interest has been aroused by
the work of Professor McDougall on the
problem of the inheritance of what appears
to be an acquired mental characteristic in
rats. This work was very fully dealt with
by Professor Crew in a recent review in this
Journal, and I only mention it here as an
example of the type of work that could be
greatly expanded to provide a different type

THE EUGENICS REVIEW,

of information. The question of whether
inheritance in the case of certain characteristics is important at all, of what type of
inheritance is in general involved, of the
role of environment and how far environment can over-ride hereditary differences
normally exhibited—all these are problems
that could be investigated under simpler conditions in an animal population made up to
resemble human populations. The simplifications would be very great. No one would
claim that if father and son never saw each
other the connection between them could be
any other than organic. In the case of
fowls nothing need connect parent and offspring except organic inheritance. Such
knowledge gleaned from animal experiments
would greatly simplify the task of interpretation of results in man. One cannot escape
the conviction that there is a whole field of
experimentation and observation which has
not been adequately explored because the
student of human heredity has been too intent upon the analysis of differences in
simple Mendelian terms.

POLICY—AND THE PROGENY TEST

The practical problem confronting the
eugenist, if he is to advocate any action at
all, involves a decision as to whether a particular type should be prevented from breeding altogether, or whether measures should
be advocated that would lead to the increase
in numbers of one type and the reduction in
numbers of another. On, what data must
such decisions be based ? We have seen how
simple Mendelism is likely to fail us, and I
would suggest that the first criterion is the
ludicrously simple one of the direct test by
results. It may bea subtle distinction, but
I think that it is a real one, that it is much
more important to know what the children
and great-grandchildren of defectives are

-like than to know what their ancestors were.

It is the same point that has been mentioned
more than once, viz. how far can the genotype be recognized from the phenotype? I
am not hopeful of cases in which the characteristics of parents are not recognizable in
a large proportion of the offspring, but forEUGENICS WITHOUT MENDELISM

tunately it would appear that the majority
of those differences which present the most
urgent problem to the eugenist are in fact
differences which depend upon many factors, and that the characteristics of the
parents can be clearly traced in their offspring. Popular eugenic argument derives
its force from such cases as those of the
well-known defective or highly excellent
families, and these are the cases in which
it can be felt that action is possible, that it
is not unfair, and that it would be useful.

The inheritance of amentia appears to be
one of the main planks in the eugenic platform. If arguments are based on the possibilities of simple inheritance and upon hypothetical carriers in the general population,
then one has the gravest doubt as to practical improvement; but amentia is not
simple in its inheritance, and the proportion
of undesirables resulting from the marriage
of aments is high. The test is how often
in matings of different types the offspring of
aments are undesirable. This criterion
gains in value because it is one that appeals
directly to the lay mind. It requires no
elaboration and no explanation.

If it is argued that amentia and other conditions are complicated, that there are
border-line cases, that defect is polymorphic,
that what is hereditary cannot be separated

193

from what is environmental, then a fortiori
all these objections apply to any attempt at
genetical analysis. It may well be that
the task of the human biologist is far more
to measure, to distinguish, and to relate,
and that once he can classify his material
the genetic problems will almost solve themselves.

THE DISADVANTAGE OF SIMPLICITY

One feels that the outlook for practical
reform is hopeful, not because human inheritance is simple, but because it is complicated, not because it can be analyzed, but
because it is unanalyzable. The clear-cut
segregation of characteristics is the dangersign; the conciusion that many factors are
involved is hopeful—the more the better.
One has to legislate for man and not for
single genes, but if the genes that attract
our attention are only numerous enough we
are not unfair if we identify the genes with
the man. ‘To the extent that inheritance
is simple and easily understood, so does the
problem bristle with practical difficulties
and doubts as to the moral validity of interference. To the extent that inheritance is
complicated, so do difficulties disappear and
doubts as to the validity of interference
resolve themselves.

YESS

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXII, No. 3.
