NOTES EUGENIQUES.!
Par le Dr. E. LANDAU.

IN a previous paper we brought forward the biological data which prove
that love and the desire for children are the natural sentiments of normal
mankind; in this second one we propose to deal with the principles and
conditions necessary, from a biological point of view, for the establishment of a healthy and normal family.

At the present time, when the progress of civilisation steadily adds
to the complexity of life, the chief considerations brought to bear upon
the arrangement of marriages are money, social standing, and the like,
while the questions of health and physical fitness, which are of far
greater importance, are relegated to a quite secondary place.

In our opinion, attention should be paid not only to the health of the
founders of a family (investigations as to those hereditary diseases the
influence of which is recognised by science as distinctly deleterious to the
development of the child, such as tuberculosis, syphilis, alcoholism,
mental defect, epilepsy, hemophilia, etc.), but also to that of the young
couple themselves. It is regrettable that this view of the grave danger
of hereditary diseases is not sufficiently insisted upon by competent
authorities.

M. Bertillon, for example, in his “ Problem of Depopulation,” states
that, according to the opinion of a medical man, alcoholism does not
lead to sterility, since it is by no means unusual to find alcoholic parents
with very large families. This is true, but it should also be noted, as
Bertillon has omitted to do, that the great majority of the offspring of
alcoholic parents die young, and that those who survive almost invariably
develop symptoms of degeneracy and are either harmful or, at best, unproductive for their country. As for the other diseases enumerated above,
the family disasters to which they give rise are a matter of common
knowledge.

It is much to be desired that a custom should be generally established
among the parents of those about to marry of offering reciprocal
guarantees as to the health of their children, a practice which need in no
wise be regarded as derogatory or painful. The young man, on his side,
ought, of his own accord, to be anxious to show that he is capable of
procreating healthy and vigorous children, and that he has no taint of
venereal disease. The young girl, on the other hand, should feel no
reluctance to undergo a medical examination which would merely provide
a guarantee of physical fitness. Needless to say, such examinations
would require to be made with the utmost care and discretion lest they
should tend to impair the romance of marriage.

1 Translated from the French by kind permission of the author.—Revue Anthropologique,
January, 1918 ; pp. 26-30.
82 EUGENICS REVIEW.

Above all, we advocate the passing of.a law such as is already in
force in certain of the States of North America, by which health certificates are made compulsory before marriage, that for the man involving
the Wasserman reaction and the test of Gramm’s bacteriological preparation, that for the woman consisting of a guarantee of potentia gestandt.
Such a proposition will undoubtedly give rise to hostile criticism, but
though it may offend against prudery it will neither injure the purity of
a serious-minded young girl nor the self- -respect of a conscientious man.

We question if the man who has abused his strength in his youth has,
at the time of his marriage, a sufficiently keen natural wish for children,
but we have little doubt that the average normal young girl desires a
child by the man she loves, for this is a need of nature imposed on her
by the right functioning of her organism. The fact that the modern
young girl puts off the birth of her first child is due to various causes.
Firstly, to the prevalent foolish ideas that maternity brings in its train a
number of anxieties, material difficulties and responsibilities, and detracts
from’the charm of youth, but also and above all, it arises from the fact
that from the first day of marriage the young couple do not look upon
themselves as equals—it is the husband who imposes and determines upon
the conditions and the wife who accepts them, very often against her
secret desires and hopes. And it is almost certain that this inequality.
arises as the result of differences in education.

Without going into the question of the rights of woman in the social
life of a modern state, it is clear that in the founding of a family she
has the same desires and the same rights as man. But owing to the fact
that her education is not sufficiently broad, that which she gives to her
own children suffers from the same limitation. She brings up her son
and her daughter differently; to the one she allows an outlook upon life
which she would not tolerate in the other, and the father also, who is
anxious to provide a wide and liberal education for his son, raises no
objection to a narrow and unpractical one for his daughter.

It is indeed unfortunate that in the education of children, even in
the most advanced and civilised countries, the very person whom a
psychiatrist would regard as an example of frenzied megalomaniacal and
mystical ideas is held up to a girl as an example of modesty, of goodness
of morality, and of worship. It is no less unfortunate that owing to the
fault of man, the mother, who has the greatest influence on the education
of the children, both boys and girls, does not receive in her own youth a
training which would lead to the broadening of her ideas upon a
biological foundation.

To sum up, we suggest—

. A eugenic guarantee as to physical fitness.
2. A broadening of the education and of the rights of woman in
the domain of the family.

Were these two conditions brought about it is practically certain that
life in the majority of households would be brightened by the coming of
a child. But, as we have already said, foolish and reprehensible ideas
militate against the desire for motherhood.
NOTES EUGENIQUES. 83

Very often the rich woman does not wish for children because it
would interfere with her social life and compel her to consider her health
in the interests of the child. She is unwilling to be cut off from sharing
with her husband in social distractions, and unwilling, too, that he should
seek them alone, more especially when she has means of her own.

It is, moreover, not to be overlooked that statistics as to the birthrate in different countries establish the fact that this decrease is in direct
ratio with the wealth of the country. In the case of the poor woman the
motive for avoiding child-bearing is quite different, and arises from
economic considerations. The husband often lacks a just estimate of the
respective duties of husband and wife; he fails to understand that it is
not a question of personal generosity, but a strict biological duty for him
to shoulder the responsibilities and ensure the material well-being of his
family, and he reproaches his wife for her easy life at home with the
children. It is he who earns the money and who consequently has the
sole right to spend it as he pleases, in the way most agreeable to himself,
and thus the resources which should be devoted to the benefit of the whole
family are squandered in a deplorable manner. For in a country where
the cafés, restaurants, taverns, drinking saloons, and bars form the
greatest attraction for the majority of men it is very difficult for an
individual who is not particularly conscientious to keep in mind his duty
to his family. .

This results in the wife being forced to leave home in order to earn
money, thereby injuring herself as a potential mother, since nothing is
worse for a woman’s health than long hours in mills, shops, and offices,
where she breathes in vitiated air, and where she is almost always on
her feet.

As long as the husband neither understands nor acts upon the
principle that his earnings belong to the family in common and not to
him personally, so long as he fails to understand that the beautiful réle
of woman is not in the search for work outside the home, but in remaining
by her own hearth, just so long will large families continue to become
more and more rare.

This dwindling is indeed inevitable, more especially in large towns
where houses are difficult to obtain, not only on account of the high
rents but also because of the selfishness of neighbours who raise objections to the noise and the merriment of children. It is essential that the
mother should not be obliged to leave her home and her children in order
to earn money. But if the man has not employment which is sufficiently
remunerative to cover the household expenses, what is to be done?

Assistance. But it is unlikely that premiums in money which are so
much talked of nowadays will have any appreciable effect in arresting
the depopulation of a country. Money is a two-edged sword; one cannot
be sure that it would be used to cover the expenses attendant on the
birth of a new child rather than in adding unnecessary comfort to the
family. Natural premiums would be more likely to achieve the desired
result. Just as there are now free schools, so there should also be not
only free provision shops of all kinds, not only pharmacies where the
84 EUGENICS REVIEW.

sick can obtain medicines free of charge, but also local doctors employed
by the State to attend to the health of the people. It will be argued that
such things already exist in the shape of orphanages, créches, dispensaries,
hospitals, workrooms, maternity homes, co-operative schemes, etc. But
all these bear that taint of charity which wounds the self-respect of many
people. .

In our opinion, the State ought, as Plato suggested in his Polzticz,
to undertake the organisation of this mutual aid as a national work.
We can no longer hope to increase the population of a country by
Draconic measures enforced against those unfortunates who have not
the courage to face the consequences of an illicit love, or who lack either
the possibility or the wish to increase their families. These are preventive measures, but we must concentrate out attention upon saving and
placing in a favourable environment the children who are born. There
must be an end of dilapidated tenements, where families live in unwholesome mixing of the sexes, where the sanitation is disgraceful, contagious diseases endemic, and where the husband after his day’s work
can find no comfort or rest.

It is the duty of Governments and philanthropic societies to concern
themselves, not with individual cases, but with the general principle of
facilitating arrangements for the sanitary housing of every household
requiring it. It would be possible, for example, if supported by the
Government, to procure localities where artisans’ dwellings could be
erected, not like the present insanitary barracks, but small houses with
gardens where life would be attractive, agreeable, comfortable, and
healthy. The hours spent in such surroundings would be hours of
relaxation and pleasure for all, and the children would be as numerous
as could be brought up without excessive difficulty.

In an article by Dr. Van Roye (Paris Medical, 26 Mai, 1917, No. 21)
we meet with the following suggestion: ‘‘To find a remedy for the
decrease of the birth-rate is very difficult. It depends upon social factors
so widely rooted that to struggle against them is to attempt the
impossible.”

The causes undoubtedly lie deep, but the struggle is not an impossible one. We are of opinion that everything depends upon the method
of attack.

Let us struggle against this social evil, not by a means of money
bonuses and Draconic laws, but by a sane education on a broad biological
basis, by social hygiene, by a reduction of alcohol consumption, by
efficient aid to large families. We are at one with Dr. Boulay, who
says in his paper (Paris, 1915, p. 52) :—“ We must, above all, bear in mind
that it is not by means of laws or police regulations that we shall make
youth more pure, the marriage state more worthy and more respected, or
children more keenly desired. We shall only accomplish our task by the

path of active virtue.”
- N. A.
