RECEPTION AT HEADQUARTERS OF THE
SOCIETY

LARGE gathering of Fellows, Mem
bers and their guests attended the

reception that was held by the
Eugentcs Soctety on November 2ist, both to
inaugurate the new premises at Eccleston
Square and to commemorate the fiftieth
anniversary of the first use by Galton of the
word ‘“‘ eugenics.”” The excellence of the
attendance was due in great measure to the
desire of Fellows and Members to do honour
to Major Leonard Darwin, to whose activities
and guidance the Society is so deeply indebted ; and the occasion was made memorable for the audience that filled tocapacity
the spacious room that now houses the
Soctety’s library by the address—reproduced
in full below—which he delivered in person.
The President of the Society, Sir Humphry
Rolleston, received the guests and later
occupied the chair.

Major Darwin said :

We meet here to-day to celebrate the
fiftieth anniversary of the birth of the
word ‘‘ Eugenics,’”’ and it has been suggested that my part in the proceedings
should be to recall some personal memories
of its sole parent, Sir Francis Galton.
This is no easy task on many accounts,
one of them being how to avoid intruding
my own personality too much. Then
again, almost everything which could be
said on this subject is to be found in the
monumental life by Professor Karl Pearson,
for whom Galton had both a keen admiration
and strong affection. In this connection I
should like to mention the excellent little
sketch of Galton’s opinions which’ I hold
in my hand, a work translated from the
German and privately printed at the instance
of his niece, Mrs. Ellis. This copy was sent by
Galton to my eldest brother with a note,
now pasted in it, in which he stated that it
was so “ over-appreciative’’ that he was
‘‘ timid about sending it,” and that its merit
in his eyes lay “‘ in justly pointing the unity
of purpose in a diversity of work”’ ; that is, of

his work. If the Eugenics Society would care
to keep it as a small memento of this occasion,
I shall be glad to present it to the library.
Indeed it might be worth while to get permission to reprint it, especially in view of this
endorsement of its contents by Galton himself, or to induce someone to write another
work on the same lines.

My acquaintance and correspondence with
Galton extended over a period of many
years, though there were long gaps in this
intercourse. Indeed, all the letters received
by me from him are contained in this small
packet, which I should like now to hand over
to my friend Professor R. A. Fisher in order
that he may, if he sees fit, preserve them at
the Galton Laboratory. In doing so I must
be allowed to congratulate him heartily on
his appointment to the Galton Chair of
Eugenics, an appointment which, I am sure,
augurs so well for the continued progress of
our science.

Naturally my correspondence with Galton
throws but little light on his scientific views.
I was, however, myself surprised to find that
in 1898 I had ventured to make a “‘ very just
criticism ’’ on his law of ancestral descent,
which he characteristically advised me to
publish, advice which, considering my then
imperfect knowledge of the subject, I wisely
refrained from following. In 1910, when
commenting on the first address on eugenics
which I ever gave, he wrote that differential
fertility was to his mind the most important
of all factors in eugenics, a statement which
I should like even now to hear continually
shouted from the house-tops.

Galton was unquestionably a great man of
science, a fact which will become more and
more apparent as time goes on. But in order
to promote racial progress, even if the
scientific foundations of eugenics were perfectly laid, something more than correct
theoretical knowledge would be required ;
for we shall always find that the greatest
obstacle in our path of progress is that most

255
256

unguidable material, human beings in the
mass. In such a campaign, Galton had many
advantages, not least amongst them being,
as his letters to me indicate, a keen sense of
humour. Indeed, an amused smile, combined
with a look of keen intelligence, is the
expression on his face which is indelibly
stamped on my memory. He had travelled
much, and I was pleased to be reminded by
his letters that when I was President of the
Royal Geographical Society, we paid him
the compliment of nominating him a VicePresident of the Geographical Club ; that is,
of the body which was the parent of that
society. He was a keenly sympathetic friend,
and when in 1892 I was standing for the
Lichfield Division, he wrote to say “ how
delighted Dr. Erasmus Darwin would have
been if his prescient eye had foreseen” my
candidature for the city where he lived, at
the same time reminding me that I should
find a medallion of him in the Cathedral, he
being our mutual ancestor. Galton subsequently sent me some hints for my speeches.
Then again, a happy married life is a great
asset for any man, and that was certainly his
lot. He wrote to me in 1897 from abroad, a
few hours after his wife had died, to say that
he should go back to his “‘ desolate home at
least for a while.” All the many happy
memories connected with that home, however, led him to remain there for the remaining twelve years of his life; that is, in the
house in Rutland Gate on which is now
placed a tablet to his memory. And it is not
without significance as to his character that
the first person to move in regard to the erection of that tablet was his butler and friend,
Gifi, a familiar figure to all who knew
Galton at home. He wrote to me more than
once in his eighty-eighth year, declaring not
many months before his death that he did
not feel his ‘‘ faculties to wane distinctly,”
though he tired very quickly. He was even
then writing to Nature in order to prove
that it is possible to “‘ convey a very respectable profile likeness *’ by telegraphing four
groups of five letters. To the end he was
trying to benefit his fellow creatures in ways
both great and small.

During all my acquaintance with Galton

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

he suffered from one material disadvantage—
namely deafness, which he bore very
patiently. As regards one ear he attributed
this ailment in part at all events to his treatment by an aurist who was very soon afterwards certified as insane. “ You have a
tumour in your ear ; everybody has one ;
the Queen has one,”’ said this aurist, and at
once proceeded to pierce the drum of his
ear with a pen-knife. The may
perhaps quote this incident as an example of

the dangers to which we are exposed in
consequence of the harmful hereditary qualities of those with whom we necessarily come
in contact!

I have felt it a pleasant task thus to speak
of one I ed so highly; but to show
that I am holding back none of my thoughts,
I should perhaps add that it is concerning
some of his proposals in regard to the
practical applications of his theories that I
believe I see certain weaknesses. I certainly
concur with this great teacher in believing
that when once an idea is widely held with
religious fervour, its effects may be immense.
To illustrate where my doubts come in I will
only allude to his statement that he looked
‘“‘forward to a suitable authority issuing
Eugenic Certificates to candidates ’’ applying
for them.* The effects of such a scheme, and
I should perhaps add of others recently
proposed by Eugenists whom I highly respect,
would be in my opinion to lower the fertility
of the rejected to an inappreciable extent,
whilst raising the birth rate of the selected but
very little if at all; and, having regard to
the comparatively small numbers probably
selected, to the effect of the regression to the
mean in the next generation, to the impossibility of keeping such a group as a separate
caste for many generations, and to the
swamping effects of interbreeding, it seems
probable that in the end a negligible effect
on the racial qualities of the nation would
thus be produced. The great labour involved
would, in fact, be better bestowed in other
directions. To win in our struggle against
racial decay we must actually reverse the

* Sociological Papers, 1905, II, p. 17.
RECEPTION AT HEADQUARTERS OF THE SOCIETY

differential birth rate, and to do this our net
must indeed be very widely spread.

In his Memories Galton declared that the
publication of the Origin of Spectes in 1859
‘‘made a marked epoch”’ in his ‘‘ mental
development ’’*; for the idea of natural
selection brought before his mind the possibility of those new methods of racial advance
to which twenty-four years afterwards he
gave the name of eugenics. Nature’s method
of promoting progress has been to throw
all the organisms committed to her charge
almost haphazard into the different environments available for them, and afterwards to
eliminate all failures without, as it were,
paying the slightest attention to any excuses
that might be offered on the ground of ill
luck. Science aims at avoiding all errors ;
but we should learn from Nature that we are
fully justified, not only in running considerable risks but also in paying “‘ scant regard ”’
to the good of the individual when a great
issue, like that of the fate of our race, is at
stake. Our aim should no doubt always be to
“replace Natural Selection by other processes that are more merciful and not less
effective,’’+ to quote some of Galton’s last
written and most pregnant words concerning
Eugenics.

Before concluding may I add that there is
another name besides that of Francis Galton
which certainly ought to be recalled on this
occasion ; for if we had not received a very
large bequest from Henry Twitchin we
should not have been meeting here to-night.
Without any aid from science he independently hit on the idea of eugenics; for
it was his knowledge of the good results
obtained in Australia by care in the breeding
of animals which convinced him that we
ought at once to begin to try to improve the
breed of man. His money was left to the
Eugenic Education Society in the hope that
progress might be made without delay by
means of widespread public appeals; and
all who follow him in advocating an immediate forward policy in order to promote a
“slow amelioration of the human breed”
may fairly quote Galton’s statement that

* Memories of My Life, p. 287.
¢ Ibtd., p. 323.

257

“an exact knowledge of the true principles
of heredity would hardly help us ”’ in solving
the main practical problems before us.*
Neither breeders like Twitchin, nor Nature
herself, have acted as if under the influence
of a knowledge of the laws of animal genetics;
and yet breeders have produced pugs and
greyhounds out of some unknown wild
ancestors, whilst the action of Nature has
resulted in the evolution of man from some
lowly organism. What is now most wanted
from science is that she should demonstrate
that a comparatively wide and rapid advance
in nearly all human qualities is now at all
events a possibility, whilst if, as I believe,
that which is now actually taking place is a
slow and invisible deterioration in our race,
she should make this truth widely known.
What is wanted from practical eugenists is
that they should make it universally felt
with religious zeal that, whilst parenthood
is often undesirable and sometimes a grave
crime against posterity, all of good stock
who unduly limit the size of their families are
either lamentably ignorant or else no true
patriots. We must have men of science and
men of affairs pulling together side by side
in our team if we are to win in our hard
struggle to save our civilization from decay ;
and, this being our aim, we must strive to
advance along that path which was clearly
surveyed for the first time by Francis Galton
now more than fifty years ago.

Mrs. Neville Rolfe recalled the early
days of the Soctety and indicated the
encouragement and help that had been
given to the initiating group by Sir
Francis Galton. A ial effort was
made during this period to bring the
word ‘‘eugenics’’ into current use. A
number of prominent journalists of the day
gave valued assistance, particularly Mr.
Arnold White and Mr. Knox. The emphasis
laid by Sir Francis Galton on the need of
securing lay public opinion in support of the
fundamental idea and ideal of eugenics had
been embodied by him in the Foreword he
wrote to the original EuGENICcS REVIEW.
‘“‘ There are [he said] two sorts of workers in

* Life of Galton. Pearson IIIa, p. 221.
258

every department of knowledge—those who
establish a firm foundation, and those who
build upon the fouhdation so established.
The foundation of Eugenics is, in some
measure, laid by applying a mathematicostatistical treatment to large collections of
facts, and this, like engineering deep down
in boggy soil, affords little outward evidence
of its bulk and importance. The superstructure requires for its success the cooperation of many minds of a somewhat
different order, filled with imagination and
enthusiasm; it does not require technical
knowledge as to the nature of the foundation
work. So a navigator, in order to find his
position at sea, is dependent on the Tables
calculated for him and printed in the
Nautical Almanack or elsewhere. But he
may safely use these Tables without having
the slightest acquaintance with the methods
by which they were constructed.’”* The
speaker paid a tribute to the many voluntary
workers who for the first five years of the
Soctety’s life carried on all its activities,
particularly Lady Chambers, Mrs. Heath,
Miss Henderson, Miss E. Corry, Miss Sellar,
and Miss Attwood and last but not least Dr.
Edgar Shuster, who had acted for several
years as joint Honorary Secretary and
Editor of the REVIEW. |

Mr. W. T. J. Gun spoke on the influence of
Sir Francis Galton upon genealogical and
biographical studies. Galton’s Heredttary
Gensus, published in 1869, was unquestionably the first introduction of biology into
genealogy, the study of which latter had
hitherto proceeded entirely on historical and
traditional lines. It was, in fact, an epochmaking book, as epoch-making, though of
course on a smaller scale, as those of the
author’s cousin, Charles Darwin.

The older genealogists devoted their attention for the most part to direct male descents,
and female lines were rarely considered
except where the inheritances of landed
estates and occasionally of titles were con
* Foreword in EUGENICS RR&VIEW, 1908.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

cerned. Now and again the Sixteen Quarterings of a given individual were worked out,
but always with a view to proving an
unblemished ‘noble’ descent; never for
biological . Galton’s methods were
directed entirely to the latter. Under the
old system, for example, the descent in the
direct male line of the late Lord Salisbury
from Lord Burleigh was regarded as of special
import, under the Galtonian system it had
no significance, as Burleigh was only one of
512 ancestors in that degree. On the other
hand the fact that Salisbury’s mother came
of a successful commercial family, introducing an entirely fresh element, was of
great importance in considering that Prime
Minister’s character and ability.

The new orientation given by Galton to
genealogical studies was reflected also in
biographical studies, but it had to be
admitted that progress in both directions
was somewhat slow. The old fashion in
biographies of dismissing ancestors as of no
account had, however, largely died out.
Lord Zetland, who in his biography of Lord
Curzon admitted the existence of parents
but went no further, was an exception at the
present time. The model biography in this
respect was most certainly Mr. Garvin's
Life of Joseph Chamberlain, where a full
account of ancestry was given in the opening
chapter. This, at least, was directly due to
Galton’s influence, and it was to be hoped
that the example would be widely followed.

Lord Horder paid his tribute to Sir
Francis Galton, following two previous
speakers. He also bore testimony to the
invaluable work of a foundation kind done
by those speakers themselves, and their coworkers. He congratulated the Society upon
its new premises. He also spoke of the very
useful labours of Dr. Blacker and of Mr.
Clinton Chance, the former as General
Secretary and the latter as the friendly
guide of the Soctety in the direction of its
finances. He looked forward to renewed
activity on the part of the Society, and a
stimulation of the eugenics-sense in this

country.

eee

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXV, No. 4.
