NATURAL REGULATION OF NUMBERS
IN HUMAN POPULATIONS |

By C. B. GOODHART M.A., Ph.D.,
University Museum of Zoology, Cambridge

the human race have tended to be

rather discouraging.'!»2 Malthus’s fears
proved to be unfounded under the quite
exceptional conditions of the nineteenth
century but it is usually taken for granted
that his basic propositions remain unassailable. The population of the world has
certainly been increasing geometrically over
the past few generations and if this continues

Ree discussions on the future of

it is bound eventually to outgrow the >

available food supply, when war, famine. or
pestilence will intervene to limit any further
increase. It is true that in some animal
species there may be other little understood
factors which limit population growth? but
these are not thought to have much relevance
to man, for whom the only solution appears
to be the immediate and universal application of a policy of deliberate family limitation, and this is not likely to be either
practicable or effective in time to save us
from the crash. It is, however, important to
remember that the arguments of Malthus,
though mathematically sound, are based
upon the assumption that the potential rate
of population growth in man has some
specific and constant value which will be the
same in the future as in the past unless it is
artificially altered. This assumption remains
unproven, and it may be worth while to
consider whether there are any possible
ways in which it might be falsified by natural
as well as by artificial means.

Man has, as a matter of fact, a rather
unusually low reproductive rate compared
with most other animals. Women are
fertile for less than half their normal lives,
ovulation is inhibited during lactation and
multiple births are rare, so that a woman
who rears a dozen children in her lifetime is
considered highly fertile. This number

could, however, be greatly increased without
requiring any fundamental physical modifications to the human body, and there is no
reason to doubt that these checks to fertility
have arisen in response to natural selection;
if there were any real selective advantage in
higher fecundity it could easily have been
evolved. Is it possible that the mean fertility
of man could be still further lowered by
natural selection? If it were halved during
the next five generations that would probably
be enough to solve our problems. At first
sight this may seem unlikely since evolution
is usually thought of as a slow process
working through hundreds of generations.
There is, however, one exception to this rule;
where natural selection is operating in a
population already genetically heterogeneous
or polymorphic for the characters involved,
and especially where the polymorphism
results from a balance between two competing types each having a selective advantage over the other in certain circumstances,
any variation in selection pressure will alter
the balance and lead quite rapidly to an
important change in the mean value by
altering the proportions of the two opposing
types in the population as a whole. To apply
this argument to human populations requires
two assumptions; firstly that fecundity in
man is under hereditary control, which is
more than likely, and secondly that man is
genetically heterogeneous for this character, a
rather more doubtful suggestion for which
however there is some supporting evidence.
In man, of course, fertility depends not only
on natural fecundity but also on psychological
and social factors which may limit the
fertility of potentially fecund individuals.
Both physiological fecundity and these other
factors may well be, at least to some extent,
under genetic control.

173
‘174
Increase in World Population

The present rate of increase in the numbers
of man is quite exceptional; up to a couple of
centuries ago the population of the world was
more or less stable or only slowly rising, and
it has been estimated at about goo million in
1800. By 1900 it had increased to 1,600
million, at the present day it is estimated at
2,500 million and it seems certain to be
3,000 million before the end of this century.
The rate of increase has however not been
the same in all races and classes of mankind.
Most attention is rightly paid to the peoples
of Asia and Africa who are multiplying at
such an extraordinary rate, but during the
same period many races have had stable or
declining numbers and a few seem to be in
danger of extinction. The African Bushmen,
Australian aborigines, Mongolians and Eskimos should not be forgotten when the
present mean rate of increase in the world’s
population is extrapolated into the. future.
A century ago Western Europeans had as
high a rate of natural increase as any race
before. or since, and yet it has been arrested,
admittedly partly by artificial means, in
four generations. The same could happen to
other races as well, and artificial family
limitation is not necessarily the only factor
involved, even in Europe.

Factors Controlling Fecundity

The selective advantages of fecundity are
ebvious and they are particularly strong in
dense populations Irving under unhygienic
conditions subject to a high rate of infant
mortality and to acute epidemic disease.
Where only a fraction of the children born
can expect to survive to rear families of their
own a large family has a better chance of
being represented in the next generation
than a smaller one, irrespective of the quality
of the individuals involved ; many of the
less fertile families will be completely
eliminated. It follows, therefore, that in
dense disease-ridden populations selection
in favour of fecundity and resistance to
disease will be relatively stronger than for
most other qualities, and if mortality is
lowered by improved conditions there will

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

be a sudden and rapid rise in numbers.
However, in primitive races of pastoral
nomads or hunters, living widely separated
under hygienic conditions, disease may be
less important and the principal limiting
factor will be periodical shortages of food.
Here fecundity loses much of its selective
advantage compared to other qualities such
as strength and intelligence, and it may even
become a liability. In a bad year an Eskimo
might be able to find just enough food to
keep two or three children from starving but
if it had to be shared among ten all would die.
It is known that in animals fecundity can be
altered by natural selection. Lack® has
shown that in some birds clutch size has
become genetically adjusted to the supply of
food available for feeding the brood. The
same effect is found in mammals, for example

the fertility of pigs has been greatly increased

by domestication; the European wild pig
produces a yearly litter of four or five while
a Large White sow will farrow ten to twelve
piglets twice a year.* In man also there is
good evidence of inherited differences in
fertility between different families, discounting any environmental effects.’

It is perhaps significant that it is just the
primitive and usually strong and healthy
nomadic peoples that are unable to replenish
themselves after they have been reduced by
disease. The often unhealthy and apparently
less virile races from dense centres of
population seem able to recover their
numbers almost immediately after the most
disastrous . epidemics. of disease, and to
compete successfully with any other races
with whom they are brought into contact.
In Fiji, for instance, the Indian settlers, who
have come from densely populated and

-disease-ridden areas, are increasing their

numbers very much more rapidly than the
native Fijians, although both races enjoy
much the same conditions of life and it is
unlikely that artificial methods of family
limitation are of much importance in either
group. a
These are admittedly rather special cases
and the argument does not apply to more
civilized races whose declining numbers
cannot be explained on the basis of genetical
NATURAL REGULATION OF NUMBERS

selection by famine. It is notorious that the
most successful nations and classes of
mankind are seldom able in the long run to
maintain their numbers and it has been
suggested that the conditions produced by
civilization and a high standard of living
may by themselves be unfavourable to
fertility. It is certainly true that the more
or less stable population in North-Western
Europe at the present time owes much to
the introduction of artificial methods of
family limitation which are only practicable
in relatively advanced and prosperous communities, but the almost universal rule of
declining numbers in advanced civilizations
dates back before the discovery of artificial
means of bringing it about, apart from
deliberate abortion, which may at some
times have been of importance. The possibility that the qualities leading to success
in man may have become genetically
correlated with relatively low fecundity
cannot be disregarded and, although this is
another unproven assumption, there are
some theoretical reasons for supposing that
it may be justified.

Under most conditions high fertility has a
clear selective advantage in itself, irrespective of any other qualities with which it may
be associated, but the less fecund lines will
only survive if they have other hereditary
qualities of high survival value to offset the
disadvantages of low fertility. It has been
suggested® that where there is rigorous
selection for one particular genetic character
there tends.to be a loss of fitness, by a
process of “ genetical erosion,’’ in all other
characters subject to less intense selection.
There is probably an example of this effect
in man with milk yield. Women of primitive peoples usually produce a copious flow
of milk, provided they receive adequate
food, but a considerable proportion of more
civilized mothers are unable to feed their
own babies. This is not likely to be due
directly to the easier life led by civilized
women, but it is true that, since artificial
feeding is now perfectly satisfactory, selection against low milk yield among them has
ceased, although in less advanced peoples
the only children that are likely to survive

175

infancy are still those whose mothers do
have an adequate supply of milk. Milk
yield in cattle has been greatly increased in
quite a short time by deliberate selection
under domestication ; in civilized man the
opposite has occurred, also probably in quite
a short time, when selection was relaxed.
The same may have happened in man

- with regard to fecundity. A large family is

likely to be represented in the next genera-,
tion even though its members are individually
of low quality, but a man with a single
daughter may easily leave no grandchildren
at all if she is ill-favoured, although if she is
exceptionally good looking and intelligent
she should have no difficulty in finding a
husband. A man’s choice of a wife is
influenced by her appearance, intelligence,

sympathetic nature, wealth and many other
qualities, and these are not necessarily
correlated with high fecundity.

If there is this tendency in man for the
more desirable qualities to become associated
with low fecundity there are mechanisms by
which it could become fixed in the genotype.
Continuous selection against low fecundity
without the other compensating qualities wil]

‘favour forms in which these characters

are genetically associated and in the course
of time the association should become closer.
There are many examples of this having
occurred in polymorphic animal species.
If therefore man is polymorphic for fertility
(as to some extent he certainly is, since
complete sterility is not uncommon) then
it is likely that the polymorphism is maintained by a balance between high fecundity
on the one hand and other qualities of high
survival value associated with low fecundity
on the other. Any such equilibrium will be
disturbed if the mortality rate in early life is
altered, and if it is lowered the relative
advantage of high fecundity will be diminished since a larger proportion of the
population will survive to an age at which
the less fecund can gain the full advantage of
their presumed superiority in competition.
Thus as the numbers grow the proportion of.
families of high quality and low fertility
should increase in each generation, which
will progressively lower the mean fertility of
176

the population as a whole. The well-known
example of industrial melanism in moths®
shows the effect of an alteration in selection
pressure on such an equilibrium. Where
‘there is predator selection against melanic
forms .they remain rare, but as soon as
selection pressure is relaxed other compensating qualities associated with the gene for
melanism allow it to spread rapidly throughout the population. The relatively higher
viability of melanic forms is probably itself a
direct result of past predator selection
against them, only the most viable will have
survived at all.

Intelligence and Fertility

In advanced human communities it is
recognized that the most fertile families are
usually below the average in intelligence, and
if this character is inherited a progressive
dechne in the intelligence of the population
as a whole is to be expected. In fact no such
decline has been found,!® and a possible
explanation of the apparent stability of the
mean level of intelligence is that individually
the less intelligent may have less chance of

leaving descendants even though a few of

them have the largest families of all. The
observed correlation of low intelligence with
high fertility does not necessarily. mean that
as a group the less intelligent are the more
fecund, the range of family size may be
greater, but if there is also a higher proportion of persons who leave few or no surviving
children, the mean family size may not be
above that for people of normal intelligence.
The number of great-great-grandchildren
rather than the number of children is the
better test of survival value, and a line with
a consistently high proportion of smaller
families of good quality may well be at an
advantage, especially when indiscriminate
mortality from disease is low, compared to
another of lower quality with a few highly
fertile individuals but with the majority
leaving no descendants at all. The few
highly fertile families are most conspicuous
in the pedigree ; the aunts and uncles who
died childless may often be overlooked. This
lowering of the mortality rate in civilized
man is having a rather similar effect in

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

disturbing the sex ratio equilibrium. There
has always been a slight excess in the number
of boy babies born, but their mortality is
higher so that by maturity the balance has
been restored. A fall in mortality has a
greater effect on the survival of boys, whose
mortality was originally higher, than on
girls, and this is leading to an increase
in the proportion of males in the whole
population. ,

Population Trends in Ireland

All this is of course rather speculative, but
it is instructive to consider the population
problems of Ireland which do suggest that
selection against fecundity may have had
important results in quite a short period of
time.11. Before 1750 the Irish lived in
conditions of great poverty and must have
had a high rate of infant mortality with
correspondingly high selection for fecundity.
The introduction of the potato then raised
the standard of living of the people and
there was an extraordinary increase in the

population, similar to but greater than that

occurring at the same time in England and
elsewhere.!2 In 1845 the potatoes became
infected with blight and, as an inevitable
result of relying on a single food crop, there
was widespread famine, disease and emigration. In the normal course of events the
population, which had shown itself to be
highly fertile, should have replenished itself
rapidly and continued its growth with only a
slight check. But this did not happen and
the population of Ireland has continued to
decline until it is now less than half what it
was in 1840, although most neighbouring
nations have doubled themselves during the
same period.’ The probable explanation of
this decline is that since the famine there has
been rather strong selection against large
families, although artificial restriction of
numbers ‘has probably been less important in
Ireland than elsewhere. In the first place
large families are likely to have been worse
affected by the famine than smaller ones;
many small families may have had just
enough food to save themselves from starvation, but where there were numerous children
to share what little was available all would
NATURAL REGULATION OF NUMBERS —

be weakened by hunger and would probably
have died. Secondly, and perhaps even more
- Important, emigration is likely to have been
selective. An only son who has hopes of
inheriting the family property, however
impoverished, will be reluctant to leave, but
if it is to be shared among half a dozen
brothers, all will be more inclined to emigrate
during bad times. By 1850 the population of
Ireland would have lost most of its more
fecund members leaving the task of replacement to the genetically less fecund who
remained. Nearly five millions of people
have probably emigrated from Ireland to the
United States, but the number of Americans
of Irish descent at the present time is
considerably more than that. The emigrants
from Ireland must therefore have maintained
their fecundity, unlike those left behind,
even though it may be true ‘that for social
reasons the rate of increase of the Irish in
America is now less than that of some other
immigrant groups. For various special
reasons this process will have been continued
since the famine. A girl’s chances of marriage
in Ireland depended largely on the size of her
dowry, which would be inversely related to
the number of sisters who had to share it.
The peasant economy required that all
members of the family should remain on the
farm as unpaid workers, and this tended to
delay the date of marriage and so reduce the
number of children born. That in itself was
an important though not a genetical factor in
limiting population growth, but it is also
likely that the more enterprising and virile
young men and the more highly sexed girls
would have refused to accept these restrictions and these are the ones that will have
left the country. Nor is the influence of the
Roman Catholic Church to be neglected;
celibate priests and nuns are probably mainly
recruited from the larger families where their
departure will not affect the running of the
family farm and will improve the prospects
of inheritance or dowry for those who remain.
It would not be surprising to find that the
mean number of brothers and sisters to each
priest and nun in Ireland is significantly
higher than among married people of the
same age.

177

World Population Trends

If this interpretation is correct it suggests
that human populations must be genetically
heterogeneous for factors determining fertility, for natural selection could only have
produced so rapid a transformation from
high to low fertility if it were operating in an
already genetically heterogeneous population. The same process may be occurring in
other European nations, though more slowly
than in Ireland where it has been encouraged
by the special factors that have been
mentioned. Throughout much of Europe the
very rapid growth of population after the
Industrial Revolution has now been replaced
by stability, and experience suggests that this
may soon be followed by a decline in numbers. Some large increase in the population
of Asia and Africa in the immediate future
is inevitable, but it may reasonably be
doubted whether the present rate of increase
will be maintained much longer, and the more
that conditions of life can be improved and
mortality reduced the faster it should fall.
It would indeed be of the greatest importance
that conditions should be improved since the
factors that have been postulated as limiting
the rate of natural increase can only operate
when a large proportion of the children born
do survive to maturity, thus lessening the
overriding selective advantage of fecundity
compared with all other inherited characters.

Malthus’s predictions proved wrong during
the nineteenth century because unforeseen
improvements in production were able to
keep pace with the increase in population.
This cannot go on much longer, but Malthus’s
other assumption of a constant figure for
human fecundity is also open to question ;
there are other perfectly possible alternatives
that can be suggested. The present geometrical increase in the numbers of man certainly
could be halted by natural selection and it is
satisfactory to realize that famine, disease and
war may not necessarily be the only natural

checks available, however little reliance is to

be placed on the efficacy of human wisdom
and self-restraint.

Conclusions
It is suggested as a hypothesis that human
178

populations may be genetically heterogeneous for factors affecting fertility, and that
this heterogeneity is maintained by a balance
of selective advantage of high fecundity on
the one hand and other qualities of high
survival value associated with lower fertility

on the other. Such an equilibrium will be

unstable and the relative advantage of the
superior qualities associated with lower
fertility will be greatest when mortality is
low. If a large proportion of individuals are
killed off indiscriminately by disease at an
early age before those with potentially
superior qualities are able to benefit from
the effects of competition with the rest of
the population there is a real danger that the
superior but relatively infertile lines will
become extinct. It is to be expected that in
dense disease-ridden populations the mean
fertility should be disproportionately high, so
that improvements in hygiene and medicine
will lead to a dramatic increase in numbers.
As soon as the early indiscriminate deathrate from infective disease is reduced,
however, the lower fertility lines will begin
to benefit in full from their presumed superior
competitive qualities, and so will form an
increasing proportion of future generations.
As a result of this the mean fertility of the
population will fall and the original high rate
of natural increase should taper off until a
new equilibrium is established at a higher
absolute level of numbers with the lower

THE EUGENICS REVIEW |

mortality offset by lowered fertility, and.also
perhaps a higher mean level of inherited
quality. This is contrary to expectation on
orthodox Malthusian theory, which assumes
that human fecundity is invariable. There
are, however, reasons for believing that this
may not be so and that fecundity in man is
subject to alteration by natural selection,
like any other character that is genetically
inhérited.

‘REFERENCES

1. Cragg, J. B. and Pirie, N. W. (Editors). 1955.
The Numbers of Man and Animals, Oliver and
Boyd. —

2. Shlyapentokh, V. E., Privoda. 1954. 3. 118.

3. Chitty, D., in Cragg and Pirie,.'1955, pp. 57-67.

4. Darwin, Charles G., 1952. The Next Million Years,
Hart-Davis.

5. Lack, D., 1954. The Natural Regulation of Animal
Numbers. Clarendon Press,

6. Asdell, S. A., 1946. Patterns of Mammalian
Reproduction, Ithaca.
7. Fisher, R. A., 1930. The Genetical Theory of

Natural Selection, Clarendon Press.

8. Harland, S.C., 1955. Advancement of Science.
11, 383. |

9. Ford, E. B., 1945. Biol. Revs. 20. 73.

10. The Trend of Scottish Intelligence, 1947. 1949.
U.O.L.P.
11. O’Brien, J. A., 1954. The Vanishing Irish, W. H.

Allen.

1z. Plumb, J. H., 1950. England in the 18th Century.
Pelican Books.
