~ INTELLIGENCE AND CHILDBEARING® ©
By D. BAIRD, M.D., F.R.C.O.G.

Regius Professor of Obstetrics and Gynseecology in the University of Aberdeen

and Bileen M. SCOTT, M.A.

Psychologist on the staff of the Social Medicine Research Unit of the , .
Medical Research Council, seconded to. work in Aberdeen

| INTRODUCTION
, By Professor D. Baird
| HAVE shown in previous publications

that reproduction is more efficient in’

private than in hospital patients in. the
sense that in the latter the stillbirth rate is
twice and the neonatal mortality three times
that in the former. Private patients correspond roughly to the Registrar General’s
Social Classes I and II and the hospital
patients to the Registrar General’s Social
Classes III, 1V and V.

It is widely held that improvements in
living conditions and diet have contributed
greatly to the striking fall in both the stillbirth and the infant mortality in recent years.
While this is no doubt so, the fact. remains
that there has been little or no narrowing
of the gap between the rates in the various
social classes. Why should this be so? Is it
because the resources of the educational and
social services have not been directed to the
points where they are most needed or are
those in the lower economic groups too
unintelligent to make use of the services
provided? For the past two years my colleague, Miss Scott, has been studying the
influence of intelligence and social class on
maternal efficiency in Aberdeen and her
work forms the basis of this paper.

_- One might expect that an efficient mother
would be healthy, have planned to have the
baby, would be well informed about the facts
of pregnancy and labour, would have consulted a doctor early in the pregnancy, would
eat a good diet, and would have good ideas
‘about the care and feeding of young babies.

Miss Scott will give you the results of her

study of the influence of intelligence on these

* Papers read at a Members’ Meeting of the Eugenics
Soctety’on May 27th, 1953.

various aspects of, what we have termed,
maternal efficiency, after which I will discuss
the relationship between intelligence, physical health and efficient childbearing.

CERTAIN ASPECTS OF MATERNAL _.
BEHAVIOUR DURING PREGNANCY |

By Eileen M. Scott

During the last three years in Aberdeen
(1950-52), a comprehensive study has been
carried out on some of the many constitutional and environmental factors which play
a part in childbearing. (Baird and IIlsley,
1953.) The survey has covered certain
aspects of medical, dietary, social and
psychological fields of study. Much of the
data collected within each field has not yet
been analysed, so that any report at present
must be restricted in scope. The present
paper describes some of the methods used
in the psychological study and some of the
results obtained. .

The Sample

The. study was concerned with women
having their first babies, because they
represent approximately 40 per cent of all
births in Great Britain, and because medical
complications are frequent in this group. It
was decided to exclude unmarried mothers,
women not normally resident in the city. of
Aberdeen, and women coming into hospital
as emergency cases—that is, those who had
not booked for hospital confinement. They
were omitted mainly because of the difficulty of obtaining comparable information
from such groups. The remainder of women
having first babies in Aberdeen is about
1,000 per year, of which about 850, or some
85 per cent, book for confinement in the

139
140

maternity hospital. This population of
married women, resident in Aberdeen,
booked for hospital confinement, and having
their first babies was selected for study.
They are called, for brevity, booked, married,
city, primigravide, or B.M.C.P. Some Io
per cent of women annually book for nursing
home confinement, and some 5 per cent
have their babies at home, which accounts
for the remaining 15 per cent who were
not included in the population at risk.

As it was not practicable to carry out a
detailed study on some 850 women annually,
a method of sampling this population had
to be decided. From the psychologist’s
point of view, there are many advantages in
studying a group of volunteer patients; they
are, for example, likely to be more co-operative and eager to talk about themselves.
The fact that they are volunteers, however,
means that the factor of selection makes
general conclusions less valid. (Rosen, 1951.)
It was therefore decided to take every sixth
booking—virtually a random sample of
one-in-six.

The women were grouped into classes

according to the husband’s occupation
on the basis of the Registrar General’s
Classification of Occupations (1950). We
shall refer to these as “‘ Social Classes I to
V.” The social investigation was concerned
with the differences between social classes,
and a straight one-in-six sampling procedure did not allow for sufficiently large
numbers to draw reliable conclusions from
each class. A greater proportion, therefore,
was taken in Social Classes I, II, IV and V
to obtain the larger numbers required by the
social study in these groups. The psychological investigation includes these extra
cases, except in Social Class IV, where only
half the additional sample was seen, because
of limited time.

Table 1 shows the numbers and _percentages in each class for the sample and the
corresponding numbers and percentages in
each class for all booked married city
primigravide.

There are larger percentages in Classes I,
II and V and smaller in III than in the
corresponding hospital population. Social

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Class IV is also smaller due to reasons

explained above. The nature of the sample

thus implies that it is necessary to consider

any analysis by individual social classes

before extending conclusions to all hospital
Table 1

PERCENTAGE DISTRIBUTION OF THE SAMPLE BY SOCIAL CLASS OF HUSBAND
NT

TOTAL NUMBER|PERCENTAGE] TOTAL NUMBER | PERCENTAGE
REGI NERAL
EGISTRAR GENERAL'S | sauce 1950-52] BMCP | SAMPLE 1950-52) SAMPLE
SOCIAL CLASS (2556 CASES) (401 CASES)

       
 

   

  

ALL CLASSES

primigravide.

The distribution of age in
the sample is virtually the same as in the
hospital population. |

The Method

The methods used were largely determined
by the wider study rather than by the
particular aspects covered in the, present
paper. (Stewart and Scott, 1953). Both
interview and test techniques were used.

As a result of a pilot study of thirty cases,
it was found that, of the various methods
tried, two sessions of about an hour each
gave the best results. In this way it was
possible to obtain the maximum information
compatible with a low default rate. The
interviews took place during the sixth month
of pregnancy, since by this time most women
had stopped outside work, and could fit in
an extra visit to the clinic without difficulty.
Further, this timing ensured that few cases
were lost through premature delivery. Those
who booked at the clinic for the first time
after the sixth month were not available
for the psychological study, as the dietary
study took place in the seventh month, and
the social study in the eighth month. This
strictly limited any extension of the psychological study beyond the sixth month.
INTELLIGENCE AND CHILDBEARING

The patients were given an appointment
by the receptionist at the time of a routine
visit to the antenatal clinic. They were told
that the purpose of the special appointment
was to give them an opportunity of discussing matters relating to their first pregnancies. They were not told that they were
going to see a psychologist, since it was felt
that this might cause unnecessary anxiety.
Even so, it was anticipated that many
would fail to keep the appointment. In
fact; only seven patients or I-7 per cent
of the 408 who were given an appointment,
failed to turn up for a first interview. Co-operation in the second visit also was on the
whole surprisingly good. Eighteen patients,
however, out of the 401 who attended the
first interview, failed to return for a second
session. In view of this, therefore, information has not been uniformly obtained for
all 401 patients.

The Interview

The first session opened with an explanation of why the patient had been asked to
come along. It was made clear that this
was a special survey on women having their

first babies, and that we would be grateful.

for any information which the patient could
give us regarding her health, reactions to
pregnancy and so on. At the same time we
would be glad to answer any questions
she would like to ask about pregnancy,
labour, hospital or any other related matter.

The patient was then asked to give a few
personal details about health, education,
employment and family history. This
usually had the desired effect of putting
patients at their ease. They were then asked
if they would co-operate further in the
research project by doing two tests (Raven's
Progressive Matrices 1938 and four sub-tests
of the Wechsler-Bellevue verbal battery).
Progressive Matrices results only are considered in this paper. (Raven, 1938.) The
twenty minute version of this test was used
because of time limitations. Two patients
refused to do the tests. Three others were
not asked to complete the Matrices test—
two because they had previous experience
of administering and scoring the test, and

CG

141

one because she had already expressed strong
prejudices against all psychological testing.
In this latter case it was felt that more useful
information could be obtained in the interview if the tests were not mentioned.

At the end of this first session, the patients
were invited to return for another visit and
a suitable appointment was then made. They
were asked to make a note of any matters
relating to their pregnancy or confinement
on which they would Jike information, with
a view to discussion during the second
session.

In addition to any such points raised by
the patients themselves in the second hour,
other topics were introduced into the conversation by the psychologist. These topics
had been selected to ascertain each patient’s
knowledge of childbirth, hospital, care of
children, and her views on the ‘size and
spacing of her family. Other matters relating
to financial, domestic and marital aspects
were also discussed, but consideration of
these does not come within the scope of this
paper.

There are several different sets of norms
available for ‘‘ timed ”’ Progressive Matrices
test grades, with only small differences
between them. They are mainly from Service
sources. Royal Naval norms have been used
in the following tables; they differ from A.T.S.
norms by only one point.

Table 2

PERCENTAGE DISTRIBUTION OF THE SAMPLE BY PROGRESSIVE MATRICES (1938) GRADES

PERCENTAGE CASES
ESTIMATED ON BMC.P.
POPULATION 1950-52

MATRICES! SCORE | PERCENTAGE CASES PERCENTAGE CASES

SAMPLE

 

The second table shows the percentage
distribution of the sample by Progressive
Matrices, grade A being highest and E lowest
142

scores. Grades A and B have a greater
percentage and grade E less in the sample
‘than the norms. This can also be observed
when the percentages are corrected for social
class composition to apply to the B.M.C.P.
population. It might be that the smaller
-percentage in the E grade is due to the
exclusion of unmarried mothers, late booking
cases and home _ confinements. Other
investigations, however (Vernon, 1949), have
shown similarly skewed distributions.

It will be remembered that we are dealing
with a sample stratified by husband’s social
class. Considerable evidence exists in the
hospital population for 1950 of a highly
significant relationship between the social
classes of husband and wife. Thus we may
possibly assume that the term “ husband’s
social class’? conveys something of the
“married couple’s social class.”

Similarly a positive correlation has been
shown by Willoughby between intelligence
test scores (both verbal and non-verbal) of
husbands and wives (Willoughby, 1927;
Richardson, 1939), so we might perhaps

‘assume from wife’s Progressive Matrices
score, something of the intelligence level of
the couple. The first figure shows the
relationship between the husband’s social

.class and the wife’s Progressive Matrices
grade for the sample.

Figure I
PROGRESSIVE MATRICES (1938)GRADE AND HUSBAND'S SOCIAL CLASS

396 BOOKED MARRIED CITY PRIMIGRAVIDAE — ABERDEEN ‘1950-52

    
 
 

PMGRADE

aN |

Cc
OBE

PERCENTAGE CASES

    

WAAAY

Zz
Z
Z
7
7
o
&
Z
i

WV

Y
HUSBAND'S SOCIAL CLASS

A&B

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

It can be seen that the percentage of A and
B grades, i.e. the higher intelligence grades,
decreases steadily from 80 per cent as we
go from Social Classes I and II to 24 per
cent in Social Classes IV and V. Conversely
the percentage of D and E grades increases
from 2 per cent in Social Classes I and IT to
34 per cent in Classes IV and V. In view of.
this relationship between Matrices score
and social class it is possible that social
class may enter into any observed association
between Matrices and behaviour.
_ Social class is also strongly associated with
age at first pregnancy, Classes I and II
tending to have first pregnancies at an older
age (66 per cent are over 25 years of age in
the sample) than Classes IV and V (38 per
cent are over 25 years of age in the sample).
Each grading of behaviour has been con
' sidered by age, where this was practicable,
‘as it was felt that older women might well

behave differently from younger, so that a
similar qualification obtains here, i.e. where
there is an association between age and
behaviour, it may well be accounted for
by the greater incidence of younger
women in Social Classes IV and V, and older
women in Classes I and II. There is, however, practically no correlation (—-0004 on
sample) between age at first pregnancy
and Progressive Matrices score, so that
we may Safely neglect. the influence of
the relationship between Age and Matrices
for the age range within this sample.

The Results

A probability of I in Ioo or less that any
relationship would occur by chance alone,
I shall refer to as “ highly significant.”” A
probability of 5 in 100 or less, but greater
than I in 100 I shall refer to as “‘ significant ”’
throughout. I shall not show the actual
numbers, but illustrate by means of diagrams based on percentages. The numbers are
given in an appendix at the end of the paper.

This paper is concerned solely with the
relationship between Progressive Matrices
test Scores and four different aspects of
patients’ behaviour before and during first
pregnancy; these are as follows:

1. Use of birth control.
INTELLIGENCE AND CHILDBEARING

2. Use of sources of information about
pregnancy and labour.
3. Quality of diet during pregnancy.
4. Intention to breast-feed.
For each aspect of behaviour, information
given by the patients forms the basis for
gradings.

1. Use of Birth Control

Patients were asked during interview
whether they had ever used any method of
birth control, whether they were still using
contraceptive methods at the time of conception, and what their plans were for future
use of birth control.

It is recognised that this is rather a diffcult subject to discuss. There may be considerable risk of influencing the patients’
responses by leading questions, and care had
to be taken to avoid this. The subject was
introduced by asking patients how many
children they wanted to have, how long they
would like between first and second children
and how they proposed to accomplish this.
It was then easier to ask if they had “ taken
any precautions before,’’ whether they were
“ still continuing at time of conception ”’ and
what plans they had made for after their
first pregnancy.

A further difficulty les in analysing the
use of different methods of birth control.
Numbers do not allow us to consider each
method separately, so some form of grouping
had to be chosen. If we group methods of
birth control according to whether husband
or wife is mainly responsible we find insuffcient cases in the “ wife’s ’’ group for statistical treatment. We have grouped together
all appliance methods, that is, mechanical
and chemical methods whether used by wife
or by husband, and all non-appliance
methods, that is, coztus interruptus and safe
period, and thus we obtain adequate numbers in each group. As use of birth control
methods is to be analysed by wife’s intelligence test score and husband’s social class,
it may be argued that better results might
be obtained by a “ responsibility ’”’ grouping
—thus relating husband’s social class to
methods where husband is responsible, and
wife’s intelligence to methods where wife is

methods (three diaphragm).

143

responsible. It will be remembered, however, that we can understand something of
the couple’s social class and intelligence Jevel
from our available measures of husband’s
social class and wife’s intelligence level. The
results seem to justify this grouping by
appliance and non-appliance methods.

Use of birth control is distinguished from
effective use in the following results :

(a) Use of birth control before first pregnancy.
This information was obtained from 384
patients, (383 who attended the second
session and one who attended the first only.
As five patients were not tested the tables.
are based on 379 cases). Of these couples 204.
had used some form of contraception before
first pregnancy—i132 used non-appliance
(twelve safe period) and 72 appliance
Ten couples
had used two or more methods cambined,
and mine couples had used different
methods at different times. These nineteen couples are classed in the appliance
group if mechanical or chemical methods
were ever used, and as non-appliance if only
non-appliance methods were used.

There is a highly significant association
between husband’s social class and the use
of birth control. As can be seen from
Figure II, 75 per cent of couples in Social
Classes I and II, 56 per cent in Social Class
III and 45 per cent in Social Classes IV and

Figure II
USE OF BIRTH CONTROL

379 BOOKED MARRIED CITY PRIMIGRAVIDAE -ABERDEEN 1950 - 52

HUSBAND'S SOCIAL CLASS

PROGRESSIVE MATRICES GRADE

60

 
  

PERCENTAGE CASES
PERCENTAGE CASES

 

Tall w

Wey .
144

V said they used some type of birth control.
This relationship holds for Matrices grades
A and Band forC. Dand E cannot be tested
because of small numbers.

_ Wife’s intelligence test grade is associated,
but not significantly, with the use of birth
control of all types. Birth control, however,
is more extensively used in the higher intelligence test grades. This trend holds for all
social classes, and within each class, but
never approaches significance.

Intelligence test grade is not significantly
related to whether appliance or nonappliance methods of birth control are used,
which appears also to be a social class
phenomenon. There are highly significant
differences between the social classes in
methods used. Of those using birth control,
non-appliance methods were used in 50 per
cent of cases in Social Classes I and II, 58 per
cent in Social Class III, and 84 per cent in
Social Classes [V and V. These results parallel
Lewis-Faning’s report (1949) although direct
comparison is not feasible owing to differences
in the samples. It appears that “ tested ”’
intelligence in this sample may be a‘contributory factor in the use of birth control, but
plays no part in determining the methods to
be used.

Older women use birth control more
extensively irrespective of intelligence test
score, which may be an effect of the higher
proportion of older women in Social Classes
I and II. We cannot test this because of
small numbers. The association between test
score and the use of birth control is more
marked in the younger age group under
twenty-five years of age. There are no
significant differences between the over and
under twenty-five age group for’ different
methods of birth control, although older
women show a greater tendency to use
appliance methods.

(b) Continuing use of birth control at time
of conception.* |

It is not, of course, suggested that mere

use of birth control indicates planning for

*In the figures quoted for failure rate by method
used, the ten couples using a combination of appliance
and non-appliahce methods are omitted. The nine

‘THE EUGENICS REVIEW

~

first pregnancy. The failure of contraception
in the group who used birth control, however,
will give some indication of unplanned first
pregnancies. (Figure ITI.)
Figure III
USE OF BIRTH CONTROL AT TIME OF CONCEPTION
204 BOOKED MARRIED CITY PRIMIGRAVIDAE — ABERDEEN [9SO- S2

PROGRESSIVE MATRICES GRADE HUSBAND'S SOCIAL CLASS

PERCENTAGE CASES
PERCENTAGE CASES

  

Wm wey

O&E Jal

Ago o¢

The proportion of those couples still using

‘birth control methods at the time of concep
tion increases significantly with a fall in the
wife’s intelligence test grade. We find the
same relationship within each social class.
There are no significant differences in this
“ failure rate ’’ between social classes. Thus
“successful ’’’ use of all methods of birth
control by the couple is related to the higher
intelligence grade of the wife. This supplements lLewis-Faning’s suggestion (1949)
that ‘“‘education’”’ is related to skill with
which contraceptive measures are applied
by the couple.

Younger women are concerned in a higher
proportion of “‘ failures ’”’ than older women.
It is possible that this is due to a lower
fertility rate in the older group (Monahan,
1950), perhaps ‘supplemented by the greater
care taken by couples in this group as will
be noted in other aspects of behaviour. In
the younger women “ failures ’’ occur more
frequently in the lower intelligence grades,
while among older women the differences
between test scores for ‘‘ failures ’’ is negligible for all methods, together or separately. |

couples who used different methods at different times
are classed according to the last method used before
conception.
INTELLIGENCE AND CHILDBEARING

If we consider the “ failure rate ’’ by method
of birth control used in the younger age
group we find for couples using non-appliance methods that the “failure rate’’ in
creases from 60 per cent in the A and B>

grades, 72 per cent in the C grade to 86 per
cent in the D and E grades. The failure rate
for appliance methods also increases as
“tested ’’ intelligence decreases but the
total numbers are small.

The wife’s “‘ tested ’’ intelligence therefore
appears to be an important factor in relation
‘to success or failure in use of birth control
methods by the couple, whether we consider

appliance and non-appliance methods to- |

gether or separately. The lower social classes
use birth control less extensively than the
upper and have a greater proportion using
non-appliance methods. Further, it is in
these classes that we find people whose
“tested ’’ intelligence is low and _ thus
associated with higher “ failure rates ’”’ in
birth control, by appliance or non-appliance
methods, when they do use it. We know in
the past that the largest families have been
in the lower social classes. These conclusions
appear to show that we will continue to get
larger families from such groups. It is of
interest, however, that women with lower
test scores and women in lower social classes
tend to state a preference during interview
for family sizes of one or two children, while
those with higher test scores, and those in
the higher social classes, prefer three to four
children. (See Appendix, tables marked with
an asterisk.)

(c) Plans for use of birth control after the first
bab

We find that there is a stronger relationship between stated intention to use birth
control after the first baby and social class
than with intelligence test score, but neither
is significant. Sufficient time has not elapsed
to allow of adequate follow-up here as yet.

2. Use of Sources of Information about
Pregnancy and Labour
Patients were asked three questions to find
out the extent of their knowledge of the facts
of pregnancy and labour, and how that
knowledge had been obtained. They were

145

asked if they had ever discussed such matters
at home, with mothers, sisters, relatives or
friends—this is classed as ‘“‘ Home’”’ source,
and is generally information of rather poor
quality. They were asked if they had ever
read any books, magazines or pamphlets,
ever seen any films, or listened to any
talks on the radio about childbearing—this is
classed as “‘ Outside ’’ source, and is usually
information of better quality than that
obtained through “ Home ’”’ sources. They
were asked whether they intended coming to
the talks at the clinic about labour—classed

“Clinic’”’ source, information of good
quality, and usually equivalent to the best:
obtained from ‘‘ Outside” sources. For the
purpose of analysis we have grouped the
patients according to the presumed quality
of the information :

Group One : “‘ Poor’ '—that 1 is, NO source of
information at all, or “Home ” source
only.

Group Two: ‘‘ Average’’—that is, either
‘“Qutside’”’ ov “ Clinic’’ source, with
or without “ Home ” source. |

Group Three: ‘‘ Good’’—that is, both
““ Outside ”’ and “‘ Clinic ’’sources, with
or without ‘‘ Home ”’ source.

This information was obtained from 388
patients. .(383 who attended both sessions,

and five who attended only one session. The

five who did not complete the Progressive

Figure IV

PROGRESSIVE MATRICES (1938) GRADE ANO USE OF SOURCES OF INFORMATION
383 BOOKED MARRIED CITY PRIMIGRAVIDAE —ABERDEEN 1950-52

  

PERCENTAGE CASES

  

AAA

POOR

GOOD AVERAGE

USE OF SOURCES OF INFORMATION
146

Matrices: test are omitted, therefore the
results are based on 383 cases). (Figure IV.)

There is a significant association between
presumed quality of sources of information
and intelligence test grade. Those with
higher test grades tend to use the “ better ”’
sources of information. This relationship
can be observed within each social class and
reaches significance in Classes IV and V.
There is also a significant relationship with
social class but it does not approach significance within each Matrices grade.

The relationship between intelligence test
grade and the quality of sources of information does not hold so strongly for women over
twenty-five years of age. These older women
tend to use better sources of information
more extensively irrespective of test score.
It seems possible that this might be a social
class effect as it will be remembered that
Social Classes I and II tend to have a greater
proportion of older women, but small numbers do not allow us to test this. However,
older women have perhaps had more opportunity to gain knowledge of pregnancy and
childbirth. In addition, older women, irrespective of social class, give the impression of
being more careful in their planning and
preparation. This may mean that they will
use outside and clinic sources of information
in order to clarify the knowledge they have
got through social experience. Younger
women because of their youth will have less
opportunity to gain knowledge of pregnancy
and childbirth through social experience,
and here the use of better sources of information is more closely related to higher intelligence test score.

It can be argued, however, that both
‘intelligent ’’ young women, and the older
women are more likely to give an answer
which they can appreciate is the “ right ”’
one. This, is, of course, possible and one of
the disadvantages of the interview method
of obtaining information. It is reasonable
to assume that the woman who is more
aware of propaganda and social pressures
towards any course of behaviour will tend
to say that she is going to behave in the
recommended manner. It is equally reasonable that she is in fact more likely to behave

‘

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

in that way than is the woman who is unaware of or resistant to these social pressures.
(Knower, 1936; Cantril, 1947.) This will be
later shown to be the case in relation to
breast-feeding.

3. Diet During Pregnancy

Of those who took part in the psychological investigation 174 also took part in a
dietary survey. The method employed was
that the patient weighed her total food
intake for one week in the seventh month of
pregnancy. For the purposes of this study
the calcium intake has been used to classify
the quality of the diets. Calcium intake is
determined mainly by consumption of milk
and some milk products. Where these are
high, diets as a whole tend to be better.
(Thomson, 1953.) A daily intake of 1,500
milligrams or more is usually recommended
during pregnancy and for the purposes of
this paper we have classified a diet as good
if it contains over 1,000 mg. daily, average
if between 1,000 and 750, and poor if below
750 mg. This classification allows sufficient
numbers in each group for statistical analysis. Social Classes I, II and III have had to
be grouped together since there were only
sixty cases between these three classes, the
remaining 114 being from Classes IV and V.
The preponderance of cases in Social Classes
IV and V is due to the fact that the policy
has been to study dietary intake in as many
cases as possible in Social Classes IV and V,

Figure V

PROGRESSIVE MATRICES GRADE : SOCIAL CLASS AND CALCIUM INTAKE
Cece ee a a
174 BOOKED MARRIED CITY PRIMIGRAVIDAE ° ABERDEEN 1950-1952

AM A&B ¢
4540

ALB <¢

 

% OF CASES IN EACH CALCIUM INTAKE GROUP

 

AVERAGE [_] sooo
INTELLIGENCE AND CHILDBEARING

in which nutritional problems are likely to
be at their most severe.

We find a highly significant association
between quality of diet assessed by calcium
intake and social class. There are fewer poor
quality diets in Social Classes I, II and ITI,
than in IV and V. The diagram suggests
that intelligence test grade may be associated with the quality of the diet within
social classes. Within each social group, the
quality of diet improved as the intelligence
grade improves. (Figure V.)

4. Breast-feeding
Patients were asked during interview
whether they intended to breast-feed or
bottle-feed their babies. Their responses
were carefully noted verbatim and subsequently graded by three investigators independently on a five-point scale. A “ Very
Good ”’ grading was given when the woman
indicated that she was eager to breast-feed,
and her statement had contained no reservations. For example, the reply “ I’d like to
breast-feed—if I can of course,’’ was regarded as a qualification and was graded
“Good.” At the other end of the scale, a
‘Very Poor” grading was given when the
woman said she did not intend to breastfeed, and a “ Poor ’’ grading when she said
she did not intend to but added some
qualification such as, ‘‘ I expect I shall have
to breast-feed in hospital.’ ‘“‘ Poor’ and
“Very Poor’ grades are combined as
“Poor ’”’ because of small numbers. Statements about breast-feeding were obtained
from 384 cases (383 who attended both
sessions and one who attended one session
only). The following table is based on the
265 of the cases for which follow-up information is so far available.
Figure VI shows that women with

higher Matrices grades appear to be more

eager to breast-feed than women in the
lower intelligence grades. This same
association holds within Social Classes III

and IV and V. Classes I and II cannot be

tested because of small numbers. A similar
trend can be shown independently between
social class and intention to breast-feed
(Ross, 1951), so that both intelligence and

147

social class seem to play a part in determining

_ attitude to breast-feeding. It may be con
tended that this is because women with
higher intelligence test gradings or in upper
social classes are more aware of the social.
pressures towards breast-feeding, thus are
more likely to say they will breast-feed. Our
hypothesis is that women who have stronger
intentions, even if this be due to awareness

Figure VI

PROGRESSIVE MATRICES GRADE AND INTENTION TO BREAST FEED
265 BOOKED MARRIED CITY PRIMIGRAVIDAE : ABERDEEN 1950-1952

   
  
   

PM. :
GRADE INTENTION TO B.F
VERY GOOD
60 Blcore)

40

PERCENTAGE CASES

WAAAY

a
A&B : Cc ‘
PROGRESSIVE MATRICES GRADE

of social pressures, will in fact be more likely
to breast-feed. The social investigators have
been following up cases for three months
after delivery to see which patients still
continue to breast-feed. This data is so far
available on the 265 cases. While it is
appreciated that there can be sound medical
reasons for the cessation of breast-feeding,
it is proposed to consider all cases together
irrespective of reason for stopping. In
Figure VII, patients have been . divided
into those still breast-feeding or giving com-:
plementary feeds, and those who have
completely stopped breast-feeding. The data
was collected at the thirteenth week after
delivery.

Figure VII shows the highly significant
relationship between intention to breast-feed
and actual performance. Those whose intention of breast-feeding was graded as “ Very
good ” or “ Good ”’ have 46 per cent breastfeeding at thirteen weeks as against 27 per
cent in the “ Fair”’ group and only 19 per
cent of those whose intention was “ Poor.”
148

The ante-natal statement of intentions
regarding feeding the baby appears to
correspond fairly well with what actually
takes place. This relationship is similar to
one reported by Newton and Newton (1950),
in which 74 per cent with good attitudes,
35 per cent with doubtful and 26 per cent

Figure VII

INTENTION TO BREAST FEED AND SUCCESSFUL BREAST FEEDING I3 WEEKS AFTER DELIVERY

265 BOOKED MARRIED CITY PRIMIGRAVIOAE — ABERDEEN 1950-!952

100

    
 

80

60

% STILL AF AT 13/52

PERCENTAGE CASES

FAIR

VERY GOOD
& GOOD

INTENTION GRADE

with negative attitudes towards breast-feeding, did in fact breast-feed successfully until
they left hospital. The longer follow-up
period here probably accounts for the difference in overall percentages. |

Conclusions |

We have examined four aspects of maternal behaviour before and during first pregnancy and related these to Progressive
Matrices grades.

These four aspects of maternal behaviour
might be given more meaning for us if we
‘considered them all together in terms of
“‘ preparatory attitudes ”’ or better, “ preparatory set to maternity.”’ (Bevan and Dukes,
1953.) Using this collective term, we find

that intelligence test scores help to differen-—

tiate between those having a good set, and

those having a poor set. The woman who is"

more careful in planning her first pregnancy,
who makes more effort to find out the facts
of pregnancy and labour, who has a better
quality diet and who is more eager to breastfeed her baby tends to have a higher intelligence test score. She also tends.to belong

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

to the upper social groups as determined by
her husband’s social class. The high
association between Progressive Matrices
score and social class has made our interpretation rather complicated. Further,
where there was an association between age
and behaviour, we have been unable to
determine whether this is a true age difference irrespective of social class effect, because
the small proportions of older women in
Classes IV and V and of younger women in
Classes I and II would not bear the heavy
cross Classification necessary.

To sum up, our data indicates that in the
sample studied : ;

(r).Use of birth control and the kind of
method used is positively associated
with social class, while effective use
of birth control is positively associated
with intelligence test grade. i
The use of sources of information, as
graded in this paper, is positively
associated with both intelligence test
grade and social class, but more
detailed analysis of the data showed
a stronger relationship with intelligence
test grade.

_ (3) Quality of diet, measured by calcium
intake, is positively associated with
social class, but the figure illustrating
this point suggests that intelligence
test grade also might be positively
associated with quality of diet.

Intention to breast-feed discussed with
each patient antenatally is positively
related to both intelligence test grade
and social class, but in neither case are
these relationships significant.

It is hoped to show in a later paper that
‘“maternal preparatory set ’’’ and “ tested ”
intelligence are related to other aspects of
childbearing such as duration and type of
labour. As attitudes cannot be fully comprehended in isolation the behaviour and
attitudes discussed here can only be fully
understood within a wider context.

It will be obvious, however, that having a
first child is only one incident in the total
childbearing life of these women. Most of
them will have subsequent pregnancies. It
would be of great interest to relate intelli
(4)
INTELLIGENCE AND CHILDBEARING | . 49

gence test scores and preparatory set at USE OF BIRTH CONTROL, METHODS.
first pregnancy to some aspects of the 379 BOOKED MARRIED CITY PRIMIGRAVIDAE, ABERDEEN 1950-2.

_woman’s complete childbearing life. We (1) PROGRESSIVE MATRICES GRADE.
would like to consider, for example, size and , .
spacing of the completed family, together
with the incidence of maternal or infant illness or mortality in seven to ten years’ time.
It would be of practical value to the obstetrician if we could show that intelligence and
maternal behaviour in first pregnancy could
indicate future behaviour in planning and

_ caring for the completed family.

Acknowledgments

The psychological survey, as indicated,
forms part of a wider inquiry into the facts
of reproductive efficiency, and I am very
grateful to my colleagues who have generously given me data from their own parts of
the investigation, and for much practical
assistance, helpful criticism and advice in
the preparation of this paper.

 

APPENDIX | My = a3.5e P< O02
The following tables show the expected .
and observed frequencies for each relation- — Sorrasponding to Figure tt.
ship illustrated in Miss Scott’s paper.
In the following analyses X? has been 7h aa =
BOO ED CITY P. VI EEN

calculated in the usual manner and_ the
probability is that of the divergence from : (2) PROGRESSIVE MATRICES GRADE,
the null hypothesis. The probability levels
are based on differences without regard to ALL
trends, as X? takes no account of the signs | "poe fue | ace |e [ee | cite
of the differences. re 97
PROGRESSIVE MATRICES (1938) GRADE & HUSBAND'S SOCIAL (LASS, Be 7h) (30.92) | (22.35)

 

   

BOOKED MARRIED CITY PRIMIGRAVIDAE ABERDEEN 0 
¥? 9) = 6.65 P< OL

(2) HUSBAND'S SOCTAL CLASS.

Birth Control wae
- Ge 38)
(sa 62)

Po <— .OO1. (2) ©

    
    

(Expected frequencies in brackets) .

1) = 48.453

Corresponding to Figure 1.
®

150
PROGRESSIVE G G ‘AND USE

BOOKED MARRIED CITY PRIMIGRAV:DAE

 

te 16) ( <6, 44)

58 66
(63.90) (58.44)

25 30
(32,94) (30.12)

soc CIUM_ INTAKE,

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

SOURCES OF INFO

ABERDEEN 1950.52.

(33. 58)
37
(39.68)

28
(19.94)

BOOKED MARRIED CITY PRIMIGRAVIDAR, ABERDEEN

 

== CE m= [=e]
; 5 89 193

tai 48)

33
* (29,93)

~

Oh
(24.88).

17
(16.7)

(as 96)

14
(18.02)

TION,

 

 

 

    
 
 

Sti11 B.F,

  

Ceased B.F.

aarp) = 14.98 P< ,.OO1

Sorresponding to Figure Vil.

 

'§ SOCTAL CLASS sI _"

 

1 89
(22.47) (94.97) (75.56)

   
 

 

23 70
(15.94) (67.42)

  

 
 

27
(23.62)

SMALL 1, 1-2, or 2
AVERAGE 2-3, 3, or 34. .
LARGE 4 and over.

* See page 145.
INTELLIGENCE AND CHILDBEARING

HEALTH AND PHYSIQUE OF MOTHERS
IN VARIOUS SOCIAL GROUPS

By Professor D. Baird

Miss Scott has shown that on the whole
women in Social Classes I and II are more
intelligent, more knowledgeable, take a
better diet and show more initiative than
those in Classes III, I[V and V. I should now
like to describe the differences in health
and physique of the mothers in the various
social groups and show how these factors
influence the outcome of pregnancy and
labour.

Figure I shows that there is a definite
social gradient for height, the proportion of
small women (less than 5 ft. I in.) rising
steadily as the social status falls.

Figure I

HEIGHT DISTRIBUTION IN EACH SOCIAL CLASS
ABERDEEN MARRIED PRIMIPARAE 1949-SI

HEIGHT

  
   
 

5’ 4” AND OVER
(TALL)

5’ 1-S' 3"
(MEDIUM)

a
°o

UNDER 5° I”
GSMALL)

I fil wi
HUSBAND'S - SOCIAL CLASS

In hospital patients, corresponding roughly
to Social Classes III, IV and V, tall women
appeared healthier than small women. The

state of health was assessed subjectively at 
the antenatal clinic into one of five grades
varying from excellent to very poor, and
Table 1 shows that amongst those assessed
as being in excellent health 41 per cent were
tall and 11 per cent small, whereas of those
graded as poor or very poor, I4 per cent
were tall and 44 per cent small. _

The incidence of prematurity and stillbirth was twice as great in small as in tall
women and in women of the same height
was twice as frequent in those in poor or
very poor health compared to those in

I5I

excellent or very good health. This method
of assessing standards of health, although
admittedly rather subjective, does pick out

Table 1
PHYSICAL GRADING BY HEIGHT IN 1791 BOOKED MARRIED PRIMIPARAE
ABERDEEN MATERNITY HOSPITAL 1949 —1950

POOR &

those with an increased liability to stillbirth and prematurity.

The association between short stature,
poor health and poor reproduction suggests
that such women are stunted and that their
short stature is not inherited. How therefore
has it come about? Table 2 shows the
relationship: between intelligence and height, —
and intelligence and number of mother’s
brothers and sisters in each social class in»
295 of Miss Scott’s cases in whom the father’s
occupation was known. | |

It shows that with regard to height and
intelligence there is a steady increase in
correlation from Classes I and II to IV and V.

      
       

Table 2

CORRELATIONS BETWEEN : INTELLIGENCE
HEIGHT
SIZE OF BIOLOGICAL FAMILY

SOCIAL CLASS/OF CASES| AND HEIGHT |ANO =
cre [= [moe
Ca [= [wee
ee [om [ooo

NOTE:(1) BASED ON 1/6 SAMPLE OF BOOKED, MARRIED, CITY
PRIMIPARAE (1950-1952) ‘

   

=
g
2
N

J

  

—-186 (NS)

 
   

—+246 (1%)

—-217 (5%)

  

(2) INTELLIGENCE {S$ REPRESENTED BY SCORE ON RAVEN'S _ PROGRESSIVE MATRICES (1938) 20 MINUTE VERSION
152 .

There is a negative correlation between
intelligence and the size of family which is
more marked in Social Classes III, IV and V
than in Classes I and II. These figures lend
some support to my own clinical impressions
which are somewhat as follows:

In Social Classes I and II, children probably get enough food, fresh air and exercise
to grow to-their full height whatever the
differences in income or intelligence of the
parents with the result that very few are
small (under 5 ft. 1 in.) and differences in
adult height are more likely to be due to
genetic differences.

In the lower income groups where money
is scarce, the more intelligent parents will be
more likely to use their limited resources to
the best advantage in an effort to give their
children the best chance within their power.
They will thus limit the number of children
to ensure that they get good food and healthy
surroundings. The daughters will, therefore,
tend to grow to their full height and to be
healthy. Since the parents are above average
intelligence for their class the daughters are
likely, on the average, to be more intelligent.
In addition their superior health and home
background will probably increase their

chance of doing well in the intelligence test.
Where the parents are less intelligent there
is less likelihood that the size of the family
will be so carefully controlled so that there
will be less money to go round and as a result
diet and living conditions will be less good.
The daughters will, therefore, not -grow to
their full potential height and will tend to be
small. The daughters, like the parents, will
have a greater chance of being of less than
average intelligence. This might explain why
in Social Classes III to V, but not in Classes
I and II, small women tend to come from
large families and to be less intelligent than
tall women.

It has been said that a poor diet does not
cause permanent stunting, but only slows
down the rate of growth and the full predetermined height is eventually reached. If
this were so it would be difficult to explain
why the average height throughout the
country is not falling since Social Classes

    

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

IV and V, who are small, have more children

than those in Classes I and IJ, who are taller.

Table 3 shows that small women, aged

15-24, who had a first baby in the Aberdeen °
Maternity Hospital in 1948, are showing a

distinct tendency to have larger families than

tall women of the same age group. In the

four years since 1948 the small women pro
duced 25 per cent more babies than the tall

women.

Table 3
PRIMIGRAV' UAE avED 18-24 IN 1948
NUMBER OF SUBSEQUENT CHILOREN TILL THE END OF [9852

 
 
    

 
 

og ° “ fae] - |

©) NUMBER OF CASES

As already stated small women show
relatively high prematurity and stillbirth
rates. They also require Cesarean section
frequently because of disproportion between |
the baby’s head and the mother’s pelvis,
whereas in women of 5 ft. 4 in. or more
Cesarean section for this cause is rarely
necessary.

Table 4 shows the shape of the pelvis in
too tall and 100 small women divided into
two groups according to whether the health
was judged to be good or poor. |

Table 4
DISTRIBUTION OF PELVIC

(ucnorson’s CLASSIFICATION) BY HEIGHT AND PHYSIQUE

ROUND OR
LONG OVAL AT RIANGULAR

BRIM SHAPES

Forty per cent of small women in poor
health (grade II) and 6 per cent of tall women
in good health (grade I) had a flat pelvis.
In a healthy woman the brim of the pelvis
INTELLIGENCE AND CHILDBEARING

is practically round; flattening of. the
posterior segment of the brim is a sign of
disease. The capacity of the brim is directly
proportional to the height of the woman,
consequently the small and unhealthy
woman has not only a deformed but a small
pelvis, hence the high incidence of difficult
labour and the high Cesarean section rate.
It is difficult, therefore, to believe that such
small women are fully grown.

Although it is known that childbearing is
unusually dangerous in small unhealthy
women they nevertheless are much more
prone to have large families. In Aberdeen
Social Class V contributes 12 per cent of
first births and 30 per cent of fifth and
subsequent births.

Table 5 shows that in the Aberdeen
Maternity Hospital the proportion of small
mothers increases with the increase in the
number of children.

Table 5

‘HEIGHT DISTRIBUTION BY PARITY

ABERDEEN MATERNITY HOSPITAL BOOKED MARRIED CITY CASES

 

Forty per cent of those having a seventh

or subsequent child are under 5 ft. I in., and
in a series of cases where pregnancy was
terminated or sterilization was performed,
because of multiparity and debility 42 per
cent were small. Such patients are unable to
help themselves and are usually living in
sordid conditions, the husband often being
unemployed. Sterilization gives the woman
instant and complete relief from the constant
dread of pregnancy and leaves her free to
concentrate on the care of the children she
already has. In properly selected cases it
contributes greatly to the happiness and
stability of the family. Maternal mortality
and stillbirth rates are high in this group but

153

under the active policy pursued in Aberdeen

‘such women contribute nothing to maternal

mortality and very little to the stillbirth rate.

From the eugenic point of view little can
be said against it since our investigations
suggest that children of such parents are
less likely than average to be of high intelligence and in any case the poor environment
makes it unlikely that they will be able to
make full use of their inherited abilities.

Miss Scott has shown that 34 per cent of
childbearing women in Social Classes IV
and V are of poor or very poor intelligence.
The combination of low intelligence and poor
environment makes the effective use of
contraceptives almost impossible in these
cases. They constitute a problem group in
which surgical measures may be necessary
to prevent further unwanted pregnancies
which would almost certainly prove disastrous to the health and well-being of the
mother and family. As Social Classes IV
and V contribute 30 per cent of the total
births and as we have seen one-third of the
child-bearing women in these social classes
are of low intelligence, it follows that this
problem group of low intelligence in a pdor
environment comprises about Io per cent of
all childbearing women.

In Aberdeen in the last four years the
average stillbirth rate was twenty—a low
figure by past standards—yet there are still
many small unhealthy women in the city
whose reproductive efficiency is low. Many
of these are intelligent enough to do very
much better. Women of the same level of
intelligence in the upper economic groups
reproduced more efficiently. There is still,
therefore, much scope for lowering the stillbirth rate by improving the social and
economic conditions of the lower income
groups.

REFERENCES

Baird, D. and Illsley, R. (1953), Proc. Roy. Soc. Med.,
46, 2, p. 53

Bevan, W. and Dukes, W. F. (1953), Brit. J. Psychol.,

44, p. 52.

Cantril, H. (1947), Gauging Public Opinion, Princeton
Univ. Press.

Knower, F. H. (1936), J. db. Soc. Psychol. 30, p. 522.

Lewis-Faning, E. (1949), Papers oS the Royal Commisston on Population, 1, H.M

Monahan, T. P. (1950), Hum. Biol, ” 950, 22, p. 281.
154 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Newton, N. R. and Newton, M. (1950), Paediatrics, Stewart, D. B. and Scott, E. M. Edin. Med. J., Trans.

5, p. 869. Edin. Obs. Soc., 60, 49.
Raven, J. C. (1938), Guide to using Progressive Matrices, pomson. A. M (1953), Personal communication
' H. K. Lewis. oo , "

Raven, J. C.: , Brit. . Med. Psychol., 19, p. Vernon, P. E. and Parry, J. B. (1949), Personnel
ven, J (1939) net, Journ ° syeme »P Selection in the British Forces. Univ. of London

137.
Richardson, H. M. (1939), Psychol. Bull., 36, p. 104. Press.
Rosen, E. (1951), J. App. Psychol., 35, p. 185. Willoughby, R. R. (1927). Genet. Psychol. Monog., 2,
Ross, A. I. (1951), Lancet, 260, p. 630. 235.

THE AMERICAN JOURNAL

| OF |
A quarterly record of research, review and bibliographic material relating to heredity
in man, published by THe American SocreTy oF Human GENETICS.

Editor:

HERLUF H. STRANDSKOV,

Department of Zoology,

University of Chicago,

Chicago 37, Illinois.
The editor and his staff of associates will be glad to consider manuscripts pertaining to human genetics.
Subscriptions to THE AMERICAN JOURNAL OF Human GENETICS or information pertaining to subscriptions
should be addressed to the Treasurer of The American Society of Human Genetics, Dr. C. Nash Herndon,
Department of Medical Genetics, Bowman Gray School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina,
U.S.A. The subscription price per annual volume is $8.00. A volume consists of four numbers. Single
numbers cost $2.50. The first volume was published in 1949. One volume has been published each
year since then.
Correspondence pertaining to membership in THE AMERICAN SocrETy oF Human GENETICS or to general
society affairs should be addressed to the Secretary of the Society, Dr. S. C. Reed, Dight Institute of
Human Genetics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, U.S.A.

 

o. Eugenics Review, Vol. XLV, No, 3
