SEGREGATION OF THE FIT
A Plea for Positive’ Eugenics

By R. AUSTIN FREEMAN

| ‘HE appearance in the April number
| of this REview of M. Dachert’s profoundly interesting article, coinciding with a second and cheaper edition of
Mr. Armstrong’s vigorous and_ spirited
little book, The Survival of the Unfitiest,
and a re-issue of Professor McDougall’s
National Welfare and National Decay,
seems to create an opportunity to raise once
more the question of the place of Positive
Eugenics in the larger eugenic scheme.

In recent years the attention of eugenists
has been mainly concentrated on the problems created by the apparent increase of the
definitely unfit; and the solutions of those
problems have been sought in the domain
of eliminative or negative eugenics. ‘The
ambitions of the earlier eugenists, including
Sir Francis Galton, to achieve a positive
improvement in the race—to evolve by conscious control a higher type of man—have
given place to the more modest aim of
arresting racial decay, or, at the most, of
securing a slow, secular change for the
better by eliminating the causes of
deterioration.

It will be well to begin our inquiry by
ascertaining the present state of authoritative opinion on the aims and desirable
modes of eugenic policy; and, since the
whole subject of eugenic reform has recently
been dealt with on a scale of monumental
completeness by our Honorary President,
we cannot do better than study the conclusions which emerge from his careful,
impartial, and exhaustive survey.

First as to aims. ‘‘ Our main effort,’’
Major Darwin insists, ‘‘ should be to improve the inborn qualities of the whole
nation ’’*; and again: ‘‘ We should strive

* The Need for Eugenic Reform, p. 165.

to raise the level of the whole people . . .”’+
The statement is elsewhere repeated and
emphasized, and it underlies the whole exposition of eugenic policy. That policy
must aim at the improvement of the whole
population, not at that of any one section of
it. Then as to the means by which this
improvement may be brought about; a
great part of the profoundly interesting
chapter (X) on Individual and Mass Selection is devoted to a clear and convincing
demonstration of the paramount importance
of the great mass of the more or less
mediocre and the relative insignificance, in
a eugenic sense, of the small minorities of
the extreme types; the eminently superior
and the abjectly inferior. Selected groups
—eugenic castes—are dismissed as useless
so far as any permanent effects on the whole
population are concerned and as being
otherwise undesirable for reasons which we
shall presently examine.

The above appears to represent the considered views of one who may fairly be
described as the leader of the eugenic movement in this country, and, since it is unlikely that any responsible eugenist will
contest them, we may accept them as stating in general terms the approved eugenic
policy of the present day.

STATE ACTION HOPELESS

Probably, few of us have any doubts that
if these principles of eugenic reform could
be put into practice, a steady, if slow, improvement of our population would result.
But it is just at this point that a most formidable difficulty arises. Measures of
eugenic reform applicable to the whole
population could be enacted only by the

+ Ibid., p. 167.

207
208

State. Legislation would be necessary ; and
that legislation would have to be of a kind
that would encourage the multiplication of
the definitely superior classes while discouraging or restraining that of the
definitely inferior. But is any such State
action imaginable in the prevailing political
conditions, or in any political conditions
that may prevail in the calculable future?
The answer is given in Mr. Bertrand
Russell’s curt dismissal of eugenics as a
practicable policy: ‘‘ Democracy stands in
the way.’’

The obstacle seems to be insuperable.
Democracy—or, at least, our present
democracy—is based on the assumption that
all men are born equal. Eugenics is based
on the observed fact that men are born very
unequal. Eugenics seeks to perpetuate the
superior stocks and to eliminate the inferior. Democracy denies the existence of
either and seeks, through environmental
agencies, to give effect to a postulated
inborn equality. The two principles are at
opposite poles, and the respective schemes
of social policy which logically issue from
them are mutually irreconcilable.

Nor is it a mere question of opposition in
theory. The principles of democracy are
being put very energetically into practice ;
and since those principles are the opposite
to eugenic principles, so the practice is the
opposite to eugenic practice; that is to say,
it is dysgenic. In its enthusiasm for
equality, democracy even tends to fly past
its theoretical objective and create a privileged class; which class includes the very
group that eugenic reform would seek to
eliminate. The dysgenic tendency is thus
inherent in the present political system ;
for, whereas the multiplication of the less
capable—and even the definitely unfit—is
encouraged by subsidies, the more capable
minority are hindered from rearing even
moderate families by the drastic taxation
which is necessary to provide those subsidies.

Moreover, this is no passing phase.

* Marriage and Morals.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Universal suffrage combined with immense
pecuniary gifts to a large part of the
electorate create a situation from which
retreat is almost impossible. We must
assume that the present political system,
with its subsidies to the inferior at the expense of the superior, will continue until its
economic and biological unsoundness manifests itself in some national catastrophe.
Meanwhile, eugenics, as defined above,
must apparently remain a more or less
academic study of a social policy whose
application appertains to some remote and
unvisualized future.

Is this a position that eugenists can
accept? Surely a moment’s consideration
of the changes that are occurring before our
eyes must suggest an emphatic negative.
The condition of our population is already
critical, and year by year it changes for the
worse. From the high fertility of the least
capable classes and the low fertility of the
most capable, it results that our population
is coming more and more to consist of the
offspring of the former. Twenty years ago,
the Census return showed that whereas the
crude birth rate, per hundred families, of
the upper and middle classes was 190, that
of unskilled labourers was 337 and that of
miners 358}; and though these figures do
not show the actual rates of multiplication,
they imply a differential rate of increase
that must, in a few generations, evolve a
population mainly composed of persons of
the unskilled labourer type. Whereas
miners, unskilled labourers, and paupers
increase and multiply, the more capable
classes, including skilled artisans, are
either stationary or actually declining in
numbers. ‘‘ In short,’? Major Darwin concludes, ‘‘ as far as we can judge from the
facts at our disposal, the nation as a whole
is slowly and steadily deteriorating as
regards its average inborn qualities.’’}

Of this deterioration there are two complementary factors which may be considered
separately; the increase of the inferior
stocks and the decrease of the superior.

+ Dr. Stevenson, quoted in Eugenic Reform, p. 322.
$ Eugenic Reform, p. 327.
SEGREGATION

These factors are of very unequal importance. For, whereas the relative increase
of the least intelligent part of the population is a grave evil, tending to produce impossible social and political conditions, it
does not of necessity involve the utter
destruction of the present civilization; the
disappearance of the superior types would
bring civilization definitely to an end. A
population composed mainly of persons of
the unskilled labourer type would be
utterly unable to maintain anything
resembling national life.

THE EXTINCTION OF INTELLIGENCE

The really great danger, then, that
threatens our society is the total extinction
of the more intelligent part of the population. The reality of this danger is impressed on us by Major Darwin’s cautiously
pessimistic conclusions. Commenting on
the figures relating to Dr. Stevenson’s
Class 1a, consisting of naval and military
officers, clergymen, lawyers, doctors,
teachers, architects, commercial travellers,
clerks, Civil Servants, etc., he says: ‘‘ My
own impression is that this group is not
holding its own; and that this is certainly
the case if we take a still smaller group,
consisting of naval and military officers,
barristers, physicians, clergymen, etc. Our
professional classes in fact, almost certainly
form a group which is dying out .. .’’*
And again: ‘‘ The stock to which the professional classes belong is, I am sure, a
splendid stock; but it seems destined, as
things are now, to play no part whatever
in maintaining the high natural qualities of
our nation in the distant future.’’+

The concluding words exhibit the
author’s natural optimism. But the future
does not seem to be so very distant. Comparison of the present with even the recent
past of Victorian times suggests a visible
lowering of collective intelligence. The
political and economic confusion of the
modern world, the financial distress com
 

* Eugenic Reform, p. 323.
+ Ibid., p. 324.

OF THE FIT 209

bined with wild extravagance, the general
march towards insolvency, the combination
of paid unemployment with scarcity of
labour, and the spectacle of nations but half
recovered from one great war, busily preparing for another; are surely indices of
declining intelligence. The political phrase,
““ world conditions ’’ is scientifically meaningless. ‘There are no cosmic or other conditions beyond human control that are
responsible for this muddle. ‘The social
environment of to-day is undeniably the
product of human conduct. Whatever the
difficulties of modern man may be, they are
of his own creating. The recurring
“crises”? and the endless conferences
associated with them seem to suggest that
modern man is less capable of reasonably
managing his affairs than were his recent
ancestors ; which yields the further suggestion that his general capacity—his intelligence and character—has already appreciably declined.

Since any measures of eugenic control
applicable to the population as a whole are
beyond the powers of voluntary associations, and will certainly not be undertaken
by the State, the question arises whether
some measures of more limited application
are not possible; measures directed specifically to the preservation, at least in quality
and perhaps in numbers, of the definitely
superior stocks. The numerical decline of
the professional classes is presumably due
to their low fertility and may be impossible
to arrest. But in addition to a decline in
numbers, we may reasonably suspect some
decline in quality. In the past, when the
social classes were more rigidly separated,
the quality of the superior stocks tended to
be maintained by a rather strict class
endogamy. At the present time, owing to
the more free mixture of the social classes
and the tendency for men of inferior stock
to improve their social status (especially in
political life) a considerable amount of
intermarriage must be taking place between
the professional classes and those of a lower
status, some of which must be disadvantageous to the former.
210

THE ONLY ALTERNATIVE

Measures of eugenic control that are
within the powers of private individuals
seem to be limited to some form of selective
segregation; to the formation, in fact, of
some kind of eugenic caste. If it is impossible for private individuals or voluntary
associations to influence the general population, it is at least possible for them to agree
among themselves to take such joint action
as may tend to secure their own progeny
from deterioration. And since this is the
only alternative to no action at all, it seems
to be worth while to consider the probable
results of such segregation of the better
endowed groups and the establishment, so
far as would be practicable, of endogamy
within such associations.

The question is dealt with in some detail
in The Need for Eugenic Reform, and the
author’s findings have the special value for
the present inquiry that they form the
basis for adverse criticism of selective
schemes. Referring, first, to the effects
within the selected community, Major
Darwin admits that “‘ It is no doubt true
that if any group of selected individuals
were to be kept quite apart from the rest of
the nation as a eugenic community, a certain average superiority would be permanently maintained, at all events after the
first generation after their selection. Moreover, the formation of such a community of
the more fit would produce certain advantages which would be reaped to a large
extent by the whole nation; for one result
of the separation of the more intelligent
individuals from the rest of the community
would be that a large proportion of men of
high intellect would make their appearance
in future generations, with a consequent
more rapid advancement in material welfare and possibly in morals also.’’*

These undeniable advantages are shown
to be set off by certain disadvantages and
difficulties. The objection that the local
improvement in inborn qualities would fail
to influence beneficially the average racial
quality of the nation need not be considered,

* Eugenic Reform, p. 154.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

since such average improvement is not the
purpose in view. But it may be admissible
to ask whether there is not a tendency to
overvalue the average racial quality and
understate the importance of the man of
exceptional intellect. One of the most
disturbing features of the present age is the
scarcity—not merely relative, but absolute
—of men of first-rate ability. At a time
when high places are being filled by men of
second or third-rate capacity, it may be that
a small increase in the number of men of
really high intellect might be of more value
to the nation than a slight rise in the
average intelligence of the population.
This, however, by the way. The difficulties of establishing and maintaining a
eugenic caste are undeniably formidable.
In Major Darwin’s opinion they are
insuperable. To the difficulties of selection
without favouritism, of maintaining the
necessary standard and of ejection of unsuitable members would be added the
jealousy and hostility of those outside and
ineligible for admission. But the most
weighty objection, in my opinion, is the low
fertility of the superior classes. If the
birth rate in a eugenic community were insufficient to maintain its numbers, the
utility of that community would largely
disappear. And this is what Major Darwin
believes would happen. ‘‘Is there any
reason,’’ he asks, ‘‘ to suppose that the fit,
if separated as a caste apart, could be
induced to maintain a high birth rate? The
average racial qualities of the nation are
now probably deteriorating because of the
low birth rate of the more fit, and what we
want to know is whether their isolation
would accelerate or retard this process.’’+

THE STRASBOURG EXPERIMENT

To this question M. Dachert’s experiment seems to have given an answer as
surprising as it is encouraging. In his
eugenic settlement, Les Jardins Ungemach,
the birth rate has been more than double
that of the adjacent city of Strasbourg, while
the excess of births over deaths has varied

+ Eugenic Reform, p. 155.
SEGREGATION

from about six times to thirteen times that
of Strasbourg. It is true that, as M.
Dachert points out, the figures are not
strictly comparable. But they are highly
significant, and, as he says, ‘‘ all the more
striking since our citizens belong to just
that class which is deemed the most infertile, the small clerk and small official
class.”’"* This rather unexpected result
does, in fact, encourage us to believe that in
a eugenic community the conscious attention to the inborn qualities of the children
would result in a greater willingness to rear
families of a size at least sufficient to maintain the population by natural increase.

With regard to the other difficulties, formidable as they undoubtedly appear, my
feeling is that, with tact and judgment,
they could be surmounted, especially if a
modest minimum standard were set which
would allow of the inclusion of the better
type of skilled artisan. The rejection of all
artificial and conventional distinctions of
social class and the insistence on personal
quality as the one condition of admission,
would disarm the hostility of even the
extreme democrat. But my impression is
that, at least in the early stages, there
would be very little hostility from outsiders.
More probably the attitude of the public
would be one of indulgent amusement. The
community would be exposed to ridicule
rather than enmity ; and by the time that it
had grown large enough to arouse hostile
opposition, it would have acquired enough
prestige and influence to be able to take
care of itself.

There is one item on the credit side of the
scheme which has not been noticed; its
moral effect on the public at large. Verbal
propaganda are apt to fall on ears already
deafened by other propaganda. The voice
of one crying in the wilderness tends to
become ineffective if the wilderness is too
thickly populated by competing vocalists.
But a practical demonstration is more
arresting, especially if the demonstrator
appears to be attending to his own affairs
and seeking his own well-being. It may be

* Eugenics Review, April 1931, p. 18.

OF THE FIT 211

that the spectacle of a eugenic Noah climbing into the ark of segregation (we will not
pursue the metaphor to the other passengers) might bring home the reality of
eugenics to people who were immune to
ordinary propaganda.

THE NEED FOR BRAINS

But the question that we have to decide is
whether a selective eugenic community is
worth while; whether it promises to bring
about any desirable result. My feeling is
that, in the existing circumstances, the
answer is clearly in the affirmative. The
present alarming crisis in our national
affairs is a convincing demonstration of our
collective incapacity. The sheer stupidity
with which our nation has, since the War,
marched open-eyed towards insolvency, suggests at once a low level of general intelligence and a disastrous scarcity of men
capable of the competent direction of public
affairs. ‘The great and urgent need of the
nation at the moment is more brains; and if
a eugenic community would produce an
increase in the number of men of marked
ability, no matter how small, it would be
of inestimable value. In any case, the
capable minority should, if possible, be
preserved from extinction and undesirable
admixture. The time is apparently
approaching when it will be impossible for
the more mentally gifted to transmit to
their children the material products of their
capacity, their industry, and their thrift.
But no political conditions can deprive them
of the power, if they elect to retain it, of
transmitting an uncontaminated germplasm.

It was to this end that, ten years ago, I
put forward my suggestion of the Voluntary
Segregation of the Eugenically Fit.+ Unfortunately, I made the tactical mistake of
presenting the scheme in what I considered
its ideal developed state, leaving the initial
stages to the reader’s imagination. I now
venture to re-state the proposal in somewhat different terms and in especial reference to those initial stages. The immediate

+ Social Decay and Regeneration.

London, 1921.
Constable.
212

aim is to prevent that dispersal and dilution of valuable inborn qualities which
occurs when a member of a family well
endowed with those qualities marries a
member of a family markedly inferior in
those respects or tainted with actual defects.
Such marriages are unfortunately all too
common; and the disappointing quality of
the children of a brilliant father or mother
thus inappropriately mated is not only a
source of lifelong regret to the parents but
an irreparable loss to the nation.

A LEAGUE OF EUGENISTS

The scheme proposed to effect this purpose is, in principle, of the utmost simplicity. It envisages the formation of an
association, or league, of practical eugenists,
somewhat on the plan of the Freemasons,
united for mutual help in safeguarding
their children’s future. Since the danger
to be guarded against is an early dysgenic
marriage, the obvious prophylactic measure
is to limit the social contacts of the young
people, so far as possible, to those whose
inborn qualities are of a desirable kind. The
ideal condition would, clearly, be segregation in a eugenic settlement in which all
the inhabitants would conform to the
standard required ; but as such a settlement
would be impracticable in the case of professional persons with established environments, we need not consider it. Nevertheless we may bear in mind the possibility
of establishing ‘‘ neighbourhoods’”’ by
sporadic settlement, as has been done by
artists, Jews, Roman Catholics, and other
bodies bound by a common interest. But
in the beginning, the idea of segregation
would have to be replaced by that of association. Facilities would have to be created
for personal contact between the members
and especially the young people. For the
adults and adolescents, social clubs of a
suitable kind would furnish the means of
meeting and making one another’s acquaintance, while the establishment of one or two
really good schools would enable the children of members to be brought together
under conditions that would inevitably produce lifelong friendships; friendships that

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

might, by mutual holiday visits, become
extended to the respective families.

When we come to the conditions of membership we are at once involved in the
dilemma that Major Darwin has pointed
out. A highly exclusive caste might
achieve almost spectacular results, but it
would be insignificant in numbers; a community setting a more modest standard of
fitness would gain in number but lose in
the average superiority of its members. My
feeling is that the latter disadvantage would
have to be accepted. If the minimum intellectual standard were not beyond that of the
best type of skilled artisan, many social
and political pitfalls would be avoided, and
a community of really effective size would
become possible. Moreover, in such a community, having a developed eugenic consciousness, assortive mating would probably
tend to produce something like the
‘ascending series of castes’? of which
Major Darwin speaks, without any formal
separation or invidious distinction. Eugenic
ambition would be felt by all; but the best
endowed would have the widest choice.

QUALIFICATIONS AND CLASSES

The actual qualifications for membership
would be settled by the members themselves, but we may consider briefly what
would seem to be desirable. My own feeling is that the qualifications should be principally mental. Physical qualities are of
relatively small racial and national importance; they are usually not deficient among
men of good mental quality ; and the special
danger against which we are providing is
the decline in general intelligence. Physical

defects, I submit, could be almost ignored

in otherwise eligible candidates. The
actual minimum standard of intelligence
and the methods of ascertainment would
have to be discussed; but they present no
special difficulty.

The members of our League seem to fall
into three classes: (1) Those beyond the
marriageable age, who would be elected only
for counsel and service, would be judged by
their personal qualities. Their family
history would not concern the League. Of
SEGREGATION OF THE FIT

those of a reproductive age there would be
(2) the unquestionably fit who would be
encouraged to rear families as large as their
means would allow, and (3) those who,
though of satisfactory intellect, suffered
from some serious inheritable defect or from
a gravely unfavourable family history and
in whom parenthood would be undesirable.
The membership of these would be conditional on either celibacy or a childless
marriage.

In the case of the second class, at least, a
record would be essential, and the following
procedure is suggested. Each member
would be required to ascertain as completely as possible the details of his or her
family history, and to communicate them
to a registrar, duly appointed and bound to
secrecy. By him the information (but not
the name or identity of the member) would
be laid before an expert committee, including, at least, one medical man, who would
assess the racial quality disclosed by the
record according to a scale previously
agreed on. They would then issue a certificate expressing the assessment by an
agreed number or letter (mental and physical qualities being assessed and numbered
separately); the registrar would add the
name to the certificate and deliver it to the
member, retaining in a secret file a copy of
the certificate and the record. ‘Thus in the
event, for instance, of a projected marriage,
it would be possible for each of the parties
to produce a certificate setting forth the
eugenic status of the family without premature disclosure of confidential matters.

There is no need further to elaborate the
proposal. The question to be decided is,
Would such a society or League be worth
while? My own belief is that it would serve

213

an extremely useful purpose. Established
on a sufficient scale, it would tend to preserve the dwindling intellectual class; it
would convert eugenics (as M. Dachert’s
experiment has done) from a somewhat academic study into a living human activity ;
it would furnish an object lesson to all
thoughtful persons; and the very ridicule
with which it would be greeted would, in the
end, have the effect of propaganda.

IMMEDIATE ACTION NEEDED

But if it is worth while, it should be
done; and it should be done now. And it
could be done to-morrow. Nothing hinders.
No money need be collected; no statutory
powers need be obtained. A dozen resolute
persons could make a beginning—and it is
the beginning that matters. A few informal
meetings, at a private house if need be, or
even the formation of a luncheon or dining
club at which the project could be discussed,
its utility and practicability weighed and
ways and means considered, would set the
scheme in motion. All that is necessary is
a small body of convinced eugenists, ready
to make an effort, at the eleventh hour, to
save at least a remnant of a people whose
great qualities once commanded the respect
of the whole world.

But I repeat that time presses. The
present national crisis and our obvious
inability to deal with it offer a lurid demonstration of the collective incapacity of the
British people. The existing confusion and
distress, compared with the order and prosperity of the past, is a measure of the
decline in racial quality that has already
taken place. It shows how low we have
already fallen.

VE SIR

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIII, No. 3.
