D. R. BROTHWELL

British Museum (Natural History)

The Amerindians of Guyana:

A Biological Review

ALTHOUGH SOME INDIGENOUS populations of South America have received fairly intensive study in recent years, other regions have remained surprisingly neglected. Human
biological knowledge of the Amerindians of Guyana (formerly British Guiana) is extremely
scattered, and the sum total far from satisfactory. There would thus seem justification for a
review of the information so far at hand, and the problems and potentialities of field-work
among these people in the future. This review would also seem pertinent in view of the present stocktaking policy of the IBP as regards human populations (for a general review of
South American Amerindians, under the auspices of this international endeavour, one is
referred to Baker and Weiner.! The information presented results from a study of both
published and unpublished data, and a short field visit I undertook during the latter part
of 1966.*

Like other parts of the Amazonian tropical zone, transport is minimal to the interior
of the country, and progress by boat or on foot is slow, particularly when there is a need to
sample communities in widely differing parts of the country. During the rainy periods of
course, communication becomes even more difficult; similarly, at other times a group may
be dispersed for reasons of balata bleeding, or when the village school is closed families
may be scattered on their cassava plots in the forests. It is thus understandable that data
tends to be restricted to specific tribes or regions and that no traits have received attention
on a country-wide basis.

In area, Guyana is some 83,000 square miles (slightly less than Britain), but only
0-5 per cent is cultivated land. Most of this is related to feeding the 199,830 Negroes,
320,070 East Indians, 8,800 Europeans, 3,910 Chinese and 75,990 hybrids,!4 who mainly
inhabit the coastal region. The 30,000 or so Amerindians are mainly situated in the interior
of the country.

With the exception of an eastern coastal area of poor savannah around the Berbice
River, and the economically more important Rupununi savannahs in the west, 83 per cent
of the country is forested.33 The Kamoa, Acarai, Kanuku and Pakaraima highlands
(Figure 1) are part of the Guiana Highlands system which extends into Venezuela and
Brazil. These would not, however, appear to have been important barriers to Amerindian
population movements between Guyana and these two countries. Soils for grazing and for
cultivation are variable. In the Rupununi savannahs the soils are poor, and plant growth is
not helped by alternating seasonal flooding and drying up.4°0 However, some areas in which
Amerindians live may well have better soils, and Knapp for example, points out that some
forty miles of good forest soil exists between the villages of Waramadong and Paruima.
Nevertheless, whatever soil variation occurs, the intensive cultivation of cassava by the
indigenous population in general has determined the need for a periodic shifting cultivation.

The general environment in which the Amerindians live is thus one of moderate heat,

* The field-work was of an exploratory nature, to look into the possibilities and problems of a more
detailed survey at a later date. The data collected on this occasion were specifically pertinent to my methodological work related to the I.B.P.86

22
» Mountains
[| Forest

Savannah
Agricultural Zone

    
 

Ssequibo R

FiGureE 1
The general geography of Guyana. Settlements mentioned i in the text are numbered as follows:1. Towakaima;
2. Paruima; 3. Waramadong; 4. Kurukabaru; 5. Kato; 6. Tipuru; 7. Karasabai; 8. Lethem; 9. Mauriru;

10. Wichabai; 11. Waripuow; 12. “Orealbe: 13. Pakuri Landing (St. ” Cuthberts).
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

high humidity except in the mountains, considerable forestation through which there is a
network of fairly navigable rivers, and moderate to poor soils which will support for a time
a simple slash and burn economy.

Settlement

Form of settlement and nature of the housing is still basically of pre-contact type,
although modifications have occurred, and wall-less houses are far less common. In certain
villages, for instance Waramadong and Pariuma, wooden “‘self-help” mission or government
houses have been constructed of a modern bungalow design.9!: 93 Availability of water is a
primary determinant of settlement positioning, though not the only consideration, and the
women may still have to carry heavy water containers 500 yards or more.

Houses may be restricted to compounds or spread over a mile or more. House type
varies to some extent, within a village as well as inter-tribally. Size of each dwelling is
determined to some extent by the size of the family unit, which may be eight or more, but
is usually less (see Table 1). Contrast in dwellings is illustrated in Plate 1 (a and b); where

TABLE 1

Analysis of a Barama River Carib settlement, by numbers of individuals per house,
and numbers of younger children,
(From data by Gillin, 1936.)

Number of Individuals
a ?[_"———0123456789

Dwellings related to numbers of occupaits 223 3 1 1 1

Number of houses with pre-adolescent
children 3 4 4 1 1

although both villages use palm leaves for roofing, the Arawak house walls are of “‘closed”’
or “semi-open”’ wooden slats or planks, whereas the Patamona house has an elliptical
adobe wall. Of these, the thick adobe type offers much better protection against the sun.

The number of houses per settlement varies considerably, from two or three to over
fifteen. With the increasing control of disease, and resultant changes in Amerindian life
expectancy, marked increases in settlement size (or village segmentation) may be expected
in the next few decades. From the point of view of land cultivation, relative to population
increase, village division and re-settlement would seem the only answer in some areas.

In the past, defecation would seem to have been anywhere in the vicinity of the settlement—an ideal situation for the spread of intestinal parasites. In recent years, however,
some attempt has been made by the missions and school teachers to establish nearby dry
latrines (where soil conditions permitted). So far, this has not been altogether successful,
and perhaps as in so many other ways this reflects the Amerindians reluctance to acquiesce
in anything which is rather thrust upon him—albeit for his benefit.

Population History

Evidence for the Pleistocene movement of people into South America is still poor,
and there is a special need for more chronological data on preceramic sites.64 Considering
the distribution of sites in relation to Pleistocene glaciation, it seems unlikely that many
Palaeo-Indians had penetrated into South America before about 11,000 years ago.5!

Stone projectile points, representing a Preceramic Lithic Horizon in Guyana demonstrate that at least a small population was established some millennia ago, although a time
range is not yet fixed.28 However, looking to the north into Venezuela, from which the early
Guyanese populations moved, the evidence suggests probable occupation south of the

24
THE AMERINDIANS OF GUYANA

Orinoco by 5000 B.c. For the sake of brevity, a summary of bio-cultural changes which
occurred in the Venezuela-Guyana region are given in Table 2.

TABLE 2

The bio-cultural background to population change in Guyana. Chronological divisions have been tentatively
made relative to certain sequences established in Venezuela. (Adapted from Evans and Meggers2® and Rouse

and Cruxent.85)
Epoch Venezuela Guyana Remarks Dates
Indo- t t
EUrOpean ..........cececsscesececees | soseescee | ceeceeecs Use of Metal
t Introduction of various epidemic
diseases
1,500
ai-Wai
Arauquinoid Rupununi
Series Taruma Movement of Abary people from
® Abary, Koriabo Trinidad (?)
Neo- 1,000
Indian Mabaruma Phase
1 Plant cultivation
Barrancoid oR eee Ceramic evidence suggests population
Series | movement
300
+ Alaka Phase Shellfish important in some areas. A.D.
ie an cece
Meso- Mamnicuaroid ..........ccccccsescsscesseecs Possibly slower cultural advances 1,000
Indian Series ? Palaeo-Indian south of the Orinoco.
Survivals

5,000

Palaeo- Joboid Preceramic Lithic Large mammals for hunting.

Indian Series Horizon Temperature lower.

No evidence of fishing 15,000

In Guyana, as probably elsewhere in the eastern tropical region, the largest population
concentration has, until the past three or four hundred years, been restricted to the coastal
region. Amerindians of the Alaka Phase may have been mainly concentrated north of the
Essequibo—at least the shell middens suggest this. Contact of the Alaka people with others
is indicated by the late intrusion of pottery into the initially pre-ceramic culture. Even at this
early stage, therefore, changes in the gene pools may have resulted from culture contact—
at least I think it important to remember that population mixture is by no means a phenomenon of recent populations.

With the advent of the Mabaruma Phase, plant cultivation replaced intensive shellfishing as the focal point of subsistence,28 and it seems highly likely that as a result of this,
considerable population increase took place between A.D. 500 and 1500. With the elaboration of different, and in some cases contemporary, phases after about a.D. 1000 (Mabaruma,
Koriabo, Abary, Rupununi, Taruma, Wai Wai) it again seems reasonable to suggest
increased tribal differentiation at this time. Just as in recent years, tribal depletion has
resulted in some coalescence, so this earlier period was probably one of efflorescence. Some
population movement into the country is also postulated during this period. Evans and
Meggers?8 suggest that the Abary Phase people moved into the North-west District from

25
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Trinidad, and that their living descendants are the Arawak. Similarly, the Koriabo Phase
pottery might also be indicative of population intrusion about A.D. 1200-1300.

Until late in the seventeenth century, there is no indication of pottery-making groups
in the interior, but some time after A.D. 1670 Taruma Indians moved into Guyana from
the lower Rio Negro in Brazil. Further movements of Amerindians from Brazil are documented as moving into the Rupununi area during the eighteenth century, and finally, during
the past century, the Wai Wai have trickled across the Acarai Mountains into Guyana.
Yet other movements have probably occurred from Venezuela across the Pakaraima
Mountains. An attempt to reconstruct changes in the population pattern of Guyana in the
past are shown in Figure 2, with the major areas surveyed archaelogically also being
indicated. oO

With all these population intrusions and expansions, the Amerindians in this northeastern area maintained a simple pattern of agriculture, continued to live in semi-permanent
villages, and retained fairly simple socio-political systems. As Evans and Meggers justifiably
point out, the marked contrast between such back-water cultures and the centres of New
World civilization may well be explainable in terms of the considerable environmental
differences.

Skeletal Remains

Tropical soils and climates are among the worst for the preservation of human remains.
Adding to this the fact that the Amerindian in Guyana has not buried in compact cemeteries,
it is no wonder that skeletal material is scarce. Indeed, parts of no more than twenty-five
skeletons are available for all the tribes, being recorded as in museums in Georgetown,
London and Berlin.’ 32, 47 The very limited conclusions which can be drawn from such
material are given in Stewart and Newman!02 and Tacoma.!04

As regards human bones from earlier periods, even less is available. My efforts to
locate all the skeletal fragments described and figured by Brett,5 which were excavated from
shell mounds, have so far failed. However, some additional fragmentary remains have
been found in recent excavations by C. Evans, B. Meggars and E. A. Goodland,* and
would seem to indicate slender, short-statured people.

Population, Tribe and Family

Various attempts have been made during the past century to determine the total
of Amerindians within Guyana. All are open to doubt, and even the most recent figure of
30,000 is unlikely to be a precise enumeration. Schomburgk,88 in 1840, gives a figure of
7,000, which was later published as the census figure in 1878, but Walker! notes that
estimates as high as 24,000 had been made at that time. Jones55 considered the enumerated
figure of 10,299 in the 1946 census to be too low, and Swan!93 gave 17,000 as a more likely
figure. At present, it seems highly probable that the Amerindians are contributing to the
Guyanese population explosion (see Appendix in Bertram‘), so that numbers may increase
markedly in the next few decades.

No critical attempt has been made to determine what Amerindian groups warrant
tribal or sub-tribal distinction. There is, however, general agreement as to the tribal distinctiveness of most communities, and these are listed according to their linguistic grouping
in Table 3. In order to give some idea of past tribes, small intrusive elements, and major
groups, I have tentatively subdivided the tribes again into four columns. Furthermore, in
order to reduce description to a minimum, but nevertheless illustrate the complexities of
tribal distributions and changes through time, the two maps in Figure 2 tentatively reconstruct the modifications which have gone on during the past two hundred years. In terms of

* This material was kindly made available for study in Washington and London.
26
Percentage of population

to
Oo

NO
©

o

a»
oO

Ww
oO

i]
o

3°

 

 

THE AMERINDIANS OF GUYANA

modern tribal spread and population concentration, Knapp5® gives a total figure for the
coastal people of 6,500; in the North-West District some 12,000 Indians; the Rupununi
area has approximately 10,000; and the Upper Mazaruni some 2,500.

TABLE 3
Tribes at present or previously living in Guyana, (Compiled from various sources.)
Large tribal groups Small intrusive or Tribes now elsewhere Extinct tribes Linguistic group
nearly extinct groups oe
Warrau Warrau
Arawak Taruma ---. Amariba .
Wapishiana Maopityan Atorai Arawak
Carib Arecuna Paraviyana
Acawaio Parukutu Serecong o
Macusi Taulipang Yao ’ Carib
Patamona Wai-Wai Waica
Camaracoto Pianocoto

Within the past two centuries no indication has been given in the literature of more
than low fertility in Amerindian groups. The small numbers of young children per family
unit enumerated by Gillin37 for the Caribs (Table 1), would seem equally applicable to other
tribes in the past. However, recent age analyses suggest that both fertility and life expectancy
may now be improving (Figure 3). Disease and very late weaning were clearly contributing

PATAMONA ACAWAIO - CARIB (Upper Barama)

   

10 30 50 70

10 «630.250 7

WAPISHIANA MACUSI a EUROPEANS

  

  

10 30 50 70
Age in years ~~

FIGURE 3
Age composition of five Amerindian tribes in Guyana and a European series. The noticeably high percentages for under ten year olds in the Wapishiana and Macusi series are probably the result of the intensive
anti-malarial campaign in the Rupununi prior to the samples being taken. Histograms for the Amerindian
groups constructed from data by Jones (1952).

27
°
Arecuna ‘

Taulipang

Arecuna

-—_ ae as oe

—_ = Ge am

Parukutu

Maopityan
 

Arecuna eras *

Taulipang s Ss s S. AA ers : ‘* ty
Ss S Ss S A,ApA ‘6 wl Pee
SS ee f/f _----- ah

wee ee eee wi le
meee ee eee eee | be

 

es Acawaio y 4- -Nx Amariba are
| | | | Arawak ® A
A A
A Atoral AA
ee g8 3 A A
Carib A
= ae @ @& i A
sm—— Macusi x. A
P Paraviyana A
A
4/, /, Patamona . A
s Serecong A A
T Taruma \ S A A
bt! Watca P AA
P T T
@w) Wai-Wai P p Tt
» 5 T
NX Wapishiana Pp Te 'g@
eet Pianocoto
WwW Warrau Tg
+3 T.
T Parukutu
® Archaeological sites Maopityan
Wai-Wai
FIGURE 2

Tentative assessment of tribal distributions and probable changes during the past two centuries. Left:
the Amerindian communities today. Right: tribes noted circa 1750-1850. Also noted are sites which
have received archaeological study.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

factors to this low fertility. Attempts to limit child numbers have also been noted. Infanticide
of babies has occurred.29 42 Gillin37 was informed that abortion was induced by older
women—usually by a combination of herbal infusions and manual assistance, but how
often this occurred was not established. Contraceptive methods were restricted to bush
medicines and ritualistic treatment by the piaiyen (medicine man). As far as I can ascertain,
the plants used have not been collected and studied.

Inbreeding, Tribal Crossbreeding, and Racial Admixture

An accurate assessment of mating patterns among the Guyanese Amerindians is by
no meanseasy—particularly if temporal as well as spatial differences are taken into account.
Moreover, although anthropologists have studied certain groups, there is still little information. Most tribes are patrilineal in descent, but matrilocal in residence. In the case of the
Arawak, however, there is a history of matrilineal exogamous clan structure.

Cross-cousin marriage, and certainly polygamy, were far more common prior to the
intensive missionary work of the past fifty years or so. Farabee?0 notes that incest occurred
—though not without tribal misgivings—and I was informed that this still occurs even to-day
in nominally Christian villages. Although within tribal localities marked inbreeding could,
and probably has, occurred at times, the population history of this area would suggest that
extreme isolation has not been possible. Population movement and intrusion must have
resulted in a mosaic of inter-tribal admixture. The German naturalist Schonberg notes
Carib-Acawaio crosses in Akawabi village 200 years ago.58 BrettS mentions Carib/Negro
crosses on the Courentyne River, and Im Thurn53 both Amerindian/Negro and Macusi/
Brazilian crosses. Much more recently Guppy? has pointed out that the so-called Wai-Wai
of one locality he visited were, in fact, predominantly Parukutu in origin. Similarly, Jones55
mentions a few Maopityan living with, and speaking, Wai-Wai.

Another factor which has contributed to tribal admixture has been the considerable
tribal warfare and slavery which occurred prior to colonial development. Such Amerindian slaves became a part of the breeding population of the captors.®2

Racial admixture has been mainly with Europeans and Negroes.* Precise assessment
is still needed, and is likely to vary considerably depending upon region. Brown!! notes the
Atorai village of Waripuow had two Negro/Amerindian hybrids, and Seggar9! notes the
adoption of a Negro girl into a village in the Mazaruni District half a century ago—and the
resulting hybrids.

Probably the Morawhanna District of the north-west—originally Carib—now shows
the greatest degree of miscegenation.!03 This mixing diminishes westwards, and in the upper
reaches of the Barama River, beyond the Towakaima Falls, the Carib stock is more intact.

However, I do not wish to suggest considerable miscegenetion in most areas. Some
groups are clearly “untouched” by any Old World population. On the other hand, there is
sufficient intermixture in some villages to permit future field studies to include aspects of
race crossing (e.g. pigmentation, hair form, anthropometric variation, dental traits).

Finally, it is worth mentioning here, from the point of view of potential gene intrusion,
that contact and trading between tribes is probably of considerable antiquity. Even in the
case of Old World goods (including plants), some have gone in advance of the immigrants
into the South American interior. Populations which have continued to enjoy isolation
from the Negro and European until very recently, such as the Wai Wai, Roucouyennes
and Mawayan,*» 87 nevertheless cultivate the banana—a plant of certain Old World

* The Negro “pork-knocker’’ (prospector) and trader of recent years is mainly responsible. Although,
originally, escaped African slaves were regarded as “Bush Negroes’’,!!° the Amerindians were employed as
interior police to recapture them, with the result that the present-day Bush Negro situation as found in
Surinam is not present in Guyana.

30
THE AMERINDIANS OF GUYANA

origin. If nothing else, the chain of contacts between foreigner and Amerindian groups
which has led to the transmission of plants and some trade goods, would have been quite
sufficient for the spread of certain epidemic disease.

Diet

The detailed assessment of diet is perhaps one of the most difficult aspects of a human
biological research programme, Generalizations can mislead more than they can inform,
and yet, in the case of the Amerindians of Guyana, one is left with only this type of data to
work on. Farabee39 was, in fact, well aware of the need for detailed nutritional studies,
which were beyond the scope of his own work, and this is becoming increasingly urgent.

Considering the total food potential for the Amerindians as a whole, a considerable
variety of plants and animals are available. However, this varies quite markedly, depending
upon the closeness of the villages to good fishing rivers, how supplied or exhausted the forest
is of animals, proximity to savannah and so forth. Although the still small proportion of
Amerindians with fairly regular work can hope to purchase rice, sugar, protein foods, etc.,
in the coastal region, air freight costs to the few interior stores is still a deterrent to spending
in this way. The majority may therefore still be considered to be living on a pre-contact
type of diet, although there is the growing, but still unassessed problem of diminishing
animal numbers in the interior.*

A further complication to unbiased assessment of food intake is that few villages are
completely unacquainted with the different food habits of the “‘civilized’’ coastal population,
and, for instance, in my own questioning of Patamona Indians I found that they were
reluctant to talk about eating insects and such “inferior” foodstuffs because their dietary
yardstick is the food of the missionary, teacher and Georgetown populace.

It is not possible here to do more than summarize foods normally used by the Amerindians, and for further information, one is referred to Im Thurn,>3 Farabee,29 30 Gillin,37: 38
Lowie® and Kirchoff.57 Certain plant foods form by far the most important everyday
constituent of Guyanese Amerindian diet. In particular, bitter cassava (Manihot utillissima)
is the staple crop in most villages. It is by far the best tropical food plant, the roots extending
deep into the earth and the leaves giving good protection against the evaporation of soil
moisture (Plate Ic). It is mature in ten to twelve months. The Amerindians are extremely
versatile in its use, making various drinkst and different types of bread (usually plain, but
it may be mixed with another plant ‘‘flour’’, such as Mora seed, Brazil nut or Dacumballi
seeds). Considerable reliance on this plant, does, however, raise an important health
question. Gourou4! has recently discussed the protein deficiencies of cassava and the
likelihood of kwashiorkor occurring where too much reliance is placed on this food.
However, no cases of this disease have been reported among the Amerindians, and clearly
sufficient in other foods is eaten to increase the amino-acid content of the diet as a whole.

Other plants farmed are generally secondary to this basic crop. Some, such as the
papaya, pineapple, limes and guava, have probably limited food importance, when considering yearly food consumption. Others are more regional, such as sugar cane, pumpkins,
beans, yams, deer callaloo (Phytolacca), sweet potato and palms (for drinks and the edible
heart). Sweet cassava (Manihot palmata), plantains and maize may be more commonly
cultivated, though not in large quantity. Some of these crops are more sensitive to climatic
fluctuation than others, and certain ones may at times be threatened by animal pests.
Peppers are in demand for the occasional meat stew, and, in fact, pepper-pot might be

* Bertram‘ discusses this problem further.
__ t The method of eliminating hydrocyanic acid from the cassava juice by heating, is likely to be considerably pre-contact in date.

31
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

regarded as an indigenous national dish. Seeds and nuts (Brazil, cashew and palm nuts,
seeds of Mimusops belata) are of seasonal value.

A variety of drinks are prepared, some having considerable food value. Names vary
according to tribe, and only one need be used here. The most common one is cassiri (unfermented cassava). Other unfermented liquids include pyuwa (using baked cassava), cane
juice, atnike (maize) and a number of palm drinks. Fermented beers include paiwarri
(cassava), oilicou (cassava and potato) and belteerie (Ita palm).

Animal protein is clearly an important but by no means regular part of the diet. Fish
are probably the most commonly available animal protein source, but in some parts of the
mountain ranges these are not easily available. About twelve varieties seem of special
importance.* Fishing methods include the (officially prohibited) use of a variety of plant
poisons43 permitting the rapid collection of large numbers. Other vertebrates can only be
said to provide periodic food, and although the list of animals eaten is considerable,f it is
important to remember their restricted availability. Insects are still eaten, and include bee
larvae, Atta cephalotes, the larvae of Calandra palmurum, and Coleoptera such as Phaneus
and Copris; but to what extent they may have dietary significance is not known.

Growth and Physique

Before any consideration of body size and shape in the Guyanese Amerindians, it
must be remembered that the full growth potential of these individuals is unlikely to have
been attained. Three factors may here be particularly important in retarding growth, and
thus influence to varying degrees some anthropometric dimensions. These are: (a) the poor
protein diet; (5) severity of intestinal parasites; 19 81 (c) tropical climate.%

Information on child development is as yet very limited, and metrical comparison is not
made easier by the unknown factor of age in many instances. In Figure 4, data collected on
546 boys and 474 girls by C. R. Jones is given in comparison with figures for London schoolchildren. In the case of both height and weight, the Amerindian children are consistently
less than the London children—a reflection of genetic and environmental differences. A
particularly marked contrast in the London and Guyana trends is suggested in the 14-16
year period, where height and weight increase falls off more rapidly in the Amerindians.
Such variation, and reported differences between tribe and ecologically divergent populations30, 53, 84 clearly deserve further study.

From the point of view of maturation and ageing, Schomburgk®® recorded “‘premature”
development and puberty in the Warrau, whereas my own impression of adult Arawak and
Patamona women was of early ageing (a finding also noted by Neel?3 on the Xavante).}

Anthropometric data, for the most part limited, are available for a number of tribes,
and for individual measurements and means one is referred to Farabee,29 30 Gillin37 and
Newman.76 Prior to this, only Ten Kate!05 had measured a few Arawak and Macusi in
Guyana.

All display rather “lateral” body builds, with generally well-developed shoulders
(Plate 2c). Mean body weight would seem to be moderately high in comparison with other
indigenous New World samples,” that for male Wai-Wai being 56-6 kg. (mean age 30 years).

* Pacu evict) pirai (Pygocentrus), gilbacker (Sciadeichys), lukunanni (Cichia), haiamara (Hoplias),
querrimam (Mugil), arapaima (Sudis), low-low (Silurus), yarrau (Hypostoma), cartabak (Tetragonopterus),
aimara (Eryhtmus) and electric eel (Gymnotus). ; ;

t Various monkeys, labba (Coelogenys), opossum, armadillo, agouti, accouri (Dasyprocta), bush-cow
(Tapir), other, bush-hog (Dicotyles), rats, several varieties of turtle, land tortoises, varieties of savannah
deer, manatee, river and land crabs, and Iguana. Of the birds, the most hunted are the mamm (Tinamotis),
maroudi (Penelope), powis (Crax), trumpeter (Psophia), scrub-turkey (Tindmus), cock of the rock (Rupicola),
whistling ducks (Anas), the muscovy (Cairina) and jabiru (Mycteria).

} This may, in part, be illusory, in that men can marry women much older than themselves.

32
65

35

50

     

-—— Boys
-~-=-Girls

Height in inches

45

40

4 5 6 7 8 9 10 1 #12 13 14 15 6 17

Age in years
FIGURE 4a

120

 

4 5 6 7 8 9 10 1 12 13 14 15 16 17

Age in years
Ficure 4b

Height for age (a) and weight for age (6) in Amerindian and London school children. The Guyana sample
is for 1020 children, being a pooled series from various tribes. Modified from Jones, 1952.

ER-——C
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Stature means for tribes of Carib and Arawak stock in South America tend to cluster about
158-159 cm. for males,98 although the Central Caribs of Guyana have a mean height of
157-4 cm. (for males).39 However, in reviewing the anthropometric data so far available for
Guyanese Amerindian tribes, Gillin37 found but few significant differences between them,
although sample sizes are far below those desirable for useful comparisons. To summarize,
the Barama River and Central Caribs show more significant differences than do the Barama
Caribs in comparison with the Arawaks. Even so, the differences are not great. It is interesting that a number of facial dimensions have been used to demonstrate significant biological
divergence in these tribes, and I feel that new or more precise methods of recording facial
variation may be particularly useful when studying populations at a tribal level.!° Certainly
considerable facial variation occurs in the Amerindians (Plate 2a, d, e), but it is questionable
whether the ‘‘classic’”” measurements always record the most significant differences.

Physiological Variation

Very little data on physiological variation is available for the Guyanese Amerindians,
or for that matter for any of the idigenous groups of South America.!> 113 Holden (quoted by
Guppy),42 recorded blood pressures for individuals from a number of tribes and found no
evidence of hypertension.* Farabee?9 gives pulse rates for a series of Macusi, the average
rate being 69-7 (range 46-96). Rates for the Central Arawaks were even higher (range 62116).29 Although a number of the individual pulse rates are low, the means are high compared with eighteen others given by Wilson!!3 for various South American populations
(mainly of “mixed” ancestry). Haemoglobin levels were determined for various tribes by
Jones>5 and in an Arawak village by Chan (Chin, et al.16) Average levels, divided by region,
sex and age, and expressed as grams per 100 ml., were low. The means ranged from 10-73
(Coastal Arawak boys) and 10-88 (Wai-Wai women) to a maximum of only 13-41 (Macusi and
Wapishiana men).

In terms of physical endurance, some of the Interior groups would seem particularly
worthy of study. By canoe or on foot, they still cover long distances, and packs of sixty
pounds or more may be carried over twenty miles a day. In the Pakaraima Highlands heavy
loads of cassava are taken in warishi (carrying baskets, see Plate 2f) up long steep slopes
with apparently little physical stress—at least no more than I experienced unloaded!

Pigmentation

Although pigmentary studies have still to be undertaken with a reflectance spectrophotometer, there is nevertheless a certain amount of data on skin, hair and eye colour
which is unlikely to be greatly contradicted by more precise data. Skin pigmentation in the
majority is “light brown’’,37 probably more so than North American populations.30 99
Weiner, Sebag-Montefiore and Peterson!!! have questioned whether tropical forest groups
are lighter than other populations more exposed to direct sunlight, and in fact Farabee30
has already suggested that the forest Carib are lighter than the Savannah Macusi and coastal
Arawaks. This would seem worthy of more precise investigation in view of the environmental
and pigmentary variations, although there are complicating factors. In particular, amount of
exposure to sunlight may not be so easily equated with Savannah or coastal settlement, for
the Amerindian may spend much of the day well protected inside the house. It may be
pertinent to question here whether variations in baby-carrying may not have also acted as a
differential selective factor in determining skin colour differences. A child slung at the front
of the mother is more protected from heat and long exposure to sunlight than the child

* Up to the date of submitting this manuscript to press, I have not been able to locate and study this
unpublished data.

34
THE AMERINDIANS OF GUYANA

carried high on the woman’s back. It is thus interesting to note that in much of South
America (and including Guyana) the small child is generally carried sitting in a broad strip
of cloth slung from one shoulder.77

The sacral pigment “‘spot’’ occurred, though I did not establish a frequency. In view
of the high incidences found in other indigenous South American groups‘ it is very likely
to be high in Guyana also.

Hair colour is predominantly black, but brown and very occasionally lighter hair may
occur. Gillin37 uses “‘black”’ hair as one criterion of ‘“‘purity” for the Barama River Caribs,
a method which seems open to considerable doubt. Probably lighter degrees of hair pigmentation can be a characteristic of these southern Amerindians in an unmixed state, and
it is significant that Sausse,’7 in his study of the primitive Roucouyenne Indians of French
Guiana, noted some children with blonde hair.

Eye colour is predominantly dark brown.

Dermatoglyphics

No data has yet been collected in this field. In view of the relevance of such information
in determining population movements and relationships in the New World,75 Guyanese
samples are clearly needed.

Serology

Blood group data on tribes are both direct and indirect, that is, on samples from
Indians now living in Guyana, and from other samples taken from adjacent territories on
tribes which have been or are represented in Guyana. For the sake of brevity, the country
in which the tribal sample was taken is given as G (=Guyana), V (=Venezuela) or S
(=Surinam).

ABO System. As expected, samples for the Acawaio (G), Macusi (G), Waica (V) and
Warrau (V) were 100 per cent group O.®!, 62, 63 However, a Venezuelan Carib sample had
0-62 per cent group A59 while Arawak and Carib samples from Surinam had 2:2 per cent
and 1-1 per cent respectively of group B and 2-2 per cent of group A (Carib only). Miscegenation would seem the explanation in the case of group B occurring, but the situation is no
longer so clear for the occurrence of group A, which may be a pre-contact characteristic
of some South American groups.75

MNSs System. Gene M was high, compatible with other Amerindian data, with the
highest figure so far (79 per cent) being for the Waica.® In contrast, the two Warrau (V)
sub-tribes tested had noticeably low M frequencies (36-50 per cent).®!

Rh System. All samples so far tested are Rho (D) positive. The chromosome DCE(Rz)
was variable but relatively high (Macusi, 10 per cent; Acawaio, 8 per cent; Warrau subtribes 1-7 per cent; Waica, 18 per cent.)®!, 62, 63

Kell and Lewis Systems. All so far are K(—) and Le(a—).

P System. The gene P varied from below 40 per cent in the Waica (V) to 46 per cent in
the Guyanese Acawaio.62: 63

Duffy System. Variation in frequency from an Fy® incidence of 58 per cent (Waica.V)
to 98 per cent in a Warrau (V) sub-tribe.®!, 62, 63

Kidd System. Jk* ranged from 56 per cent in the Waica (V) to 48 per cent in Acawaio
(G), comparable with other South American frequencies.

Diego System. Relatively high figures have been recorded in some tribes for Di(a+)
(28 per cent, Macusi; 41 per cent Acawaio; 3 per cent Guayo Warrau; 0 per cent Waica.61,
62, 63,)

Gm System. So far frequencies have been obtained for only a Carib (S) and a Waica (V)
sample. Gm(x-+) incidence is 52 per cent in the Caribs!00 and 31 per cent for the Waica.34

35
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Clearly much genetic variability can be demonstrated in the Guyana tribes by serological work, and further tribal samples need testing in the near future. In combination
with other data, these traits promise a more accurate assessment of the biological distances
of the various groups from one another.

Anthroposcopic Variants*

*‘Non-metrical”? morphologic differences have long been recognized in physical
anthropology, and have similarly long presented considerable problems in methodology
and quantification. Nevertheless, they may provide valuable indications of population
variability, and it is encouraging that Neel and his colleagues72» 73 applied a number of such
traits with success in their study of the Xavante Indians.

Mainly head variants and hair form, quantity and pattern have so far been studied in
primitive groups, but other characters such as the distal hyperextensibility of the thumb
and hand clasping differences would be worth further exploration in South American
populations.

As I have already mentioned, facial variation is considerable. Eyelid morphology has
received special attention in some populations, particularly the development of the epicanthic fold. However, the application of eye-fold classifications worked out on Asiatic populations to New World series is not altogether satisfactory,52 and there is a need for a re-study
of this character in Amerindians.? Well-defined epicanthic folds (completely covering the
inner margin of the lachrymal caruncle) are not common in the Guyanese Amerindians,
although Gillin37 considered that 13 per cent of the Barama River Caribs were in this
category. Published evidence of eye obliquity is rather contradictory, Farabee29 reporting
it as uncommon, whereas Gillin37 records 33 per cent (¢) and 48 per cent (¢) for his medium
category alone. The nasal bridge is moderately high (an Amerindian feature contrasting
with Asiatic mongoloids), and the nasal profile is variable, with some indication of tribal
differences. The ear is relatively long in relation to facial height, thinness of helix and antihelix being common.

No dental surveys have yet been undertaken except in terms of caries incidences. Shovel
incisor variants occur, and from the evidence of Peruvian and Venezuelan Indians!3: 39 this and
other dental traits are likely to produce valuable evidence of inter-population differences. Malocclusions are also worthy of further attention, and Gillin3’ records the surprising figure of
9-2 per cent under-bite in Barama Caribs (? the result of in-breeding).

Head hair is abundant, and baldness very uncommon. The hair can be wavy, and I
am Satisfied that this is not the result of race-crossing, but a pre-contact trait with possibly
tribal differences.t Eyebrow concurrency has received statistical analysis by Gillin,37 but
the results would seem questionable in view of the practice of brow plucking (in their
opinion an aid to vision). Facial hair is limited in spread, but can be well developed at lip
and chin (Plate 2d). Neither in the Arawak or Patamona Indians I observed, or in previous
reports, has chest or back hair been noted, although pubic hair is present. In males, sparse
leg hair also occurs.

The Disease Spectrum

Before discussing the possible human biological significance of Amerindian diseases,
it is necessary to review the range of disease and abnormality which has been reported.
Much of the information on recent Amerindian groups results from the efforts of Dr.
Cenydd Jones—often, I suspect, working in far from ideal circumstances. In overall health,
the tribes would seem to show some variation, even at this late date. Thus, for instance, the

* Some aspects of this Section will be covered in detail elsewhere.
+ Of course in villages with Negro/Indian crosses, this hair trait is affected.

36
THE AMERINDIANS OF GUYANA

tuberculosis mortality rate for the Amerindians in the North-west District is about 40 per
10,000, which is highest in the country,56 whereas the Wai-Wai were reported to be free of
this disease—although displaying high malariometric indices.55

Diseases may be spread from the coast (gonorrhoea) or mining areas in the Interior
(tuberculosis). Epidemic infection has also spread from other countries, as instanced by the
measles outbreak of 1950 on the Rupununi Savannahs which spread from Brazil,56 and the
infection of Amerindians with chickenpox through contacts with Venezuela.92

The reception of the medical ranger, and occasional medical officer, is improving,
whereas the witch-doctor no longer has importance. The large number of previously used
medicinal plants!97 are now but occasionally used.

Smallpox. Schomburgk84 88 notes a severe outbreak amongst Arawaks in 1830.
Similarly, Brett5 records further epidemics in 1841 and 1854. In recent years, this disease
has not been a threat, although the possibility of its spread from Brazil and Venezuela has
stimulated vaccination campaigns.

Measles. Schomburgk and Brett again record epidemics, resulting in frequent mortality.

The Macusi were decimated by such an epidemic in 1930, and the Rupununi area had
a further outbreak in 1949.55 Jones notes that thirty deaths occurred in settlements lying
between Lethem and Wichibau Pau, and that in this locality 10 per cent of all cases developed
broncho-pneumonia (with a total measles mortality of 6 to 7 per cent). This epidemic had
spread into the Patamona during 1950, but died away without reaching the Acawaio.

Cholera. Brett notes that much of the colony was affected in 1857 and estimates that
mortality among some Indians was as high as a third of the community. It has therefore
contributed to population reduction in the past, although of no significance to-day.

Malaria. The reference by Schomburgk to frequent ‘‘fever”’, “inflammation of the
abdominal organs” and “liver complaints’”’ amongst Amerindians, would seem to indicate
considerable malarial infection by the early nineteenth century (in the absence of other
infection to-day which would explain these fevers and spleen enlargements).

Studies of Anopheles darlingi incidences and malariometric rates have been undertaken
by G. Giglioli, L. G. Eddey and C. R. Jones (see Jones55 for a review of their findings).
As A. darlingi favours sheltered low-acidity waters for breeding, the banks of the Rupununi
have been particularly favoured by the mosquito, but on the other hand, the more acid
waters of the Upper Mazaruni and Kamarang are not suitable. As a result of such environmental factors, malariometric indices have varied considerably from tribe to tribe, high
values being noted in the Rupununi Savannahs, the Caribs of the lower Barama River
and the Wai-Wai, but only slight malaria occurred amongst the Acawaio of the Upper
Mazaruni areaS5, As a result of the anti-malarial campaigns of recent years, few cases of
malaria now occur on the Coast, and in the Interior yearly numbers only ranged from 220
to 670 from 1960 to 1964.6

Tuberculosis. Death rates for this disease are considerably higher than in the other
Guyanese racial groups (26-2 per 10,000 in 1949, according to the Registrar General’s
report). Sanatorium admissions between 1960 and 1964 for Amerindians averaged about
49 per year, which is about 27 per cent of all admissions.6 The majority of cases are adult
males, who contract the disease during a period of employment in mining communities or
towns. Mantoux tuberculin surveys have been undertaken on samples representing most
tribal groups, and a more limited BCG vaccination campaign initiated.55

Chickenpox. Mild epidemics occur, but are not serious.

Whooping cough. This is a serious disease to the Amerindian, with distressing results
and high mortality. Jones 56 notes that it caused numerous deaths in the Savannahs in 1953.

Influenza. As regards the marked decimation of Amerindian numbers, the pandemic of
influenza following World War I, would seem to have hit these people severely.56

37
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Pinta. Only one Wapishiana family has been suspected of having this disease.55

Unsheathed Microfilariae. Giglioli36 noted in a sample of 274 Patamona Indians, 19-7
per cent infected with Filaria ozzardi and 11-6 per cent with Acanthocerlonema perstans.

Eye Diseases. Schomburgk noted that the “majority” of one Warrau group he saw
had “inflammation of the eyes”, and in a group of twenty-three Arecuna, most had “‘bad
eye disease” and two were blind. Both Roth84 and Jones55 also state that blepharal conjunctivitis is common, and to a lesser extent corneal ulcerations.

Yellow Fever. Jungle yellow fever is endemic in certain areas of the Interior. Data
showing regional variations in immunity rates has been collected by a number of workers55
Immunity rates vary by as much as SO per cent.

Leishmaniasis. This has occurred in the Interior (see map in Garnham and Lewis35),
but apparently not in recent years.

Intestinal Worms. In the small samples which Jones55 studied for these parasites, the
Patamona/Acawaio/Macusi ranged from 95 to 100 per cent for hookworm (? all Necator);
42 to 86 per cent for Ascaris; 14 to 48 per cent for Trichuris; and 0 to 3-5 per cent for
Strongyloides. Chin and colleagues! also note anaemia resulting from Ascaris infection in
an Arawak village. Geophagia is common in infected people.

Dysentery and Diarrhoea. These conditions, especially gastro-enteritis, are still serious
child-killers in Guyana as a whole® but available evidence suggests that the Amerindians
have the most resistance to these conditions. Outbreaks have occurred however, and Schomburgk (Roth84) notes a Macusi group hit by these infections, and Brett5 a dysentery outbreak amongst the Warrau. In recent years, the only instance recorded of considerable
dysentery was at Orealla in 1949, though mild diarrhoea occurs not uncommonly early in
the rainy season.55

Skin Conditions. Schomburgk, and later Barrington Brown,!! both state that skin
disease was common. Considering the various signs of nutritional deficiency outlined by
Jones,55 including dry skin and keratosis, it may well be that these earlier authors were also
noting the results of dietary inadequacy.

Multiple bites from the various species of Simulium fly can be painful and cause much
skin irritation,9® but are seasonal in nature.

The jigger (Tunga penetrans) is usually removed by the Amerindian before it becomes a
health threat, although Schomburgk notes children with badly affected (septic) foot jiggers.
In the past, settlements have actually been abandoned as a result of intense jigger infestation.

Malnutrition. Assessment is difficult, especially in the absence of precise dietary
information. Jones5> considers that generally malnutrition is low, but Chin!6 reported that
in a sample of 55 pre-school Arawak, there was clinical evidence of malnutrition in most,
and four with advanced manifestations of protein deficiency. A recent contributing factor
to protein deficiency in the case of some Amerindians is the prohibition of certain meats by
Seventh Day Adventist missionaries.12. 92, 103 Waterlow (quoted by Jones55) undertook a
nutritional survey of the Acawaio, noted the children were somewhat “skinny and potbellied”’ and suggested that deficiencies probably lay in the fat soluble vitamins and calcium.

Oral Health. Nineteenth-century comments on dental health vary from Schomburgk’s
assessment of Warrau teeth as “entirely bad’’,84 to Brett’s on the healthiness of the Acawaio
dentition.5 In recent groups, advanced caries is well in evidence, and although suggestions
have been made for an Interior dental service,58 for the present advanced caries remains a
chronic threat to health. In view of the variations in caries prevalence in Amerindian
groups!3: 74 it is interesting to note further possible differences in the Guyana Amerindians.
As yet the statistical data is crude, and does not include proper allowance for missing teeth
in caries assessments. However, considering the extent of the differences between three
regional groupings, Coastal Arawak, Patamona and Acawaio of the Pakaraima Highlands,

38
THE AMERINDIANS OF GUYANA

and Macusi and Wapishiana of the Rupununi Savannahs, by far the highest decay percentages are for the Savannah people, and the lowest for the Pakaraima region.55 This is
likely to reflect mainly differences in diet, including its inadequacy, although variations in
the fluorine content of ground water cannot yet be ruled out for some areas.

Congenital Defects. Assessment of the survival of congenitally defective individuals in
pre-contact cultures—from the evidence of mission influenced Amerindians—is difficult.
Abnormalities have certainly been noted; Schomburgk met an imbecile Wapishiana boy,
and Farabee39 mentions instances of feeble-mindedness, a mute, and a female with only
one breast. A review of Amerindian attitudes to defective children has yet to be made, but
Farabee states that amongst the Macusi at least, the baby with marked deformity was
eliminated by strangulation. Other small indigenous populations in South America are no
less presented with the alternative of destroying or “‘carrying” severe abnormality, and in
the Xingii/Xavanite tribal areas, for instance, club-foot and mental defect may be “relatively
common problems”’.73 |

As a result of a relatively high degree of inbreeding, there is evidence that deaf-mutism
has an abnormally high frequency in some Guyana Indian groups (though precise statistics
are not available). Jones55 notes seven cases of deaf-mutism in three Macusi villages (Karasabai, Tipuru, Mouriru), three in Wapishiana villages, and one Acawaio case. Earlier,
Farabee?® noted seven other instances of deaf-mutism in the Wapishiana tribe.

Diseases and Amerindian Micro-evolution

There is now sufficient evidence to demonstrate that diseases may at times have been
powerful selective forces in human evolution,45: 7! changing the genetic mosaic of earlier
populations in varying ways.* At a recent IBP meeting on “‘Natural Selection and Transmissable Disease” some possible correlations were considered and, more important, the
complex nature of the problems occurring in this field were acknowledged. Certainly much
of the literature on human polymorphisms and differential susceptibility to diseases is
rather speculative, although nevertheless worth while, and the following comments referring
to Amerindians simply pose further questions or re-cast previous ones.

I think at the beginning of any such consideration of Amerindians, the conception of a
modern but biologically pre-contact population must be accepted as mythical however preColumbian in nature a particular tribal economy and culture might appear. Reluctantly,
Neel and Salzano7? concede this point in their review of “surviving primitive’’ Amerindian
groups. Even where Europeans and Africans have not penetrated into an area, intervillage and inter-tribal contact has been sufficient to provide the necessary bridge for the
transfer of a variety of epidemic diseases. In other words, mortality and genetic variation
to-day is most unlikely to reflect accurately pre-Columbian populations.

In considering disease and the genetic make-up of Amerindian populations, it is important to remember that, unlike Old World peoples, there are two well-defined disease
strata. I say well-defined in that the period after A.D. 1500 was certainly one of heavy disease
intrusion, although possible early trans-Pacific and Viking contacts may have formed
additional, though probably minor, avenues for disease. Which diseases fall into which
disease stratum is by no means clear in some cases, and further discussion of this problem
must be restricted to the spectrum of disease in the region of Guyana. Before doing so, however, there is a further point of general relevance. This is the question of how important
diseases which are not killers might be in determining genetic changes in populations. Disease which can kill at or before reproductive age may be of primary importance, but due

* Nineteenth-century anthropologists were aware that disease patterns should be considered within the
peaton ct human biology, and noted racial differences in susceptibility. All too often we do not give them credit
or this.

39
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

consideration must be given to the possible additive effects of less fatal conditions. In particular, moderate debility from a disease, in a population with a hunting and collecting
economy or at a primitive agricultural level, may be a death sentence—even if lack of
nourishment is the only other factor involved.

Probable pre-Columbian Diseases

As Hare46 points out, some parasites have enjoyed a comfortable relationship with
man throughout his evolution and are unlikely to have exerted at any time a strong selective
pressure. Considering, therefore, transmissible infections which could be pertinent to human
biological studies, one is left with surprisingly fewer than the post-contact list.

In the case of treponemal diseases the temporal status of syphilis in the New World
is still in dispute. The palaeopathological evidence can still be used to argue both ways4
Neel and his colleagues73 suggest that laboratory findings on some modern Amerindians
are in favour of a post-contact date, though Vogel’s (Barnicot3) claim of high A and AB
frequencies in persons with advanced syphilis might be used to argue to the contrary. A
better case has been made for pinta as pre-Columbian in date,44 and although only one
Wapishiana family has displayed evidence of this in recent years,55 it may have considerable
antiquity in the area.

To my knowledge, intestinal worm load as a selective factor, has not received the consideration by human biologists which it deserves. These parasites are not direct killers, but
in populations with a minimal nutritional level, resistance to heavy infestation has distinct
advantages. Noticeable frequencies of intestinal helminths have been recorded in Middle
and South American groups,* though in no case have we the degree of statistical detail
which is desirable. At least some of these parasites are likely to have considerable antiquity
in their association with man in the Americas. Allowing for differences in economy and
culture, there would still seem to be evidence for racial differences in resistance to helminths.20 80 Otto78 claims less susceptibility to Hymenolepis nana in Negroes than in
Europeans; similarly, Smillie and Augustine?’ claim that hookworm larvae less readily
penetrate Negro skin. Similar conclusions as to differential resistance to filariasis were
reached in a study of different groups in Surinam.27 While being critical of these early
findings, it must be noted that recent work on host-parasite relationships and immunological aspects underline the long—and, no doubt, regionally variable—adaptive relationship of man and helminths. 22 23, 24, 66

Regarding the Amerindians in Guyana, with very high infestation of Necator and
Ascaris, one is struck by the apparent lack of symptoms—strongly contrasting, for instance,
with findings on certain Chinese groups, where general weakness, flabby muscles, heart
palpitations, etc., were common.!5 Also, unlike the Chinese samples, there is no evidence
that such parasite loads result in retarded puberty, menstrual upsets, and partial impotence.
Unfortunately, in the absence of larger samples, egg counts, and a more precise assessment
of worm load per individual in the Amerindian group, such comparisons must remain
tentative.

Although onchocerciasis has not been reported in recent years in Guyana, its presence
in Venezuela35 and Surinam® suggests that other eastern regions may have been involved
at an earlier date. It is most unlikely that all five species of Simulium present in Guyana

* Costa Rica, 77 per cent hookworm in rural groups ;89 Mexico, over 50 per cent infected with Ascaris,
Hymenolepis, and Trichuris in one locality studied ;8999 Columbia, Ascaris causes child ill-health, though
hookworm is uncommon;!!2 Chile, Ancylostoma frequent in some areas, Taenia has about 1 per cent fre
uency ;5° Xavante of Brazil, Trichuris, Necator, Enterobius and Ascaris present, but frequencies not established ; Oyampis of French Guiana, evidence of noticeable hookworm infection ;87 Guatemala, Ascaris in over
80 per cent of the children ;31 Quechua Indians of Peru, Trichuris in 51 per cent, Heterodera in 32 per cent,
Taenia in 2 per cent and Ascaris in 82 per cent.79

40
THE AMERINDIANS OF GUYANA

would be unable to transmit this infection. My reason for mentioning it here is that this
helminth may provide evidence of a very different selective process operating on man—
perhaps including Amerindian communities. Choyce,!7 in considering possible population
differences in susceptibility to this disease, points out that degree of iris pigmentation appears
to be correlated with degree of ocular onchocerciasis (from iritis to secondary glaucoma and
complicated cataract).

Post-contact Diseases

A number of these intrusive parasites have had profound effects upon the Amerindian
tribes, even to the point of causing extinction. Malaria, which has made spasmodic progress
in Guyana for well over a century—and may not have reached some parts of the Interior
until two or three decades ago—has been a major debilitating condition. Dunn26 has
recently reviewed the problem of malaria in the Western Hemisphere, and presents further
evidence to support the view of a post-contact date. Malaria may therefore only have been
a health threat for about two centuries, and for much of this time only the coastal groups
would seem to have been severely hit. Yellow fever virus, on the other hand, may have a
longer and more widespread history in the tropical region, although the evidence is indirect.
Between 1508 and 1655, a number of yellow fever epidemics occurred in the Caribbean
area,95 and it is reasonable to suspect that about this period it became established with its
vector Aédes aegypti on the mainland of South America. In view of the high immunity rates
which have been recorded for some Amerindian samples in Guyana, it raises the question
as to what extent “subclinical”? infection results from reduced virulence, and how likely
genetically determined host resistance might be in this instance.

Tuberculosis is another disease which is controversial as regards its establishment in
the Americas. Morse® in reviewing early Amerindian skeletal evidence remains unconvinced of a pre-Columbian date, but accepts its prehistory in the Old World.7 For the
Guyanese Amerindian, this is a continuing—if not increasing—threat. Contrary to the
opinion of Neel and Salzano,72 I think Jones has good grounds for considering that nutrition,
home environment, and changes in the pace of life, cannot be used to argue away their
pronounced susceptibility to this disease. By this argument, one would certainly expect
some of the poorer coastal non-Indian communities to display higher frequencies. Admittedly, the question of inherent differences in response to tuberculosis, is a complex one.%4
It may be significant to this argument that the North American Indian, with a much longer
recorded history of high tuberculosis rates may now be moving towards greater resistance to
the infection.25 |

Smallpox is another disease which had penetrated the Caribbean area by 1507, and
had probably reached epidemic proportions in Mexico by 1521.46 As in the North, South
American Indians could well have been affected by the seventeenth century, although it
may be significant that there is no good evidence in Guyana before early in the nineteenth
century, when the epidemics were devastating.* The claim that ABO polymorphism is
related to a differential susceptibility to smallpox!’ underlines the possibility that it determines some micro-evolution in the indigenous communities of the New World.

It is still very debatable as to what extent mortality from measles may be related to
inherent factors or purely the result of nutritional and psychological changes. Brett> noted
in the measles outbreak of about 1854, that lack of food enhanced the severity of the
condition. Inability to collect food or culturally determined restriction on eating during

* Some time prior to 1854, vaccination had already been undertaken on some mission Indians,> and it
is thus possible that in later epidemics of smallpox there was a strong differential survival in favour of the
mission settlements—with perhaps genetic consequences for the more recent generations.

41
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

sickness have also not helped even in recent years. Nevertheless, it would seem premature to
dismiss possible genetic factors when, even in modern Amerindian villages with medical
aid at hand, severe epidemics can occur with a mortality of 6 to 7 per cent.

Psychological Factors

In their recent study of the Xavante Indians, Neel and colleagues73 regret the lack of
information regarding the psychology of such primitive communities. Indeed, survival may
at times be a matter of mind rather than body. Psychological studies would be of value in
Guyana no less than elsewhere, and in view of ever-increasing contact and European-style
education, has become urgent. The Amerindian’s traditional composure, resistance to
directives and commands, and his placid view of time passing, are personality traits which
must have greatly assisted his adaptation to the tropics.

Future Development and the Amerindian

The present government of Guyana has stated its intention to continue developmental
aid to the Amerindians. The intensive health surveys of Dr. C. R. Jones between 1949 and
1951 and the establishment of medical rangers in the Interior has enhanced the health
status of these people. The periodic distribution of milk, and vitamin capsules at school is a
further beneficial innovation of some years standing.93 A special Department of Amerindian Affairs was set up under the late Mr. Stephen Campbell, a Parliamentary Secretary
and an Amerindian, with a view to their better participation in Guyanese society.!4 Mr.
Campbell has now been succeeded in Parliament by Mr. Philip Duncan, also an Amerindian,
who is well aware of the doubts and problems of his own people. As a result of recommendations made by Mr. S. C. Knapp,58 Indian Affairs Officer to the Canadian Government, the
Guyana Development Programme accounts nearly three million Guyanese dollars for
future land, road and building development, water supply, health and education, in Amerindian areas.7 How fast these plans will come into effect would, however, seem debatable.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Help has come from numerous directions, and in particular I should like to thank the following
individuals and institutions. The Director of the British Museum (Natural History), Sir Terence
Morrison-Scott, kindly made research funds available to me for field work. Dr. Audrey Butt
provided information and photographic data. Dr. Clifford Evans and Mr. E. A. Goodland made
available to me excavated skeletal material. Mr. Philip Duncan, M.P., Mr. E. Cossou (Commissioner for the Interior), Dr. Leslie Chin, and Mr. Henry Josiah (Guyana Information Office), gave
advice and help in various ways. The Canadian High Commissioner in Georgetown and his staff
provided valuable information regarding Amerindian development plans. As regards mission
information, I wish to give special thanks to the Archbishop of the West Indies, and to Father
Petry and Father Wilson Brown of the Catholic Centre. Various members of the Commonwealth
Institute of Helminthology assisted in my worm education. General assistance was given by Mrs.
Irene Copeland and Miss Theya Molleson.

Last, but not least, my thanks to the many Amerindians who were friendly to this inquisitive
lone Englishman.

REFERENCES

Baker, P. T., and Weiner, J. S. 1966. The Biology of Human Adaptability. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

. Ball, P. A. J. 1966. The relationship of host to parasite in human hookworm infection. In The Pathology
of Parasitic Diseases. Ed, A. E. R. Taylor. Oxford: Blackwell.

. Barnicot, N. A. 1965. Natural selection and transmissable disease. Nature, Lond. 208, 535.

Bertram, C. 1963. In Search of Mermaids: The Manatees of Guiana. London: Davies.

. Brett, W. H. 1868. The Indian Tribes of Guiana. London: Bell and Daldy.

. B.G.D.P. 1966a. British Guiana (Guyana) Development Programme (19661972). Ch. 7, Health. Georgetown: Government Printery.

. B.G.D.P. 1966b. British Guiana (Guyana) Development Programme (1966-1972). Ch. 10, Amerindians.
Georgetown: Government Printery.

I AWAW N=

42
 

PLATE 1

(a) Part of the Arawak village of Pakuri Landing (St. Cuthbert’s Mission).

(b) Typical adobe houses at Kato (Patamona village).

(c) Cultivated plot deep in the forest near Kurukabaru. In the foreground is scattered maize, beyond
which is cassava and then forest.
 

PLATE 2

(a, d, e) Amerindian facial variation

(a) Patamona female; (d) Man of Arecuna stock, but now regarded as Patamona; (e) Macusi male.

(b) Close-up of the eye region, showing a common variant with no epicanthic fold but an exposed
lachrymal caruncle.

(c) Posterior view of an Acawaio male, displaying a short and rather lateral body build. Photo by
courtesy of Dr. A. J. Butt. .

(f) Patamona warishi with a substantial load of cassava. Such heavy packs are carried long distances
by both sexes.
THE AMERINDIANS OF GUYANA

. Broesike, G. 1880. Das anthropologische Material des anatomischen Museums der Kéniglichen Uni
versitat—Berlin. Berlin.

. Brothwell, D. R. 1967. Epicanthic polymorphism, with special reference to New World populations.

In preparation.

. Brothwell, D. R., and Harvey, R. G. 1965. Facial variation. Some problems of recording shapes and

determining the affinities of human populations by means of facial differences, with special reference to

- the people of Tristan da Cunha. Eugen. Rev. 57, 167.

. Brown, Barrington C. 1877. Canoe and Camp Life in British Guiana. London: Stanford.

. Butt, A. J. 1960. The birth of a religion. J. R. anthrop. Inst. 90, 66.

. Brewer-Carias, C. 1964. Algunos Aspectos Sobre Antropologia Dental en los Indios Soto y Otras Ex
periencas en la Guayana Venezolana. Caracas: Grafos.

. Central Office of Information. 1966. Guyana, London: HMSO.
. Chang, K. et al, 1949. Studies on Hookworm Disease in Szechwan Province West China. Baltimore:

Johns Hopkins.

. Chin, L. et al. 1966. Progress Report on Work of St. Cuthbert’s Group for Period Ending 31st December

1965. Unpublished. Georgetown.

. Choyce, D. P. 1964. Ocular onchoceriasis in Central America, Africa and British Isles. Trans. R. Soc.

trop. Med. Hyg. 58, 11.

. Collier, W. A., Fros, J., and Schipper, J. F. A. 1952. Blood groups of some American Indian Settle
ments. Documenta Med. geogr. trop. 4, 225.

. Corbo, S., and Ricci, M. 1958. Accrescimento infantile e parassitismo intestinale. Re. Ist. sup. Sanita

Rome. 21, 120

. Culbertson, J. T. 1941. Immunity Against Animal Parasites. New York: Columbia Univ. Press.

. Dalton, H. G. 1855. The History of British Guiana. London: Longman, Brown.

. Dawes, B. 1964. Advances in Parasitology. London: Academic Press.

. Dineen, J. K. 1963a. Immunological aspects of parasitism. Nature, Lond. 197, 268.

. Dineen, J. K. 1963b. Antigenic relationship between host and parasite. Nature, Lond. 197, 471.

. Dubos, R., and Dubos, J. 1953. The White Plague. Tuberculosis, Man and Society. London: Gollancz.
. Dunn, F. L. 1965. On the antiquity of Malaria in the Western Hemisphere. Hum. Biol. 37, 385.

. Elsbach, L. 1933. Geneesk. Tijdschr. Ned.-Indié. 73, 647. Quoted by Culbertson, 1941.

. Evans, C., and Meggers, B. J. 1960. Archaeological Investigations in British Guiana. Bull. Smithsonian

Inst. Bur. Am. Ethnol, 177.

. Farabee, W. C. 1918. The Central Arawaks. Anthrop. Publs. Pa. Univ. Mus. 9.
. Farabee, W. C. 1924. The Central Caribs. Anthrop. Publs. Pa Univ. Mus. 10.
. Flores, M., and Reh, E. 1955. Estudios de habitos dietéticos en poblaciones de Guatemala. Boln. Of.

Sanit. Pan-am. Supl. 2, 101.

. Flower, W. H. 1907. Catalogue of the Specimens Illustrating the Osteology and Dentition of Vertebrated

Animals, Recent and Extinct, contained in the Museum of the Royal College of Surgeons of England.
London: Taylor and Francis.

. Forbes, G. P. A. 1959. The forests of British Guiana and their future development Timehri, 38, 57.
. Gallango, M. L. 1963. Incidence of Gm® and Gm* genes among Venezuelan Indians and Mestizos.

Hum. Biol. 35, 361. :

. Garnham, P. C. C., and Lewis, D. J. 1959. Parasites of British Honduras with special reference to

Leishmaniasis. Trans. R. Soc. trop. Med. & Hyg. 53, 12.

. Giglioli, G. 1947. Report on Malaria Outbreaks Amongst the Patamona Indians. Quoted by Jones 1952.
. Gillin, J. 1936. The Barama River Caribs of British Guiana. Pap. Peabody Mus. 14 no. 2.
. Gillin, J. 1948. Tribes of the Guianas. In Handbook of South American Indians. Ed. J. H. Steward. 3,

799. Bull. Smithsonian Inst. Bur. Am. Ethnol. 143.

. Goaz, P. W., and Miller, M. C. 1966. A Preliminary description of the dental morphology of the

Peruvian Indian. J. dent. Res. 45, 106.

. Goodland, R. 1965. The Rupununi Savanna. J. Brit. Guiana Mus. Zoo. 41, 1.
. Gourou, P. 1964. The Tropical World. Its Social & Economic Conditions and Its Future Status (p. 159).

London: Longmans.

. Guppy, N. 1958. Wai-Wai: Through the Forests North of the Amazon. London: Murray.

. Guppy, N. 1964. Fishing with the Guiana Indians. Animals, 3, 234.

. Hackett, C. J. 1963. On the origin of the human treponematoses. Bull. Wid Hlth Org. 29, 7.

. Haldane, J. B. S. 1957. Natural selection in man. Acta Genet. Statist. med. 6, 321.

. Hare, R. 1954. Pomp and pestilence: Infectious Disease, Its Origins and Conquest. London: Gollancz.
. Harper, W. F. 1956. On five aboriginal Indian Skulls from British Guiana, Rep. Br. Guiana Mus. Zoo.

11, 21.

. Henckel, K. O. 1940. Maucha monfgolica. Revta. med. lat. amer. 25, 760. ;
. Henfrey, C. 1964. The Gentle People, a Journey Among the Indian Tribes of Guiana. London: Hutchinson.
. Herzog, E. 1950. The Geographical pathology of Chile. In Handbook of South American Indians.

Ibid. 6, 137.

. Hester, J. J. 1966. Late Pleistocene Environments and Early Man in South America. Am. Nat. 100, 377.
. ImBelloni, J. 1944. Los y4mana y el Ilamdo “ojo mongolico’’. Estudio anatomofisionémico. Relac.

Soc. argent. Antrop. 4, 167.

. Im Thurn, E. F. 1883. Among the Indians of Guiana. London: Kegan Paul.
. Jarcho, S. 1966. Human Palaeopathology. New Haven: Yale University Press.

43
55.

56.
357.
58.

o9:.

60. Layrisse, M., and Arends, T. 1956. High incidence blood group found in Venezuelan Indians. Science,
» 633.

61. Layrisse, M., Arends, T., and Wilbert, J. 1958. Peculiar distribution of the Diego factor among the
Warrau. Nature, Lond. 181, 118.

62. Layrisse, M., Layrisse, Z., "and Wilbert, J. 1962. Blood group antigen tests of the Waica Indians of
Venezuela. Southwestern J. Anthrop. 18, 78.

63. Layrisse, M., Layrisse, Z., and Wilbert, J. 1963. The Blood Groups of Northern Continental Caribs.
Hum. Biol. 35, 140.

64. Lothrop, S. K. 1961. Early migrations to Central and South America: an anthropological problem in
the light of other sciences. J. Roy. Anthrop. Inst. 91, 97.

65. thas, Rs ut 1948. The Tropical Forests: An Introduction. In Handbook of South American Indians.

66. Mackay, J. P. 1953. The host-parasite relationships between man and his tissue invasive “‘parasites”’
in East Africa as a basis for medical policy. E. Afr. med. J. 30, 13.

67. Mackie, 1 T. T., Hunter, G. W., and Worth, C. B. 1954. A Manual of Tropical Medicine. Philadelphia:

un

68. Mills, C. ‘A. 1942. Climatic effects on growth and development with particular reference to the effects
of tropical residence. Amer. Anthrop. 44, 1.

69. Morse, D. 1961. Prehistoric tuberculosis in America. Amer. Rev. Resp. Dis. 83, 489.

70. ae D., Brothwell, D. R., and Ucko, P. J. 1964. Tuberculosis in Ancient Egypt. Amer. Rev. Resp.

is

71. Motulsky, A. G. 1958. Metabolic polymorphisms and the role of infectious diseases in human evolution. Hum. Biol. 30, 43-72.

72. Neel, J. V., and Salzano, F F. M. 1966. A prospectus for genetic studies on the American Indians. In
The Biology of Human Adaptability. Ed. P. T. Baker and J. S. Weiner. Oxford: Clarendon. pp. 245-274.

73. Neel, J. V., Salzano, F. M., Junqueiro, R. C., Keiter, F., and Maybury-Lewis, 1964. Studies on the
Xavante Indians of the Brazilian Mato Grosso. Amer. J. Hum. Genet. 16, 52.

74. Neumann, H. H. and DiSalvo, N. A. 1958. Caries in Indians of the Mexican Cordillera, The Peruvian

- Andes and at the Amazon Headwaters. Brit. dent. J. 103, 13.

75. Newman, M. T. 1958. A trial formulation presenting evidence from physical anthropology for migrations from Mexico to South America. In Migrations in New World Culture History. Ed. R. H. Thompson. Social Sci. Bull. 27, 33. Tucson, Univ. Ariz. Press.

76. Newman, M. T. 1960. ‘Adaptations i in the physique of American Aborigines to nutritional factors.
Hum. Biol. 32, 288.

77. Nordenskidld, E. 1931. Origin of the Indian Civilizations in South America. Goteborg.

78. Otto, G. F. 1935. Human infestation with the dwarf tapeworm, Hymenolepis nana in Southern United
States. J. Parasitol. 21, 443.

79, Payne, E. H., Gonzales-Mugaburu, L., and Schleicher, E. M. 1956. An intestinal parasite survey in
the High Cordilleras of Peru. I. Amer. J. Trop. Med. Hyg. 5, 696.

80. Price, A. G. 1939. White Settlers in the Tropics. New York, Amer. Geogr. Soc,

81. Ricci, M., and Corbo, S. 1958. Parassitismo intestinale e posizione auxologica del bambina. Riv.
Rarassitol. 19, 187.

82. Roth, V. 1952. Amerindians and the State. Timehri, 31, 8

83. Roth, W. E. 1915. An Enquiry into the Animism and Kalic-lore of the Guiana Indians. 30th Ann. Rep.
Bur. Am. Ethnol. (1908-1909), Washington.

84. Roth, W. E. (Ed.). 1922. Richard Schomburgk’s Travels in British Guiana 1840-1844, Georgetown:
Daily Chronicle Office.

85. Rouse, I., and Cruxent, J. M. 1963. Venezuelan Archaeology. New Haven: Yale Univ. Press.

86. Royal Society. 1965. Provisional United Kingdom Contribution to Phase One of the International Biological Programme. London: The Roy. Soc.

87. Sausse, A. 1951. Populations Primitives du Maroni (Guyane Francaise). Paris: Inst. Geogr. Nat.

88. Schomburgk, R. H. 1840. A Description of British Guiana, Geographical and Statistical. London:
Simpkin, Marshall.

89. eee Mo 4s 953. Recherches anthropologiques sur les oromis de la Region d’Ixmiquilpau (Mexique).

* Anthrop.

90. Schreider, E. i958, Récherches anthropologiques sur les oromis de la region d’Ixmiquilpau (Mexique).
L’Anthrop. 59, 253.

91. Seggar, W. H. 1952. The Mazaruni Amerindian district. Timehri, 31, 43.

92. Seggar, W. H. 1954. Some aspects of development of a remote interior district. Timerhi, 33, 30.

93. Seggar, W. H. 1959. Community development amongst Amerindians. Timerhi, 38, 21.

. THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Jones, C. R. 1952. Report of a Medical Survey of Amerindians in British Guiana. 1949-1951. Colonial
Development and Welfare-Scheme D 36.

Jones, C. R. 1954. The health of the Amerindians. Timehri, 33, 23.

Kirchoff, P. 1948. The Warrau. In Handbook of South American Indians. Ibid. 3, 869.

Knapp, S. C. 1965. Report on the Amerindians of British Guiana and suggested Development Programmes. Georgetown: Government Printery.

Layrisse, M., Arends, T., and Sisco, R. D. 1955. Nueva grupo sangniuco encontrado en descendientes
de indios. Acta méd. Venez. 3, 132.
95.
96.
97,
98.
. Steggerda, M. 1950. The 1 and hair of South American Indians. In Handbook of South
100.

101.
102.
103.
. Tacoma, J. 1963. American Indians from Suriname, A Physical Anthropological Study. Utrecht.
105.
106.
107.
108.
109.
110.
111.
112.

113.

THE AMERINDIANS OF GUYANA

. Seibert, F. B. 1963. A theory of immunity in tuberculosis. In Life and Disease: New Perspectives in

Biology and Medicine. Ed. D. J. Ingle. New York: Basic Books.

aw sbury, J. F. D. 1964. The Plague of the Philistines and other Medical Historical Essays. London:
ollancz.

Smart ah prunes (Dipt.) from British Guiana and the Lesser Antilles. Trans. Roy. Entom.
oc, Lond. 5

Smillie, W. G.. and Augustine, D. L., 1925. Intensity of hookworm infestation in Alabama. Its relation
ship to residence, occupation, age, sex and race. J. Amer. Med. Assoc. 85, 1925.

Steggerda, M. 1950. Anthropometry of South American Indians. In Handbook of South American

Indians. Ibid. 6, 57.

American Indians. Ibid. 6

Steinberg, A. G., Stauffer, R., Blumberg, B. S., and Fundenberg, H. 1961. Gm phenotypes and geno
types in U.S. Whites and Negroes; in American Indians and Eskimoes; in Africans; and in Micro
nesians. Amer. J. Hum. Genet. 13, 206.

Steward, 3 H. 1948, Culture Areas of the Tropical Forests. In Handbook of South American Indians.
id. 3, 883.

Stewart, T. D., and Newman, M. D. 1950. Anthropometry of South American Indian Skeletal remains.

In Handbook of South American Indians. Ibid. 6, 19.

Swan, M. 1957. British Guiana. The Land of Six Peoples. London: HMSO.

Ten Kate, H. 1887. Observations anthropologiques receuillies dans la Guyane et le Venezuela. Rev.
d’ Anthrop. 16, 44.

eee Nations. 1958. The Future Growth of World Population. Population Studies No. 28. New York:
bytes T. 1866. El Dorado; or British Guiana as a Field for Colonisation. London: Cassell, Petter
an pin.

Vogel, F., Pettenkofer, H. S., and Humbold, W. 1960. Uber die Populations Genetik der ABOBlutgruppen. Acta Genet. Statist. med. 10, 267,

Walker, W. (Ed.). 1878. British Guiana at the Paris Exhibition. London: Stanferd.

Waterton, C. 1893. Wanderings in South America. London: Macmillan.

Weiner, J. S., Sebag-Montefiore, N. C., and Peterson, J. N. 1963. A note on the skin-colour of Aguarana
Indians of Peru. Hum. Biol. 35, 470.

West, R. C. 1955. The Geography of The Pacific Lowlands of Colombia and Adjacent Areas. Project
NR 388-059, Washington: Office of Naval Research.

Wilson, E. A. 1950. The basal metabolic rates of South American Indians. In J. H. Steward (Ed.).
Handbook of South American Indians. Ibid. 6, 97.

45
