REVIEWS OF BOOKS

BIOLOGY

Deuchar, Elizabeth M. Biochemical Aspects of
Amphibian Development. London, 1966. Methuen
(Monographs on Biological Subjects). Pp. ix +
206. Price 30s.

IT HAS ALWAYS been a main objective in most
areas of experimental biology to formulate the
problems in terms which allow them to be
tackled, if not solved, by the methods of biochemistry and biophysics. Experimental embryology has followed the same path. It finds itself,
however, in a position of considerable difficulty.
It has been comparatively easy to translate
such biological processes as digestion, metabolism or nervous conduction into chemical or
physical terms. Even the processes of heredity—
if one is content to reduce them to the mere
transmission of “‘hereditary factors” from one
generation to the next—presented no insuperable
difficulties. Embryology, however, has at least
one foot in the field of morphology, or form in
entities of far more than molecular size. Most
of morphological biology, which includes comparative anatomy and much of evolution theory,
and which was for so long the central kernel of
the subject, is still quite out of reach of physicochemical methods. Embryology is on_ the
borderline. Some parts of it, such as the metabolism of embryos, present no great intellectual
difficulties, though still plenty of problems which
are not yet solved. Needham’s monumental
Chemical Embryology, published thirty-five years
ago, provides sufficient evidence that this aspect
of the matter is by no means unapproachable.
Coming right down to the present day, the new
methods, which go under the name of molecular
biology, for the investigation of the synthesis of
particular specified proteins and its genetic
control, have recently been widely applied to
embryonic systems, and we are clearly still in
an early phase of an “information explosion”
on these aspects. of developmental processes.
The difficulties arise when we try to face up to
the problems, not of the metabolism or synthesis
of defined molecules, but of the transformations

of highly complex cells or tissues. We find
ourselves facing not merely end-products, in
the form of differentiated cells, which are clearly
of enormous complexity, but also a basic
controlling system which is itself rather highly
complex, since the DNA of the genes exists
in higher organisms in the form of chromosomes
which contain at least protein, RNA, and quite
possibly lipid, and even carbohydrate, in addition
to the nucleic acid which we should like to
regard as ultimately the conductor of the whole
orchestra.

The amphibian embryo was the favourite
experimental material of embryologists for
several decades after they first tried to find how
to approach processes of cellular differentiation
and morphogenesis in physico-chemical terms.
It has also been the subject of extensive investigations on embryonic metabolism, and of some of
the recent molecular biological approaches.
Dr. Deuchar, in attempting a short monograph
of about 65,000 words on the biochemical
aspects of this type of embryo, has therefore
taken on an exceedingly large task. She has
acquitted herself very well. The material is
clearly organized, largely in terms of the
sequence of temporal stages. It will be useful to
the biochemical readers, to whom the book will
make most of its appeal, that there is a short
and very clear outline description of the morphological development of the embryo, which
provides a sound basis on which the later
descriptions can rely. It is fortunate again that
Deuchar has had the sense to begin her description of the embryo long before fertilization, 1.e.
with the formation of the ovum. In the very
short term of one life history the cytoplasm of
the egg is of little less importance than its
nucleus, a point which is too often forgotten by
enthusiastic geneticists. The coverage carries
on from oogenesis right up to the time of
metamorphosis.

The treatment throughout is well balanced in
emphasis on different questions, and the facts
and the interpretations put on them (and
Dr. Deuchar’s evaluation of these interpretations)

160
REVIEWS OF BOOKS

are clearly and succinctly expressed. Attention
is paid to items which appeared in the literature
only less than a year ago. Naturally in the space
available it was impossible to provide a complete
coverage of all published items. The limitations
of a short monograph have also made it necessary
for Dr. Deuchar to be a bit cavalier in her
treatment of some still highly controversial
subjects, such as the relationship of mitochondria
to the synthesis of yolk granules, or the
interpretation of work with artificial inducing
materials. There are a few places in which she
does not seem quite to have grasped the crucial
issues of the most recent work. For instance,
there is no reference in the index to ribosomes,
and her discussion of the nucleolarless mutant
of Xenopus gives what has now turned out to be
a rather misguided account of nucleolar function.
However, it would be almost impossible for any
book, even with the minimum time expended on
its printing and production, to be fully up to date
with the most recent advances. Dr. Deuchar’s
monograph will certainly provide an extremely
valuable introduction to the whole subject,
though the specialists will then wish to go to
fuller accounts of the detailed fields which she
sketches in.

Cc. H. WADDINGTON

GENETICS

Whitehouse, H. L. K. Towards an Understanding
of the Mechanism of Heredity. London, 1965.
Arnold. Pp. xii+372. Price 55s.

IN RECENT YEARS there has been a tendency in
some textbooks of genetics to allow modern
ideas concerning gene action to overshadow the
experimental evidence upon which basic ideas in
genetics are founded. Little consideration for
example, is usually given to the chiasmatype
theory or to the evidence which led to the
rejection of the idea that genes were discrete
entities arranged on the chromosome like beads
on a string. Dr. Whitehouse deals with these
matters and many others in his book, the purpose
of which has been to present the important
evidence upon which current beliefs concerning
the mechanism of heredity are based. The main
emphasis is on experimental evidence and little
space is devoted to speculation and conjecture.

The evidence presented covers the whole
field of genetics. Roughly half the book deals
with those classical experiments and observations
which led to the basic concepts in genetics, the
remainder is concerned with recent evidence
regarding the chemical nature of the gene, the
genetic code, and current ideas concerning gene
action. The evidence is well assembled and
presented in a readily accessible manner.

The book has been carefully written and great
trouble taken to avoid scientific inaccuracies
but, perhaps because of the complex nature of
the subject matter, it is not light reading.
Mention might have been made of allosteric
activation (as distinct from inhibition), and more
time spent on the effects of hormones in
regulating gene activity (apart from work on
insect larvae); the most convincing experimental
evidence in favour of the Lyon hypothesis is
not mentioned. However, apart from a few such
small points, the book forms a very extensive
coverage of the subject, and the author states
quite clearly in which fields our knowledge is
still far from complete, as for example the
organization of chromosomes particularly with
regard to their replication.

In summary, this is a scholarly presentation of
the evidence for current beliefs concerning the
mechanism of heredity. It fulfils an important
need and should prove particularly valuable to
University students and those concerned with
teaching genetics.

ALAN E. H. EMERY

Liith, Paul. Schépfungstag und’ Mensch der
Zukunft: Die Entwicklung der modernen Genetik.
Diisseldorf-KG6ln, 1965. Eugen Diederichs Verlag.
Pp. 350. Price DM 14.80.

THE AUTHOR, a German physician, describes
in his preface how he had to learn human
genetics as a medical student under Hitler and
how he later on set out to clarify and purge his
ideas. The result is a creditable book, which
describes not only the historical development of
genetics and evolutionary theory but also the
racialist and antisocial movements which were
and still are a product of the misunderstanding
and falsification of some of the results of those
sciences. The English reader may find the book

161
