REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS.

Clayton, I. M. The Shadow on the Universe, or the Physical Results
of the War. Simpkin, Marshall, Hamilton, Kent and Co., Ltd.;
price 2s. 6d. net; pp. 142.
WE can sympathise with Mr. Clayton in his anxiety concerning the
effects of the present War, but neither his methods nor his opinions are
likely to be of assistance in meeting a crisis. A writer who can give a
separate paragraph to such a remark as “ The universe has gone through
some perils, but never one of the significance of this” (p. 4), is not likely
to make a serious contribution to any subject; and we are not surprised
to find (Chapter II.) that his only notion of the dysgenic effects of war,
upon which his whole book is built, is the supposed inherited effect of
wounds and impaired constitutions, which there is every reason to suppose does not exist. The book is full of the wildest exaggerations, such
as (p. 14) the suggestion that the revolutionary wars reduced the stature
of the French nation “ by nearly a head”; or (p. 10), “A few more years
and the human race will be extinct.” On a par with his illusions as to
the cause of the racial injury which modern war inflicts, is his suggestion
of the remedy, which consists, we gather (p. 38), in psychic efforts on the
part of women to mould the character of their children during pregnancy.
Probably the real purpose of this hysterical book is found (on page 20)
in the statement “Conscription is the death sentence of the race”; and
(p. 99), “ Militarism fights for, and supports, the lowest instincts of life;
pacifism, the highest.” R. A. FISHER.

Rivers, W. H. R., M.D., F.R.S. Kinship and Social Organisation.

Constable and Co.; 1914; price 2s. 6d.; pp. 96.
THIS book comprises three lectures of exceptional interest and importance, in which Dr. Rivers seeks to show that the use of terms of kinship
in different tribes is intimately related to tribal customs and _ social
organisation, and can be made to throw light upon a tribe’s social history
even when its distinctive customs have disappeared. Historically, the
elucidation of the “classificatory ” system of reckoning kinship was the
work of Lewis Morgan, and he also saw its importance in revealing
forms of social organisation which have now ceased to exist. At the time
at which Morgan wrote, however, he was not aware of specific rights and
duties pertaining to the different classes of kinsmen, and this left the
way open for McLennan to disparage the importance of primitive kinship systems by regarding them merely as terms used in mutual salutation. Further, Professor Kroeber, of the University of California, absolutely rejects the view that the nature of the classificatory system has
been determined by social causes.

Dr. Rivers presents a carefully selected body of facts to show, first,
that the classes of relations denoted by kinship terms have especial duties
and functions assigned to them, and, next, that the special classification
used depends upon the marriage customs in vogue. For example, in
Fiji, the Southern New Hebrides, and the Island of Guadalcanar in the
Solomons, what is called the cross-cousin marriage is practised. That
is to say, it is habitual for a man to marry the daughter of his mother’s
brother, or of his father’s sister. In this case the relationships of fatherin-law, maternal uncle, and paternal aunt’s husband will be held by one
and the same individual, and there several relationships will be represented by one word. Thus in the Mhau district of Fiji the word vungo
is applied to the above three relationships, the word ~ganei for the three
corresponding female relatives. The term éavale is used by a man for
the son of a paternal uncle, or of a maternal aunt, as well as for the
wife’s brother and the sister’s husband. MNuzudavolo is used not only for
