America, Russia and Europe
SOME DEMOGRAPHIC FACTS

N JANUARY LAST, some interesting film

material was shown on B.B.C. Television

under the title of “The Titans’. It related
to historical events during the rise to power of
the U.S.A. and the U.S.S.R. over the past fifty
years. In such programmes it was hardly possible
to do justice to the element of population growth,
which played an important part in the increase of
national strength. Here are a few figures to
remedy the deficiency. Choosing dates for which
Russian statistics of one kind or another are
available, the increase in total population may
be seen from the following statement:

TOTAL POPULATION

YEAR U.S.A. U.S.S.R.
(millions)
1850 24 60
1939 131 171
1960 181 210

During the same period the population of
Western and Northern Europe grew from perhaps 130 million to 290 million.

The principal factors at work in these disparate developments have been:

i. Emigration from Europe to America; the
United States has received in all nearly 30
million immigrants.

ii. Enormous war losses in Russia after 1939,
offset in part by extensions of boundaries.

iii. Big falls in mortality and fertility in all the
areas under review, but occurring later in Russia
than elsewhere.

By 1970, it may be estimated, the total populations of the U.S.A. and U.S.S.R. will be of the
order of 210 and 250 million respectively. The
net growth rates of the two countries are quite
similar at present, and so the relative numbers of
their peoples are likely to remain in the ratio of
6:7 for a time. The approximate birth and
death rates in recent years have been, on average:

BIRTH DEATH NET GROWTH
RATE RATE RATE
U.S.A. 24 9 15
U.S.S.R. 25 8 17

oI

These rates are only crude ones, that is to say
they represent a simple division of total population size into the total numbers of births and
deaths, and so may not reflect a true measure of
mortality and fertility. The percentage agedistributions of the populations are, however,
somewhat different, as the following figures
show:

PERCENTAGE OF POPULATION

AGE-GROUP U.S.A. U.S.S.R.

0- 9 22 22
10-19 16 15
20-34 20 28
35-44 14 10
45-54 11 11
55-69 12 10
70 and over 5 4
Total .. 100 100

The effects of the greater Russian war losses
can be seen in the age-group 35-44, but in the
preceding group and in the generally younger
age-distribution the effects of the higher Russian
fertility, except in the most recent years, is
evident.

The net population growth rate in Western
and Northern Europe to-day is only about onehalf of that for “the titans”. Even so, the historical growth of European population over recent
decades has not been far inferior to that of
America and Russia. Why, then, have those two
countries outdistanced Europe as world powers
in the twentieth century? In part this must be
attributable to their much greater land area,
bringing more space in which to manoeuvre and
more natural resources to develop. Even more
important, however, is the fact that they are
each unified whereas Europe is deeply divided
by language and custom. The relevance of these
population data in connection with Great
Britain’s projected entry into the Common
Market is evident.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

In such a simplified analysis as this, itis hardly the impact of the Common Market project upon
possible to present any useful facts bearing upon __ their work, so also should eugenists be preparing
eugenic questions. Just as, however, professional for new fields of activity ensuing from closer
men and industrialists are now busy considering European links.

INDIAN JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

VOLUME XLI No. 160

EDITORIAL BOARD
KENNETH K. KURIHARA GYAN CHAND
J. K. MEHTA A. N. AGARWALA
OM PRAKASH (Managing Editor)

Special Number on Growth and National Income

Dynamic Growth Programming for the “Takeoff Path.” By KENNETH K. KuRIHARA

Analysis of Growth Rate and Capital Coefficient. By KEHAR SANGHA

Subjective Criteria in Income Distribution of the U.S.A. By RicHarp J. Warp

Income Distribution, Income Taxation and Economic Development in Ghana and Nigeria. By DAVID CARNEY
Towards Full Employment Equilibrium. By JoszEF Nowicki

On Growth Model Behind the Third Plan. By MABEsH CHAND

A Model for Programming of Autonomous Investment Fund and Growth of Employment. By V. R. PANCHAMUKHI
Schumpeter’s Theory of Growth. By V. S. MAHAIAN

The Ricardian Theory of Growth Reconsidered. By P. SUBRAMANYAM

International Trade and Economic Growth. By ViNop DUBEY

Foreign Exchange Difficulties and National Output in a Developing Economy. By NiLov MAJUMDAR

The Indian Journal of Economics was founded in 1916 by the late Professor H. Stanley Jevons. Volume 41 starts with issue
No. 160. Subscription per volume (four issues, including postage) is Rs 17/-, £1/6/- or $3.80.

This Special Number costs Rs 6.50, 10/- or $1.50 up to October 31st, 1962 and Rs 8/-, pats or $1.80 thereafter. Write to the
Managing Editor, Indian Journal of Economics, University of Allahabad, Allahabad-2 (india).

 
