NATURAL SELECTION IN MAN

And the Evolution of Human Intelligence
(The Galton Lecture, 1930.)

By PROFESSOR S$. J. HOLMES, Ph.D.

(Professor of Zoology, University of California.)

was advanced by Darwin as an ex
planation of evolutionary changes is
one of remarkable simplicity. It is based on
the almost obvious assumption that the members of a species differ in their hereditary
qualities and that those individuals which
are best adapted to their conditions of life
are more apt to survive and propagate than
their less fortunate rivals. All that is
required, therefore, to demonstrate the
actual operation of natural selection is to
prove that some variations are better able to
survive than others. As a result of several
investigations the operation of natural selection is shown to be not merely a plausible
possibility, but an actually demonstrated
fact. Reasonable difference of opinion,
therefore, is only possible as to the extent
to which natural selection is operative and
how far it affords an adequate explanation of
the course of organic evolution.

Now, differential survival rates depend
upon two quite distinct factors, both of
which may be included under natural selection in the broad sense in which this term
was employed by Darwin. ‘The first factor, and one which is the most commonly
stressed in discussions of the subject, is the
differential death rate, or what has sometimes been termed lethal selection. The
second is the differential rate of reproduction, or what Pearson has called reproductive selection. These two forms of selection,
or varieties of natural selection, differ in
that the first depends upon the preservation
of the individual, while the second is concerned primarily not with the individual
per se, but with its progeny. Fertile
organisms may be no more apt to be pre
‘HE theory of natural selection which

served than relatively sterile ones, but their
progeny may come to prevail simply because
there are more of them. Frequently high
fertility is an adjunct of general vigour and
other qualities which aid the individual in
the struggle for existence, but in many
cases, as notoriously in man, lethal selection commonly works in one direction, and
reproductive selection in another. The survival rate, or the net reproductive rate
arrived at by deducting deaths from births,
is a resultant of the action of these factors.
The interaction of these factors varies with
time and place. Now they co-operate towards the production of superior types, and
again they may work at cross purposes.
There is quite general agreement that in our
present civilization the differential birth rate
is favouring the more rapid production of
an inferior breed of humanity which lethal
selection is not succeeding in eliminating.
Although reproductive selection just at
present is perhaps the most potent factor
in modifying the heredity of man we should
not lose sight of the ever-active and discriminating operation of mortality. It is to
this aspect of our subject that I shall confine myself this evening, and I shall for the
time being employ the term natural selection in its narrower sense of a differential
death rate. | Most discussions of natural
selection in man, as in lower forms of life,
are concerned with the ability of this theory
to afford a theoretical explanation of evolutionary changes. There have been few
attempts to demonstrate its actual existence
or to determine the extent of its operation.
The most important of the earlier efforts to
make good this deficiency of our knowledge
are due directly or indirectly to Professor
8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Karl Pearson. It was shown statistically
that long life and good health run in families, and that they have a positive correlation with fertility. Hence the strains with
long life tend to increase more rapidly than
those with shorter life.

The problem of natural selection was
also attacked in another manner in the
attempt to show that a high death rate in
infancy leaves a stronger group of surviving children, as is indicated by a relatively
low death rate in the same group in later
years. In an elaborate statistical investigation Dr. Snow endeavoured to show on the
basis of data from Prussia and England and
Wales that when proper allowance is made
for various disturbing factors, the infant
mortality rate shows a negative correlation
with the death rate in childhood. The
mathematical labour involved, the statistical
pitfalls to be avoided, and the paucity of
good data available for treatment probably
explain why, with very few exceptions,
similar studies have not been made by the
methods employed by Pearson and Snow.
The result of these investigations on the
selective character of infant mortality
attracted widespread attention and elicited
much comment. Various objections were
raised against this work on grounds which
I shall not discuss, but granted that the
statistical methods employed are sound and
that it is established that there is a negative
correlation between the death rate of infancy
and that of later childhood in the same
cohort of individuals, does it necessarily
prove that selective elimination is the cause
of this relationship? The validity of the
reasoning is dependent upon the exclusion
of other factors which might cause the same
result.

MORTALITY AND IMMUNITY

As I have elsewhere* pointed out, a high
death rate in the first year may cause a low
death rate in a subsequent year not necessarily as a result of selection, but as a consequence of the fact that many causes of

* Studies in Evolution and Eugenics. New York,

1923.

infant mortality produce an immunity
among the survivors. Several of the common causes of early death such as measles,
scarlet fever, whooping cough, and
diphtheria, leave their survivors immunized
against a subsequent attack. In the case of
diphtheria, it has been shown that epidemics are followed by a larger crop of immunes as revealed by Schick tests, due not
only to recovered patients but also to individuals immunized by very mild and usually
unnoticed infections. Let us suppose that as
a result of an unusual epidemic of contagious
diseases there is a high death rate in the
first year of life. Let us suppose that
another epidemic comes along five years
later. The children who were spared and
immunized during the first epidemic will
suffer a relatively low death rate in their
fifth year, and we might thus obtain a
negative correlation between the mortality
of infancy and that of childhood, whether
the diseases concerned were selective or not.
It is unfortunate that the influence of immunity is able to bring about the same kind
of correlation as that due to differential
mortality, because it renders the demonstration of a differential death rate by the
methods employed by Pearson and Snow
an almost insuperable task.

SEX DIFFERENCES IN DEATH RATES

There is, I believe, strong presumptive
evidence of a differential death rate in early
life which is furnished by the distribution
of sex mortality. It is well known that
the death rate of young males is considerably higher than that of young females.
The ratio of male and female deaths in the
first year of life varies considerably with
time and place. Where the infant death
rate is high, the mortality of the two sexes
comes to be more nearly equal. Where it
is low, and in proportion as it is low, we
find a relatively high mortality of males.
It is a somewhat curious coincidence that
this relationship was pointed out independently and nearly at the same time by Dr.
F. Lenz, Dr. T. H. C. Stevenson, and in a
paper by Miss Goff and myself. The sex
NATURAL SELECTION

ratio at death, or the ratio of male deaths
.to 100 female deaths, varies from 104 in
Chili (1919) where the infant death rate is
304, to 135 in New Zealand (1922-3) where
the rate is 43. The conclusion drawn by
Miss Goff and the writer was that the male
by virtue of his peculiar complex of chromosomes is inherently the weaker sex.

There has been some discussion as to
whether the high mortality of young males
is due to recessive sex-linked genes, as it
demonstrably is in some cases, or, as suggested by Miss Goff and myself, to the
peculiarities of male organization—as is evidently the case with the high male death
rate from inguinal hernia, and doubtless
with the very high relative male mortality
from injuries at birth. But whether the
frailty of the male is to be attributed more
to sex-linked factors or to mere differences
in sex, it is evident that it is due to the
hereditary constitution of the male sex.
Since the reduction of infant mortality has
resulted in a relatively high male death
rate, it is a fairly good inference that this
reduced mortality is due largely to a diminution of deaths which are non-discriminatory or mildly discriminatory as to sex, and
therefore have relatively little association
with differences in vitality. All admit that
many infant deaths are due to causes that
are about as apt to kill a healthy baby as a
puny one. If such causes are so far as
possible removed, the death rate which remains becomes relatively more discriminating on the basis of vitality as it demonstrably is on the basis of sex.

If this be true, the sex ratio at death
might be used as a sort of rough index of
the selective influence of different causes of
mortality. This possibility led me to
undertake a compilation of the data on the
relative death rates of the two sexes from
various causes. ‘The first year of life was
chosen on account of the similarity of environmental influences for both sexes during this period and because extensive data
were available in our statistics on mortality.
The results of this study showed that the
sex incidence of death varies greatly with
different diseases, as had indeed long been

IN MAN 9

known in certain cases. In general, the
male ratio from defects of development, or
what might be called faults of organization,
is high. ‘This is illustrated in the ratios
for malformations of the heart (143.8), intestinal obstruction (162.8), and hernia
(371.2), as compared with a ratio of 128 for
all causes combined. Nervous diseases,
which in large part are due to internal factors, have also a high male ratio, 134.6.
Measles, diphtheria, scarlet fever, and enteritis show a relatively low male ratio.
The ratio for epidemic diseases in general,
excluding the anomalous case of whooping
cough, is 124.3. In striking contrast to the
preceding, the deaths due to accidental
causes show a male ratio only slightly
greater than that of the two sexes at birth.

The proneness of the male to die from
constitutional causes manifesting themselves in very early life and leading to more
frequent defects of organization, the fact
that in early infancy when the death rate
is highest the male ratio at death is also
highest, and the fact that the reduction in
infant mortality has taken place largely in
the later months of the year leaving
neo-natal mortality little affected, all go
to indicate a selective influence of mortality
associated with inherent differences in constitutional vigour and normality.

INHERITANCE OF VITALITY

Another indication of the selective character of mortality is yielded by the relation
between the death rates of parents and their
young children. It should be borne in mind
that the early death of one or both parents
might deprive a young child of proper care
and hence lead to an increased liability to
death. This objection cannot apply, however, to deaths at advanced ages, when all
the offspring are past the period of early
youth. If, in such cases, low infant and
child mortality is associated with long life of
parents, it is reasonable to infer that the
low death rates of parents and offspring are
both due to the inheritance of superior
vitality. This relation has been found by
Pearson in his study of pedigrees derived
IO

from the Society of Friends. The percentage of daughters who died under five years
of age was found to decrease with increased
longevity of both father and mother even in
advanced years. Also, the longevity of
daughters was found to increase as that of
their parents increased. Ploetz has found
that the percentage of children dying under
five years of age decreases as the parents
live to more advanced ages. In a study of
parental longevity and infant mortality in
two very different groups, the royal families
of Europe, and families recorded in American genealogies, I have found, in agreement
with Pearson and Ploetz, that where the
parents live into advanced age groups there
is a marked decrease in the mortality of
their children. There seems to be no
plausible explanation of all these results,
except by the hypothesis that long life in
parents is correlated with inherited vigour
in infancy.

ELIMINATION OF DEFECTS

If, for lack of adequate data, the statistical studies of natural selection have thus
far yielded rather meagre results, we have
an abundance of evidence of a differential
death rate furnished by our rapidly increasing knowledge.of human heredity. To the
extent that people die of causes of a hereditary character, to that extent natural
selection can be said to be in operation. I
shall give, mainly for the purpose of illustration, only a few cases of the selective
elimination of hereditary strains. Hzmophilia, popularly known as ‘ bleeding,’ is a
strongly hereditary taint, being transmitted usually as a recessive sex-linked
character. On account of the difficulty of
stopping hemorrhage, individuals who inherit this trait not infrequently bleed to
death. In fact, affected males usually do
not reach adult age. There are also several related defects of the blood system that
frequently prove fatal.

Gutmann reports a family of 38 persons,
15 of whom died of apoplexy and 5 others
suffered from heart disease. Hzematuria,
apparently a Mendelian dominant, although

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

not always completely so, often leads to
relatively early death. Among diseases
dependent on disorders of metabolism mention may be made of hereditary family
jaundice, goitre, and diabetes. C%dema,
which, like diabetes, commonly requires the
co-operation of an environmental factor,
shows a tendency to run in families. Crowder and Crowder give a family pedigree of
five generations of cedema of the glottis
affecting 20 individuals, 15 of whom met
their deaths from this cause. Death may
also be attributed to hereditary peculiarities
of form. Achondroplastic dwarfs experience great difficulty at childbirth, when a
Ceesarian operation is commonly necessary,
a fact indicating a strong tendency of
natural selection to eliminate such stocks.
If natural selection fails to eradicate
strains exhibiting club-foot, syndactylism,
and congenital dislocation of the hip, it is
because the afflicted individuals are shielded
by the helping hands of their fellows. Unquestionably mutual aid has greatly checked
the elimination of individuals having many
kinds of hereditary disorders. The -hereditary anomalies and defects of the eyes,
such as cataract, displaced lens, absence of
iris, and numerous others are seldom causes
of death in our modern, civilized society.
Neither is deafness. One can get along
with almost any kind of physical deformity
and have a reasonable expectation of marrying and attaining old age. It is not upon
such anomalies that natural selection is now
acting with any considerable degree of
vigour. It is rather upon more general and
obscure differences in constitution which
affect the resistance to disease and cause a
proneness to the degenerative maladies of
middle and later life. These differences of
constitution give rise to proclivities, or diatheses, to various diseases which are not
transmitted as clearly defined Mendelian
units, although they doubtless depend, like
other hereditary characters, on unit factors.
We have evident hereditary diatheses to
asthma, nephritis, rheumatism, heart
disease, and a host of nervous disorders
which tend to reduce vitality and shorten
life. There are hereditary differences in
NATURAL SELECTION

susceptibility to various germ diseases, including probably tuberculosis and pneumonia. ‘The problem of a hereditary predisposition to tuberculosis is one of unusual
difficulty, on account of familial contagion
and the development of immunity by minimal infections in early life; but it is not
without significance that hereditary differences in susceptibility to tuberculosis and
pneumonia have been demonstrated in animals through carefully controlled experimentation. The strongly hereditary diatheses to cancer which are demonstrable in
mice suggest that a similar diathesis may
occur in man. And there is a fair amount
of evidence from human pedigrees giving
independent support to the same conclusion.

SOME RACIAL FACTORS

When we compare the reactions of different races to disease, the evidence of hereditary racial variations in susceptibility is
often quite clear. Here there is a great need
for caution because differences in food, sanitation, habits of life, and especially in
degrees of slowly acquired direct immunization to various infections, afford many
opportunities for erroneous interpretations.
For these and other reasons the great bulk
of the literature on the racial incidence of
disease is quite inconclusive as to the real
influence of race.

In order possibly to throw some further
light on racial susceptibility to disease, I
have made a compilation of all of our available data on the mortality of Negroes and
whites from various causes in the United
States. In general the Negroes have a
much higher mortality than the whites,
and therefore the fact that there are some
diseases from which they suffer relatively
little affords all the more evidence of a true
racial immunity. As has long been recognized, Negroes have a remarkably low death
rate from scarlet fever, the mortality of the
whites being frequently over three times
that of the blacks. Probably for much the
same reason, the Negroes have a very low
death rate from erysipelas, since this
disease, like scarlet fever, is attributed to

IN MAN : II

a streptococcus invasion. The Negro is also
peculiarly resistant to diphtheria and to a
somewhat less extent to measles, and he has
a very low rate for diseases of the skin.

On the other hand, the high Negro mortality from tuberculosis and pneumonia
affords strong presumptive evidence of a
hereditary susceptibility to these infections.
We may explain a part of the Negro’s mortality from these diseases as a result of
unfavourable environment, but the fact that
our Negro recruits for the late war who
passed the same tests for physical fitness as
the whites when they were admitted to the
army, and were kept under similar conditions in camps, nevertheless showed a rate
for lobar pneumonia over three times as
high as the whites and a much higher rate
also for pulmonary tuberculosis and other
respiratory diseases, affords strong evidence
of a hereditary diathesis for pulmonary
diseases. In the inter-racial struggle going

.on between Negroes and whites in the

United States, the selective influence of
diseases is, I am convinced, destined to play
an important role. Although different
diseases affect the two races in quite different
ways, the influence of lethal selection is, on
the whole, quite strongly in favour of the
whites.

UNDIMINISHED LETHAL SELECTION

While the progress of medicine and
hygiene has reduced the action of patural
selection in relation to defects and diseases,
the contention that this evolutionary factor
has been practically eliminated is quite unjustified. In one respect natural selection
is probably acting with undiminished, if
not actually increased vigour in our present
civilization,. and that is on the basis of
native differences in intelligence. Among
the lower forms of mental defectives, which
are really pathological in origin, we find
a high death rate. Most low-grade idiots
die before adolescence. The high death
rates among the epileptic, the insane, and
other victims of grave nervous disorders
indicate that those with hereditary diatheses
to such maladies tend to be eliminated by
IZ

lethal selection. Among the kind of feebleminded that we commonly meet with in
such stocks as the Jukes and Kallikaks,
physical development is probably quite as
good as in the rank and file of intelligent
people. Nevertheless, the death rate of
such stocks is high. Vagabonds, paupers,
inebriates, prostitutes, and ne’er-do-wells
of all sorts are not, as a rule, good actuarial
risks.

SELECTION FOR INTELLIGENCE

The great mass of dull-minded human
beings who are incapable of acquiring more
than the mere rudiments of education and
are unable to succeed in occupations requiring skill or executive ability are forced into
the ranks of unskilled and poorly-paid
labour. They are compelled to live upon
relatively poor food and in _ insanitary
homes; and they suffer from inadequate
medical assistance when they are ill. Consequently their mortality is high. If we
study tables of occupational mortality the
broad general fact will become apparent
that the death rate, barring a number of
individual exceptions, tends to be high in
proportion as the occupation requires little
intelligence and skill. In our present industrial society, we find an occupational
stratification on the basis of levels of intelligence. The differences in occupational
mortality which appear so striking are
partly the direct effect of mental differences,
and partly an indirect effect resulting from
the varied environments into which different
mental levels tend to segregate. If we compare the death rates of general shopkeepers
or innkeepers with those of clergymen and
schoolmasters between the ages of twentyfive and thirty-five, as given in the census
report for 1911, we find that the second
group has a death rate about five times that
of the first. In the next decade, from
thirty-five to forty-five years, the death
rates of the shopkeepers and innkeepers are
about four times as high as those of the
clergymen and school teachers, but in the
more advanced age groups the mortality of
the shopkeepers and innkeepers is reduced

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

to about half of that of their rivals. That
these differences in occupational mortality
should be relatively larger in the early age
groups is of especial significance in relation
to natural selection, because the individuals
are in the early part of their reproductive
period. After the reproductive age relative
mortality rates have very little significance
for racial heredity.

But another fact of the highest importance in relation to selective mortality is
that the death rates of infants vary enormously in different occupational groups, and
that this mortality is distributed in much
the same way as that of their parents.
Tables of infant mortality according to the
occupation of the father were compiled for
England and Wales after the censuses of
191r and 1921. Occupations were graded
into a few major groups largely on the basis
of knowledge and skill. The first consists
mainly of the professional classes, the
second of semi-professionals, the third of
skilled artisans, the fifth of unskilled
labourers, while the fourth group is made
up chiefly of semi-skilled workers. In the
first group infant mortality is strikingly
low, 76.4; in the second somewhat higher,
106.4; in the third it is 112.7, and among
the unskilled workers 152.5. Although the
major occupational classes were not quite
the same in the 1921 census, the relation
between parental occupation and infant mortality showed much the same gradation as
in IQII.

THE EUGENIC SIGNIFICANCE

There is no question that the mortality
of some occupational groups is much higher
than in others, but the eugenic significance
of this fact depends entirely upon the extent
to which our occupational groups are characterized by differences in hereditary endowments. Inasmuch as membership of the
first group requires rather more than usual
mental ability, and since the mentally incapable tend to gravitate into more poorly
paid employments, we should expect, a
priori, to find a certain degree of correspondence between occupational level and inNATURAL SELECTION

telligence level. Thanks to several studies
on this subject we have now a considerable
body of data which confirms this conclusion.
The very extensive series of mental tests
given to American Army recruits during
the Great War reveal a marked average
reduction in the intelligence score as we
pass from occupations such as engineering
down to unskilled labour. A larger number
of researches have been carried out upon the
intelligence of children as related to parental occupation. In general the scores show
much the same gradation as those of the
occupations followed by the parents. Duff
and Thompson, in a survey of the intelligence of 15,419 schoolchildren in Northumberland in relation to the occupations of
their parents, find a gradation from an in
telligence quotient of 112.2 for children of:

parents in the professional class down to an
intelligence quotient of 96 for the children
of parents following low-grade and unskilled
occupations. Jones and Carr-Saunders
report much the same relation between
parental occupation and the intelligence of
orphan children. In a study of 2,782 children in Wisconsin it was found that there
was a range of scores from 115 for children
of the professional class, to 89 for those of
unskilled labourers, and the intelligence
quotients showed a high correlation (0.74 to
0.79) with the intelligence quotients of the
fathers’ occupations as indicated by the army
tests.

It would be possible to adduce the results
of several other researches in this field, but
as they show a substantial agreement, these
illustrations must suffice. Intelligence quotients, whatever they may mean, are certainly characteristic of various occupational
groups. If we study the proportion in
which these groups furnish children who
become distinguished for intellectual
achievement, as indicated by taking impartially chosen lists of great men, we find a
similar gradation. One of the most significant studies bearing on our problem is
Terman’s inquiry into the parentage of
1,000 very exceptional children in the California schools. Only those children were
chosen whose intelligence quotient was over

IN MAN 13

140, or above the highest one-half per cent.
of the school population. The financial
status of the parents of these children was
not above that of the parents of children
of ordinary intelligence who served as a
control group. The home environment of
the gifted children was probably a little
more favourable than that of the rank and
file of students, but there was little in their
homes and nothing in their school experience which would account for the outstanding ability of these children. Their
ability was manifested in pre-school years
and persisted in a later period when
a follow-up study was carried out, thus behaving very much like a characteristic due
to internal factors and probably a result of
heredity. This conclusion is strengthened
by a study of these children’s fathers who
were found,, as a rule, to follow occupations
requiring a superior degree of intelligence.
The largest proportion of them belonged
to the professional classes, or what would
correspond with Group I of the RegistrarGeneral’s classification. "Those who fit into
Group II contributed the next largest proportion. A smaller number came from
the homes of skilled artisans, while unskilled labour contributed the lowest proportion of all, namely o.2 per cent.

Of course, it may be objected that all this
discussion of occupation mortality and intelligence is futile because the gradation
of intelligence found in these occupations
simply reflects the influence of environment
and opportunity. But this objection encounters a serious difficulty in the fact,
which is becoming more clearly established
as the results of investigation accumulate,
that the intelligence quotient is a very constant attribute of human beings, and when
fairly estimated is normally capable of little
modification. One cannot make good ability
out of inborn dullness. Families show
differences in ability far greater than those
which training or cultural advantages are
capable of producing. In the light of what
is known of the distribution of test scores
in occupational groups, one can only conclude that human beings are segregated to a
large extent on the basis of inherited levels
14

of intelligence. Of course, all grades of
ability may be found even in the lowest
occupations, and sometimes very mediocre
ability may get into the higher ones. We
are dealing with conditions which apply to
groups and to which there are many individual exceptions.

If the results of psychological tests are of
any value whatever in gauging relative
differences in ability, we are forced to conclude that the distribution of mortality in
occupational groups affords at least a rough
index of the action of natural selection in
eliminating inferior intelligence. Inasmuch as the members of any occupational
group vary greatly in mental qualities,
there are probably marked variations in
mortality, correlated with intelligence levels
within each group. Dr. H. T. Ashby (Infant Mortality, p. 42), in speaking of investigations carried on in New York,
remarks :

‘‘ The unanimous opinion of the doctors who made the observations, was that
neither the surroundings of the infant,
nor the exact character-of the milk obtained, were as important factors in the
health of the infant as the intelligent care
of the mother.’’ And the same writer
further states that, ‘‘ Competent and
good mothers are to be found living side
by side in the same street with ignorant
and careless ones. The husbands of each
are earning very likely the same wages,
yet the home of the one will be probably
always clean, the children will also be
clean and attend school regularly, while
next door everything is dirt and squalor,
and only two or three out of probably a
large family have been _ successfully
reared. The essential difference will be
the amount of intelligence and care bestowed upon infant life.’’*

It is unfortunate that in studying our problem we are unable to get away from the discussion of social classes. If we could investigate directly the relation between mor
* See also Poverty, Nutrition, and Growth, a
Report of the Medical Research Council, 1927.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

tality rates and levels of intelligence, quite
regardless of social or occupational groups,
it would be a much more satisfactory procedure. The eugenist has no concern with
social groups per se. The data on intelligence quotients in occupational classes afford
him about the only available material on
an extensive scale bearing upon the relation
between intelligence and selective elimination. If he would gain an insight into the
workings of natural selection he must perforce use this material for what it is worth.

The complex economic system under
which we live exposes people to very
diverse conditions, which make very great
differences in their average expectations of
life. In a mainly pastoral or agricultural
period of development, when people followed
very similar pursuits and lived in much the
same way, the incidence of mortality was
doubtless much more uniform. Under such
circumstances a high-grade moron with
sufficient intelligence to follow the ordinary
pursuits of his tribe would probably have
nearly as good a chance as his neighbour,
who might be a mute, inglorious Milton.
The present economic order is much more
deadly to people with dull minds. It is not
improbable that at present the intelligence
quotient is on an average the most important single factor in survival. In proportion as we have developed a highly industrialized civilization, the main incidence of
selection has been shifted from physical
characteristics to mental traits. To a
degree unparalleled in previous ages expectation of long life has come to depend
upon better endowments of brains. The
ministrations of natural selection therefore,
in the restricted sense in which I have been
employing the term, are working steadily
to promote the evolution of intelligence.

THE DIFFERENTIAL BIRTH RATE

From the standpoint of eugenics, this is
a highly satisfactory condition and one upon which we might be inclined to congratulate ourselves, were it not for the fact that

 

+ See the Report of the Mental Deficiency Committee. Part IV, page 95.
NATURAL SELECTION

the effect of natural selection is probably
more than counteracted by the dysgenic influence of: the differential birth rate. After
all, as was pointed out before, it is the net
survival rate, or the surplus of births over
deaths, that determines the direction of
evolution. But we may at least hope that
the future will bring a substantial reduction
of the evils of differential fecundity. There
is indeed some evidence that in certain large
urban communities much progress toward
this goal has already been made. If it is
permissible for a eugenist to indulge now
and then in a bit of optimism, he might
picture an era, possibly far off, to be sure,
when the fertility of subnormal humanity
will be reduced below that of the bearers of
superior heredity. When this happy condition arrives, the race will find itself once
more on the highway toward real biological
improvement. Unless the present operation
of the differential death rate comes to be
very profoundly modified, natural selection
would then be working toward the promotion of eugenic progress. We cannot, of
course, expect that natural selection will
always continue to act as strongly as at present in the elimination of inferior types of
mental heredity. The reduction of the
death rate will probably occur in the future
by saving more lives, especially in infancy, among the lower occupational
groups, but as our present industrial civilization may be regarded for all practical
purposes as a permanent condition, it will
be a very long time before the differential
death rate on the basis of levels of intelligence will be reduced to a factor of minor
importance.

THE RESEARCH NEEDED

Whatever advances our race may make in
the promotion of eugenic improvement, it
will never be able to eliminate the relatively
high death rate of inferior hereditary types.
The reduction of mortality has probably
occurred largely through the removal of
non-selective, or mildly selective, causes of
death, so that we have really succeeded in
reducing the action of natural selection

IN MAN 15

much less than is commonly imagined.
Strive as we may to save our weaker fellow
creatures from the consequences of their
many and often obscure hereditary defects,
we shall never have the knowledge, if we
had the power, to substitute completely
other factors for the operation of natural
selection. The grim reaper will always aid
us, as he has done in countless past ages,
by his kindly ministrations. We need to
have a better knowledge of his ways, for
they are often mysterious, but it is to be
hoped not past all finding out. What is
especially needed is an abundance of full
and accurate family records in different
hereditary classes, with precise information
as to the cause of death in each member.
The essential thing to know is how people
who die early differ from those who die late.
And this knowledge should cover not only
physical conditions, but also mental capacity. We should have therefore more accurate diagnosis of the causes of death and
more adequate measures of real intelligence.

The principal reason why our knowledge
of natural selection has made so little progress is because we really know so little
about ourselves. I cannot see how our insight into the problem can be very greatly
enhanced until we accumulate and record
more facts about individual persons and the
reasons why they die. This knowledge
may be difficult to obtain and may come
slowly, but it is essential for the real scientific treatment of our problem.

CONCLUSION |

In the present lecture, I have attempted
to bring together some scraps of information which have been gathered upon our
topic and to point out some features of selective elimination which have not received so
much attention. But I can report only
very modest achievements in this field.
We have scarcely progressed beyond the
stage of learning what kinds of facts we
need to know in order to find out how natural selection works. We know that it still
works towards the elimination of undesir16

able types of humanity and that its workings have been greatly modified by social
progress. In some respects it has doubtless
been reduced in effectiveness ; but I am convinced, even though no one else agrees
with me, that in other ways it may be

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

working more vigorously than ever. A factor of great biological importance it will
always remain, do what we may, and however bungling our efforts at eugenic reform
may prove to be, it will always aid in the
development of a better adjusted race.

\ Oy”

THE ETHICS OF STERILIZATION

Two Letters Provoked by Recent Opinions

From the Reverend Father M’Nabb, 0.P.

IR,—As you do me the honour to reply
to my quotation from St. Thomas

Aquinas by giving another quotation
from St. Thomas, perhaps you would do me
the favour to add a further word to the
discussion.

1. My quotation was eminently relevant,
** No one should unjustly hurt another in
order to further the common good.’’* Although this principle was appealed to in the
matter of injustice through false accusation,
yet it was a broad principle of justice which
would be a fortiori applicable to the matter
of ‘ sterilization.’

2. I must express my gratitude that you
have printed verbatim the whole article of
St. Thomas. Discussion tends to be more
prolonged than profitable when the authorities are merely referred to or are given
in fragments. Moreover, it is all to the
good that the most fundamental matter of
social justice should be discussed, as
Aquinas always discusses such matters, in
the calm atmosphere of ethical principles.
But though a scholarly discussion on steri
* Summa Theologica, Part II, Ilae, Q. lviii, Art. 3.
In the same spirit St. Thomas, the Doctor Veritatis
(Doctor of Truth), says: ‘‘ It is not lawful to tell a
lie in order to deliver another from any danger whatever”? [Ibid., Q.110. Art. 3].

lization by an appeal to ethical principles
would be valuable, I feel I have no right to
ask your hospitality for such a favour. Yet
I should be glad to point out that your
appeal to St. Thomas in support of sterilization is not valid.

3. You will notice that St. Thomas does
not once mention the word ‘“ sterilization,’’
but the word ‘‘ mutilation.’’? The reason for
his silence is that there is a wide difference
between the two words. St. Thomas takes
mutilation to mean the ‘‘ removal of a member of the human body.’ Sterilization is
the ‘‘ removal of a procreative member or
element of the human in order to prevent
procreatton.’’

St. Thomas wrote the article in order to
prove what some denied, that it was lawful
to save life by cutting off a limb. The very
first objection is directed against those—
Christian scientists before our day !—who
argued that all mutilation or, as we should
say, all amputation was against nature and
therefore against morality.

But it is quite clear that, though amputation is not in itself morally evil, amputation done under certain circumstances,
and especially under the circumstance
of aim or purpose, may be morally evil.
Thus amputation against the will of the amputated would be morally evil. Or again,
if a Catholic surgeon removed the editor’s
eyes in order to damage the EuGENIcS

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXII, No. 1.
