A. H. HALSEY

Department of Social and Administrative Studies, Oxford
Sociology, Biology and Population

Control

THERE IS NO more fascinating strand in the intellectual history of the nineteenth and
twentieth centuries than that of the relation between the biological and social sciences.
Sir Francis Galton’s life (1822-1911) spans the greater part of this eventful and uneasy
period of scientific development. He was born at a time when no discussion of social
policy could avoid an explicit stand on the Malthusian issue: he lived through the remarkable integration of biological and social science provided by Spencer’s and Darwin’s
evolutionary theories. He was himself perhaps the greatest single contributor to the advance
of precise anthropometric measurement and statistical method in social biology: the
credit for correlational calculus belongs to him; the exact study of identical twins began
with him; and, to refer to a topical and practical example, he pioneered the development
of composite photographs and fingerprinting for personal identification. Our methodological debt to him is immense.

Ideological Divisions

But if I think of him also as the scourge of the criminal classes and the champion
of the privileged, I point, however rudely, to the ideological forces which, expressed
intellectually as hereditarianism and politically as conservatism, had largely disintegrated
biological and social science into relations of suspicion and hostility at the time of his
death. Herbert Spencer had died eight years earlier (1903) and it was at this time that
Durkheim was writing and teaching brilliantly at the Sorbonne to demolish psychological
reductionism and to establish the autonomy of sociological explanation. There can be
no serious argument now that Galton greatly underestimated the importance of social
environment in the formation of physical and mental character and of the utility for many
intellectual problems of analysing human social systems as if they were independent of
man’s genetic endowment. |

It may be that the hostility of sociologists to biological theories of society was
intrinsically necessary to the establishment of sociology as a discipline in the following
half-century. That sociology did develop autonomy in both its subject-matter and its
academic organization in this period is a commonplace of modern intellectual history.
But what is perhaps more remarkable and less remarked is that this intellectual development was so much a by-product of ideological reaction. Whether or not this is so, the
struggles between nations, classes and races which have so dominated this period could
scarcely have been expected to have left no mark on intellectual developments. They were
in fact just as influential, if less dramatically so, in the shaping of research work in the
biological and social sciences as in physics.

The question now, and the theme of this lecture, is whether, and if so on what terms,
the intellectual alliance of the mid-nineteenth century can be re-established. I am reminded
here of Bernard Shaw’s story of the old lady, a very devout Methodist, who in the 1870s
moved from Colchester to a house in the neighbourhood of the City Road in London.

* The Galton Lecture, delivered in London on 25th April 1967.
155
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

There, mistaking the Hall of Science for a chapel she sat at the foot of Charles Bradlaugh
for many years, entranced by his eloquence, without questioning his orthodoxy or moulting
a feather of her faith.

Sociology has been no old lady from Colchester. But at all events for me the question
has a special excitement. I was brought up in impeccably subversive circumstances in a
non-Galtonian family, in the wartime RAF and at the London School of Economics
immediately after the war. The part of that institution which lies to the eastern side of
Houghton Street offered an intellectual home to the intensely held moral conviction as
well as the political optimism of those who sought equality and the protection of the
weak. Sociology for that generation was almost exclusively an egalitarian intellectual
movement. Darwin was known to us less as a great scientist than as the man who in The
Descent of Man had written:

We civilised men . . . do our utmost to check the process of elimination; we build
asylums for the imbecile, the maimed and the sick; we institute poor laws; and our
medical men exert their utmost skill to save the life of everyone to the last moment.
There is reason to believe that vaccination has preserved thousands, who from a
weak constitution would formerly have succumbed to smallpox. Thus the weak
members of civilized societies propagate their kind. No one who has attended to the
breeding of domestic animals will doubt that this must be highly injurious to the
race of man. It is surprising how soon a want of care, or care wrongly directed, leads
to the degeneration of a domestic race; but excepting in the case of man himself,
hardly anyone is so ignorant as to allow his worst animals to breed.

And Herbert Spencer, far from being recognized as the single most important English
sociologist, was in our consciousness the source of social Darwinism and the man who
invited us to believe that:

It seems hard that widows and orphans should be left to struggle for life or death.
Nevertheless, when regarded not separately but in connection with the interests of
universal humanity, these harsh fatalities are soon to be full of beneficence—the
same beneficence which brings to early graves the children of diseased parents, and
singles out the intemperate and the debilitated as the victims of an epidemic.!!

In the direction of social biology we were inclined to believe that Lancelot Hogben was
the only safe author.

This personally inauspicious background would not merit remark were it not for
the larger circumstances of history and academic organization which had cut off productive exchanges between sociology and biology in the previous half-century. In a paper
presented at a conference of biological and social scientists in New York last November the
American sociologist Professor Marvin Bressler summed up the consequences by saying that
“sociology now has virtually no commerce with biological theories of human behaviour”’.3
He then went on to analyse this state of affairs and to suggest remedies. I propose to do
the same by reference to his discussion. Intriguing as it would be, we need not concern
ourselves with the history of the costly divorce proceedings which so quickly followed the
brilliant marriage between Spencerian “ superorganic ” and Darwinian organic evolution.
We can accept the melancholy fact as Professor Bressler describes it. It may be that, like
Mark Twain’s death, the story of separation has been exaggerated. But no matter: our
task is to establish new and durable relationships.

We can, I think, be encouraged by conferences like the one to which I have referred
or to the two symposia recently organized by the Eugenics Society because they suggest,
and even demonstrate, the possibility of a unified science of social behaviour from the
convergence of genetics, psychology, ethology and sociology. Historians of science might

156
SOCIOLOGY, BIOLOGY AND POPULATION CONTROL

be inclined to scorn our present enthusiasms. They could remind us that great figures
of the past like Freud in psychology or Darwin in biology or (as Professor Bressler pointed
out in his paper) Auguste Comte in sociology, took it for granted that science is a unity.
They might be inclined to add that, having abandoned the nineteenth century principle of
evolution as applied to society in its Spencerian form, our chances of establishing universal
bio-social laws are more remote now than ever before.

Certainly we have become more sophisticated. We recognize that there is a long road
with many pitfalls between the study of geotactic fruit flies and that of the lumpen proletariat,* or from the phenomenon of population control by grouse on the Scottish moors
to an explanation of reduced fertility among some of their predators such as the English
upper middle classes in the 1870s.¢ Nevertheless, our awareness either of these vast distances
or of the oversimplifications of earlier attempts to chart them need not prevent us from
recognizing that some intellectual pathways already exist, that some scientific linking
principles are known and, above all, that appropriate methods of study have been developed
which justify the hope of secure, if complicated, interconnection between fields of inquiry
which too often exist in isolation.

Professor Bressler offers us sufficient reasons for the present state of affairs. They are
of three kinds: organizational, scientific and ideological. The principal organizational
reason is that academic specialization creates vested interests and therefore “trained
incapacity” and intellectual narrowness. The resulting barriers between scholars have been
justified and reinforced by the main scientific reason which is that reductionism in general
and instinct theory in particular have been shown to be intellectually unsound. And,
finally, the organizational and scientific reasons have been powerfully supported by ideo-,
logical rejection of social Darwinism and politically reactionary doctrines which have
been associated with “the biological approach” to the study of man.

There is, of course, nothing logically necessary about the ideological division—
nothing that is inherent in science which compels us to adopt conservative or radical
political views. We can say, with Professor Bressler, that science is politically and socially
neutral. But ideas and ideology are hard to separate in the real world and we typically
have to ask, as we did of Sweden or Spain in the war, ‘‘on which side is she neutral?”
Neutrality as such is perhaps not our fundamental problem. Certainly it would be difficult
to fault Professor Bressler’s detached and humane demonstration of the absence of intrinsic
threat to such social values as freedom and equality in biological theories applied to
society. The difficulties stem rather from the passions which guide problem selection in
the human sciences. There is no escape from the dilemma that passion is at once both a
powerful motive towards as well as a potential corrupter of scientific work. The dilemma
is necessary. Our only protection is in the preservation of the institutions of free scientific
inquiry. |

The Autonomy of Sociology

Professor Bressler is eloquent and persuasive in his review of some of the problems
on which productive collaboration is possible between sociologists and their colleagues
in genetics, biology and ethology. I do not wish to detract from his justifiable enthusiasm
which in any case I share. Nevertheless, we must see to it that our energies are not wasted
in swinging a pendulum. Thus I would stress the validity, especially hard won in sociology,

* Cf. Professor T. Dobzhansky’s paper in the proceedings of the New York Conference and his article
with Boris Spassky ‘‘Effects of Selection and migration on geotactic and phototactic behaviour of drosophila”’, Journal of the Royal Society. In the press.

See Professor V. C. Wynne-Edwards’s paper in the proceedings of the New York Conference 14
and J. A. Banks, Prosperity and Parenthood, Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1953.

157
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of disciplinary autonomy. There are many far from trivial problems in the social sciences
to which the importation of genetic ideas is either unnecessary or even positively misleading. In the case of Ardrey’s prediction of the necessary failure of American armed
forces in Vietnam by deduction from the territorial imperative the absurdity is obvious.!
(On the same reasoning the European conquest of the continent of America was impossible
and the United States does not exist.) Professor Bressler is tempted into the quip that
“insistence on disciplinary integrity and the intense hostility to any form of reductionism
may be the academic version of the territorial imperative’. May be: analogies can illuminate.
But I think we must take more seriously his reminder of ‘‘ Skinner’s caveat against assuming
that similar patterns of social organization [e.g. pecking orders in the barn yard and orders
of precedence in mediaeval Europe] in man and animals arise from similar contingencies’.

More telling still are the examples of sociological explanation of properties of populations which can also perfectly properly be defined genetically. Thus in recent years we have
advanced our understanding of the quality of human populations by temporarily jettisoning
the genetic concept of a “‘pool of ability’’ and looking at ability as if it were entirely a product
of such social forces as economic growth and the expansion of educational provision.
This kind of academic autonomy sets limits to the range of soluble problems that can be
tackled within the discipline but within that range the use of extraneous (in this case
genetic) ideas actually impeded understanding. Nor is it certain that disciplinary autonomy
can be only a temporary expedient. I would guess that, for example, the theory of conscious, rational and organized behaviour can only be constructed with models of the
cost/benefit type used in economics and not from genetic models. In short there will remain,
however successfully we collaborate, many human phenomena which we must approach
through Professor Bressler’s maxim that “the most parsimonious study of mankind is man”’.

These reservations are above all necessary so that we may insist on the advances
which are open to us through collaboration across the disciplines. The study of social
and genetic determinants of intelligence is an outstanding example of exciting possibilities
here, and I shall return briefly to it. I think that there is good ground for hope that, with
the extension of work in population genetics and the development of more refined models
of social stratification and social mobility by sociologists, we may go a long way towards a
viable theory of the socio-genetics of human ability.

Darwinian Population Theory and Sociological Factors

A no less instructive example of all three aspects of the unsatisfactory history of
relations between biology and the social sciences—scientific, organizational and ideological
—is the study of population size and population control. This I want to look at in more
detail. The general theory of population size, as is well known, was formulated as sociology
by Malthus at the turn of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries * and migrated into
biology by chance.t But the point I want to bring out here is that the migration was
imperfect in the sense that a fundamental sociological element of it was left out.

* Eversley, D. 1959. Social Theories of Fertility and the Malthusian Debate.® I do not want to suggest
here that Malthus’s ideas were sui generis. The attribution of theories to individuals is usually a convenient
but distorting device of group memory. David Eversley has shown in his magnificant history of social
theories of fertility that Malthus both had significant forerunners and, if carefully read, can be seen to have
put forward the major anti-Malthusian as well as the Malthusian theories in his writings as a whole.

+ ‘In October, 1838, that is, fifteen months after I had begun my systematic inquiry, I happened to
read for amusement Malthus on Population, and being well prepared to appreciate the struggle for existence
which everywhere goes on, from long continued observation of the habits of animals and plants, it at once
struck me that under these circumstances favourable variations would tend to be preserved and unfavourable
ones to be destroyed. The result would be the formation of new species. Here, then, I had at last got a
eer by which to work.” (Francis Darwin, The Life and Letters of Charles Darwin, New York, Appleton,

158
SOCIOLOGY, BIOLOGY AND POPULATION CONTROL

Darwin took over Malthus’s notion that potential geometric progression of numbers
was a consequence of the fecundity of species. In Chapter 3 of The Origin of Species, he
wrote, “In looking at Nature, it is most necessary ... never to forget that every single
organic being may be said to be striving to the utmost to increase in numbers”. He was
unsure as to the checks which restrained geometric progression in the real world but in
putting forward four main categories of check he included only Malthus’s “positive” or
ecological limiting forces and not his “preventative” or sociological checks. In other
words disaster, famine and disease are there as,

first, the amount of food, which sets an extreme limit to species increase;
second, predation by other animals;

third, adverse climate; and

fourth, communicable disease;

but not the “‘preventative” controls which, despite the moralistic terminology of vice and
virtue in which Malthus cast them (and which even to-day lead us into confusion as to
what the Pope really means) are the basis of modern theories of the demography of human
populations.

These theories are sociological rather than ecological or biological in emphasis. By
sociological I mean to refer to social interactions within a society—that is to systems of
mating rather than random mating, systems of communication, convention, prestige,
co-operative labour, etc. which are shared by the members of a group. By ecological I
mean to refer to external factors in the environment such as climate or the existence of
other species which bear upon the form of society. In this sense Malthus’s positive checks
are ecological and his preventative checks are sociological.

At first glance the student might be tempted to regard Darwin’s omission as constructive, if only on the grounds that, because man is uniquely equipped with rationality
and forethought, the idea of planned fertility is an irrelevant conception to apply to other
species. The premise of our student would be more or less correct but the inference is
seriously misleading. Thus, Professor Wynne-Edwards has pointed out in a forthcoming
paper 14 that biologists are now “inthe anomalous position of being committed to Darwin’s
concept that organisms are always striving to increase their numbers and all that follows
from this, and at the same time are finding in actual fact that many animals have efficient
adaptations for holding their populations down. Some of these populations are limited
to a quite low ceiling density, and it can be shown that they are rarely, if ever, exposed to
Darwin’s checks at all’’.

All species, including man, are subject to the ultimate check of limited food supply
but the proximate or immediate causes of population limitation are normally to be found
in sociological rather than biological factors over a very wide range of species.

This is clear enough for human populations. The rate of population growth in
industrial countries during the last hundred years falls well within the limits of both
fecundity and food supply. Voluntary limitation of fertility is the operative factor. Thus
it has been demonstrated by Ansley Coale 7 that if immortality were added to the birthright of every American citizen, this would have less effect on the long run population
size of that country than a mere 20 per cent increase in fertility. Indeed the social and
social-psychological factors operate within alarmingly narrow limits in that if married
couples in the United States were now to have completed families of 2:5 children on the
average then the population would become stable. But if these couples have one more
child each and the figure becomes 3-5 then the population would double in forty years.
Either of these outcomes is possible. Both patterns exist in identifiable sub-groups of the

159
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

American population.13 Fecundity, and whether it has changed during the period of
industrialization, is largely irrelevant. Similarly with food supply. Both total population
and GNP per capita have risen in the industrial world over the same period: in at least
half a dozen countries the rate of increase has been about 20 per cent per decade for two
or three generations. Extrapolation on past American experience of fertility and production
produces the result that the average American two centuries from now will be thirtyeight times better off.10

Social Control of Population Size in Non-Human Societies

But what is less widely appreciated is that sociological factors are also usually, as
Wynne-Edwards insists, the proximate causes of population control in animals. Let me
retail one of his own examples:

The real state of the balance between supply and demand, when one is dealing
with living food resources, is usually hidden, and quite different from what one might
expect. This is clearly illustrated in the case of the beaver. In an hour or less an adult
beaver can cut down an aspen tree that will provide bark and twigs to feed a family,
perhaps for several days. The tree has possibly taken 20 years to attain a productive
and economical size for consumption; and thus to get the maximum food yield from
their habitat beavers ought not to cut down more than one stem in 7,000 on an average
day, if they are to provide for a 20 year rotation. At this rate their food must always
appear to exist in limitless superabundance, even though they are actually consuming
the entire annual increment of the poplar forest and there is nothing to spare.14¢

It is of the greatest importance in interpreting this insistence on the relevance of a
sociological approach to non-human as well as to human societies that we do not fall
into the sematic confusion which equates the words social and environmental. We must
begin by remembering, as Professor Thoday put it in the first Eugenics Society symposium
that “no characteristic is largely acquired . . . every characteristic (apart from the breeding
potential of an individual) is entirely acquired”. But at the same time it is also true that
“every characteristic is both genetic and environmental in origin’’.12 We must, secondly,
recognize that a Darwinian evolutionary explanation which invokes genetic factors interacting with environmental forces other than the social system in general or collective
planning in particular, may be adequate for its purpose. A good contemporary example is
that of the rapid symbiotic evolution of the myxomatosis virus and the rabbit.4 The South
American myxo virus was introduced into Northern Victoria in 1950. All but 1 per cent
of the rabbits that were bitten by the mosquitoes which carry the virus died within ten days
and the immunity of the survivors was not genetically inherited. The survival prospects for
rabbits were obviously catastrophic. But this also set no less serious problems for the
myxo virus. Once dead the rabbit carcass rots and the virus with it, or else it is eaten by
the insusceptible fox or eagle. For the survival of the virus there had to evolve a higher
proportion of resistant rabbits so that infection could be securely passed on to other
rabbits. Ten years later the adjustment had emerged. Rabbits had become resistant in
20 per cent of cases and the virus was less virulent than its original form. Both organisms
had evolved through random errors and accidents or mutations in the DNA that controlled
their inheritance, and natural selection had reduced or eliminated genes inimical to survival
for the two species in their particular environmental circumstances. Genetic processes in
interaction with environment of this kind and therefore evolution must be presumed to
be going on though usually less dramatically in all forms of life including man.

But third, which is the present point of emphasis, sociological factors have to be

160
SOCIOLOGY, BIOLOGY AND POPULATION CONTROL

recognized as by no means confined to human populations. Ethological studies of animals
since Darwin have demonstrated this repeatedly without their consequence for the stracture
of Darwinian theory being explicitly challenged. This is the main burden of Wynne-Edwards’s
thesis. He expressed it in the proposition that “‘conventional competition could be the
basic cause of social evolution” or alternatively that “promoting competition under conventional rules for conventional rewards appears to be the central biological function of
society.”” *

Conventional rules governing competition are well known to ethologists: for example,
aggressive territorial behaviour, peck orders and the like, establish relations of inclusion
and exclusion, dominance and submission without typically involving killing within a
species. Wynne-Edwards’s most recently documented example is taken from his studies
of the Scottish red grouse (Lagopus lagopus scoticus). The main food supply is heather
(Calluna vulgaris) which also gives cover to these large, noisy and relatively slow-moving
birds. Food is the ultimate limiting factor on population density which is correlated with
the amount of heather cover and its nutrient quality. However, within the food supply
limit and the effects of predation through grouse shooting, there is a well defined apparatus
of social control which determines the actual population density. It works as follows.
Direct competition takes place between male grouse for territories or living spaces on the
moor. Grouse society is thus divided into property owners and a reserve army of outcasts
with only the former having adequate access to food, cover and fertility.

The territorial system operates for ten or eleven months of the year with a crisis of
redistribution between established cocks and fully grown young birds in September.
Last year’s system of holdings quietly dissipates itself in August when the old birds are
moulting. Then one fine morning in September, weather, as you can imagine, permitting,
competition begins. Old birds resume territorial stations with much aggressive vocal
display. The rest, mostly females and young birds, lie low until the ritual is over and then
all have freedom of the moor for the rest of the day. Then the forward young cocks join
in the dawn competition and after a few days of confusion the renewed class of proprietors
is established and the rest are pariahs, allowed on the moor only on sufferance. Every
morning brings renewal of aggressive male display until territorial boundaries are closely
demarcated. In the following weeks females begin to be absorbed to pair with the males.
The lower class become vagrants only joining the territorial class when a vacancy occurs.
By February or March the pairs are completely solidary and defend their territory all day,
driving off all intruders. Mortality is low among the established birds during the winter
and high among the unestablished of whom few or none survive to the following spring.
Typically the August population is two and a half times the breeding population of the
previous April and therefore, if numbers are stable from year to year, 60 per cent of the
August population are eliminated by the following March. I have omitted the detail. The
essential point is that the operative control of grouse population size is a social system which
relates numbers to territory, maintains a social hierarchy and through these controls
mortality and fertility.

The Theory of Population Homeostasis

So far so good, and the utility of a sociology of non-human societies is illustrated.
But how is the population level determined over time and, more particularly, how does
this happen in the case of man? The theory which Wynne-Edwards accepts and which he
extends to human societies, as did Carr-Saunders in an early work,5 is taken over by
* V. C. Wynne-Edwards,!4 p. 9. See also his Animals Dispersion in Relation to Social Behaviour, Oliver

& Boyd, 1962, p. 132: “‘society is ...an organisation of individuals capable of providing conventional
competition between its members’’.

161
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

analogy from physiology—the principle of population homeostasis. We have already noted,
in the case of the myxo virus and Australian rabbits, an illustration of the idea of equilibrium
but not homeostasis fitted into the context of Darwinian evolutionary theory. We may
also note another biological version of homeostasis theory, but one which is untenable.
It is familiar to historians of sociology as Spencer’s argument against Malthus that among
vertebrates “the degree of fertility varies inversely as the development of the nervous
system”.

At the highest development of civilization in man the elaboration of mental activity
would, according to this argument, produce a natural balance.* The sociological version
of homeostasis theory advanced by Wynne-Edwards and Carr-Saunders is unproven and
indeed also untenable in its application to man. Among the criticisms of it recently made
by Dr. Mary Douglas 8 is the crucially damaging one that it does not work: if it did we
would not be worrying about population explosions in Asia and Latin America.

Dr. Douglas also puts forward the criticism of homeostasis theory that it does not
seriously consider underpopulation—an omission which enables Wynne-Edwards and
Carr-Saunders to treat the actual population as if it were the optimal population. Certainly
such an assumption would not fit the circumstances of many human groups because there
are many activities, and not only productive activities, which require a minimum number
of participants. She argues that there is much anthropological evidence to suggest that
primitive peoples tend towards underpopulation and that the latent potential for geometric
increase in numbers, far from being a threat to the food supply, is in fact not sufficient
for such societies to realise the full possibilities of their environment. If, as Dr. Douglas
points out, this were also true of animal populations it would remove the basis of the
problem, i.e., there would be no question of internal social controls if the positive or
external checks kept the population level below the point at which it threatened to overexploit its food resources. Wynne-Edwards does mention such a case—that of fish in the
North Sea. But this example of heavy predation is presumably rare.

Among human groups the case is quite different. All known human societies have
social controls on mating. Marriage systems are frequently elaborate among primitive
peoples.

The function of these social controls is, of course, the same whether the problem of
reproductive limitation is set by limits on the food supply or by more complex optima
derived from other needs or drives peculiar to the species. In the case of human societies
the latter type of factor is more typical and of greater sociological complexity.

Dr. Douglas produces four examples to illustrate her thesis that human groups do
make attempts to control their populations but that these are more often inspired by
concern for scarce social resources (that is for objects giving status and prestige) than by
concern for dwindling basic resources.

Let me quote her last example—the Nambudiri Brahmins who are one of the richest
landowning castes in Southern India.

They are rich and very exclusive. To maintain their social and economic advantage
they avoid dividing their estates, but allow only the eldest son to inherit and to
administer it on behalf of his brothers (in the same way as the Rendille camel herders).
The other sons are not allowed to marry at all. For each married couple only one son
and one girl are likely to be allowed to marry. The other sons console themselves
with women of another caste, but the other daughters are kept all their lives in the
strictest seclusion (Yalman). Only a very rich community could afford to seclude

* See D. Eversley,? pp. 188-191. This thesis was inconsistent with much of Spencer’s other writings
on population.

162
SOCIOLOGY, BIOLOGY AND POPULATION CONTROL

and condemn to sterility a large proportion of its women, and such a ruthless course
must presumably be justified by the value of the prize, in this case maintaining a
social and economic hegemony”’.

Population quality

Beyond the question of population quantity there lies the question of quality. Where,
as among human beings, social control of fertility takes on elaborate forms and directions
(through marriage customs, birth control, infanticide, etc.), how do these sociological
factors interact with the genetic constitutions of mating populations to produce an evolution
in population quality? Here is an intriguing shared problem between genetics and sociology.
I have time only to illustrate it. There were strong strands in nineteenth-century Malthusian
thought which depreciated poor laws and social welfare generally as social forces promoting
the survival of the unfit and therefore the progressive deterioration of the genetic quality
of industrial populations. In the twentieth century we have seen the same kind of reasoning
among psychologists. It runs as follows: first, on the assumption that IQ measures genetic
potential; and second, given two empirically demonstrated facts (1) that social class is
directly correlated with IQ and (2) that social class is inversely correlated with fertility,
it must follow that the intellectual quality of our population is declining. Indeed it must.
The results of the Scottish Mental Survey could be explained by a temporary ameliorative
set of environmental trends between 1932 and 1947. Meantime, meritocracy only hastens
deterioration of the population as a whole.

But the second fact—the inverse relation between status and fertility which has been
characteristic of Western populations since the mid-ninteenth century—may be changing.
Certainly differentials have narrowed. For example, the most recent of the Growth of
American Family studies 13 shows that the relation among Catholics is U-shaped and that
there are in general very small differences of expected family size among non-farm wives
when they are classified on the basis of husband’s income and occupation. Indeed, Dr. C. O.
Carter at the second Eugenics Society symposium argued that with the extension of family
planning over wider sections of the population in this country we may reasonably look
forward to the establishment of a positive correlation between intelligence and fertility and
therefore to arising average intellectual quality in the nation.6 We have here a complicated
example of shifting social characteristics in a population which have crucial consequences
for its genetic evolution.

Problems like this take us back through Wynne-Edwards and the grouse to the
Darwinian evolutionary theory and its assumption that each individual organism constantly
strives to increase its progeny in competition with all others. Yet if this were so why do
the grouse, for example, not become steadily more aggressive towards rivals within the
group by individual selection in favour of aggressive traits and against submissive behaviour ?
Why do we in fact observe so many instances of sacrifice of individual benefit for group
advantage? This is the classic problem of “‘ genes for altruism”’ as J. B. S. Haldane phrased
it. They do not fit into the pure Darwinian theory. Sir Arthur Keith’s group theory of
human evolution in a more general form applying to all social animals is now widely
accepted. Local mendelian breeding groups and not individuals are the units of evolution.
What remains largely unsolved are the mechanisms of inter-group selection.

Genetically the clues lie in the analysis of gene pools, polygenic inheritance, heterosis
and in bi-sexuality which modify the recombination of genes in succeeding generations
away from the influence of individual selection. Nevertheless, the net long-run tendency
ought to conflict with group survival.

Sociologically, for Wynne-Edwards, the clues lie in social heirarchy: also, I would

163
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

add, in the further study of mobility between strata and the social patterns of reproduction.
Meanwhile a challenging puzzle remains.

Academic Organization

There I must leave the discussion and illustration of scientific problems on the
boundaries between those biological and social science disciplines which interest themselves in the study of man. I would like to end with a remark about academic organization.
Darwin, 1 have noted, read Malthus by chance. The past half-century has been one of
organizational isolation between the biological and social sciences with the barriers strongly
reinforced by ideological conflict. Ideological conflict is not wholly regrettable, it can have
creative functions: it may have aided the establishmnet of academic autonomy for sociology,
but it has also hindered scientific advance on common problems. Science needs an appropriate social organization. In the future we shall need to recruit able and appropriately
educated young people to solve these problems. Conferences and symposia, admirable
though they are, are not enough. We must reconstruct academic boundaries to achieve
our purpose. We need the kind of university degree which integrates the biological and
social studies—for example along the lines of the human sciences degree which we are now
seriously discussing in Oxford. Only in this way will the necessary organization for scientific
advance in the directions desired and pioneered by Galton be accomplished.

REFERENCES

. Ardrey, Robert. 1966. The Territorial Imperative. New York: Atheneum.

. Banks, J. A. 1953. Prosperity and Parenthood. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.

. Bressler, Marvin. Sociology, Biology and Ideology. In Proceedings of the New York Conference
Russell Sage Foundation, 1966. In the press.

. Burnet, Macfarlane. 1966. Biology and the Appreciation of Life. The Boyer Lectures, 1966. Australian
Broadcasting Commission.

. Carr-Saunders, A. M. 1922. The Population Problem. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

. Carter, C. O. 1966. Differential fertility by intelligence. In Genetic and Environmental Factors in Human
Ability. Ed. J. E. Meade and A. S. Parkes. Edinburgh: Oliver and Boyd.

. Coale, A. J. 1959. Increases in Expectation of Life and Population Growth. In Population Conference,
Vienna, 1959. Vienna: International Union for the Scientific Study of Population.

. Douglas, Mary. 1966. Population control in primitive groups. Brit. J. Sociol. 17, 263.

. Eversley, D. 1959. Social Theories of Fertility and the Malthusian Debate. Oxford University Press.

. Kuznets, Simon. 1958. Six Lectures on Economic Growth. New York Free Press.

. Spencer, Herbert. 1908. Man Versus the State. New York: Appleton.

. Thoday, J. M. 1965. Geneticism and environmentalism. In Biological Aspects of Social Problems.
Ed. J. E. Meade and A. S. Parkes. Edinburgh: Oliver and Boyd.

. Whelpton, P. K. et al. 1966. Fertility and Family Planning in the United States. Princeton University

ess.

. Wynne-Edwards, V. C. Population control and social selection in animals. In Proceedings of New York

Conference, Russell Sage Foundation, 1966. In the press.

bt fmt et
NK OOS YT AN f& WHE

bet
» WW

164
