FURTHER RESEARCH ON CHEMICAL CONTRACEPTION*

By JOHN R. BAKER, M.A., D.Phil.

T HE work on chemical contraception condition, and the name " jellies" has been

done under my direction in the Sir used loosely for such products. This is most

William Dunn School of Pathology at confusing, for the word gel or jelly is only

Oxford is financed by the Birth Control In- properly applicable to an elastic solid, such as

vestigation Committee, part of whose funds a gel suppository. (A few of our own research

are derived from the Eugenics Society. For products are just solid and elastic at room

eight years I have benefited from the advice temperature, but can be squeezed from a

and encouragement of Dr. C. P. Blacker. My tube, and we call this limited type " tube-

co-workers are Dr. H. M. Carleton, who con- jellies.") If an aqueous semi-liquid has a

fines his attention to the pathological side of considerable content of gum, we may call it

the research, Mr. R. M. Ranson and Mr. J. a mucilage. If the product is non-aqueous,

Tynen. Most of our work may be classified but owes its semi-fluidity to a fat or other

under four heads: the study of the scientific substance insoluble in water, we speak of an

basis of chemical contraception; the inven- ointment. If the vehicle is wholly fluid, we

tion of good chemical contraceptives; the speak of a douche.

testing of proprietary products; and the Pastes may be used in two different ways:

making of reports on semen specimens sub- either smeared on the upper (cervical) side of

mitted by patients.

a rubber occlusive pessary before the latter

Nomenclature

is inserted in the body, or inserted by some mechanical means in the vagina shortly before

The naming of chemical contraceptives is coition. In our opinion these two uses require

rather confused, and I wish to suggest the different properties in the product, and we

following classification, based on the nature suggest that pastes should be called cervical of the vehicle in which the contraceptive is or vaginal, according to their intended uses.

dissolved or suspended. The words are logical Gel and fatty suppositories dissolve or

extensions of terms commonly used in melt at the temperature of the body, and are

pharmacy, chemistry and physics.

therefore unsuited for use in the tropics. It

The product may be solid, semi-liquid or is likely that vaginal pastes, in collapsible

liquid at room temperature. If it is solid, we tubes, will become the simplest means of

may call it a suppository, and of this there chemical contraception in hot climates,

are three kinds: the gel or jelly suppository though gel suppositories may be transported (usually with gelatine as a vehicle); the fatty to tropical uplands in refrigerating vans.

suppository (often with cocoa-butter); and

the tablet suppository (including the types Simplicity and Complication

which produce a foam on contact with water). In our own country, elaborate methods of

The semi-liquid products, which can be contraception are often advised. The woman

squeezed from a collapsible tube, are pastes, has to smear a cervical paste or ointment

mucilages and ointments. Pastes are thick over a rubber pessary and insert it before aqueous products, without any considerable retiring to bed, without knowing whether it

admixture of gums, and the word is par- is going to be required or not. If coition

ticularly applicable when starch is present. occurs, a suppository is inserted. Next Gelatine is often present in these in the sol morning the vagina is washed out with a

* An address delivered to the Eugenics Society on March i6th, I937.

douche and the pessary removed, cleaned, dried and put away. This elaborate technique

lo9

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

may be all right for some women, who are very painstaking and have the necessary privacy and bathroom accommodation, but even for these the necessity to take precautions without knowing whether they will be needed is irksome. For the majority of
women these complications are a great difficulty, and for poor women, with almost no privacy and no proper bathroom accommodation, they are impossibilities. The existence of complicated methods of contraception will not prevent the innately careless and foolish woman from having many children, while the innately careful and far-seeing ones produce fewer offspring. This will have a dysgenic effect, and thus the discovery of a really simple but effective method is of eugenic
importance. Our work has definitely eugenical signifi-
cance also in quite another way, for we are investigating also the methods of stimulating sperms to greater activity, and this may be useful in promoting the fertility of certain eugenically desirable people.
The only contraceptive that can be used just when required and which needs no mechanical help for insertion is the suppository. The fatty suppository has the disadvantage that the spermicide diffuses out too slowly, while the tablet may not dissolve sufficiently quickly if the vagina is dry. The gel suppository cannot fail to become fluid if it is properly designed, and the spermicide is in solution in it, ready for immediate action. If the spermicide is a really powerful but harmless one, a very convenient method of contraception is thus available. I claim that chemical contraception has never really been tried, because there has not been a powerfully spermicidal gel suppository on the market. Until it has been tried, we cannot be certain that chemical methods alone, without any occlusive pessary, are necessarily unsafe. It has not been definitely proved that the human uterus cannot suck up sperms from the vagina; but if it can do that, it cannot fail to suck up the spermicide also.
Tests of Spermicidal Power
We have designed a series of rather complicated laboratory tests for telling us how likely

a given product is to achieve its purpose. In designing these tests we have had the advantage of being able to discuss them with the very experienced clinical workers who
constitute the medical subcommittee of the National Birth Control Association. My first tests were designed eight years ago and seem very primitive now, but we have profited from criticism and are using a set of tests which are, I believe, about as good as laboratory tests ever will be. I greatly hope that the medical profession will accept them as guides to the choice of suitable products. A full description of our tests will be published in the Journal of Hygiene, and only a brief
mention of them is allowable here. We first test the rate of disintegration of
a suppository. This test is obviously not applicable to an already semi-liquid paste, mucilage or ointment. We next titrate to find the amount of acid or alkali present. It is a strange fact that nearly every product on the market is acid. The vagina is probably usually acid, and no doubt people have thought it best not to change the reaction; but this is really a very thoughtless dogma, for the vagina normaRly receives semen and cervical secretions, both of which are alkaline. No damage is likely to accrue from weakly alkaline or acid chemical contraceptives on account of their alkalinity or acidity, and alkaline products would perhaps be particularly suitable for cervical pastes and
ointments. The next test is that of total spermicidal
power on human sperms in alkaline solution. This test shows how much spermicidal power
can be extracted from the product. We postulate that in normal circumstances there are 6 c.c. of fluid in the vagina after coition, and our standard (S) concentration is therefore one suppository or one dose (2 grams) of a paste or ointment to 6 c.c. of sperm suspension. There ought to be a margin of safety, and we therefore do tests also at weaker
concentrations of the spermicide ( :2 S 4'S98,'s
etc.). Observations on the activity of the sperms are made at five and thirty minutes. The test is also performed in an acid medium, since the contents of the vagina may be

FURTHER RESEARCH ON CHEMICAL CONTRACEPTION

III

slightly acid after coition, and some spermicides are less effective in acid solution. The next test is the extremely important diffusion test, which measures not the total amount of spermicidal power that can be extracted from the product, but the rate of diffusion of the spermicide out of the (already disintegrated) vehicle into the semen. Observations are made at 2, 5, 15, 30, 6o, I20 and i8o minutes. This test is exposing the reason for the ineffectiveness of chemical contraceptives used alone, for although enough spermicide is sometimes present, it generally remains uselessly in the vehicle and does not come into contact with the sperms. This particularly applies to pastes and ointments.
The Pathological Test
The pathological test is on bitches, which were chosen on account of the general histological resemblance of the vagina to the human one. The organ is much larger than one would expect from the relative body sizes of bitch and woman, and we think it fair to make the dose half a suppository (or half the
normal dose of a paste or ointmnent). We
introduce half a suppository into the bitch's vagina daily for a fortnight, and then kill the bitch and make microscopical sections of the vagina, which are examined by Dr. Carleton.
Pregnancy Rate
Any product which comes out well in our tests is suitable for clinical trial. It is naturally essential that a good contraceptive should work well in practice, though it is probable that failures will never be completely eliminated, for people will always exist who will fail to carry out even the simplest instructions.
When it is desired to compare the efficiency of different contraceptives in practice, clinical workers should give information which will make it possible to calculate the pregnancy rate for each method. The pregnancy rate is the number of pregnancies per I00
ovulations, i.e. I00P where P is the number of
pregnancies (whether full-term or abortions) and V is the number of ovulations at which

conception might have occurred or did occur. V=M-A+P, where M is the number of menstruations (i.e. the number of ovulations not resulting in pregnancy); A is the number of times that the husband is absent from his wife during one whole menstrual cycle (starting at any point in the cycle), at a time when his wife is menstruating regularly; and P is the number of pregnancies (i.e. the number of ovulations resulting in pregnancy). When exact data for M and A are not available, one may allow thirteen menstruations to the year. It is not possible to make allowance for the number of menstrual cycles in which, for one reason or another, coition did not occur during the most fecund period, mid-way between two menstruations. The most convenient way in which to write the
formula for pregnancy rate is MIA+P
When ovulation starts again after pregnancy, there may be some lack of correspondence with menstruation, but probably not enough to influence the results greatly. Clinical workers must be careful to get information as to when menstruation starts again after a full-time pregnancy or abortion (if indeed it does occur before the next pregnancy). Pearl* allowed only 0o04 year for the puerperal state in his calculations of the pregnancy rate of over 30,000 women, the details of whose menstruations were not known; but clinical workers will probably be able to get the necessary information. They should confine their studies to married women and should report the values of M, A and P for each woman separately. Pearlt has shown that where no contraceptive device is used the pregnancy rate is considerably higher up to the age of twenty-four (except that girls of fourteen and less who become pregnant have a low rate). It would therefore be best to divide married women into two groups, namely those less than twentyfive years old, and those aged twenty-five to thirty-nine. It would be best to exclude women aged forty and over. I suggest only two age groups, because probably only a
* Lancet, I933, II, 607.
tMilbank Memorial Fund Quarterly, I936, XIV, I.

II2 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

rather small number of women will agree to sterile, and those who fear that their sperms

test one contraceptive consistently and to are particularly resistant to spermicides, so

give information on their menstruations, that they present particular difficulties for

pregnancies, abortions, etc. Individual chemical contraception. We have shown that

women will, of course, pass from one age there are men with unusually resistant

group to the other if they become twenty-five sperms. We report on the volume of the

years old during the period of observation. specimen, the number of sperms per c.c.,

Pearl's figures, arrived at in a slightly dif- their activity, resistance to spermicides, and

ferent way, indicate that if a contraceptive abnormalities in structure (if any), the pH

were having any effect at all one should of the semen and its buffering power against

expect a mean pregnancy rate of less than acids, and the presence in it of crystals,

sixteen for the younger age group and less prostatic concretions, and cells other than

than eleven for the older. The figures given sperms.

(sixteen and eleven) are roughly those for American white women when contraceptives Conclusion

are not used.

In conclusion, I want to say that I am

Reports on Semen Specimens

hopeful that our research will result in the discovery of a reliable chemical contracep-

We make routine examinations of the tive, and that this Society will consider that

semen of two classes of patients of clinical it has served the cause of eugenics by sup-

workers, namely men who fear they may be porting our work.

American Journal of Physical Anthropology
Published by The Wistar Institute
Ales' Hrdlicka, Managing Editor, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.

VOL. 22

CONTENTS FOR APRIL-JUNE 1937

No. 3

WM. M. SHANKLIN AND N. IZZEDDIN. Anthropology of the Near East female. One text figure,
P'AN MING TZU. Origin of deep and circumflex femoral group of arteries in the Chinese. One text figure.
D. ROTHMAN. The endocranial course of the middle meningeal artery in American Whites and American Negroes. One text figure.
G. LEVIN. Racial and " inferiority " characters in the human brain. Eight text figures.
M. S. GOLDSTEIN. Weight. A survey of differences of method, instruments.
A. CIOCCO. Sitting height and sitting height: Stature index in adults. Survey of differences in methods of measuring, instruments and classifications.
W. W. HOWELLS. The designation of the principal anthropometric landmarks on the head and skull.
Proceedings of the Eighth Annual Meeting of the American Association of Physical Anthropologists, held
at the Faculty Club, Harvard University, Cambridge, Mass., April 8th to ioth.

Price $6.00 per volume, Domestic; $6.50 per volume, Foreign. Issued quarterly

Many early volumes are still available. Prices upon request

Address subscriptions to

THE WISTAR INSTITUTE OF ANATOMY AND BIOLOGY 36th Street and Woodland Avenue Philadelphia, Pa., U.S.A.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XI, No. 2.

