C. P. BLACKER,
M.A., M.D.

The International Planned Parenthood Federation

ASPECTS OF ITS HISTORY*

I HAVE BEEN ASKED to speak this morning about the I.P.P.F.'s history. But histories can be dull. How, I asked myself, could I avoid
boring you with a dry recital of bare facts-facts about the dates and places of conferences, the number of attending delegates, the countries represented, the resolutions passed, etc. How could I avoid incurring the charge levelled against a certain Oxford professor that, in a lengthy syllabus, he made everything seem equally unimportant?
I decided to try to do three things: first to relate the developments of our movement to the successive world events to which it has reacted; second to describe how closely our respective countries-the U.S.A. and the U.K.-have worked together; and third to give you some first-hand experiences of people and events. But a word first about my title to speak on this subject at all.
I first became involved in the birth control movement as a medical student some forty years ago, and when I look round the world to-day I find that there are few people with such a long first-hand experience. In 1953, when a governing body of the I.P.P.F. was first established, I was appointed its Vice-Chairman. I held this position until 1959, when I was put into a then newlycreated post-that of Administrative Chairman -which I occupied till I resigned at the end of 1960. The I.P.P.F., having been founded in 1952, has existed for twelve years. Hence I have been
0 Presented at the Fourth Conference of the International Planned Parenthood Federation, Western Hemisphere Region, San Juan, Puerto Rico, April 19-27, 1964. The paper was addressed to an almost wholly American audience. C.P.B.
t See Th EUGENICS REVEEw, 1964. 55, 238.

one of its honorary officers, holding certain administrative responsibilities, for the first eight of these years.
I will divide my cursory review into three parts: the long period before 1939; the decade which followed the end of the Second World War (1945-54); and the next decade (1955-64) which brings us to the present day. A valuable survey of the I.P.P.F.'s history has recently been written by Mrs. Vera Houghton. It was published in THE EUGENIcs REvIEw (1961-62, 53, 149-53, 201-7).
It is the story before 1955 that I am best qualified by my age to tell. I will speak, from the standpoint of an Englishman, of events wholly enacted in the Old World which I think might be of interest to Americans. I will speak much of Americans but little of America.
Period before 1939 I commend the account of this period which
is given by Dr. Norman Himes in his Medical History of Contraception, first published in 1936. The publication of a new edition of this workt, with an ably written introduction by Dr. Alan Guttmacher, is an imaginative and valuable enterprise for which your Committee on Maternal Health deserves credit and thanks. In Dr. Himes's words, the course of events in the last century "oscillates between England and the United States." I will try to convince you that this oscillation has continued to the present day.
In England, Thomas Malthus (1766-1834) and Francis Place (1771-1854) were contemporaries for sixty-three years, Place having been born five years after the other. The ball was then, so to speak, propelled across the Atlantic where the

I 35 THE EUGENICS REVEEW, October 1964, 56, 3.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

influence of this couple was felt by two some- business man, had much to do with the prepara-

what younger Americans-R. D. Owen (1801- tion of the Geneva conference. Indeed, Mrs.

1877) and Charles Knowlton (1800-1850). Owen Sanger mentioned his name first, together with

had, early in his life, spent some time in Switzer- that of Edith How-Martyn, when expressing

land and France. Both these men, you will thanks to helpers in her preface to the volume

remember, recommended techniques of contra- of Proceedings. She said that these two-

ception; and you will recall how there was a second crossing of the Atlantic, from west to

co-operated with me throughout and devoted over a year to the preliminary preparation of the

east, when Knowlton's pamphlet, with the now- Conference.

queer-sounding title The Fruits of Philosophy, In a sense the preparation was too well done.

was published in England. It was this event The wide preliminary publicity attracted the

which provoked the celebrated Bradlaugh- notice of those who, for religious or political

Besant trial. The decline of Britain's birth rate reasons, were opposed to Margaret's ideas.

began soon after. Thus did the ball come back Time was given for opponents to take steps to

to the Old World where things began to move in neutralize her objective. The purpose of the

various European countries.

conference was finally declared to be the study

As you know better than I, Mrs. Margaret of population problems; discussion of solutions

Sanger embarked on her crusade and life-work of these problems was ruled out of order. Mrs.

before the first war. Her friendship with Have- Sanger who, with friends, had raised the money

lock Ellis (1859-1939) began before 1914. I did and done the work, was quietly pushed into the

not know either in those days. But I was with background and was never given the opportunity

them when they met in the middle twenties. I to speak. But the conference ended well for her.

recall the warmth of their regard for each other In a closing address, when it was too late for

and the easy flow of their conversation in the "objections" to be raised, Sir Bernard Mallet,

course of which Margaret's prison experiences the conference's president, whom I later came

were lightly touched. Here was another inter- to know intimately, said:

change between our two countries. At this time Ellis was in his early seventies; his flowing white

I cannot sit down without an expression, perhaps too long delayed, of admiration for the work of

beard and gentle manner well befitted his Mrs. Sanger, and of recognition to her husband,

reputation, by then world wide, as a sage. I later saw him fairly often and corresponded with him.

whose genial presence and generous hospitality have done so much to smooth away difficulties.*

He was critical of the report of the (British) The words "too long delayed" came from the

Brock Committee on voluntary sterilization heart, for Sir Bernard was well aware of all that

(1934) which had recommended that, as a strictly Margaret had done. There was another pleasing

voluntary measure, sterilization should be episode-quite unrehearsed. At a concluding

formally legalized. Ellis strongly held that such gala dinner at which the guests were seated at

a step was unnecessary and would do more harm separate tables Sir Bernard made a speech in the

than good. Subsequent experience suggests that, course of which he expressed thanks to various

in certain contexts but not in all, his views were people. A recital of names was tepidly received

realistic. They have prevailed, for example, in until he came to Mrs. Sanger's. Clapping began

India but not in Sweden.

at a certain table which was slowly taken up at

I first met Margaret Sanger in connection with other tables. The crescendo was quite slow. But

the important World Population Conference, it steadily mounted until about a third of the

which met in Geneva during the summer of company stood up and cheered.

1927. This was convened by her and was the This conference provided a further example of

first of its comprehensive kind ever held. Among Anglo-American co-operation. In his inaugural

Margaret's closest friends in England were address on the first day, Sir Bernard declared

Clinton and Janet Chance, whom I am happy to that

recall. Clinton Chance, an able organizer and * Proceedings: p. 356.

the first suggestion for the present conference came from certain well.-known scientists in the United States of America who then approached,

136

INTERNATIONAL PLANNED PARENTHOOD FEDERATION

and found an eager response from, their British colleagues. This rhe added] will account for what some will no doubt consider an undue predominance of the Anglo-Saxon element in our councils.t

Abraham Stone I pay this rare tribute that, having sat with him at numerous committees and other gatherings, I never once heard him make a contribution which was not to the point, conciliatory and, in a welcome sense, construc-

At least two organizations were (so to speak) tive. I was always glad to hear him intervene.

conceived at this conference held during 1927 The future historian of our early years will

in Geneva. One survives and flourishes. It is the accord him a place second only to Mrs.

International Union for the Scientiflc Study of Sanger's.

Population. This union was formed in 1928 and In 1930 a conference was held in Zurich. It was

has now become an important though somewhat very different from that held three years before in

technical professional organization of demo- Geneva, for it was attended only by supporters

graphers. I may mention, jumping twenty-six of birth control. My main impression of this

years that, in 1954, this union gave valued help conference was the vigour of the German

to the United Nations in promoting a second delegation several of whom were not seen again

world conference on population which was held after the war.

in the palatial headquarters of the Food and I now turn to world events to which our move-

Agriculture Organization in Rome. And a ment reacted. The two world wars have had quite

tremendous conference it was. One of its most different aftermaths. Some ten years after the-

memorable features was a reception of the first there set in the economic depression which

participants in the Basilica of St. Peter by the brought world-wide suffering. It was the depri-

Pope, who addressed to us words of greeting and vation and hardship, mainly affecting families

encouragement. The I.P.P.F.'s Governing Body with numerous children, which gave impetus to

held its second meeting in Rome after this the birth control movement. Clinics, sometimes

Conference. Mrs. Sanger was not present. But in federated under umbrella organizations, came

so far as the Demographers' International Union into existence in several countries. Sympathy

was jointly responsible for the Rome conference, for the unemployed grew and became wide-

and in so far as the Union can be counted as one spread. But the depression had a second con-

of Margaret's unplanned progeny, so can we sequence. I refer to the decline in birth rates

assign to Margaret some ancestral responsibility throughout the "western" world. The hardships

for the Rome gathering in 1954.

caused by the depression were slowly realized

I now move back to Geneva and 1927. It as the conditions worsened. By contrast, the

was there that I first met Abraham Stone who demographic implications of the fall of the birth

became a close friend. It was an inexhaustible rate were realized later and with dramatic

pleasure to meet him at ensuing conferences suddenness. In the U.K. the moment occurred

before and after the second war. His modesty, in the second half of 1936. The story, which is

charm and lucidity as a writer caused him to be rather peculiar, may not bore you. There were

widely honoured outside no less than inside the published at about the same time in that year

I.P.P.F. He was singled out by invitation to give three books (by Kuczynski, Carr-Saunders and

a paper to the austere Rome Conference just Glass) which drew attention to the now-obvious

mentioned on the delicate subject ofPresent Day fact that, though births still at that time exceeded

Family Planning Techniques. The conference as a deaths, the population would, if trends then

whole was almost as allergic to anything classifi- current persisted, soon fail to replace itself. A

able as "Malthusian propaganda" as had been glance at the -population pyramid based on the

the earlier conference in Geneva. Hence Abra- 1931 census, undercut like a Christmas tree in its

ham was on dangerous ground. But his tact was lower tiers, provided a convincing visual

perfect. There were no complaints such as demonstration. These three.books were reviewed

would have empted at Geneva in 1927. To in two consecutive articles which appeared on

successive days-28th and 29th September, 1936

t Ibid: p. 17.

-in The Times of London. It is interesting to

'37
ER-C

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

note to-day how these articles over-stated the an upward turn in 1943 (the middle of the

case. They concluded that-

second war), and by 1947 it reached the highest

there is no evidence that the British race will maintain its numbers in the future. Far from it:

figure since 1920. The great depression which followed the first

its numbers will certainly fall, perhaps catastro- war began in 1929-some ten years after its end.

phically, during the next fifty years.

The carresponding year for the second war would

These two articles came as a sort of national have been 1956. But happily we were spared this shock. They made widely known something spectral aftermath. However, something else which had before been understood by but a happened. Instead of a global depression there handful of demographers. The articles received a befell another event universally acclaimed as

wide publicity and were much quoted in the welcome but nevertheless having disturbing

provincial press of the U.K. I have a volume of features. I refer to the dramatic and world-wide

press cuttings which leave no doubt of their falls in death rates. In under-developed countries

effects.

these declining death rates and rocketting

There quickly ensued a general revaluation populations, have furnished a stronger argument in which our movement participated. One of the for birth control than was produced by the effects was that the term birth control fell into economic depression after the first war. Indeed,

disfavour and was replaced by the expression "Family Planning"; voluntary bodies which had previously called themselves birth control associations changed their names to family
planning associations. Services for the diagnosis and treatment of

the entirely -unforeseen fall of the death rate has provided an unprecedented stimulus to the birth control movement. It has done more: it has
created an urgency which would surely have
seemed inconceivable to those who, in the late 'thirties, were predicting depopulation and the

infertility, designed to help parents to have doom of capitalism.

children and therefore to raise fertility, were

established alongside contraceptive services, so First Post-War Decade (1945-54)

that the family planning movement became two- So I come back from world events to our

sided. It is scarcely an exaggeration to say that, movement. During the war rumours had reached

almost overnight, an over-population scare was me that Mrs. Sanger had been seriously ill.

transformed into a depopulation scare.

Hence it was a happy surprise indeed when, soon

Not long after came the war when family after 1945, she reappeared in London full of

planning and most other pre-war interests were plans for the future. In 1946 Elise Ottesen

driven out of our heads. There were many Jensen (president ofthe Swedish Family Planning

differences between -the two wars, and one was Association known as the R.F.S.U., and later

in the ways they ended. The first ended suddenly Margaret Sanger's successor as the I.P.P.F.'s

and to everyone's astonishment. Indeed, we were president) took steps to initiate an international

caught on the wrong foot with no proper organization. That the possibilities might be

schemes for demobilization ready. The second discussed, she invited to a conference in Stock-

war was different. The scales were turned at holm representatives of European organizations

Stalingrad and in North Africa; and by the which, after the war, were reconstituting them-

beginning of 1944 it was obvious what the ending selves, and also representatives from the United

would be. It was but a question of time. The States. Thus in August 1946 was set up an

British Government took advantage of this interim international committee which could

forewarning by appointing in 1944, a Royal later be replaced by something permanent. This

Commission on Population. Its original object project was carried out during the next year-

was to try to forestall a post-war decline of the 1948-at a conference held at Cheltenham. The

country's population. But half way through its interim body was christened the International

deliberations (its report was published in 1949) Committee on Planned Parenth'ood (I.C.P.P.)

the sign-post changed. Quite unlike what had and consisted of representatives of but four

happened during the first war, the birth rate took countries-the United States, Britain, Sweden

1 38

INTERNATIONAL PLANNED PARENTHOOD FEDERATION

and Holland. These four countries should not be packed to capacity, was ablaze with jewelled

forgotten in the palmy present when the I.P.P.F. turbans and multi-coloured saris. The vice-

has some thirty-five members. Then it was that president of India, Dr. S. Radhakrishnan,

Mrs. Sanger took another decision which further opened with a speech which should receive

consolidated the relation between the U.S.A. prominence in any later edited symposium of

and the U.K. She firmly resisted the suggestion, noteworthy declarations in the movement's

put to her by several people, mostly British, that history. And it was then that we first saw that

if the U.S.A. were to provide most of the funds remarkable woman, Lady Rama Rau, in action.

for an international organization, its head- In an account of the conference written immed-

quarters should be in the United States. Mrs. iately afterwards I mentioned three out of many

Sanger would not hear of it. She insisted that the noteworthy ixnpressions; the exceptional vitality,

headquarters should be in London. Through the power of leadership and charm of Lady Rama

goodwill of Mrs. Dorothy Brush, the Foundation Rau who, with Mrs. Sanger, was elected joint

which bears her name provided generously; and honorary president of the new Federation; the

the Eugenics Society, of which I was at that intelligence, common sense and realism of the

time secretary, provided office accommodation many Indian observers and delegates (267 were

rent free.

recorded in the programme, most of them

Another world event which profoundly shaped women); and the remarkable achievement of

the course of our moVement was the acquisition Mrs. Vera Houghton, by then secretary of the

of independence in 1947 by India, Pakistan, I.P.P.F., who had travelled ahead of the rest of

Ceylon and Burma. It is inconceivable that under us to help with the organization. Four new

the restraints of our Colonial Office these countries joined the Federation-India, Hong

countries could have taken such- vigorous Kong, Singapore and Western Germany, taking

initiatives. Mrs. Sanger, who had travelled much the membership to eight.

in Asia during the inter-war years, was not slow I recall the irregular way that the foundations

to perceive the newly disclosed openings. India, were laid of our regional organization. There was

however, was in difficulties because of the stand- at this stage no Governing Body, no Executive

point of Mahatma Gandhi. Two trials of the or other committee and no responsible group.

rhythm method (directed by Abraham Stone Decisions were taken informally by Mrs. Sanger

under the auspices of the World Health Organiz- who would call whom she pleased to her room in

ation) clearly demonstrated that this method the Taj Mahal hotel. On leaving her room with

was not universally practicable. In 1951 the Abraham Stone after one of these meetings, I

Bombay Family Planning Association-later to asked him if he didn't agree that some sort of

expand into the Family Planning Association of regional demarcation and grouping should be

India-convened its first all-India conference. considered which could take some of the weight

Mrs. Sanger saw the opportunity. She wired to off the London Office and encourage local

the lady who is tow the I.P.P.F.'s president initiatives. He said he agreed. As we walked

suggesting that the next conference of the interim down the hotel corridor one of us suggested that

committee should be held in India. Thus origi- a beginning might be made with three such

nated the important Bombay conference of 1952 regions; one for Europe centred in London,

where the I.P.P.F.,* having been planned in 1946, another for Asia centred in Bombay and another

was, in a working physiological sense, conceived. for the Americas centred in New York. Two or

(It was born, properly constituted, in the follow- three days later a plenary meeting was held in

ing year).

the same large Jehangir Hall; but this was

This was a most memorable conference to sparsely attended compared with the packed

which I cannot do justice in this cursory review. inaugural celebration. Mrs. Sanger had asked

Two things stand out in my memory. The first me to preside and from a platform I put various

was the magnitude and brilliance. The inaugural issues to the vote. All were passed with little

meeting in the massively domed and capacious discussion. I was about to terminate the pro-

Sir Cowasji Jehangir Hall, its stalls and gallery ceedings when Abraham, who was sitting in the

139~

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

front below me, said: "What about those task was just accomplished within the assigned

regions ?" I was not prepared for this and asked time limits. The most difficult lap in the course

him if he thought it was in order to bring the was to evolve an agreed version of our Aims.

matter up then. He said he thought it was quite Mrs. Houghton and I produced a third draft

in order. So I outlined the proposal, and put it to which we later submitted to Mr. Griessemer and

the meeting. It was carried without a dissentient. Mrs. Pilpel to be polished and dressed in legally

That, I suppose, is how important decisions are acceptable phrasing. Throughout this meeting, I

sometimes taken in the early and formative was conscious of, and grateful for, the happy

stages of many movements.

way that the American and British represent-

In the following years, 1953, another six-day atives worked together.

international conference (the fourth since 1946) Thus was the Governing Body of the I.P.P.F.

was held, again in Stockholm. Its theme was constituted. There have since been modifications

Population and World Resources in Relation to of the original Stockholm version to meet

the Family. Here there were gathered together in expected developments and expansions.

committee representatives of ten countries. We A decision of major importance taken at

met daily, out of conference hours, during the Stockholm was the establishment of a fourth

six days. An approved Constitution and Govern- region. The Asian region, centred on India,

ing Body resulted. These were prolonged and which had been approved the year before, was

rather difficult meetings. I was appointed split into two-a Central Asian Region (then-

chairman in which office I was much assisted by called) comprising India, Pakistan, Ceylon and

six "observers" among whom were Mr. Tom Burma; and a then-called Western Pacific Region

Griessemer and Mrs. Harriet Pilpel, both legal (centred at Singapore) including the other

experts, whom I then met for the first time. Many Asian countries then interested. Two other full

have been the happy encounters I have since had members of the Federation were elected-the

with Tom. I may perhaps say something about Association in South Africa and in Finland; and

our task. At Bombay the previous year, Mrs. Australia's was added to Japan's organization

Sanger had asked me to prepare a draft of a as an Associate member. This meeting in

constitution for consideration at Stockholm. Stockholm demonstrated to us all how great was

Mrs. Houghton and I worked on such a draft the honour and affection in which Mrs. Ottesen

which was ready by the following April. I Jensen was held in her own country.

thought it proper, as a first step, to submit this To the world conference held in Rome the

draft to our presidents, Mrs. Sanger and Lady following year (1954), and to the second meeting

Rama Rau. There resulted some useful sugges- of the Governing Body afterwards held in that

tions which were embodied in a second draft. city, I have already alluded.

This was circulated to various countries whose

F.P.A.s were to send representatives to the The Last Decade (1955-1964)

conference. When, in Stockholm, we sat down We now come to recent times of which many

twenty-four strong (eighteen people with power here know as much as I. Three important figures

to vote and six observers) we had before us the have appeared on the scene to guide the Feder-

second draft above-mentioned and lists of ation-Mr. George Cadbury, Dr. Alan Gutt-

comments, criticisms and suggested amendments macher and Mr. Cass Canfield. Mr. and Mrs.

from India, Hong Kong, Singapore, Sweden and Cadbury have travelled widely and have pro-

West Germany. Several of these suggested duced reports on the countries visited in the

amendments were incompatible and, what with course of these travels. These reports, as Rufus

linguistic difficulties, you can imagine, I am sure, Day for one will testify, have been invaluable

that it was not easy to produce an agreed version. to those responsible for deciding where to give

But the co-operation of everyone concerned was help and how to give it. I have seerq enough of

excellent; a vague mistrustfulness which seemed Dr. Guttmacher to appreciate how great is his

to hover at the outset was changed in the course authority and to realize what an asset to us he is

of the meetings into general friendliness and the going to be. And I can say the same of Mr.

:146

INTERNATIONAL PLANNED PARENTHOOD FEDERATION

Canfield who is now chairman of the Governing during 1957 and at The Hague in 1960. During

Body. But I continue my story.

this period the I.P.P.F. took on its present form.

In 1955 a big conference was held in Tokyo There were four member-organizations in 1946;

and the Governing Body again met. Here began there are now some thirty-five members of

the participation in our conferences of physiol- different categories. Our expansion has, I think,

ogists and research workers whose presence has fairly closely matched the growth of public

been an increasingly important feature of later interest in the population explosion and in its

occasions. Prominent in Tokyo were Dr. possible remedies. The campaigns against hunger

Gregory Pincus, Dr. Warren Nelson, Sir Solly and want have provided effective reminders that

Zuckerman and Dr. Alan Parkes. Shortly before mere food, however abundant, is no permanent

the Tokyo conference, Mr. Jerome Fisher solution. The accelerating growth of world

(U.S.A.), till then joint treasurer with Mr. Aird population has provided the theme of many

Whyte (U.K.), had, to our chagrin, suddenly national and international conferences whose

died. Through a most fortunate turn of events proceedings are published in an increasing spate

there stepped into his place Mr. Rufus Day. of volumes which are apt to find their way to the

With increasing assets later accruing through desks of a small band of wearying reviewers.

the initiatives of Mr. Hugh Moore and others, The discovery of the pill, an event which our

our finances were becoming realistic. Less was successors may be tempted to call epoch-making,

heard of shoestrings. At successive meetings of belongs to this last decade. So does the improve-

the Governing Body Mr. Day presented masterly ment in mutual understanding between the

statements and recommendations. After a world's religious faiths. So do the money-raising

preliminary meeting of a finance committee, he campaigns conducted in our respective countries.

would report on the assets available for disposal; Yours has from the start been the I.P.P.F.'s

and then, taking account on the one hand of the main financial mainstay; and you were the first

Federation's basic needs (such as the Head- to embark on a major appeal. Personalities from

quarters Office, the regional organizations and your country, moreover, have crossed the

the News Sheet) and on the other of the appli- Atlantic to stimulate and advise us on how to

cations for grants from member-organizations, make our U.K. appeal. I have particularly in

he would gear the demands to the resources in a mind Mr. Cass Canfield. Further co-operation

list of recommended allocations. I have listened between our two countries developed during this

at these meetings with unfailing admiration, last decade. Mr. Cadbury's assignments and

amounting sometimes to wonder, to his activities since 1960 provide an example. To tell

measured and lucid expositions. He so the truth, I am not sure if Mr. Cadbury is now an

combines an understanding of priorities with Englishman or a Canadian. He may be both.

mastery of detail and fairness of judgement that But he won't, I am sure, mind being treated for his recommendations have invariably been my purpose as an Englishman. Another example

accepted with minimum debate. In this way we is surely the appointment this year of Sir

have most mercifully been spared awkward Colville Deverell as the I.P.P.F.'s Secretary-

discussions of intricate issues over which General. If he is with us to-day, I confidently

disruptive partisanship could easily be evoked. wish him well in your country.

Mr. Day's skill and wisdom, and those of Sir About the years after Tokyo (1955) I am no

Jeremy Raisman, Mr. Aird Whyte's successor better qualified to speak than many younger men

as Treasurer in the U.K., have piloted the ship and women of your own country. Among those

into protected waters of financial security. Mr. I have in mind are Mrs. Brush, Mrs. Ferguson,

Day has done the steersmanship; Mr. Hugh Mr. Day and Mr. Griessemer. I hope that you

Moore and others have provided the fuel.

will induce one of these to write a history of the

After 1955, conferences of widening scope Federation's expansion as seen from the New

were held in New Delhi during 1959 and in World.

Singapore during 1962. The Governing Body I finish on a personal note. I take this fine

met after these conferences and also in Berlin opportunity which you have been good enough

'4I

THE EUGENICS REVIEW
to provide for me of paying tributes to some of tality from her old friend Mrs. Roslyn Weir. the Americans with whom this movement has I also pay a tribute to Dr. William Vogt whom brought me into contact. I have mentioned Mrs. I first met at Bombay in 1952, whose books I Sanger who will always remain our presiding have read with admiration and for whom I have genius. I thank, also, Mrs. Brush and Mrs. much affection and sympathy; to Mr. Joseph Watumull. Mrs. Brush has influenced her Van Vleck with whom I have held many Foundation to support the I.P.P.F. during what stimulating discussions in New Delhi, Singapore we may call its lean beginnings. I have mentioned and elsewhere; and to Mrs. Frances Ferguson how the generosity of the Brush Foundation whose unusually sensible contributions to sustained the London Office over many years. committee discussions I have admired from 1952 Mrs. Brush herself ably edited the monthly news onwards as much as I have appreciated her sheet (now called the International Planned kindness when she put me up in New York five Parenthood News) till 1957 when it was taken years ago. over by my old friend Dr. L. N. Jackson. She This account has not been easy to prepare. has continued to provide financial support. She There was so much to say about so many events. also served as Honorary Adviser on Field Work There are numerous and grievous omissions for from 1957 to 1960 and in this capacity travelled which I hope I will be forgiven. But my diffiwidely on behalf of the Federation and Mrs. culties in deciding what to leave out will be Sanger. Lastly I am personally endebted to apparent to you. May I conclude by thanking Mrs. Brush for inviting me in 1959 to you for the honour you have done me in Cleveland where I received memorable hospi- inviting me to address your Conference.

Volume XXXVII Number 3

July 1964

Edited by Thomas Park, University of Chicago

Hemolymph Calcium Fluctuations as Related to Environmental Salinity during Ecdysis of the Blue Crab, Callinectes sapidus

Rathbun

PAUL A. HAEFNR, JR.

Water Balance in a Carnivorous Desert Rodent, the Grasshopper Mouse

K. SHMIDT-NELsEN and H. B. HAINEs

Salt Tolerance and Water Requirements in the Salt-Marsh Harvest Mouse

HOwARD HmANES

Head-Body Temperature Difference in Homed Lizards

JAMES EDWARD HEATH

A Comparative Study of Carbohydrate Metabolism in Fish as Affected by Temperature and Exercise JOHN MARK DEAN and CLARENCE J. GOODNIGHT

Cardiovascular Response to Temperature in the Lizard Sauromalus obesus

JAMEs R. TEMPLETON

Growth and Liver Glycogen in the Chick Embryo under the Influence of Corticosteroids

R. C. CLAWsoN and L. V. DoMM

Thermal and Metabolic Responses of the Gray Jay to Cold Stress

JAMEs H. VEGHT

Water in the Mantle Cavity of Land Snails

WALTER C. BLmNm

New Books in Physiological Zoology
KNUT SCHMIDT-NIELSEN, Desert Animals: Physiological Problems of Heat and Water, Edward F. Adolph

PHYSIOLOGICAL ZOOLOGY is published quarterly in January, April, July and October. Subscription 82s. 6d. per volume. Single copies 24s. 6d., including postage.

THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS, 6750 Ellis Avenue, CHICAGO

I42

