DISEASE AND DEFECT

V

2.-Amentia Pediees from aEn m h Urban District

TONEKN now knows where is Albert Hops, nor what are his procreative activities. It is only sure that he is 3!, and that he was once in Garnett Mental
Hospital-as his brother Bertram, a year younger, is now in Cramelton House, awaiting ertification under the Mental
Deficiency Act. These two are the first children of the
first marriage of Mother Beer, whose two families are given on Chart I. By her first husband, Hops, who was consumptive and
died at 39, she had six children-the two

cult to say whether or not they exaggerate the characteristics of the families of all aments in the m . This group, indeed, is
very like that which was described in our April issue of last year (Vol. XXII, No. I), and which was considered fairly representative of the problem confronting that rural authority. As then, all names have here been changed, both of persons and places, while for the sake of verisimilitude an effort has again been made to find pseu-
donyms which correspond to the real
names.

already mentioned, as well as Charles (28)

and David (23), who are both at Oneship Colony under the Mental Deficiency Act,
Edgar (20), who lives at home and whose
intellect sent him to Bath Street Special School, and Florence, who is also at home and the only one of the six to be apparently

NONE NORMAL IN THIRT EEN The Luttrell family constitutes Chart 2.
The father here appears to be normal, and is so described in the chart; but our informants also say that he is " alcoholic,"

normal.

a term which is subject to too many inter-

The mother herself is mentally normal pretations to be used in evidence against

and appears to be physically stong. But him. He chose, however, a feeble-minded

she has curious tastes, since she married a wife, and between them they have produced second consumptive after the death of the an amazing record of fertility and failure.

first, and bore him four further children- Besides two miscarriages, there have been

George Beer, aged 12, and Doris Heen, aged 10, who are both at Wavemead House

thirteen children in all, five of whom are
already dead-three at nine months, one at

under the M.D. Act, and Henry and Ivy, aged 9 and 7 respectively, who appear so

22 months, and one (of consumption) at IS years. All these are giv on the far right

far to be normal.

of the chart, since their places in the family

Beyond the consumption and death of her are not known.

first, and the consumption and very delicate health of her second, nothing s known

Of the remainng eight children, the eldest, Jenny (34), is feeble-minded and at

against her two husbands.

Cokemound Hall under the M.D. Act. Her

This family and those that follow have been described as unusually glaring in-

following sisters, Kate (33) and Lucy (3I),
are both feeble-minded, and the next child,

stances, by a particularly efficient local Martin (29), is described as of " weak in-

urban authority for the care of child aments. tellect, though not designated as feeble-

It was Doris Helen who, being under care, minded." His younger sister, Susan Jane

caused the investigation of her family. Dolly (26), who was the starting-point of

It should be noted that these falies are not typical, but exeptionally bad, instances known to thiS authority. But in view of the
selection which is imevitably eserised by

the investigation, is feeble-minded and at Sheepton State Institution under the M.D. Act. The last three of the family, Nathaniel (20), Oswald (i8), and Percy

institutions and care committees, it is diffi- (i6), are all like their brother Mrtin in

53

THE EUGENICS REVIEW
I I I I!
I

I.31*

0I.
I..

.

41
K...

1
i.iI

C,.b5 66 0gr.
A

.
C.)

f.r.*

N

-II

ii

U

ITI . s- . 1 -. 'I
un

p, 6N
S

jfa.

*js .1I.

.1 .

-.

£

ii

e 4d-*1I

V-

CI

'gm

DISEASZ AND DI5

55

being of " intellect but not designated as fble-minded."

father, hsband, or citizen. Of the eight children, three died in infancy, and their

TH AMENTS AND SIX DEATHS Neither Mother nor Father Bosmead, on
Chart 3, could probably be described as feeble-minded within the meaning of the Act, but the itelligence of both is very
low, and he has done no regular work for ears. Their fertility is very nearly as

places in the family are not known. Of

the survivors, Bertha (28), Daniel (26), and

Sally (I6), the starting-point of the study,

are all inmates of Oneship Colony under

the Act. Chris (27) and Edith, who may

be either a than Sally,

little both

older or a little younger appear to be nomal.

high as that of the Luttrell's, and the death RURAL AND URBAN CONTRASTS

rate among their children is even higher. Only six out of twelve survive, three having died as infants, one at 6 years old, and
anc.ther at ten, while one lived to be 27. O-f the six surviving children, the first
two, Queenie (32) and Ronnie (28), are normal. Their brother Samuel (25), how-
ever, is feeble-minded and at Cokemound
Hall under the M.D. Act, and his younger sister Dora (24), who was the starting-point of the investigation, is also feeble-minded,
being at Oneship Colony. Trnxie (22) iS
the third feeble-minded child and inhabits
another institution, Hampton House. The last surviving child, Una, is 15 and normal.

The pedigrees we printed last April were both longer (four generations) and much more detailed than these. But they came from a remote rural district, where every individual is comparatively wellknown and where most families have been rooted for many generations. Those presented here, however, are from a densely populated industrial town where few know their neighbours, and where there is constant migration.
As it is, with but two generations of each family, it is impossible to do more than guess at the genetic factors involved. Only one thing is fairly certain, that each familv

A MORE DIFFICULT GENETIC TYPE The Tiller family (Chart 4) affords an
instance, rarer than is sometimes thought, of a whole family of defectives springing from parents who really " appear quite normal." Thomas (20), their eldest son and the starting-point of the investigation, is at Oneship Colony under the Act, and his
two younger brothers, Victor (I5) and Wil-
liam (iI), are both attending the Bath Street Special School for Mentally Defective Children. Another brother, Alfred, who died at the age of I2, attended the same school.
The Lorrams (Chart 5) are typical of the large and mainly defective families which spring from parents of a very undesirable sort. Mother Lorram is a feeble-
minded epileptic auid now an inmate of
Cramelton House; of her husband nothing is known, not even his whereabouts-which, considering the burden he has left the commity to bear, argues that he is either a feckless vagrant or without conscience as

is the victim of its own individual type of morbid inheritance. The Tillers alone suggest that amentia is a simple recessive -and knowledge of the parentage and sibs of the father and mother might well prove inconsistent with such an interpretation.
In the Hops-Beer family the mother seems to be solely responsible for the state of her children, to whom she appears to have transmitted a defective factor, but not the dominant inhibitor which she herself also carries. The fact that both her husbands were consumptive may be an instance of sexual selection-perhaps she was the only woman such weaklings could secure to look after them-and it may be pure coincidence. It is doubtful whether their pulmonary weakness has any essential con-
nection with the mental weakness of their
children. On the other hand, it is possible that such physical welings lack the full
' dose' of an inhibiting factor which is present in most people, such as their wife, and which would have prevented the appearance of amentia in their children.

56 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Tuberculosis is certainly very much com- famly, twelve in all, would have bee e

moner in ament families than in the gneral vnted,I e the mother would ceotatnly

population; and it is therefore possible have b serilied and possbly ao the

that amentia is in part caused, or at least father. It is quite pble that the same

not inhibited, by a general lack of vitality. would have happed to the Bimeads,

Carrying both epilepsy and amentia, whose parents are admittedly border-line

Mother Luttrell would be expected to pro- cases. The Lorrams, too, would now be

duce an unfortunate type of family, even if non-exient, since the mother would surely

she had married a thoroughly sound man. have been sterilized, if not also the unknown

Considering, therefore, that her husband father (it may be remarked, parenthetically,

also is not too sound, it is not surprising that ament women are much more dangerous

to find an unrelieved record of defect in racially than ment men, sine the latter

their family.

find it hard to get wives who are not also

The high death rate among the Bosmead defective, whereas the former, wIhe young,

children, as well as the constant doubt can frequently attract a low type of

about the interpretation of " normal," normal man).

make it impossible even to guess at the With such a policy, therefore, only the

factors at work, but they certainly do not Tillers and the Hops-Beer group would

suggest a simple recessive. Both here and now be in existence, and the county would

in the Luttrells the deficiency, whatever it have to support only eleven aments and

is, seems frequently to be lethal. Even the three apparent normals of this generation,

Tiller family is less indicative of the mating instead of the total burden it now caries

of two heterozygous ' carriers,' than of the of twenty-one aments, four border-line

transmission by one parent of some defect cases, and eight normals, to say nothing of

which is usually dominant, but which was the fourteen useless births which ended in

inhibited in the transmitter by some other early death.

factor.

If the policy were supplemented by that

The Lorrams, like the Boxmeads, sug- of the progeny test employed by the most

gest a genetic factor which is more potent successful breeders of stock, Mrs. Hops's

than any ordinary recessive, and which is output would probably have been reduced

in some circumstances lethal.

from ten children to two, and the Tillers

THE PRACTICAL ASPECTS

from four to two. If the general policy adopted were the

This article, like that of last April, has ideal practical one of both taking account

two authors-the welfare agency which sup- also of the family history of potential

plied the facts, and the present wrivter who parents, and of encouraging sterility among

has only recounted them and considered their the weakly as well as among the definitely

genetic interpretation. The latter, however, defective, it is probable that not one of all

is entirely responsible for the following these forty-seven children would Have been

discussion of the practical aspects, since the born. The reader will note, incidentally,

welfare agency cannot agree with the stock- that these forty-seven, reduced to thirty-

breeder's attitude he adopts.

three by early deaths, are the gross product

The important question the eugenist of eleven parents.

must be prepared to answer is: " What Not many to-day, of course, will murmur

effect would sterilization, or other equally at the risk of thus preventing the appear-

effective policy, have had if it had been in ance of a few normal children-eight in a

force before these parents were married?" total of forty-seven-since some, at least,

To that question there is more than one would in all probability prove carriers of

answer. If the standards of diagnosis and uikdesirable genetic qualities. And, as one

certification were then what they are now, has to repeat again and again in face of the

the existence of the whole of the Luttrell misleading statements of the non-biological,

NSZASE AND DZFBCT

57

alu of these peop are the prFeny, if not

the i ate child, of defective ances-

tos, and ae likewis the tial

tors
Just

of
as

s*milarly a sientiic

defectie
diagnosis

descendts.
of normality

cannot be fined to the individual him-

self, but must t his family into accot,

so a scentiic prognosis of descndants

must look fr than the mediate

children.

I. M.

THE ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING
wl be Wd at
THE ROOMS OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY
BURLINGTON HOUSE, PICCADILLY On Wedneday, May 13th, at 4 p.m.
The MXetinh will be followed by
en Addrss by
LORD SALVEPEN
DIVORCE AND MARRIAGE LAW REFORM
Tea will be wrovided
EgeicesRee, VoL XXI No. 1.

