SOME REFLECTIONS ON GENIUS*
By W. RUSSELL BRAIN, M.A., D.M., F.R.C.P.

The Nature of Genius

the highest degree, that positive, scientifi-

PERHAPS the best justification for
choosing genius as the subject of a lec-
ture to commemorate Francis Galton
is that he was intensely interested in it, and his curiosity was so far-reaching that we can discuss hardly any aspect of genius without finding it illuminated by a reflection from some facet of his thought. For genius is a manifestation of human faculties, and it is related to heritable qualities, some of which are good, while others are bad. It comes to fruition through a complex interplay of nature and environment and it is one of the greatest of social values. It is of the utmost importance to society, therefore, to study those laws which govern its appearance. In the past, and to a large extent even to-day, genius has seemed mysterious, but this will not always be so. Even to-day we are beginning to see the directions along which research must be pursued if we are to understand it better. Genius is mysterious, like many other scientific problems, only because we do not at present possess the data with which to understand it.
The word " genius" is surrounded by an emotional aura. We must begin by separating the uncritical admiration which is often the appropriate response to the works and personality of genius from the dispassionate spirit of inquiry which sees genius as the product of scientific laws which, however complex they may be, have nothing to do with miracles.
What then is genius? Galtont used the term " hereditary genius " to express " an ability that was exceptionally high and at the same time inborn." Kretschmer proposes a different definition. " We shall give the name genius," he writes, " to those men who are able to arouse permanently, and in
* The Galton Lecture, delivered before the Eugenics Society on February i6th, I948.
t Hereditary Genius, 2nd ed., p. viii. : The Psychology of Men of Genius.

cally grounded feeling of worth and value in a wide group of human beings. But we shall
only do so in those cases where the value
arises with psychological necessity, out of the special mental structure of the bringer of value, not where a stroke of luck or some coincidence of factors has thrown it in his lap." Galton later, in the preface to the second edition of Hereditary Genius, regretted that he chose such a title, and said that on
looking back he would have preferred " Hereditary Ability." Thus he clearly recognized that the subject of his study was in some respects different from genius in the
popular sense of the term, which is broadly
the meaning defined by Kretschmer. Galton was concerned with the general laws of the inheritance of exceptional ability, which is
often an important factor in genius in the
popular sense. Kretschmer is interested in the particular psychological qualities which distinguish the genius from persons who merely possess exceptional ability. The two approaches are complementary to each
other. When Galton uses the term " ability"
what does he mean by it? He means ability to be a judge, a statesman, a poet, a musician-in other words, to be exceptionally successful in one of a variety of callings. Are we therefore justified in concluding that some unitary factor underlies these varied manifestations of " ability," such as " the ability to acquire and manipulate concepts" postulated by Terman* as " the sine qiua non of genius " ? Galton's own work shows that such- a view is too simple, for he demonstrated that some forms of hereditary ability manifest themselves in various spheres of activity, but others do not. Thus judges, statesmen, poets and other literary men appear fairly frequently in each other's families. Scientists have
* Psychological Approach to the Biography of Genius. The Eugenics Society and Hamish Hamilton, p. T.

12

SOME REFLECTIONS ON GENIUS

many relatives who are scientists and a factors, i.e. in popular language, as being

smaller number who distinguish themselves inherited or at least innate." I am sure that

as men of affairs, but few writers and almost this is fundamentally true, but I propose to

no poets, artists or musicians among their develop and elaborate it. Burt begins by

relations. And the eminent relatives of talking of function and, being concerned with

artists tend themselves to be artists, and inheritance, ends by discussing structure.

those of musicians to be musicians. Galton The two approaches are complementary, but

himself pointed out that Mendelssohn and I am going to consider mainly the physio-

Meyerbeer were the only musicians on his logical. The nervous system consists

list whose eminent kinsmen achieved success anatomically of units-the nerve cells-

in careers other than as musicians. Some which are very much alike, blAt we must not

allowance must be made for environment in conceive of the genius as being necessarily

the shape of family tradition, but I do not more richly endowed with nerve-cells than

think that this can explain the variability of the ordinary person. What is important is

the manifestations of hereditary ability in their organization. Nerve-cells are grouped

some families and its comparative fixity in into functional patterns, which are best

others.

called " schemas." Where the genius excels

My first aim in this lecture is to try to dis- the ordinary person is that in some respect

cover what is the source of these differences, he is richer in schemas. This may mean that

and I shall suggest to you that they depend he has more nerve-cells, we do not know, but

upon differences in the organization of the it is quite possible for the same number of

nervous system. And that will lead me to cells to be arranged either in simple or in

another question: since the genius is by complex patterns, just as a child's reader and

definition abnormal, and is so by virtue of Shakespeare's works are composed of the

an abnormal nervous system, what is the same twenty-six letters; and the normal

relationship between the nervous abnor- number of nerve-cells is so large that dif-

mality we call genius and those more familiar ferences of organization by themselves could

abnormalities we call disease ?

account for profound differences of func-

tional capacity. Without going into the

The Cerebral Basis of Genius

question of what is being tested by intefli-

A neurologist is naturally interested in the gence tests, and whether the function being

cerebral basis of genius. How does the brain explored is single or multiple, there can be no

of the genius differ from that of the ordinary doubt that it is a function or a group of

person ? Burt* has recently proposed a functions of a highly special kind. The

physiological interpretation of intelligence. schemas are those concerned in conceptual

" The mental processes essentially required or abstract thought. This is of the essence

by intelligence tests," he points out, " involve of some kinds of genius, but by no means of

the integration of a variety of perceptual and all. Consider the different parts played by

motor activities into a systematic whole-: intelligence in the philosopher, in whose

the more the processes tested depend upon work conceptual thought turns round and

this integration the closer they correlate reflects upon itself, the scientist who directs

with intelligence." He goes on to conclude it upon the data of observation, and the artist

that " the individual differences in integra- in whom its role is altogether more obscure,

tive capacity revealed by the tests may be and intimately related to feeling.

pimarily due to differences in the neuronic The relationship between intelligence and

architecture of the central nervous system," the use of words is of special importance for

and " finally, being structural, these dif- the study of genius. No doubt thinking of

ferences may readily be conceived as being some kind can occur without words, but the

larely, if not mainly, dependent on genetic whole of human culture has been rendered

* Intelligence and Fertility. The Eugenics Society and Hamish Hamilton, p. 38.

possible by the evolution of speech. We do not first have thoughts and then put them

I4 THE; EUGENICS REVIEW

into words; we use words in 9rder to think, or, to be more accurate, the schemas which
underlie the use of speech play an essential
part in the construction and evocation of the schemas for conceptual thought. This does not mean that intelligence is identical with

the capacity for speech, but that in the
individual as in the history of the race the
higher levels of conceptual thought are
attainable only in the presence of a highly developed capacity for the use of verbal symbols. Just as intelligence exhibits a wide
range of variation throughout a population,
so also does speech. Indeed, there is evidence
that different functions concerned in the use of verbal symbols may vary independently, and this is especially true of the use of visual symbols in reading and writing. Extreme degrees of congenital "word-blindness " attract attention early; minor defects of reading, writing and spelling are probably much commoner and constitute permanent handicaps in intellectual development. At the other extreme high literary ability may occur in families, e.g. the Bronte sisters. These facts suggest that hereditary factors may in part determine whether a
person's capacity for verbal symbolization is subnormal, normal or above the average.

Memory plays a vital part in both speech
and intelligence. Many great writers have
possessed remarkable memories. Boswell* says that Dr. Johnson's memory " was so tenacious that he never forgot anything that
he either heard or read.". Coleridge described his own memory as " tenacious and systema-
tizing." Having read a book in the morning he could in the evening repeat whole pages verbatim. It was, as Lowest says, " one of the most extraordinary memories of which there is record, stored with the spoils of omnivorous reading, and endowed into the bargain with an almost uncanny power of association."

Shelleyf is said to have been able to read for sixteen hours a day. " He took in seven or eight lines at a glance, and his mind seized the sense with a velocity equal to the

* Life of Joh/nson. Birkbeck Hill's edn., vol. i, p. 48.

t

The Road to Xanadu,
Shelley, by Newman

p. 43. Ivey White,

vol.

i,

p.

96.

twinkling of an eye. Often would a single word enable him at once to comprehend the meaning of the sentence. His memory was prodigious." Taking speech alone into consideration, the better the memory the larger the vocabulary and the greater the richness and differentiation of thought.
Inspiration and the Unconscious Mind
Perhaps the most remarkable feature of the creations of genius is the extent to which they arise independently of the conscious mind. This has always been recognized by poets and artists. Inspiration means the inbreathing of an impulse from without, felt to be in some way separate from the conscious personality, and often therefore personified by primitive thought. As Goethe* put it: "No productiveness of the highest kind, no remarkable discovery, no great thought that bears fruit and has results is in the power of anyone; such things are above earthly control." The process of creation is apt to be accompanied by a high degree of emotional excitement, so that often the artist feels possessed, and compelled to work with continuous energy until he has fulfilled his task. Those who are interested in the psychology of poetic inspiration will find it analysed at length in Livingston Lowes' remarkable book on Coleridge, The Road to Xanadu, in which he traces the sources of the images in The Ancient Mariner and Kubla Khan, and shows how they become modified and fused in the unconscious to emerge in Kubla Khan as a dreamlike stream of fantasy, but in The Ancient Mariner subdued and integrated by
creative thought.t The ordinary man has
been prone to dismiss poetic inspiration as a harmless form of madness of no interest except to the few eccentrics who enjoy poetry. But the geniuses of science have recognized that the inspiration which leads to scientific discovery does not differ from that of the poet in its nature but only in its subject-matter.+ An admirable illustration
* Conversatiotns of Goethe with Eckermann. Every-
man edn., p. 250. t See also Principles of Literary Criticism, by I. A.
Richards, and The Poetic Image, by C. Day Lewis.
: See The Anatomy of Inspiration, by Rosamund
E. M. Harding.

SOME REFLECTIONS ON GENIUS

of this is given by Poincar6* in a discussion words must be unusually well-equipped with

of mathematical discovery. After describing verbal and ideational schemas, but what kind

how he made some of his own discoveries, he of artist in words a man is will depend upon

says: "One is at once struck by these subtle differences. The philosopher and the

appearances of sudden illumination, obvious poet are both word-users, but how dif-

indications of a long course of previous un- ferently they employ them! Galton* said:

conscious work.... This unconscious work " An over-ready perception of sharp mental

... is not possible, or in any case not fruit- pictures is antagonistic to the acquirement

ful, unless it is first preceded and then fol- of habits of highly generalized and abstract

lowed by a period of conscious work. These thought, especially when the steps of reason-

sudden inspirations are never produced .. ing are carried on by words as symbols."

.except after some days of voluntary efforts The poet, who uses words to evoke images,

which appeared absolutely fruitless, in which and images to move and delight, is the very

one thought one had accomplished nothing, opposite of the thinker, who must detach his

and seemed to be on a totally wrong track. thought from the concrete and purge it of

These efforts, however, were not as barren feeling. Can anyone doubt that these dif-

as one thought; they set the unconscious ferences between geniuses and ordinary folk

machine in motion, and without them it and between one type of genius and another

would not have worked at all, and would not depend upon differences of neural organiza-

have produced anything. The necessity for tion, partly innate and partly developed by

the second period of conscious work can be use? What a supreme development of the

even more readily understood. It is neces- cerebral processes of speech must have been

sary to work out the result of inspiration, to present in Shakespeare to have provided

deduce the immediate consequences and put him with that vast vocabulary from which

them in order, and to set out the demonstra- he drew inexhaustibly fresh felicities of

tions, but, above all, it is necessary to verify phrase to startle us with their beauty! And

them." Here a mathematician of genius is how rich must have been his neural centres

describing precisely the same process as went of feeling to have enabled him to respond in

to the making of The Ancient Mariner.

sympathy with every note of the gamut of

I shall not now follow Poincare in his human passion, and find words for every

speculations as to the nature of the work done nuance of love and hate, pity and terror!

by the unconscious mind in creation, but The poet uses words to evoke images, and

merely point out that the creative genius, images to arouse feelings, and he employs

whether he be an artist, a scientist or an new combinations of words to shock his

abstract thinker, possesses this unconscious readers .into new experiences or to revivify

capacity to an extent far exceeding that of old ones. And most poets have believed that

the ordinary man. It would seem to pre- these combinations of words should excite

suppose a memory capable of retaining all pleasure in virtue of rhythm and rhyme or

the relevant data and associative processes of assonance. Anyone who has the smallest

exceptional richness by which the data can experience of writing verse knows that the

be brought together into novel and fruitful choice of words is only to a very limited

combinations in what Galton,t who also extent conscious, and this is equally true of

studied creative thinking, called " the ante- words representing images or ideas, and of

chamber of consciousness." These uncon- words as pleasurable combinations of sounds.

scious mnemic and associative functions Mr. Ivor Brownt makes this point in his

depend upon the richness and complexity of comments on these lines of Shakespeare:

those physiological dispositions of nerve-cells we have called " schemas." The artist in

"Can such things be And overcome us like a summer cloud

*. Science and Method, p. 46, et seq.
t Inquiries into Human Faculty and its Development.
Everyman edn., p. 146.

Without special wonder ?" * Ibid., p. 6o.
t The Observer, November gth, I947, p. 2.

i6 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

" What a symphony on the ' u ' sound is modify the pattern of events by discerning

here! " says Mr. Brown. "How far was in them meanings that elude the less gifted.

Shakespeare's knack of pouring high emotion But his task is far harder than that of the

into such enchanting melody a consciously novelist or the playwright, for he must take

contrived thing ? Perhaps this kind of his characters as he finds them, and by his

assonance just bubbled up in him as second superior knowledge and will impose his plot

nature. He can never have found the time upon theirs. He is the artist in action.

to give each line a day of contemplation."

" High emotion " is the purpose of the Musical Genius

creative writer who is a poet, novelist or play- Musical genius presents features which

wright, and he must therefore possess a rich suggest that it depends upon a highly

development of those basal structures of the specific development of the nervous system.

brain which are concerned with feeling. As a Musical ability is inherited, and it does not

result he is able, as Shelley* said in describing seem to be correlated in inheritance with any

his own powers, " to apprehend minute and other form of ability. The most notable

remote distinctions of feeling, whether rela- example is of course the Bach family, which

tive to external nature, or to the living beings was actively musical for seven (or according

which surround us." Surely it is the alliance to Galton, eight) generations. " Of some

of this high development of feeling with sixty Bachs known by name and profession

intelligence and the capacity for expression all but seven were organists, cantors or town

that makes the creative artist. And it is this musicians, many of them of eminence in their

which distinguishes Coleridge the poet from professions."* The innate character of

the many other Coleridges of outstanding musical talent is illustrated by the ex-

intellectual capacity that his family pro- tremely early age at which it is often ex-

duced in successive generations. Though hibited, as, for example, by Mozart and

these functions are distinguishable in thought, Beethoven, though music teems with infant

and even depend upon areas of the brain prodigies. The sense of absolute pitch prob-

which are anatomically distinct, we must ably depends upon the inborn organization

recognize that in artistic creation they are of the nervous system. Mozart exhibited it

integrated into a unity, for reflection en- at the age of seven. Sir Frederick Ouseley

riches and subtilizes feeling, and the word at the age of five said: " Only think, Papa

is a true creator of thought. As Blaket put blows his nose in G " .t The greatest musi-
it: " Ideas cannot be given but in their cians do not always possess it; Schumann

minutely Appropriate Words, nor can a and Wagner, for example, did not.

Design be made without its minutely Appropriate Execution."

We cannot say what is the neural basis of musical genius without first knowing what

I cannot do more than allude to the psy- cerebral activity underlies the enjoyment of chological characteristics that distinguish music in the' average person. Clearly there the great military leader, statesman and must be good hearing and a high capacity to administrator, and which, as many genealo- discriminate musical notes, which is probably

gies show, are often inherited. The genius in cerebral rather than auditory.+ But this in these fields must possess an outstanding turn must meet with a responsiveness of the intelligence which operates upon the minds feeling centres, so that certain combinations

of men as well as upon their material circum- and sequences of notes cause not only plea-

stances. As with the artist, however, it is a special blend of feeling with thought that enables his cerebral schemas to reflect the thoughts and feelings of his fellows, and to
* Shelley, by Newman Ivey White, loc. cit., p. 530. t Quoted in Fearful Symmetry, by Northrop Frye,

sure-or discomfort !-but also other feelings, which vary in their intensity and definiteness
* The Oxford Companion to Music, by P. A. Scholes. p. 56.
t Ibid., p. 2.
I See Inquiries into Human Faculty. Everyman edn.,

P. 93.

p. I9.

SOME REFLECTIONS ON GENIUS

in different persons. To this executants add guishes musical genius from musical apprecia-

a motor skill.

tion remains to be mentioned. No composer

It may seem useless to ask why music of genius has been a woman, and this must

arouses emotions, and certain sorts of music surely be due to innate and not cultural

certain emotions; there is no answer in causes-, for women have not lacked access to

terms of thought. If I may speculate for a musical instruments. Indeed, as executants

moment I would suggest that the answer is they can hold their own with men on many;

to be found in terms of cerebral function, and more women than men appreciate music,

namely that in musical people the electrical if one may conclude this from the presence

rhythms excited in the hearing centres of the of twice as many women as men at public

brain by musical sounds evoke resonances in concerts in this country. Does the fact that

the rhythms of the emotional centres, so that men make music for women to enjoy support

such people respond to music with feeling.* Darwin's theory* that the biological link

The unmusical lack these resonances, either between sound and feeling in music lies in

because their auditory discrimination is too the fact that music is a highly developed

poor, or because they do not possess the form of the sexual calls of animals ?

linkages between hearing and feeling. The The concept of physiological schemas

musical genius has both in high degree, and underlying both the conscious and the un-

since, unlike the artist in words, he has no conscious processes of mind can be used to

vocabulary to learn and needs no experience bring the idiot savant and the calculating

of life as his raw material, he comes into the boy into line with the conception of genius

world almost fully equipped to exercise his here proposed. These bizarre and limited

talent, and has only to acquire the necessary geniuses are freaks endowed with the

skill with his hands.

schemas of genius in a narrow field, but their

Within musical genius we recognize schemas work physiologically and not different kinds of ability. In " pure music," psychologically, so that the process, like as, for example, Mozart's symphonies or artistic inspiration, is unconscious, and the the Brandenburg concertos, " nothing is possessor can give no explanation of how involved but our perception of musical it is done.

quality and the delight those perceptions afford."t In opera and the finest religious Genius and Mental Disorder

music the composer discovers tunes and har- The belief that there is a correlation be-

monies that express and reinforce the tween genius and mental disease is a very

emotional content of the words. In what old one, and there are many reasons why it

many would consider the most satisfying should have become widely accepted. There

music of all, such as Beethoven's last four have been insane geniuses, and many more

quartets, the genius of the composer evokes whose behaviour has differed strikingly from

in the listener not only delight in the music that which the average person regards as

as such, but emotions which can be expressed normal. Indeed, since a genius is by defini-

only, and that inadequately, in such terms tion mentally abnormal in one sense, it

as mystics use. It would take us too deeply requires only a slight lapse of logic to con-

into musical esthetics and too speculatively sider him mentally abnormal in another, i.e.

into neurophysiology to discuss the basis of in the sense of insane or at least unstable.

these differences.

Both insanity and genius tend to excite a

One characteristic that sharply distin- somewhat similar emotional reaction, be-

cause they seem to be the result of mental

* It is interesting that in those rare individuals in
whom music causes epileptic attacks the emotional response to music appears to be abnormal and to

processes which the ordinary man does not share. Galtont himself thought that " there

precede the attack. (See Shaw and Hill, J. Neurol.,

Neurosurg. & Psychiat., I947, 10, I07.)

* The Descent of Man, 2nd edn., p. 572, and The

t Beethoven, by J. W. N. Sullivan. The New Library, Expression of the Emotions, p. 2I9.

P. 5 1.

t Hereditary Genius, 2nd edn., p. ix.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

is a large residuum of evidence which points
to a painfully close relation between the two,
and," he went on, " I must add that my own
later observations have tended in the same
direction, for I have been surprised at finding how often insanity or idiocy has appeared
among the near relations of exceptionally able men." But only statistical evidence can
settle this question. Havelock Ellis,* counting every reported case of insanity, including senile disorders, among I,030 British men of genius, found an incidence of only 4-2 per cent, while less than 2 per cent
were reported to have had insane parents or children. The incidence is significantly higher among poets, yet among I50 poets
born since I700, and included in the Oxford Book of English Verse, only twenty-two, or
approximately I5 per cent, are known to have been either insane or so grossly psycho-
pathic as to be seriously neurotic or opium or alcohol addicts. In spite of this, poetry is not a dangerous trade. On the contrary. Mr.
Harold Nicolsont has drawn attention to the longevity of the thirty-two most famous British poets who flourished between the middle of the fourteenth and the middle of the nineteenth century, nineteen of whom lived beyond the age of 6o and ten beyond 70. I have carried this investigation farther by taking I50 poets born between I700 and I862 whose work is represented in the Oxford Book of English Verse. Their average age at death was 70: thirty-two lived to between 6o and 70, thirty-three to between 70 and 8o, twenty-seven to between 8o and 90, and two were over 90 when they died. As far as can be ascertained, the longevity of poets does not differ significantly from that of the general population.
Mr. Nicolsonf has recently defended the mental health of authors. True, some of them may have been eccentric, but few have been actually insane. Apart from these, their peculiarities are not symptoms of mental disorder. " Of course," he says, " all creative writers are nervous; even Horace, that complacent hedonist, referred to them

as the 'genus irritabile vatum'-'that tetchy breed of bards '; but to be nervous, even to
be extremely nervous, does not necessarily imply that one is suffering from a nervous
disease." I propose to consider separately what Mr.
Nicolson calls " nervousness," and actual
insanity. He first defines " creative writers " as those who " by the force of their imagina-
tion, or the delicacy of their perception ... have discovered new combinations of experience," and he adds that " the creative writer,
the poet and the artist do . .. possess a certain nervous sensibility, which manifests itself not merely in their receptivity to inspiration, but also in certain, apparently morbid, eccentricities." Goethe* held similar views, but drew a different conclusion from them. Speaking to Eckermann about poets he said: " Their extraordinary achieve-
ments presuppose a very delicate organization, which makes them susceptible to unusual emotions and capable of hearing celestial voices. Such an organization in conflict with the world and the elements is easily disturbed and injured; he who does not, like Voltaire, combine with great sensibility an equally uncommon toughness is liable to constant illness." Is " nervous " in Mr.
Nicolson's sense the same as "neurotic" ? If we ask what is meant by " neurotic " we are faced at once by the chaotic state of psychological thought. Psychiatrists use the term in at least four different ways: (i) to indicate a failure to adapt to life owing to certain psychological defects; (2) to describe
various different abnormal symptoms; (3)
for many different theoretical accounts of the psychological causation of (i) or (2); and (4) genetically, to indicate an inherited basis for the tendency to develop the condition
explained by (I), (2) or (3).
Eysenckt in his recent statistical study
finds that the characteristics of neurotic introverts include anxiety, depression, obsessional tendencies and irritability. According to their own statements their feelings are easily hurt, they are self-conscious, moody

* A Study of British Genius. t The Lancet, I947, ii, 709.
t Ibid.

* Conversations of Goethe with Eckermann. Everyman edn., pp. 335-6.
t Dimensions of Personality, p. 246.

SOME REFLECTIONS ON GENIUS

I9

and given to day-dreaming. He* distin- Dickens* manifested some obsessional traits,

guishes a factor for neuroticism from a factor but his general mood of elation, associated

for introversion, the former operating in the with hyperactivity and broken by short

(conative) sphere of will and activity and the recurrent periods of depression, suggests

latter in the (affective) sphere of feeling. Let that he too was cycloid.

us leave on one side the question whether the No man is a genius because he is a cyclo-

symptoms enumerated are due to the intro- thyme, but the association of cyclothymia

version alone or to the combination of intro- with the intellectual equipment of genius

version and neuroticism. Is there any dif- modifies in a distinctive way the character

ference between Mr. Nicolson's " nervous " and the creations of genius. Several such

creative writer and Dr. Eysenck's neurotic effects may be noted. The creativeness of the

introvert, except that the former possesses genius may show a rhythm determined by

higher intelligence and powers of expres- the cyclothymia, cycles of productiveness

sion ? Given this intellectual equipment and alternating with cycles of sterility. This has

sufficient drive, the writer's sensitive feelings been traced in the life of Goethe by M6bius,t

and his moods provide the raw materials who believes that it illuminates even his love

upon which his self-consciousness directs his affairs, and applied to musical compositions

analytical thought. His day-dreaming be- in the case of Hugo Wolf.+ Secondly, the

comes imagination, his obsessions ever and untiring energy and flight of ideas of the

again turn his eyes upon those dark places phase of elation may persist as a milder

of the mind from which the normal man enduring state without disorder of thought,

hurriedly averts his gaze, and the flame of and add greatly to the productivity of the

his words distils from his experience the artist, as was the case with Dickens. More-

quintessence of his raptures and his agonies. over, the cyclothyme often possesses a rich

So I would suggest that those traits which Mr. endowment of feeling which sharpens his

Nicholson calls " nervous " in the genius are sensibility to nature and to personal relation-

genetically and psychogenetically identical ships, and contributes a characteristic zest

with those which we term neurotic in the to his work. I hope to publish an analysis

ordinary man.

of the influence of mania upon the poetry

The form of insanity which is most closely
related to genius is cyclothymia, the manic-
depressive state. Many men of genius have either been cyclothymes themselves or have been cycloids with a family history of cyclothymia. Three poets born in the eighteenth century-Smart, Cowper and Clare-were cyclothymes who were periodically insane.

of Christopher Smart, who left one poem, " Jubilate Agno," written while he was insane, and the better-known " Song to
David," written during convalescence. Finally, the extroversion of the cyclothyme enables him to speak to the ordinary man, while the introversion of the schizothyme makes his ideas so personal as to be in extreme cases unintelligible.

Other noted cyclothymes were James Bos- To sum up, then, I have presented the view

well, George Fox, the founder of Quakerism, that genius is usually the resultant of a

Goethe, Robert Mayer, who discovered the number of factors. Intelligence is doubtless

law of conservation of energy, and Hugo the most important, and this is the dis-

Wolf, the composer. Isaac Newtont at the tinguishing feature of those families in which

age of 50 suffered from a mental disorder great ability is transmitted through successive

characterized by depression and delusions. generations, often manifesting itself in a wide Dr. Johnson was racked by obsessions and range of achievements.§ This is what Dr.

compulsions, but his recurrent depression * See Charles Dickens's Letters. The Nonesuch

may mean that he was also a cyclothyme.

Dickens, 1, P. 79I, and 2, pp. 17, 24, and i69.
t Quoted by Kretschmer, loc. cit.

* Ibid., p. 26I. t Isaac Newton, by J. W. N. Sullivan.

t " Manie et Inspiration Musicale," R. Pauly and H. Hecaen, Ann. med-psychol., I939, 97, 389.
§ Terman, loc. cit., p. Io.

20 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Johnson* meant when he said: " The true The obsessional scrupulosity of John Wool-

genius is a mind of large general powers, man helped to liberate the slaves, and

accidentally determined to some particular Charles Dickens's " morbid " preoccupation

direction." But there is reason to think that with cruelty and prisons moved his " nor-

there are specific abilities distinct from in- mal" fellow countrymen to abolish abuses

telligence which, when associated with it, which their own insensitiveness had long

decide the character of genius. Power of tolerated. Who can say whether Donne,

verbal expression is one such talent, and Swift, Boswell, Johnson, Shelley, Darwin,

musical ability is another. Probably many Dickens and Ruskin would have been of

factors are concerned, and it is the unique- more or less value to the world without their

ness of particularly favourable combinations psychological handicaps ? And would human

that makes the genius.

culture be the richer or the poorer without

Most geniuses are perfectly sane, but its obsessionals and its cyclothymes ? Is Mr.

among creative artists, especially, the pre- Edmund Wilson* right when he likens such

dominant role of the feelings explains the geniuses to Philoctetes in Sophocles's play

closer correlation between genius and mental of that name ? " The victim of a malodorous

instability. Here those very traits which in disease which renders him abhorrent to

the less intelligent prove a social handicap society and periodically degrades him and

may, when linked with high intellectual makes him helpless is also the master of a

capacity and powers of artistic expression, superhuman art which everybody has to

become a social value, for in the social respect and which the normal man feels he

balance sheet of genius the deficiencies of the needs.... The bow would be useless with-

individual may be the assets of society. Is out Philoctetes himself. It is in the nature of

there not sometimes an overlap between the things-of this world where the divine and

psychopath and the saint, the pervert and the human fuse-that they cannot have the

the reformer, which makes it impossible to irresistible weapon without its loathsome

distinguish them by current psychology ? owner."

* Boswell's Life of Johnson. Birkbeck Hill's edn., vol. ii, p. 437, nOte 2.

* The Wound and the Bow, p. 294.

PHYSIOLOGICAL ZOOLOGY
Edited by Warder C. Allee, the University of Chicago. In the October 1947 nuwber: THE EFFECT OF TEMPERATURE ON THE INTERSEX CHARACTER OF DAPHAVIA LONGISPINA. By KATHERINE K.
SANFORD. THE EFFECT OF CERTAIN DEPRESSING AGENTS ON INTRACELLULAR OXIDATION OF INDICATORS IN HYDRA.
By C. M. CHILD. RESPONSES OF FISH MELANOPHORES TO CHEMICAL WARFARE AGENTS. By C. ILDD PROsSER, BRUNO VON LUBAcH
and GEORGE W. BENNETT, with Technical Assistance of MARIAN F. JAMES. EFFECTS OF TESTOSTERONE PROPIONATE ON SEX DEVELOPMENT IN FEMALE AMBMOMfA LARVAE. By
BEATRICE MINTZ.
THE EFFECT OF MALE HORMONE ON AGGRESSIVE BEHAVIOR IN MICE. By ELIZABETH A. BEEMAN. PHtSIOLOGICAL ZOOLOGr is published quarterly in January, April, July. and October
Subscription $zo a year Canadian postage 2oc. Single copies $3 Foreign postage 48c.
THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS, 5750 Ellis Avenue, CHICAGO
Eugenics Review, Vol. 14 No. 1

