.: be Eugen Cs_ ucatfou Socfety.

-rest0ent: MAJOR LEONARD DARWIN.

~~- .

U)i~~~WcenVre9tbent0:

SI-R JAMES BARR, M.D.

CHIANCELLOR STARR JORDAN.

SIR JAMES CRICHTON-BROWNs, F.R.S.

DR. A. PLOETZ.

BISHOP D'ARCY.

M. EDMOND PERRIER.

ML W. C. MARSHALL.

PROF. SEWARD, F.R.S.

PROFESSOR W. P. BENHAM, F. R. S.

-Members of Council:

MR. CROFTON BLACK.

SIR E. BRABROOK, C.B.

MRS. THEODORE CHAMBERS.

HON. SIR JOHN COCKBURN, KC.M.G.

MR. R. NEWTON-CRANE.

MR. A. E. CRAWLEY.

SIj H. CUNNINGHAM, K.CI.E.

DR. LANGDON DOWN.

MR. HAVELOCK ELLIS.

PROF. J. FINDLAY.

MR. WHELER GALTON.

-,DR. GREENWOOD.

DR. W. HADLEY.

.

ADMIRAL HENDERSON.

MAJOR HILLS.

LADY OWEN-MACKENZIE.
MR. R. MOND. DR. F. W. MoTT, F.R.S. MR. G. P. MUDGE. MiRS. G. POOLEY. PROF. E. B. POULTON.
MR. W. REA, M. P. DR. A. REID.
MR. JOHN RUSSELL.
DR. ETTzE SAYER. F. C. S. SCHILLER, D.Sc. PROF. A. SCHUSTER, F.R.S. EDGAR SCHUSTER, D. SC. DR. C. G. SELIGMANN. PROF. J. A. THOMSON.

Dr. INGE, THE VERY REV. THE DEAN OF ST. PAUL'S.
MISS KIRBY. ML ERNSsT LANE, F.R.C.S. MR. W. C. MARSHALL.

DR. TREDGOLD. MRS. ALEC TWERDIL MR. W. C. D. WHETHAM, F. R. S. DR. DOUGLAS WHITE. DR. A. GORDON WILSON.

Hon. Treasurer: MR. P. VON FLEISCHL.

Hon. Secretac: MRS. A. C. GoTTo.

Members representing Branch Councils are nominated by the Branches.

:Sfrmingbam:

MR. CAREY GILSON. MRL HUMPHREY HUMPHREYS. MR. P. MILLS.

MR. R. T. BODEY. MR. D. LAURIE. DR. W. B. WARRINGTON.

-lbaslemere:

WBelfazt:

0Iasaow:

Mr. W. C. MARSHALL.

PROF. J. H. LINDSAY.

(To be appointed.)

-Rew ZeaIan>:

THE HIGH COMMISSIONER OF NEW ZEALAND. ADMIRAIL HENDERSON.

"EBugenics is the study of agences under social control that may improve or impair the racal gualties offuture generations either physically o,r mentally."

OBJ ECTS.

Persistently to set forth the National Importance of Eugenics in order to modify public opinion, and create a sense of responsibility in the respect of bringing all matters pertaining to human parenthood under the dominatioil of Eugenic ideals.
II.
To spgead a knowledge, of -the Laws of heredity so far as they are surely known, and so far as
that knowledge may affect the improvement of the race.
III. To further Eugenic Teaching, at home, in the schools, and elsewhere.

Membership Associate Membership

SUBSCRIPTION.
One Guinea per Annum.
- - - - Five Shillings per Annum.

PRIVILEGES.
Attendance at Lectures, Discussions, and General Meetings, Use of Library. Members only receive THE EUGENICS REVIEW free.

Forms of Application for Afembership and Associaze Meinbership and ful particulars of thse Society can,be obtained of the Hon. Secretary.

OFFICES: Kingsway House, Klngsway, W.C. OFFICS HOURS: 10.0 am. to 5 p.m, Saturday. 10.0 a.m to 1 p.m.

PERIODICAL LITERATURE.

ENGLISH.

THE JEWISH REVIEW, July, I9I3. Vol. iv., No. 20. Jewish Eutgenics.

J. Snowman, M.D. Pp. 159-175. The writer thinks that the

general conception of the purity of the Jewish race requires some

modification. In Germany where the non-Jewish population is distinctly

blonde, the proportion of blonde Jews is 30 per cent. In Arabia, Africa,

and Caucasus where the non-Jewish population is mainly brunette, only

about I5 per cent. of the Jews are blonde. The dark Jews of India and

Abyssinia form an extreme instance. What is the eugenic value of prosely-

tism ? The biological utility of Gentile blood to the Jewish race is con-

trolled by the attitude the newcomer and his descendants will maintain

to the Jewish religion. In the past inter-marriage must have determined

some of the anomalies of Jewish physical features, but to-day the Ghetto

system has been relaxed, and forces of assimilation are commonly far less

strong, so that inter-marriage under modern circumstances must consti-

tute a very serious leakage from Judaism.

On the subjects of alcoholism and insanity, the effects of selection in an

urban population, and the prevalence of nervous diseases among the Jews,

the writer is too dogmatic, and makes more definite statements than evi-

dence warrants, and at times seems not a little confused. Eugenists will

be far more interested in his quotations from Jewish teachers showing that

Judaism and Eugenics are as he puts it "in complete accord," than in

doubtful arguments about the causes of the physical features of Judaism.

Here are some of them:-"A Jew without a wife is no man " (Bera-

choth 63a). "He who marries a wife unsuitable to him is flogged by the

Almighty and beaten by Elijah " (Kiddushin 7a)-without disrespect we

might ask which process comes first. "He who marries for the sake of

money will have unworthy children " (Nedarhim 20a). The Rabbis held

that in the case of a legally bethrothed woman who concealed physical

defect, its discovery made void th-e bethrothal. If no inquiry had been

made she might be divorced, her Ketubah unpaid (Mish. VII., Kethu-

both 7). Should the husband contract serious physical defect, leprosy

and polypus disease b>eing enumerated, the Beth-Din were empowered to

compel him to divorce his wife (Ibid. Mishua 9). Yebamoth 64b urges

restraint from marriage into a family tainted by epilepsy or leprosy. The

great beau ideal is to marry the daughter of a scholar, a forecast as

to offspring being made by considering the lady's brothers. Even in the

light of recent research we should not despise this method. " A pretty

wife improves a man's mental attitude to things in general " (Berachoth

57b), and " Woman only exists for beauty," are texts we commend to some

of our more strong-minded sisters especially when it is qualified by

"Woman is onily the mother of her sons " (Kethuboth 57b). The following

would not perhaps always be true, "Happy is the husband of a comely

wife, the number of his days is doubled" (Sanhedrim ioob) nor does the

full content of the following appear on the surface. "He who marries

a beautiful figure will have a stubborn and rebellious son" (Sanhedrim

1o7a). These with some old Testament additions will help to explain

much in the matter of eugenics and the Jew.

C. S. STOCK.

SCIENCE PROGRESS IN THE TWENTIETH CENTURY, October, 1913. No. 30.

The Significance of the Piltdown Discovery. A. G. Thacker. Pp. 275-

290. The author discusses in an interesting manner the inter-relations

of the various species of palaeolithic man of which remains have been

found. The fragmentary skull unearthed at Piltdown in Sussex is the

most recently discovered of these, and has given rise to much controversy

as to the characteristics of the race from which its original owner sprang.

Nature and Nurture in Mental Development. F. W. Mott, M.D.,

F.R.S. Pp. 291-323. The first and second of the three Chadwick Public

Leictures, delivered in 1913 by the author.

PERIODICAL LITERATURE.

375

The Interpretation of Fact in the Study of Heredity. Charles Walker. D.Sc. Pp. 324-342. The author adduces arguments to support his theory that only recently acquired characters are inherited in a Mendelian manner and not ancient racial characters. As the function of the chromosomes is to provide the mechanism for Mendelian inheritance, it follows that only recently-acquired characters are represented in them.

THE HIBBERT JOURNAL, October, 1913. Vol. xii., No. i. The Moral

Obligation to be Intelligent. Professor John Erskine. Pp. 174-I85. Into

this short paper is packed a fine criticism of the Anglo-Saxon attitude

towards intelligence. "Be good, sweet maid, and let who will b-e clever,"

illustrates a real and deep-seated antithesis in the English mind. The

author culls examples from Milton, Shakespeare, Thackeray and many

other writers. He points out how characters like Mr. Boffin in "Our

Mutual Friend " wholly admirable in his station as Dickens has repre-

sented him, would have been treated by Balzac. He would have

made us feel not only admiration for the stable loyal character,

but also deep pity that such goodness should be so tragically

bound in unintelligence or vulgarity. This deep-seated habit of

mind is of profound importance to eugenists; it is perhaps their

greatest obstacle. In judging of the goodness or badness of any course

of action they are guided solely by the results, including in results more

than the merely immediate effects. The writer says truly that the great

Englishman who combines intelligence and character, usually seems an

exception to his own people, and is often best appreciated in other lands.

Eugenists will echo the regret and approve the principles of the follow-

ing passage: "as a race we seem as far as possible from realising that

an action can intelligently be called good only if it contributes to a good

end; that it is the moral obligation of an intelligent creature to find out

as far as possible whether a given action leads to a good or a bad end;

and that any system of ethics that excuses him from that obligation is

vicious." The ethical system, implicit in current pronouncements of

some ecclesiastics on such matters as divorce, will come under the censure

of this passage. To use some words of the author they are trying to

make the will of God prevail without using their intelligence to find out

what is the will of God. The profound melancholy of Plato's words " that

sin is but ignorance, and knowledge and virtue are one," sinks dieep into

the mind of students of eugenics.

C. S. STOCK.

BEDROCK, October, I913. There are several articles in the current number of this journal which have, an indirect bearing on Eugenics, such as that of Professor Poulton on "Mimicry and the Inheritance of Small Variations," a reply to Professor Punnett's article in the July issue, and Sir Bryan Donkin's paper on the "State Punishment of Crime." Of direct importance is Mr. J. E. Lane's essay on the "Control of Venereal Disease in England." Mr. Lane's experience entitles him to spe-ak with autho-
rity on this question, and the reader of his scathing indictment will probably feel that the belated appointment of a Royal Commission is but scanty compensation for apathy which for years has characterised the governing classes of this country with respect to this matter. It seems incredible that as recently as I899, when approached by leading bodies of the medical profession, the Government of the day declined to take any action on the ground that public opinion was not sufficiently informed on the subject to justify such a course.
Mr. Lane urges the importance of action along two lines, viz., systematic instruction both of the laity a-nd the medical stuldent, and increased facilities for efficent treatment. Under both headings the present state of affairs is, as he points out, unsatisfactory and there is not a little danger that the public interest, excited by the appointment of a Royal Commission may subside without any practical results having been obtained.

376 EUGENICS REVIEW.

BIOMETRIK.A, October,I913. Vol. ix, Parts iii. and iv. The first

paper in this issue is a study of pigment anomalies among natives of NgoDyrrnaa.spashWlasb.ilnaaiRnns.ddm.MfbaoycrdmTDoshrne.aelnuHles.xettfouSl.pmaespSauetspraupnrlinseeumsate;nhnetiitnetgxoiepsentchiiteolalutuEssiutoagrnenandtoeifdcinslbtiefyLeraebnisonutrimanaegtnrcooairuetyntstemmepRphmtoootmiboery-

BIlBt(phmeshmPNaa3erfoniaeieaeean)sfoipsaoeavtsrdisneldcrmmhiecattsrtisrsgeoonlhhtce,uhoiieitdegdhnelsynpsrrBtartr;.et.bsiTtnabixikoyaiaewnppo(oai-undtn2eofennt)ghMcsAnMMhuaeirstetCoaoamttnia.hsroirfhpnibteis'rea9naol,inLsrrhtMvf0yposeateIecen8.lhttrsnutbmMraed,hsthhiaoytueeGiueepnlfiffglorerrauoesaeoinAlMoellnesrtxlitvniae,v,etfpulaitsetednnoeomnnrhsh.awcsbwccaieretioyeeaslnoroasRrnenoifCpte,vgyodeodDoaoWsiel:slfrtldutoir-tehe.,calhnePd(heytuSeonriaerplfooAd)sgAlaniffraBeieptmdneolBettnmTeiaslee-rhrwdweohisstcfclmufoantomoaaoierbioswrnotncMaotetnoboioinngHfrrefrPaAsmdraaaisdenscserendiIfnecaaarnindiegairtiotdtcmlesoBsesfrtteaenoener,oLailawmtlnx-Rooterilyt,ctbenhsaltiR,lhm.rslse.,yhaiaoatatisscndseatomafstalcetrisaithetee-iosamffAemadalcneinuoai.imllsnwsrcgdlAltmafadaohtoeyeneewnroihsnnsddt,reopedtITthgonrmeienhbusrbhxnttp-restyocoeeuetuetntulnropaxrbhhd-onttpoeleescyEPftdhwei7immtlniorrero5seaeasc-loiiCntholsctoglbfeiofseNyulrnonsuerdsaotaccwtsyswpifCsuneliistecauoa.ndounhoi-ao;s,sl--nge-anrldf

similarthe
one

Human of the

Viscera, authors,

the paper published

bieniIn9g04i.n

continuation of a The concluding

study by memoir in the

vptorheelduimmcietsicoiensllebaqynueaaDtri.aonscHr.isthiDoceuilsmdSopburyzoavPeroofonfesPvseaollrvuiePceianMrescaolsinnuirocefamltehonebtsstr.eetcreicnTsth.ereapAuomtrhtoonro'gns

classesthe diet of the working
cited as worthy of special

attentbiyon.Miss

Dorothy

E.

Lindsay

should

be

1913.PROCEEDINGS OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY OF MEDICINE, November,

Section of Epidemiology and State Medicine. The paper read at the

MOecdtiocbienremebeytiDnrg.

of the Epidemiological section W. McC. Wanklyn should be

of the Royal Society of carefully studied by all

those interested in eugenics. Dr. Wanklyn has made a careful survey

votehfaatwloeordnkeii-nsh,ga-lctfolaospfsutthheiotmpmeoiplucdlolanytd,iiotdiniosnocsfreLidonintLadboolnnedoitsno,hoouaurnsdecditvhiinelistsaettaniteoenm.eonftIsatfifaaniprmpseaanrrey-s

cases not affording the conveniences necessary for the maintainance of

a civilised existence, and in some cases incompatible with any standard
othielrn Wanklyn'siovcabanifsiutgvrttsiheec.ademu"apmmdlLtfasetTaetsth;ithecarhrrenlaoiiyacnupaendtsldstyileiyodoy-npniengkis.ceitceeoanetnAlehpwcMsdeiyhsten.topeggerreaneinnessiWnemdnsoreeitfannaitlmtigmnho,regalnwstyyaoiehhnnteewqtoceduhnelooeowtylntafardleiiitooltcftfhaifote,olhfsosnoeef:suuaw;rc-tnth"opdhapAaosTondhssogdeodarbuegawusdrepesehslshtoiytefofaraloinnofivddmnewhDswtarteh.treleltedh-htseeeseupdmrrru.aercecnosogansudattinrerndddiag-s,-

heart, prsinocmie-iwbdefsboprlefourtaeoalfrassrl-wnopifrurrnkeengticae",rcd,egandntuTsluug.yaaphsesacsnteenesdhmsiditsubtahrIfpoomntiuwwatrtfs.gaeegoohigronagstbeleerhxile,edunpabeIneetonfmaoioneiumunnsnhqtotobfgdseue,fno.easatbren,g-ltioictyishdtolvte.olnaTyeerhdaroah.oenytnbaieddttsnyboapctadlruaoaineebpncyl,ndasodl;oi-otseinsdubhesdtgetlwu.eilhitcotfenheoin-innnsrnsdtetePoa.ersetfpswncrhoekeeaseciunsoByttnit.nthupsdhsrehttlteoyheioicsefvonToell!oimsheornusshshaspg,soseoatltpthumaaetooshicrelrssreoieeueesnpdesotc.eatsworns,h,lmoeeheeaatyotftgsTyooorheimhfroeeanameayrhttieyiaylah,msolknepo-iyebajosdliuelgensns-isdcoctpnistoaogebthismlmslhed.fieee,er-"t

PERIODICAL LITERATURE.

377

The eugenic importance of these results is, inter alia, that the characters which have survival value under such conditions are not necessarily or even probably those which we desire to see perpetuated. We may, if we please, argue that the insanitary conditions are the effect and not the cause of the degeneracy, but so long as there is reason to suppose that any exceptions to this rule occur, so long will it be necessary to strive for their amelioration as a part of our eugenic propaganda.
THE MEDICAL OFFICER, November Ist, 1913. The Sanitary Control of Venereal Diseases in New York. Hermann M. Biggs, M.D., General Medical Officer, New York City Department of Health. Pp. 213-2I6. Dr. Biggs describes the regulations adopted on February 20th, 1912, in New York for the notification of venereal diease, and for its diagnosis and treatment at the public expense. He describes also, the reasons which prompted the Boardc of Health to adopt these regulations and meets the various objections which have b-een urged against them. Finally, he gives a critical summary of the statistical data which have been collected as a result of notification and, from Teturns sp-ecially asked for from practising physicians.
THE JOURNAL OF STATE MEDICINE, October, 1913. Vol. xxi., No. io.
The Relation of Eugenic Education to Public Health. Mrs. A. C. Gotto. Pp. 623-631. A paper read at the Paris Congress of the Royal Institute of Public Health. Together with other papers read before the Eugenics and Child Study Section, it was summarised in the July number of the REVIEW.
BRITISH MEDICAL JOURNAL, November ist, I913. Hereditary Transmission of Sarcoma. J. S. Manson, M.B. Pp. 1135-1137. This is a valuable contribution to the study of inheritance in cancer. The facts recorded are that woman died in I898 of lympho-sarcoma on the left side of the neck; she had three sons, of whom the two youngest died in I913 of the same disease localised in exactly the same place. Neither the father or mother, or any brothers and sisters of this woman had cancer. Clinical details of the t'hree cases are given. The author, after a brief discussion of other hypotheses, concludes that heredity is the best explanation of the facts.
LANCET, September 20th, 1913. The Incidence of Inherited Syphilis in Congenital Mental Defzciency. J. Leslie Gordon, M.D. Pp. 86I-863. By the application of the Wasserman test to 400 cases of congenital mental defect Dr. Gordon arrives at the following conclusions: (i) That syphilitic infection is associated with a considerable number of cases of congenital mental defect, and that in most cases the infection is due to inherited disease. (2) Inherited syphilis either by itself or in conjunction with other factors plays an important part in the causation of congenital mental defects.
LANCET, November 8th, 1913. An address on Heredity and Inheritance as they concern the Physician, delivered before the Birmingham
Society for the Study of Heredity. Charles Mercier, M.D., F.R.C.P.,
P. 1299-I303. There is not much to learn from this clever but rather cynical address, except that Dr. Mercier has little sympathy with the systematic study of heredity and little knowledge of the aspirations of eugenists; that he believes the doctrine of the continuity of the germplasm to be inconsistent with the fact that on the whole vigorous people tend to have vigorous children, and asserts that " there is very little evidence that idiocy, imbecility, and weak-mindedness are heritable in the sense that they are passed on from parent to child." His own theory of reproduction and development, which he modestly admits has only one adherent, is described with much humour and vivacity. But the description leaves us in doubt as to whether he had throughout his lecture any objects but to surprise, amuse, or mystify his audience. " The female element," he suggests, " contributes the substance or matter of the

378 EUGENICS REVIEW.
offspring; the male element contributes the force or energy that animates the matter." The sperm is conceived as giving an impetus to the ovum which, except for accidents, determines the whole course of development in the same way as the stroke of the batsman determines the flight of a cricket ball. As development proceeds, the impetus is gradually used up, but it may be used up in two different ways, either in giving bulk to the body or complexity of structure to the brain. It thus follows that with a constant impetus intellect, which depends on complexity of brain structure, will vary inversely with bodily size, so that on the whole we should expect genius from dwarfs and idiocy from giants. As " evidence " that this is in fact the case he mentions that Caesar, Marlborough, Nelson, Napoleon, and Wellington were below the average size.
FOREIGN.
ARCHIV FUR RASSEN- UND GESELLSCHAFTS-BIOLOGIE X., I-2; JanuaryApril, 1913 (published October 3rd).
J. C. H. de Meijere: Zutr Vererbung des Geschlechts und der secundaren Geschlechtsmerkmale (p. I-36). A further exposition and criticism of recent theories of the inheritance of sex. (An earlier paper by the same author appeared in the Archiv, Vol. vii., i9ii.) The writer agrees with Professor 0. Hertwig that the sexual differences are frequently so great and appear in so many different parts of the body, that one must assume that they develop from a large number of different sets of determinants. He believes that each sex is homozygotic, and contains within itself the characters of both sexes, and that there is a special male and a special female complex of determinants, from either of which the entire soma can develop. He therefore concludes that Mendelian phenomena play no part in the determination of sex. At the most a Mendelian factor might act as a ferment on one or the other complex of determinants. He objects to a Mendelian theory for the reason that (i) the expectation of i : i is not realised; (2) only on condition that this expectation were realized would it be possible to prove that a character
is heterozygotic; (3) the determination of sex is often a result of an
alteration in the number of chromosomes, that is to say, of the action of forces which are not subject to an alternative mechanism of heredity; (4) because of the frequently anomalous behaviour of the heterochromosomes.
W. Weinberg: Uber die Fahlbeckcshe Degression der Knabenfroportion bei im Mannesstamm aussterbenden und uberlebenden Geschlechtern (p. 37-40). In his well-known book on the Swedish nobility, Professor Fahlbeck calls attention to the fact that in the case of families that become extinct, the proportion of males to females born decreases from generation to generation until it falls considerably below the normal proportion of 104-105 boys to ioo girls. This Fahlbeck considers to be a sign of degeneration, and more recently Lenz has suggested that it must be because the effects of degenerate rudimentary constituents are more likely to be manifested in males than in females. Weinberg replies that, since the perpetuation of male lines always presupposes that in each generation boys must be born, the proportion of boys and girls in all generations except those last observed must be above the normal, and that this would of course also follow if the sex of the other children born to each generation were wholly dependent upon chance, and consequently in the proportion of 1o5-Ioo. He also shows with the aid of a formula constructed for the purpose that the same phenomenon would be observed if the sex of the individual members of a family, premature deaths, and the failure to marry or to have children were wholly dependent upon chance, so that unless we have evidence to the contrary there is no necessity for believing that the decrease of the proportion of males

PERIODICAL LITERATURE.

379

is due to degeneration. The more children born to a family and the larger the proportion of males to females, the greater its prospect of enduring in the male line. Old families, therefore, are the surviving representatives of such as had a large proportion of males in their early generations. The moral to be drawn from Fahlbeck's and Lenz's conclusions is, that new theories based on statistical evidence are very apt to be of doubtful value unless carefully tested for the effects of chance.
Mathilde von Kemnitz: Der asthenische Infantilismus des Weibes
in seinen Beziehungen zur Fortpflanzungstatigkeit und geistigen
Betatigung (p. 4I-66). "Asthenic infantilism is a form of infantilism that is caused by the transmitted constitutional anomaly ' asthenia,' and consequently is always accompanied by asthenic symptoms." The author dismisses all causes of a social nature, such as the effects of exhaustion, malnutrition, bad housing, condition of mother during pregnancy, etc., and declares that asthenia is entirely a result of injury to the germplasm. Hysteria she believes is largely induced by false education, and neurasthenia she considers to be an anomaly of the peripheral nerves due to an exaggerated weakness of the sympathetic nerve. The author, however, stands on firmer ground in dissenting from the views of the late Dr. P. J. Mobius and Professor von Gruber, according to whom the characteristic symptoms of asthenic infantilism in women who have had a university training are a result of their intellectual activity, and that therefore the higher education of women and their employment in the learned professions is injurious to the race. " We can state it to be a scientific fact that women of asthenic habitus who are employed in intellectual pursuits and are incapable of reproduction, were already constitutionally asthenic before they began their studies; they do not become asthenic because they are engaged in mental work." Frl. von Kemnitz agrees with Professor von Gruber that many women employed in the learned professions are asthenic; but finds the explanation to lie in the fact that the majority of asthenic women have no natural desire for marriage, and consequently, whenever the choice is open to them, are glad to engage in some intellectual pursuit. Moreover, according to present views, only a slight and superficial education is considered necessary to prepare young women for motherhood, and fathers are in the habit of giving their daughters facilities for serious study only when there is no hope of marriage for them. The robust, healthy girl is taught to dance, the asthenic to develop her intellect.
Felix A. Theilhaber: Zum Preisausschreiben: " Bringt das materielle und soziale Aufsteigen den Familien Gefahren in rassenhygienischer Beziehung?" (p. 67-92). During the first half of the nineteenth century the birth-rate of the Jews in Berlin was 33-35 per i,ooo of the population, and the death-rate about 25 per i,ooo. In I9II the corresponding figures were 14-I6 and I3'5. The number of births to each i,ooo women between
the ages of 15 and 5o has fallen from ioo08 in i88o to 56-8 in 1905, and
the average number of children born to each Jewish and Jewish-Christian
marriage has decreased from 3S3 in I875-81 to 1-8 in 1902-II. At the same
time there has been an increase in the percentage of marriages and of persons of marriageable age. All this has occurred in spite of the fact that the religion and tradition of the Jews favour large families. The Jewish working class is, as one would expect, much more fertile than the professional and mercantile classes, but it is comparatively small. The author concludes that the decrease in the fertility of the Jews in Berlin is simply an adaptation to the requirements of life. The proportion of well-to-do persons among them is very much larger than in any other class of people in Berlin. " Under the social conditions of to-day the deleterious effects on families from the point of view of race-hygiene, which result from material and social betterment or, as the case may be, from the desire for wealth and social position, is extreme." He thinks

380 EUGENICS REVIEW.

that it will soon be time for us to discover new laws which condition
the increase of po,pulation. The old ones have become obsolete.
Ernst Schultze: Das Aussterben der Australischen Urbevolkerung
(p. 93-109). It was unfortunate for the Australian aborigines that their country was settled first by convicts and later on by adventurers in search of gold. Violence, tuberculosis, small-pox, and venereal diseases, together with the tendency to restrict the numbers of their offspring, have reduced the native population from perhaps i5o,ooo at the time of the first settlement of the continent by Europeans to a little over 40,000 in I9OI. Dr. Schultze warmly defends the Australian natives from the many slanders which have been cast upon them by prejudiced or uninformed and irresponsible writers, and ends his paper with a rather perfunctory sketch of their manner of life, accompanied by a few statistics.

E. Altschul: Studie uber die Methode der Stichprobenerhebung
(p. 110-I57). A contribution to the theory and criticism of the representative method of statistical investigation, i.e., the method of obtaining returns by means of samples which are taken as representative of the subjects investigated.

Kleinere Mitteil,ngen. Hans Friedenthal : iUber beucrisste ?nd willkurliche Beeinflussutng des menschlichen Wachsturns (a paper read before the Berlin Society for Race Hygiene, January 26th, I912). W. Weinberg: Zur Frage der Messung der Frutchtbarkeit. A. Ploetz: Neomalthusianismus zund Rassenhygiene (read at the International Eugenics Congress in London).

Among the more important books and papers reviewed are :-A.

Hauptmann: Serologische Untersutchungen von Familien Syphogener

Nervenkranker (Zeitschri/t f. d. ges. Nezurologie u. Psychiatrie, Vol. viii.,

p. 36-80). Max Picard: Ein Beitrag zur Lues- und Paralysefrage (Dis-

sertation, Frankfurt, 1912). An attempt to discover the prevalence of

syphilis infection in Freiburg I.B. and its neighbourhood. Richard

Stern: Uber Korperliche Kennzeichen der Disposition zur Tabes, Leipzig

und Wien, 1912. Hermann Lundborg: Medizinisch-biologische

Familienforschkungen eines 2232 Kipfigen Bauerngeschlechtes in

Schweden, Jena, 1913. The most extensive genealogical investigation

from the biological point of view that has yet been attempted. H.

Kurella: Die Intellektuellen und die Gesellschaft, Wiesbaden, 1913. A

contribution to the natural history of gifted families.

H. B.

ZEITSCHRIFT FUR INDUKTIVE ABSTAMMUNGS- UND VERERBUNGSLEHRE,
June, 1913. Band Io, Heft. I and 2. This number contains three papers
which deal with observations upon inheritance or the results of experi-

ments in breeding, all of which are of considerable interest. Die Vererbung unpigmentierter Haare und Hautstellen bei Rind und
Pferd als Beispiele transgressiv fluktuierender Faktoren. A. R. Walther. Pp. I-48. The author has collected evidence with regard to, markings in horses and cattle; this evidence he discusses with special reference to the question of "factors."

Der Vererbungsmodus der gefulilten Levkojen-rassen als Fall geschlechtsbegrenzter Vererbung. R. Goldschmidt. This paper is based
upon Miss Saunders' work upon stocks. The data there collected is discussed and reason is shown for thinking that the phenomenon of sex limited inheritance plays a part.

The Inheritance of certain Quantitative Characters in Tobacco. H.
K. Hayes. The author attempts to interpret observations made upon the size, shape, and similar characters of the plants with the help of the hypothesis of the interaction of a multiplicity of factors. The interpreta-
tion is of a most complicated nature. The attempt is of interest since workers in genetics have for the most part up to the present concerned themselves with qualitative characters.

PERIODICAL LITERATURE.

381

ZEITSCHRIFT FUR INDUKTIVE ABSTAMMUNGS- UND VERERBUNGSLEHRE, July, 1913. Band io, Heft 3. Untersuchungen iiber den Bastard Dianthus Armeria x Dianthus deltoides nebst Bemerkungen uber einige andere Art kreuzungen der Gattung Dianthus. G. Wichler. This paper occupies nearly half the number. Whereas previous experiments on these lines have not, as a rule, gone beyond the F3 generation, in this, case F3 and F4 were obtained. The results agree with those of other investigators. The F2 generation is not stable, but behaves like a complicated Mendelian hybrid. All the observed facts are said to be capable of explanation upon the Mendelian hypothesis.
On the Zygotic Constitution of Dominant and Recessive Whites in the Silk Worm, Bombyx mori. K. Toyama and S. Mori. As a result of breeding experiments it is concluded that there are six forms of white and yellow silkworms for each of which a zygotic formula is given.
Variationsstatistische Untersuchungen an Acaritum Napellus. 0. Schuepp. A large number of measurements were made of various characters. The variations in one character are for the most part quite independent of variations in any other character. The author gives the results of the study of several problems such as the relation between variations and the habitat, between the structure of organs and their position in the individual plant.
Uber Mendelsche Vererbung beim Rind. Dr. Kiesel. A small number of observations agree fairly well with the results to be expected on the Mendelian hypothesis.
ZEITSCHRIFT FUR INDUKTIVE ABSTAMMUNGS- UND VERERBUNGSLEHRE, October, 1913. Band io, Heft. 4. On the AMode of Inheritance of Certain
Characters in Double-Throwing Stocks. E. R. Saunders. This paper is a reply by Miss Saunders to certain criticisms of Goldschmidt in a
former number. It is maintained that the results obtained by Miss Saunders cannot, as Goldschmidt suggested, be explained by assuming that this is another case of sex limited inheritance. The explanation put forward by Miss Saunders is that there are two factors which in the "pure breeding" singles are linked together, but which in the "eversporting"
singles have become free. Uber Getreide-speziesbastarde. F. Jisenko. Crosses between wheat
and rye have been obtained, but only between wheat ? and rye e and
not vice versa. The crosses are generally sterile, but representatives of F3 and F4 do occur. The results conform to those to be expected according to the Mendelian formula.
CONCORDIA, November Ist, I913. Der IV. Deutsche Kongress fiur Sduglings-schutz. Dr. Fritz Rott. Pp. 424-427. The principal problems discussed at this congress were the protection of infants in relation to the decline of the birth-rate, the doctor's place in the care of infants, and the position of the illegitimate child according to German law. The article here cited contains clear abstracts of the papers read and of the discussions.
Der XIV. Internationale Kongress gegen den Alcoholismus. Dr. Warnack. Pp. 427-429. A general summary of the proceedings of the
congress.
CONCORDIA, November i8th, 1913. Die unentgeltliche Geburtshilfe der Stadt Zurich. M. Giterman. Pp. 438-440. The system adopted in the town of Zurich for providing attention at child-birth free of cost, either in a lying-in hospital or at the mother's own home, is here described.
Die XI. Internationale Tuberculosekonzferenz zu Berlin am 22-25 October, 1913. Pp. 440-442. A very much condensed abstract of the proceedings.
Der Internationale Jugendschutzkongress in Brussel, 23-26 Juli, 1913. Dr. Wilhelm Bloch. Pp. 442-444. A short indication of the lines on which this congress worked.

382 EUGENICS REVIEW.
BULLETIN DE LA STATISTIQUE GENERALE DE LA FRANCE. Tome III., Fasc. I. October, 1913. Duree des Mariages, Table d'extinction des mariages pour la population de la France (I906-I909). Michel Huber. Pp. 94-Ill. This is an interesting statistical study of the average duration of marriage in France and in other countries. Further, the married people recorded in the census of i9o6 have been classified according to the duration of their union, and for each class a figure has been obtained which represents the number of marriages terminated either by the death of the husband or of the wife or by divorce. Thus 300,000 couples had been married less than one year, and it appears that among this number of marriages of less than one year's duration 2,000 are dissolved by the death of the husband, I,900 by the death of the wife, and I by divorce. The seventh and eighth years of married life are those in which the proportion of divorces is highest. After this they grow gradually less frequent, but the chance does not completely disappear till long after; indeed, some people seem to celebrate their golden weddings that way.
AMERICAN ANTHROPOLOGIST, April-June, 1913. Vol. xv., No. 2. The
Head Forms of Italians as influenced by Heredity and Environment. France Boas and Helene M. Boas. Pp. I63-I88. The material on which this work is based is Rudolfo Livi's "Antropometria Militare." By a study of the variability of the cephalic index in various parts of Italy the following conclusions have been reached: (i.) that the different head forms which occur in North and South Italy are not blended by inheritance wheTe they occur side by side in central Italy, but that the ancestral forms are segregated out; (ii.) that city life exerts a direct influence on the cephalic type. In order to get over the difficulties introduced by the admitted inaccuracy of the material, a number of corrections and assumptions have been made which tend to destroy one's confidence in the soundness of the arguments employed.
POPULAR SCIENCE MONTHLY, May, I9I13. Heredity and the Hall of Fame. Dr. F. Adams Woods. Pp. 445-452. The Hall of Fame is an arcade built on the banks of the Hudson in New York. In it are placed tablets to the memory of the greatest Am-ericans. No mere temporary popularity can open its doors for none can be so honoured till at least ten years after his death. Forty-six persons only have been thus dis-
tinguished, and the study of the more eminent of their relatives is the
subject matter of this article in which the author deduces fresh evidence of the inheritance of ability. TIhe figures arrived at were included
in his contnrbution to the proceedings of the Eugenics Congress (Problems
in Eugenics, p. 246), but much more detailed information appears in the present paper.
POPULAR SCIENCE MONTHLY, October, 1913. Vol. lxxxiii., No. 4. A Problem in Educational Eugenics. Professor Chas. W. Hargitt, of Syracuse University. Pp. 355-367. The author lays stress upon the differences exhibited in the human material which is to be educated. The idea that education is to be the common pnvilege of all, without distinction, soon leads to the conclusion that education will cure all ills. Education will bring out natural capacity, but can neither implant nor eradicate natural traits. Our school and college standards have been adapted to mediocrity, and we have failed to make a proper "selection." The effect has been to place a premium on mediocrity and to discourage initiative. Education for scholarly ends is not for all, and further, the ordinary school is not for all. Referring to heredity the writer quotes an answer given to the query "When should a child's education begin?'" "One hundred years before it is bornm! " Under the section "Educational Eugenics " he enunciates some of the principles which should guide us to a better system. Adequate vital statistics should be available in order to give the teacher some rough idea of the potentialities of his pupils. A school, a high school, and a college census should be taken.

NOTES AND NOTICES.

383

POPULAR SCIENCE MONTHLY. Vol lxxxiii., No. S. November, 19I3. Economic Factors in Eugenics. Dr. W. L. Holt. Pp. 471-484. The author analyses the economic factors which influence the birth-rate at the present day. He places them under five heads: (i) The increased un-
certainty of a livelihood among the working people; (2) the rise in the cost of living without a corresponding rise in wages; (3) the ambition of American parents to give their children better food, clothing, and in particular better education than they had themselves; (4) the entrance of women into all professions; (5) the demand for luxuries, especially luxuries for children. The conclusion to which the author comes is that economic reform is needed above all things, and that it should aim at preventing the children of desirable parents from being an economic
burden instead of being, as is desirable, an economic asset.

NOTES AND NOTICES.

New Viee-Presidents and Honorary Xembers.-M. Perrier, the president of the Societe d'Eug6nique Fransaise, and Professor Sergi,
president of the Italian Eugenic Committee, have been appointed vicepresidents of the Society, and the following have been elected honorary members:-

Her Grace the Duchess of Marlborough.

The Right. Hon. A. J. Balfour, F.R.S. Sir Archibald Geikie, O.M., late President of the Royal Society. Professor Weismann.

*** **

Professor Weismann's Letter to the President, in which he accepts the appointment, is likely to be of interest to our readers. We publish

herewith a translation of it:

s

Dear Sir,-The Eugenics Education Society has, as you inform me, done me

the honour of choosing me as an honorary member. I accept the choice with

sincere thanks. Though my great age prevents me from taking any personal

share in your councils, it is a pleasure to express the warm interest which I feel

in your efforts. It is certainly a great step in advance if we are trying to-day to

establish principles for regulating the reproduction of the human race in such a way that the good and vigorous may multiply more and more and grow stronger

in their better qualities as time goes on. Even if it can only be brought about

slowly that mankind is made more resistant to the many hostile influences which

assail it, nevertheless I have no doubt that this object may be achieved, indeed

that it certainly will be achieved, albeit very slowly, yet in a manner which grows

ever better and more complete. In this view I believe I agree with you and with

the Eugenics Society generally, and may well, on that account, belong to your

numbers.

(Signed)

AUGUST WEISMANN.

** **

The Present State of the Seienee of Eugenies.-On the Isth October,
1913, Professor Karl Pearson wrote a letter to the Times on the subject

of the " Popularization of Eugenics." We would, if possible, avoid all

controversy with one who has done so much for our science, and who was, moreover, so highly trusted by its founder, Sir Francis Galton, as is evidenced by his will. One sentence, however, cannot be passed ovei in complete silence, namely, the following: " But even he (Sir F. Galton) in the last years of his life saw that the popular movement he had started was likely to outgrow its knowledge, and feared that more evil than good might result from it."

384 EUGENICS REVIEW.
Sir Francis Galton, it will be remembered, died on January 17th, I91, and, in this connection, the following extracts from the many letters and notes which he wrote to the secretary of this society in 1909 and I9I0 may be worth placing on record:
" It would be just the thing for the Eugenics Education Society to
publish . . . . being intended to educate in the A. B. C. of biometry
and the like."-March 22nd, I909.
" I congratulate you all on the get up of the EUGENICS REVIEW."AprilI5th, I909.
"What a good No. II. is brought out. I blush to find my name so often in it."-July 17th, I909.
" The first page of Public Opinion of this week, which I know that Mr. Crackanthorpe reads, contains important extracts taken from an article by a chief Canadian editor taken from the Toronto Globe, which would afford useful copy to the next REVIEW. It is very forcible and fresh."-September i8th, Igog.
" I also suggested to him that he ought to become a member of the Society. . . . ."-October 6th, I909.
"Similarly I am sadly ignorant of the proper action to take re agitation for segregation of the feeble-minded. The upshot is that I shall be much guided by what those do who are active in the Eugenics
Education Society and understand the conditions better than I do."-
December 3oth, I909. In I9I0, when Sir Francis Galton's health was failing considerably,
much of the correspondence was carried on by his niece, Miss Biggs. In October she sent a message to say". . . . it would be a good subject for the REVIEW if some Swiss correspondent could get at the truth of the
matter and the subject were well authenticated. Why not write to Daily
Mirror for address of their correspondent, he says." In the same month, however, he himself wrote as follows:
"The enclosed from the New Zealand Herald, August 25th, just
received, is good eugenic news. (A newspaper cutting containing the following passage: 'Professor Kirk's idea for the formation of a society of eugenists was enthusiastically taken up, and no doubt Wellington will soon have a strong body.') I have written to Mr. C. (Crackanthorpe) about
it, and suggested that Chief Justice Sir Robert Stout ought to be made
an honorary something of our society (I forget what we could give in that way). I daresay you will keep the ball rolling, and perhaps communicate with Professor Kirk, of Wellington."
These and other extracts unquestionably prove that Sir Francis fully maintained his interest in the society and its work until the end. How far they are relevant to Professor Pearson's remarks we are not quite sure; for we have had some difficulty-a difficulty which, we fear, the general public will also feel-in determining when allusion was being made to such nonsense as that lately appearing in the Press concerning the " eugenic baby," and when to the work of this society, the Gesellschaft fur Rassenhygiene, the Societe Francaise d'Eugenique, and other kindred institutions.
* * **
New Branches at Edinburgh, Oxford and Brighton.-As a result of
the very successful meeting which was held in Edinburgh on October
3oth, when Major Darwin delivered an address to the Medico-chirurgical and Obstetrical Societies of Edinburgh, a provisional committee has been formed for the purpose of organising a branch of the society in that city. Sir Thomas Clouston is the convener of the committee, and other members are Dr. Berry Hart, Dr. J. W. Ballantyne, Professor Cossar Ewart, Dr. Brock, and Mr. Smith, headmaster of Merchiston Castle
School. At Oxford a branch was formed during the autumn with Professor
E. B. Poulton, F.R.S. as president, and Dr. Edgar Schuster as honorary

NOTES AND NOTICES.

385

secretary and treasurer. The inaugural meeting was held in the Hall of Queen's College, which was full to. overflowing. The Dean of St. Paul's delivered an address. At Brighton a committee has been formed for the purpose of organising a branch of the society. The mayor, Mr. Otter, is the chairman, and Mr. Wellman the honorary secretary. The first step arranged is to hold a public meeting in the Pavilion, on January 27th at which Major Darwin and Mrs. Gotto have consented to speak.
* * **
Leetures on the Groundwork of Eugenics in 1914.- Dr. L. Doncaster, Fellow of King's College, Cambridge, will deliver a course of eight lectures on "Evolution and Heredity," at the Imperial College of Science, South Kensington, on Fridays at 5.30 p.m., beginning Janluary 23rd. He will discuss the general evidences of evolution, the best-known theories of evolution, variation and mutation, and theories of heredity both old and new. He will also deal with the relation between heredity and sex, and will conclude with a lectuTe on "Heredity in Man," in which the bearings of the principles discussed in previous lectures an the possibility- of human improvement will be described. This course will be followed in the summer by instruction in statistical methods as applied to problems in eugenics, to be given by Dr. M. Greenwood, Junior, at the Lister Institute of Preventive Medicine, Chelsea Bridge Road, S.W., on Fridays, at 5.30 p.m., beginning on May Ist. Dr. Greenwood will give an outline of the statistical work and theories bearing an heredity, and will explain the principal statistical constants, such as means, standard deviations and co-efficients of correlation. Their calculation will be practically illustrated on suitable data. These two courses are intended to form part of one complete scheme of instruction which, though elem,entary, will be sound and thorough, and equal to the best class of university teaching. Both lecturers are well-known authorities on the subjects with which they will deal. The fee for the complete series will be one guinea, to be paid in advance to the Hon. Secretary, Eugenics Education Society, Kingsway House, Kingsway, W.C., who will be pleased to answer all enquiries concerning the course.
* * **
Marriage Regulations.-We learn from the " Medical Times " of
September 27th, 1913, that the Ontario Government has prepared a Bill
to amend the regulations relating to marriages, which provides that mentally defective persons shall not secu!re licenses, and imposes a fine of
Lioo or imprisonment on clergymen and issuers of licenses who evade
the law. Where neither of the contracting parties is a resident in the locality, the license cannot be issued until an advertisement of the proposed marriage has appeared in the public press for three weeks.
** **
The Debate on Eugenies at the Oxford Union. - On November
i3th a motion that " this house approves of the principles of eugenics " was carried by a majority of 39 votes, having 105 supporters and 66 opponents. But from the three reports of the meeting which we have been able to collect it is not possible to obtain any idea of the course of the debate. Our venerable contemporaries, The Oxford Magazinie and The Isis, concern themselves only with the manner of the speakers and fill a column or a couple of columns with criticisms which are mildly patronising or laboriously smart. The younger Varsity has been brought up in the same tradition, but its comments show a livelier wit, and it does make fragmentary allusions to the substance of the speeches. We are told, for instance, that Mr. J. B. S. Haldane (New College), whom all three papers agreed to praise, " has no fear of eugenics thwarting him of his lady-love. For a eugenic girl is a healthy girl, and a healthy girl is an attractive girl." Eugenics has on many occasions come before debating societies in various colleges, but its inclusion among the few non-

386 EUGENICS REVIEW.

political subjects indication that it

discussed by the union is of has grown largely in esteem

special during

significance the last few

ayseaarns

as a serious topic.

* * **

The Birth -rate Commission.-The National Council of Public

Morals has appointed a private and character of the decline in

commission to
birth-rate; (b)

inquire into its causes;

(a) the extent (c) its effects;

(d) and to consider its economic and national aspects. The members of

the commission are: Chairman, the Right Rev. Bishop Boyd Carpenter,

the Bishop of Birmingham, the Duchess of Marlborough, Lord Wil-

loughby be Broke, Lady Willoughby de Broke, Lady Aberconway, the

Bishop of Barking, the Dean of Westminster, the Dean of St. Paul's, Sir

John Gorst, Sir Thomas Whittaker, M.P., Sir A. Pearce Gould, Sir J.

Macdonell, Sir J. Crichton-Browne, Surgeon-General G. J. H. Evatt, the

Venerable Dr. W. Sinclair, Principal A. E. Garvie, Rev. J. Monro

Gibson, Rev. R. F. Horton, Dr. A. T. Schofield, Dr. Major Greenwood,

Rev. F. B. Meyer, Rev. Thomas Phillips, Professor G. Sims Woodhead,

Dr. A. Newsholme, Dr. T. H. C. Stevenson, Dr. J. W. Ballantyne, Dr.

C. W. Saleeby, Dr. Agnes Savill, Dr. Ettie Sayer, Dr. Mary Scharlieb,

Dr. Florence Willey, Rabbi Professor H. Gollancz, Professor L. T. Hob-

house, Mrs. General Booth, Mr. A. G. Gardiner, Mr. Walter Heape, Mr.

J. A. Hobson, Mrs. George Morgan, Mr. R. Donald, and the Rev. James

Marchant (secretary). Dr. T. H. C. Stevenson, the Superintendent of

Statistics for the Registrar-General, and Dr. A. Newsholme, Medical

Officer to the Local Government Board, have joined the Commission with

the consent of the President of the Board and the Registrar-General, and

whilst holding themselves free not to sign any public report, will bring the

available statistical data to help the inquiry. It will be seen from this

list of names that the commission appears to be a strong and representa-

tive one. We cordially wish it success in its difficult task.

** **

Aphorisms on Marriage from the Indian Sages.-We have received

pforpoumlarthiesinsgecrtehtearayncoifenttheideSaalrsaswofatimarMrainadgael,,

a the

society which aims at following translations

from the Indian sages:

"A girl, who is not descended on his mother's side within the sixth

degree and does not bear the same family name (Gotra) as his father's,

is eligible for marriage."

(Mann III. 5.)

" In connecting himself with a wife, let a man studiously avoid the

ten following families, be they ever so great in political power or rank,

or ever so rich in cows, goats, horses, elephants, gold, or grain."

(Mann III. 6.)

"The family which is not religious, that which is destitute of men of
character, that in which the study of the Veda is neglected, that which has

thick or long hair on the body, and that which is subject to such diseases

as piles, consumption, asthma, bronchitis, dyspepsia, epilepsy, leprosy,

and albinism; because offspring. Therefore

all these faults and both husband and

wdiisfeeassehsoualrde

transmitted to the come from good

7.)(physically, morally, and intellectually) families." (Mann III.

" Let a man never marry one who is pale and anamic, nor one who

is altogether a bigger and stronger dundant member, nor one who is an

person invalid,

than himself,
nor one either

or has a rewith no hair

or too much hair, nor one immoderately talkative, nor one with red

eyes."

(Mann III. 8.)

" It is better that men and women should remain single till death rather than marry unsuitables, i.e., persons of opposite qualities, characteristics, and temperaments should never marry each other."
(Mann IX. 89.)

QUARTERLY CHRONICLE.

387

An Italian Eugenies Committee.-Dr. Mario Carrara, professor of forensic medicine at Turin, has informed us that on the 24th of March last the Roman Society of Anthropology considered the question of organising a section for the study of eugenics, and appointed a special committee for the purpose under the presidency of Professor G. Sergi.

Eugenies in Austria. -The Sociological Society of Vienna is starting a section for Social Biology and Eugenics. The inaugural lecture was delivered in the philosophical faculty of the university, on Decembeer i9th, by Dr. Julius Tandiler. Fu;rther particulars may be obtained from "Die Soziologische Gesellschaft," 3 Bezirk, Jacquingasse 45, Vienna.
** **
Letters of the late Dr. Alfred Russel Wallaee.- Mr. James Marchant (Lochnagar, Edenbridge, Kent), who, at the request of the family of Dr. A. R. Wallace, is arranging and editing a volume of his letters and reminiscences, would be thankful to those of our readers who have letters and reminiscences if they would send them to him. The letters would be safely and promptly returned.

Wanted, Eugenies Review Vol. 1. No. 2.-This number is now out of print, but we continue to receive inquiries for it. If any of our readers have copies to dispose of, would they kindly communicate with the Hon. Secretary of the Eugenics Education Society, Kingsway House, Kingsway. Five shillings will be paid for the first copy offered.

The Ameriean Genetie Assoeiation is the name now adopted by the American Breeders' Association. The American Breeders' Magazine will be enlarged in size and called The /ournal of Heredity.

QUARTERLY CHRONICLE.
CENTRAL SOCIETY.
PROGRAMME.
November 6th.-At the Grafton Galleries, 5.15 p.m., Mr. W. McDougall on "Psychology in the Service of Eugenics." Chairman, Major Leonard Darwin.
December 4th.-At the Grafton Galleries, 5.15 p.m., Mr. Geoffrey Smith on "A Contribution to the Biology of Sex." Chairman, Major Leonard Darwin.
COMMITTEES.
October 22nd.-Lecture Committee Meeting. November 6th.-Research ,.
,, I3th.-Research ,. ,, 2ISt.-Executive Council ,,
December Igth.-Executive ,.
MEETINGS.
October 2oth.-Mr. Rollaston Stables lectured on " Heredity " at the Eugenic Club, High Holborn, W.C.
October 2gth.-Major Darwin delivered an address on " The Need for Eugenic Reform " before the Medico-Chirurgical and Obstetrical Society, Edinburgh, with a view to inaugurating a branch in that city.
October 3oth.-Major Darwin delivered an address on " The Need for Eugenic Reform " before the Royal Faculty of Physicians and Surgeons,
in the Faculty Hall, Glasgow. Dr. J. A. Adams, president, in the chair.

388 EUGENICS REVIEW.
October 3oth.-Mr. John Russell lectured on " Eugenics, or the Science and Art of Human Breeding: An Appeal to Potential Fathers and Mothers" at a drawing-room meeting in the house of Mrs. Maurice Singer. Mrs. Theodore Chambers in the chair.
November 3rd.-Miss Trench lectured on " Eugenics " at a mothers' meeting in Croydon, kindly arranged by Mrs. Link.
November 7th.-Mr. C. S. Stock lectured on " Eugenics and Social Progress " at the Women's Institute, Victoria Street, S.W.
November 2oth.-Mr. Rollaston Stables lectured on " Eugenics and Social Responsibility " at the Eugenic Club, High Holborn, W.C.
November 2ISt.-Mr. E. J. Lidbetter lectured on " Eugenics and
Social Problems " at the Women's Institute, Victoria Street, S.W. November 22nd.-Mr. R. Dixon Kingham lectured on " The Ideal
of Eugenics " at the Workers' Educational Association, Birkenhead. November 23rd.-Mr. R. Dixon Kingham lectured on " What is
Eugenics? " at the Birkenhead Men's Adult School. November 23rd.-Mr. R. Dixon Kingham lectured on " Eugenics"
at the Rock Ferry Men's Meeting. November 23rd.-Mr. C. S. Stock lectured on " Eugenics " at the
Sutton, Wallington, and District Socialist Society. November 25th.-Mr. C. S. Stock opened a debate at the Ladies' Resi-
dential Club. Proposition: "Heredity is a Stronger Force than Environment."
November 27th.-Mr. R. A. Fisher opened a debate at the Pioneer Club. Proposition: " The Eugenist can Advocate a Practical Policy."
December x6th.-Mr. Rollaston Stables lectured on " The Claim of the Eugenic Ideal " at the Eugenic Club, High Holborn, W.C.
December 2oth.-Mr. R. Dixon Kingham lectured on " Parenthood and Patriotism " at the Anerley Congregational Church.
BELFAST. On ioth November, 19I3, a public meeting of the branch was held in the Medical Institute, and the attendance was fair. Professor Lindsay, M.D., occupied the chair, and introduced the speaker of the evening, Mr. H. 0. Meredith, M.A., Professor of Economics in the Queen's University, Belfast. The subject of Professor Meredith's paper was " Eugenics and Economics," and was handled by him in a very able manner. Although Professor Meredith gave full credit to the importance of eugenics, he was disposed to disagree with many eugenists as to the relative unfitness and fitness of the slum and middles classes respectively. He believed that the effects of environment would explain many of the differences found. In the discussion which followed Professor Gregg Wilsoin, Professor Lindsay, and Dr. W. James Wilson took part.
JAMES WILSON, Hon. Sec.
BIRMINGHAM HEREDITY SOCIETY. The annual business meeting of the above society was held on October 17th. The Committee were able to report a successful year's work, and the Treasurer's report showed that the Society was in a satisfactory financial condition. The officers and committee were elected for the ensuing year. On November 24th Dr. Starr Jordan lectured to the Society, his subject being " Eugenics and War." He emphasised strongly the loss to a nation of its fittest and best males through the ravages of war, and pointed out the inevitable effect on the succeeding generation. Sir Oliver Lodge, who, in the absence of the President through illness, occupied the chair, made some pertinent remarks on the childishness of war, and expressed the thanks of the Society to Dr. Starr Jordan for his interesting address.

QUARTERLY CHRONICLE.

389

During the autumn some eight or nine propagandist lectures have

been delivered by members of the Society to various societies in the dis-

trict, notably a series to the Workers' Education Society, which was

exceptionally well attended.

PERCIVAL MILLS, Hon. Sec.

HASLEMERE.

Two meetings have been held this quarter. On November 6th Mr.

H. R. Stables spoke on " Crime and Eugenics." On December I2th a

discussion-meeting was held, when Mr. Marshall read a short paper

on " Are Certificates of Health previous to Marriage Desirable? " A

discussion followed, in which several members took part. The Branch

has sustained a heavy loss in the death of Mr. Edward Nettleship, who

was a member of committee and branch representative on the Central

Council.

L. E. MUIR, Hon. Sec.

LIVERPOOL.

A Council meeting was held on October gth to consider arrangements

for the winter session. Three lectures have been delivered to the Branch,

which were open to the public. On October 24th Dr. F.W. Mott, F.R. S., spoke

to us at the Medical Institution on the " Neuropathic Inheritance of Crime

and Insanity "; on November I2th Mr. R. D. Laurie, M.A., lectured at

the University upon " Eugenette "; and on December gth Chancellor D.

Starr Jordan gave an address within the same hospitable walls upon

" Eugenics and War." The attendance at these lectures has been con

siderably greater than the previous average, and we are particularly

grateful to Dr. Mott and Chancellor Jordan for visiting us from a

distance.

The Honorary Secretary has given four addresses to smaller audi-

ences: October x3th, to the Hunter's Lane Literary Society on " Popula-

tion Facts and Problems "; October 14th, to the South Church Working

Men's Club on " The Scientific Basis of Social Policy "; November 4th,

on " Social Structure "; and December 12th, to the Bootle Branch of the

Independent Labour Party on the same topic. A free discussion followed

in each case.

R. T. BODEY, Hon. Sec.

MANCHESTER AND DISTRICT.
The first meeting of the branch this session was addressed by Dr. Herbert on " Eugenics and its Methods." There was a good attendance and an interesting discussion. Good reports appeared in the Press. The only other meeting of the society was addressed by Dr. Starr Jordan. Being an afternoon meeting the attendance was the smallest we have had, but those present expressed themselves as in accord with the views
of the lecturer. In the first week in November our President (the Dean of Manchester,
Bishop Welldon) addressed a meeting of the local clergy. This meeting
was awaited with keen interest, as it would show to some extent the attitude of the clergy. One present, reports " it was astonishing what a cordial reception his remarks met with from all the speakers and from the
meeting at large. The Dean explained the Mental Deficiency Act, and especially that not merely the parents but others like the clergy could bring it into operation. Two clergy who were guardians spoke out, and I think a great impression was made."
Under the auspices of the Openshaw Brotherhood, Manchester, Mrs. B. B. McKellen, one of our members, addressed an audience of about 5oo
at the Whitworth Hall on " Eugenics," Councillor Titt being in the chair. The lecture was received with great enthusiasm, and many questions were put at the close. The many requests from members of the audience for
a further exposition of the eugenic theory were most encouraging. The Honorary Secretary addressed a large number of men on the
subject of " Venereal Diseases." The attention at times became almost painful-a measure of the desire for knowledge which may be believed

390 EUGENICS REVIEW.

on this important subject. About an hour was spent in answering the

questions and a number of myths were exploded. From outside informa-

tion it is evident the address made a great impression, and the subject

was discussed in many works for some time. Another address to young

athletes on the same subject has been arranged.

The Honorary Secretary is booked to address the North of England

Education Conference on " Eugenics," and also the Moss Side Forum on

the same subject.

J. D'EwART, Hon. Sec.

PUBLICATIONS RECEIVED.

Ancient Eugenics, by A. G. ROPER. The Arnold Prize Essay for 1913.

(Publisher: B. H. Blackwell, Oxford, 1913. Price 2S. 6d. PP. 76.)

Annual Report on Certification of Lunatics and Observation Wards for

for year ended May I5th, I913, by J. CARSWELL, M.D. (Publishers:

Beg, Kennedy, and Elder, Glasgow, 1913. PP. 35.)

The Case for Co-Education, by C. GRANT and N. HODGSON. (Publisher:

Grant Richards, London, 1913. Price 5s.
Beauty for Ashes, by LADY HENRY SOMERSET.

Pp. 325.) (Publishers:

Upcott

Gill

and Sons, London. Price is. net. Pp. iiI.) An account of Duxhurst

Inebriate Colony.

Before I Wed, or Young Men and Marriage, by SIR THOMAS CLOUSTON,

M.D., LL.D. (Publishers: Cassell and Co., London, 1913. Price

2S. 6d. Pp. 129.)

Biology, by W. D. HENDERSON, M.A. The People's Books, No. 3.

(Publishers: T. C. and E. C. Jack, London and Edinburgh, I913.

Price 6d. Pp. 92.) A highly condensed introduction to biology

which the beginner may perhaps find a trifle difficult to follow on

account of the many technical terms employed.

Contributo allo Studio dei Rapporti tra l'intelligenza ei fattori biologico-

sociali nella Scuola, by F. U. SAFFIOTTI. (Estratto dalla Revista di

Antropologia. Vol. xviii. Fasc. I-II. Pp. 34.)

L'Echelle Metrique de l'intelligence de Binet et Simon modifiee selon le

methode Treves-Saffiotti, by F. U. SAFFIOTTI. (Extrait de l'Annee

Psychologique. Tome xviii. 1912. Pp. 327-340.)

Economics as the Basis of Living Ethics, by J. G. MURDOCH. (Pub-

lishers: Constable and Co., London, 1913. Price 8s. 6d. Pp. 373.)

Ellen Key, by LOUISE NYSTROM-HAMILTON. (Publishers: G. P. Putnam's

Sons, New York and London, 1913. Price 5s. net. Pp. I87.) A few

lines from the introduction by Havelock Ellis sum up Ellen Key's

position. Because woman is the mother, and the future of the race is

in her hands she needs complete freedom of development to exercise

the function of motherhood in the wider sense of the word. Eugenists

will be mainly interested in her educational work in connection with

sex and marriage.

English Church Law and Divorce, by SIR LEWIS DIBDEN and SIR CHAD-

WICK HEALY. (Publisher: John Murray, London, 19I3. Price 5s.

Pp. i8o.)

La Famille Franfaise et son Evolution, by LOUIS DELZOUS. (Publisher:

Armand Colin, Paris, 1913. Price 3 frs. 50. Pp. 292.)

The Family Among the Australian Aborigines, by B. MALINOWSKI. (Pub-

lishers: Hodder and Stoughton, London, 1913. For the University of

London Press. Price 6s. Pp. 326.)

From Girlhood to Womanhood, by Dr. E. SLOAN CHESSER. (Publishers:

Cassell and Co., London, I913. Price 2S. 6d. Pp. I41.)

A Guide to the Mental Deficiency Act, 1913, by J. and S. WORMALD.

(Publishers: P. S. King and Son, London, 1913. Price 5s. Pp. 145.)

The Health and Physique of School Children, by A. GREENWOOD. (Pub-

lishers: P. S. King and Son, London, 1913. Price is. Pp. 94.)

PUBLICATIONS RECEIVED.

391

The Healthy Marriage, by G. T. WRENCH, M. D., B. S. (Publisher: Churchill, London, 19I3. Price 3S. 6d. Pp. 300.)
An Imaginative Child: Studies in a Child's View Point, by A. A. HILTON. With an introduction by H. Lee. (Publisher: R. Allenson, London, I913. Price is. 6d. Pp. I44.)
Life, Emotion, and Intellect, by C. B. ANDREWS. (Publisher: T. Fisher Unwin, London, 1913. Price 5s. Pp. 95.)
Life and Its Beginnings, by Dr. H. WEBB. (Publishers: Cassell and Co., London, I9I3. Price 2S. 6d. Pp. I37.)
Mechanism, Life, and Personality: An Examination of the Mechanistic Theory of Life and Mind, by J. S. HALDANE. (Publisher: John Murray, London, 1913. Price 2S. 6d. Pp. I39.)
Note Psicologiche su due Gemelle, by F. U. SAFFIOTTI. (Estratto dalla Rivista di Antropologia. Vol. xviii. Fasc. I.-II., I9I3. Pp. II.)
The Old-Fashioned Woman: Primitive Fancies about the Sex, by ELSIE CLEWS PARSONS. (Publishers: G. P. Putnam's Sons, New York and London, the Knickerbocker Press, 1913. Price 6s. net. Pp. 373.) A brightly written book, giving an account of some of the habits and customs of primitive and uncivilised peoples which specially concern women and tracing their equivalents in modern civilised races.
Our Ancestors, by R. G. MACLAGAN. (Publisher: T. N. Foulis, Edinburgh, 1913. Pp. 448.)
The Painted Lady, by ARABELLA KENEALY. (Publishers: Stanley Paul and Co., London, 1913. Price 6s. Pp. 380.) The inherited hobby of Lord Chelmers, one of the principal characters of this novel, is to run the village of Eugenia. This he is enabled to do successfully, because from a careful study of the works of Sir Francis Galton he had arrived at a principle which he states in the following words: " Take care of nurture and nature can take care of herself ! " Eugenists will find plenty to criticise in Eugenia, and plenty to enjoy in the excitement and interest of the well-told tale in which it figures.
Pedagogical Anthropology, by M. MONTESSORI. Translation by F. T. Cooper. (Pub,lisher: W. Heinemann, London, 19I3. Price 14S.
Pp. 5o8.)
Practical Eugenics, by WILLIAM J. ROBINSON, M.D. (Publishers: The Critic and Guide Company, New York, 1912. Price 5o cents. Pp. 93.) A lecture advocating the rational control and limitation of offspring; certificates of freedom from venereal and mental disease before marriage; the sterilization of the feeble-minded, degenerate, and criminal; venereal prophylaxis.
A Primer of Social Science, by Right Reverend Monseigneur HENRY PARKINSON, D.D., Ph.D. (Publishers: P. S. King and Son, London,
1913. Pp. 276.)
The Principles of Evolution, by J. MCCABE. (Publishers: Collins's Clear Type Press, London, 1913. Price is. Pp. 264.)
Problems of Genetics, by W. BATESON, M.A., F.R.S. (Publisher: H. Milford, Oxford University Press, London, 1913. Price I7S. Pp. 258.)
Problems of Life and Reproduction, by MARCUS HARTOG. (Publisher: John Murray, London, 1913. Price 7s. 6d. Pp. 362.)
The Purpose of Education, bv ST. GEORGE LANE Fox PITT. (Publishers: The Cambridge University Press, London, 1913. Price 2s. 6d.
Pp. 83.) Report of the Proceedings of the English-Speaking Conference on Infant
Mortality, Caxton Hall, Westminster, August, 1913. (Published by
the National Association for the Prevention of Infant Mortality. Price 3s. Pp. 456.)
La " Scala Metrica dell'Intelligenza di Binet et Simon " Studiata nelle Scuole communale elementari di Milano, by F. U. SAFFIOTTI and Z. TREVES. Publisher: C. Civello, Milan, I9II. Pp. 67.)

392 EUGENICS REVIEW.
Sexual Disease and its Medical Prevention, by H. N. ROBSON, M.R.C.S. (England), L.R.C.P. (London). (Publishers: Simpkin and Marshall, London, 19II. Price 3s. 6d. Pp. 104.) This small book is written in a plain, straightforward manner, and would be readily understood by almost anyone. It can be recommended as a useful handbook of the subject.
The Small Family System: Is it Injurious or Immoral? by C. V. DRYSDALE. (Publisher: A. C. Fifield, London, 1913. Price is. Pp. ii9.)
Social Renewal, by G. SANDEMAN. (Publisher: W. Heinemann, London,
I9I3. Price 2S. 6d. Pp. 150.)
Socialism Rejected, by BERNARD SAMUELSON. (Publishers: Smith, Elder and Co., London, I913. Price 7s. 6d.)
Some Suggestions Regarding the Care of the Feeble-Minded under the Mental Deficiency Bill, 1913, by A. R. DOUGLAS, L.R.C.P., L.R.S.C. Reprinted from the Journal of Mental Science, July, 19I3. (Publisher: Adlard, London, 19I3. Pp. 6.)
Suggestions for Amendment of Consolidated Orders anzd for Improvement in Poor Law Administration, by J. T. DODD, M.A., J.P. (Publishers: P. S. King and Son, London, I913. Price 3d. Pp. 23.)
Transactions of the National Association for the Prevention of Consumption and Other Forms of Tuberculosis, at the Fifth Annual Conference, August, 19I3. (Publisher: Adlard, London, I9I3. Price 4s. 6d.
Pp. 222.)
What a Boy Shoutld Know, by Dr. A. T. SCHOFIELD and Dr. P. VAUGHAN-
JACKSON. (Publishers: Cassell and Co., I9I3. Price 2S. 6d.
Pp. II8.)
******
We included in the July number a notice of a book entitled " The Three Gifts of Life," by Miss Nellie Smith, but omitted to state that it is published in England by Messrs. Cassell and Co., Ltd. They have now pointed out this omission to us, and we take this opportunity of rectifying it.

