THE EUGENICS REVIEW

POPULATION

compendium, and others are reprints of papers

Glass, D. V. and Eversley, D. E. C. (Editors). Population in History. Essays in Historical Demography. London, 1965. Arnold. Pp. ix+692. Price £5.

previously published elsewhere, although some of the latter have been substantially revised by their authors, and others have been translated into English for the first time. There are three
parts, containing a total of twenty-seven different

FEW FIELDS OF historical study are so important contributions.

or have been so neglected as population history. Part I, under the heading of "General", con-

That population changes have frequently been at tains two introductory essays by the editors, two

the root of the social, economic and political shorter but nevertheless stimulating pieces by

transformation of nations can scarcely be dis- Professor L. Chevalier and Professor K. F.

puted, yet attempts to analyse and explain these Helleiner, a study by Dr. Sigismund Peller of

demographic changes were, until recently, few fertility and mortality among Europe's ruling

and far between. It is true that the subject has families since the sixteenth century, and a paper

given rise to much speculation, but it has been by Mr. J. Hajnal entitled "European Marriage

rare for these hypotheses to be supported by Patterns in Perspective". This last is one of the

sound statistics.

outstanding contributions in the volume. The

Perhaps the principal reason for this neglect European marriage pattern is (or rather, was,

lay in the enormous amount of tedious spade- since it now seems to be disappearing) character-

work needed before meaningful historical series ized by "(1) a high age at marriage and (2) a high

of population statistics could be compiled. proportion of people who never marry at all".

Before the establishment of regular censuses and Mr. Hajnal shows first how these patterns have

systems of vital registration in most European been peculiar to western Europe, and then poses

countries in the nineteenth century (or in the the question of how long they have been in

eighteenth in the case of Scandinavia), the existence. It is clear that they were already firmly

principal source of demographic data was the established in the eighteenth century, but for

parish registers of births, marriages and burials. earlier periods the data are so scanty that firm

The information in these registers requires care- conclusions are difficult to draw. However, on

ful and painstaking analysis before any worth- the basis of the available evidence, Mr. Hajnal

while figures can be compiled. Furthermore, the suggests that in the Middle Ages and the

interpretation of the results is no easy matter, "ancient world" things may have been different:

and most historians would need the advice of a people married younger and fewer remained

demographer or statistician before drawing any single throughout life. Precisely when and how

firm conclusions. During the past twenty years, the "European pattern" became established are

however, these problems have been systematic- thus questions for future research. This simple

ally tackled, principally in France and in and important theme has never before been

England, although the examples provided by adequately discussed, and Mr. Hajnal's admir-

these studies have also been followed in other able paper is all the more readable for the

European countries.

lucidity and informality of his style.

In France the moving spirit, from the demo- Part II deals with Great Britain and comprises

graphers' side, has been M. Louis Henry, who, ten different contributions, only two of which

in collaboration with M. Michel Fleury, has are here published for the first time. The

produced a short manual for research workers principal themes running through this section

on the techniques of analysing parish registers. are the causes of the increase in the population

In England the impetus behind these studies has during the eighteenth century, and the light

come largely from Professor Glass and Dr. which the recent studies of parish registers

Eversley, the editors of the work under review. throw on this problem. In two contributions

The book consists of a collection of essays on Professor Glass examines, first, Gregory King's

various aspects of demographic history; some of estimate of the population of England and

these essays were specially written for this Wales at the end of the seventeenth century and,

100

REVIEWS OF BOOKS

second, the estimates made by Rickman, Farr, based on rather shaky assumptions. His con-

Brownlee and Griffiths for the eighteenth and clusion that the long-term decline in French

early nineteenth centuries. Griffiths's hypotheses fertility began somewhere about the year 1770

of the decline in mortality in the eighteenth has not been fully corroborated by the studies

century and the possible causes of such a decline of parish registers described by M. Henry,

are then examined critically in three papers by although the practice of birth control was

Marshall Habakkuk, and McKeown and undoubtedly spreading among certain sections

Brown. The last of these is particularly stimulat- of the population, principally the nobility,

ing. The authors' main theme is the examination during the eighteenth century. The other chapters

of the possible influence of medical science on devoted to France consist of a study of the data

mortality in the eighteenth century, and they available for the sixteenth and seventeenth

reach the challenging conclusion that an exten- centuries by Professor Goubert and a discussion

sion of medical services at that time would have by M. Meuvret of the relationships between on

been more likely to produce a rise than a fall in the one hand the famines and epidemics of the

mortality. In the section of their paper in which Ancien Regime and on the other the fluctuations

they discuss the possible influence of the birth in fertility and mortality.

rate, however, McKeown and Brown are on Professor Glass and Dr. Eversley are to be

rather weaker ground. Statements such as congratulated in bringing together in one volume

"Coitus interruptus . . . to be effective requires such a large range of valuable studies. It should

more self-control than is usually credited to the prove indispensable to all students both of

majority of people" are open to dispute; so are demography and of economic history. Not only

their conclusions on the potential effect of does it bring out the salient points of recent

changes in age at marriage. Detailed studies of research, but it also indicates the lines along

particular areas are provided in the papers by which future investigation should be directed,

Eversley on an area in Worcestershire and by and it should thus provide effective stimulus to

Chambers on Nottingham and the Vale of such research.

Trent; and in an essay on "The Changing

J. G. C. BLACKER

Adequacy of English Registration, 1690-1837",

Professor Krause of Rutgers University puts forward the view that the general quality of the parish registers deteriorated during the eighteenth
century. Part III is concerned with Europe and the

United Nations General Principles for National Programmes of Population Projections as Aids to Development Planning. New York, 1965. Pp. vi+60. Price 75 cents (HMSO, 5s. 6d.).

United States, and comprises eleven contribu- THIS MANUAL, WHICH should perhaps be

tions: four are devoted to France, and the others regarded as a short introductory textbook for

to Ireland, Scandinavia, Finland, Italy, Barmen the developing countries, was planned at the

(a small town in western Germany), Flanders 1961 session of the UN Population Commission.

and the United States. The French studies In 1963 and 1964 it was sent in draft to various

include a paper of outstanding interest and value agencies, institutions and individual experts and

by M. Louis Henry, wherein he summarizes the subsequently it was revised, in the light of their

principal features of the recent analyses of parish observations, before publication.

registers in France. We are also given an English About one-half of the text consists of a very

translation of the paper by M. Jean Bourgeois- useful and thorough bibliography, classified

Pichat on the evolution of the population of according to the different aspects of the subject.

France since the eighteenth century, which was The remainder of the book describes the various

first published in Population in 1951. His types of projections, and the general considera-

reconstructions of the patterns of fertility, tions underlying their preparation and use.

mortality and age-sex distributions in the Technique is not dealt with, and there are no

nineteenth century are of great value; but his examples; thus the exposition cannot in any

extrapolations into the eighteenth century are sense be regarded as complete, but at least the

101

