EUTELEGENESIS*
By HERBERT BREWER

T HE present concern of eugenics is commensurate with the great reward which

with the elimination of defect. Its success would give.

greater mission, however, lies in the The difficulties indeed appear immense.

creation of excellence. If man has arisen Intensity of selection must govern the rate of

from a simian stock then we may be the biological change. Since man is a slow

forerunners of beings as superior to ourselves breeder, any appreciable rate of advance

as we are to the apes. It is difficult to give requires a selection not less effective than

precision to the idea of such exalted beings. that which is applied to domesticated

Nevertheless the idea exists and gives to animals. The creation of superior breeds of

eugenics its most powerful inspiration.

livestock has only been possible by preferring

Yet superman remains a dream, as elusive a few out of thousands or more. In the best

as that of Messiah. " When shall Messiah strains of highly bred animals 40 to 6o per

come? " asked the Jewess of Braniza. cent. may have to be culled merely to

" When all the Jews have become either prevent the standard from deteriorating.

altogether virtuous or altogether vicious," Similar selection in the human species might

was the reply. The biologist is apt to reply in well seem possible only by a ruthless over-

somewhat similar terms to the eugenicist. riding of individual preference and by

Mankind may one day create something annihilating most of what is connoted by

better than itself. But first it is necessary to love and marriage.

unravel the complexities of Mendelian in- But entirely new possibilities exist in the

heritance in man, and to assess a myriad application of invention to the mechanism of

genes as good or bad. Even H. G. Wells, so reproduction. Contraception has already

daring elsewhere, gives no encouragement begun to show how far-reaching may be the

here. " The deliberate improvement of man's effects of such inventiveness. Through

inherent quality," he says, " is at present contraception the emotional satisfactions of

unattainable."

sexual union have become dissociated from

Yet facts from wide fields of experience support a challenge to these views. Few great advances of any kind have waited upon sure calculations and complete knowledge for their inception. If action is dependent on knowledge the converse is also true. The physicist might have waited in vain for his data but for the trial and error initiatives of the workshop. Racial advance may be regarded as an adventure entailing risks

the ends which that union was evolved to fulfil-i.e. the fusion of male and female germ cells. Here it may be noted that it is through coitus that reproduction is involved in the turbulent emotions of sex. Yet coitus is but a means, the real end being fertilization. The intense consciousness aroused by the means is in contrast with the entire lack
of it in relation to the end itself. The emotions.
which might appear to constitute insuperable obstacles to radical departures in human

reproduction therefore are linked to accessory

* The views expressed in this article do not appear among the Aims and Objects of the Eugenics Society (EUGENICS REVIEW, July 1934, page 133); nor have they been submitted for the consideration of the Council. Fellows and Members will have an oppor-
tunity of discussing them on October 22nd, when M.
Brewer will read a paper on " Eutelegenesis" at the

rather than to fundamental factors. Contraception makes physical love inde-
pendent of fertilization, but not the reverse. In the mind of primitive and semi-civilized man conception, as Hartland* has shown, was

Rooms of the Linnean Society. The Eugenics Society accepts no responsibility for opinions expressed in

frequently believed to be independent of sex

contributions to the RE:VIEW.-ED.

* Hartland, E. S., I90. Primitive Patenity.

I2I

122 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

union. Positive eugenic advance may well The problem of diluting semen to facilitate

depend upon whether civilized man can its maximum degree of employment has

recapture the outlook of our forbears who received much attention. Walton* has

held these beliefs. For science has trans- diluted rabbit sperm i88 times without loss

formed primitive fiction into modem reality. of fertilizing capacity. Russian workers have

To-day generation without antecedent sexual devised solutions giving maximal dilution of

union is not only an experimental fact but 320 times for cattle and I,000 times for

a practice which is being widely and success- sheep, though the optimal degrees are less.

fully applied to stockbreeding.

By these means there are said to be no

The first authentic case of the artificial technical obstacles to breeding in one season

insemination of a mammal was that of I,200- I,500 calves or 2,ooo lambs from one Spallanzani, who, about the year I780, male animal. These achievements will probsucceeded in fertilizing a spaniel bitch with ably be surpassed by the application of the

injected semen. Towards the end of the last results of the researches now being made on

century similar experiments were extended sperm physiology and the inducement of

to horses and cattle. Later, Iwanoff in cestrus and ovulation by endrocrinological

Russia greatly developed the practice. Work- methods.

ing mainly with horses he obtained a greater Since John Hunter's first case in I799,

percentage of conceptions than with natural artificial insemination has occasionally been

methods. His work, interrupted by the war, employed in the treatment of human sterility.

was only resumed in I923. Since then great Rohledert enumerates I23 cases of which

progress has been made. According to only about one-third were successful, and

figures of the Moscow Experimental Station, these usually after repeated trials. This rela-

giving results up to I932, two million cows, tive failure has been attributed by Havelock

three million ewes, 650,000 mares and 2oo,ooo Ellis, and others to the absence of erotic

sows had been successfully impregnated by stimulation. A more probable explanation

artificial means.* A discussion of the prob- lies in the suggestion of Rohleder that human

lems involved, with much reference to insemination-is only attempted as a rule upon

Russian data, may be found in The Tech- subjects of low fertility. Normal subjects

nique of Artificial Insemination, by A. would probably yield different results. It

Walton. By transferring spermatozoa to may be noted here that human spermatozoa

suitable solutions maintained at tempera- may be preserved for long periods outside the

tures below body heat, it has been found body. Belding,§ using Baker's buffered glu-

possible to preserve their vitality for some cose solution maintained at 8 degrees

time outside the body. Milovanovf reported Centigrade, was able in a series of experiments

a normal percentage of conceptions in cattle to preserve vitality for I53 hours, and in one

with sperm kept up to two days. Walton case for twenty-six days. It would appear

was able to preserve the fertilizing capacity that only lack of opportunity prevents arti-

of rabbit spermatozoa for about seven days. ficial insemination being applied to the

Lebedeva§ has noted motility in ram sperm human subject as successfully as it has been

kept for twenty-nine days. Belonoschkinll, to animals.

working with bull and rabbit sperm, records Have these facts any implications for

motility for fifteen days.

eugenics? It is suggested that they have

and that it is worth considering tentatively

* Moscovits, E., 1934. Int. Rev. Agr., XXV, I05. t Milovanov, V. K., I932. Probi. Zhivotn, 3, I0-I3. Anim. Breeding A bst., 1, 2, 90. t Walton, A., 1930. Brit. Journ. Exp. Biol., 7,201-19.
§ Lebedeva, N. K., I934. Probl. Zhivotn, 4, 125-9.
AJnim. Breeding Abst., 3, I1 37. 11 Belonoschkin, B., I932. Zeitschr fur. Biol., 92,
542-4.

* Walton, A., 1933. The Technique of Artificial
Insemination, p. 43. t Rohleder, H., I924. Normal, Pathologische und
Kunstliche Zeugung beim Menschen.
: Havelock Ellis, igio. Studies in the Psychology of
Sex, Vol. VI, p. 632. § Belding, D. L., I933. Amer. Journ. Obs. and Gyn.,
XXVI, 6, 868.

EUTELEGENESIS

123

what these implications may be. For the process of reproduction from the germ cells of individuals between whom is no bodily contact, I propose the name telegenesis. The possible application of this process to the eugenic breeding of man may be termed eutelegenesis. Many psychological objections may be aroused at the mere mention of such a project. But for the moment only its physical aspects will be considered.
In the human male reproductive system, as in that of other mammals, there is an enor-
mous margin of wastage. The spermatozoa
in a single emission average about 226 millions, a normal man producing, between the ages of twenty-five and fifty-five, something like 339,385 millions.* Since coital capacity is set aside as a limiting factor, artificial insemination renders feasible an immensely increased multiplication in relation to the male. If only one spermatozoon out of each thousand were utilized, this great wastage would yet enable one man in a year to fertilize five million women. Such a standard is not yet technically possible with animals. But there seems no reason why with improved technique it should not ultimately be so.
We may consider the results which might follow an experiment in human reproduction carried out by using the germ cells of a few highly selected males to impregnate the general body of females. Such a process might produce a great and rapid improve-
ment in the hereditary qualities of the race.
A genetically similar method has been applied to animals with remarkable results. According to Winters: t " Improvement is made very rapidly by the use of good pure bred sires. Since the sire is mated to all the females, it is through him that improvement is most economically made. By the continued use of pure bred sires, in a few generations the stock will have all the appearance, action and practical value of pure breds." Cumulative crossing with a superior breed in this way means that in each successive
* Marshall, F. H. A., I922. Physiology of Reproduction, p. I6q.
t Winters, L. M., 1925. Animal Breeding, p. 205.

generation the proportion of inferior inheritance is halved, thus:

Generation ist
Percentage of Inheritance
Unimproved 5°

2nd 3rd 4th 5th
25 I2*5 6*25 3'I2

In terms of Mendelism similar results may be shown. Suppose a population consisting of homozygous dominants to be all crossed with a homozygous recessive, and that each succeeding generation is back crossed to the latter, then the proportion of homozygous
recessives in the nth generation will be 2
Such a system of reproduction would transform the problem of negative eugenics. The authors of the Brock Report observed that the crux of the problem of the hereditary transmission of mental disorder and defect was the carrier, and that the carriers in these cases probably outnumbered the visibly affected by at least ten to one. With relatively rare genes the ratio becomes greater. Where with random mating a defect dependent on a duplicated recessive factor is exhibited in one per ten thousand, I98 per ten thousand will be heterozygous (i.e. carriers) for the same defect. Though mating may not be entirely at random, it is evident that the existence of a great reservoir of latent defectiveness is responsible for the frequent appearance of unpredictable degeneracy. To attempt the elimination of such degeneracy by sterilizing it as it appears is like clearing a river of fish by catching the few which jump from the water. The method now in view would meet the problem by sweeping out of existence the whole inextricable tangle of latent defect in a few generations, replacing it concurrently with hereditary material of the highest excellence. The carrier female, on this view, need not be denied the gratification of her matemal impulses, which with women in general must
be regarded as fundamental to self-realization and happiness. A vast store of maternal energy would thus be conserved and canalized for racial progress.

I24 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Applied to the purpose of creating homo- of an animal mating, it is an act of deliberate

zygous types of the highest excellence in creativeness to which animal life holds no

respect of heredity, and to the rapid diffusion parallel. It is hardly necessary to add that,

of advantageous mutations as they occur, though in eutelegenesis there is a conscious

eutelegenesis might accomplish in a few dissociation of reproduction from coitus, this

generations what otherwise would require does not imply that sexual love has no part

millenia. " What is now most wanted from to play in satisfying the deep emotional needs

science," said Major Leonard Darwin,* " is of mankind.

that she should demonstrate that a com-

paratively wide and rapid advance in nearly To bring eutelegenesis from the realm of

all human qualities is now at all events a theory to practice, some organization would

possibility." Eutelegenesis would appear to be required. This would call for the services

furnish an answer to that question.

of geneticists, psychologists, physiologists,

It is frequently assumed that any far-
reaching scheme for the eugenic breeding of humanity can only be accomplished by compulsory measures. Compulsion, in the
opinion of the writer, is both wrong and un-
necessary. Eugenic advance must be the
voluntary adventure of free men and women, or nothing. Eutelegenesis might be such an adventure. AJI it need ask of society is that
people with courage and imagination enough
to make a new experiment for human progress should be left alone. Compared with Plato's eugenic methods, eutelegenesis is mild and conservative. It does not require the abolition of marriage and the family. Men and women who, mutually attracted in the customary ways, desired to marry and to have children would not be denied. The difference would be that when a child was decided upon, man and wife would act upon the simple moral principle that the welfare of the child must be the first consideration. The logical consequence of that principle is that
the best hereditary endowment possible should be chosen for the child. All that would be needed to finally implement the decision would be a simple manipulation, less painful than drawing a tooth and no more unchaste than an ante-natal examination, carried out by a qualified physician.

and other experts. Its function would be to provide, for prospective parents who sought its assistance, the widest choice in the way of superior human types whose germ cells were available for eutelegenesis. There might be included such types as saints, philosophers, scientists, poets, artists, musicians and athletes. If there was an effective demand for politicians and film idols, even this should, if possible, be satisfied! But a preliminary selection of a stringent character would have to
be carried out by the experts. Freedom from hereditary diseases and deformities, more positively, the possession of a harmoniously balanced physical organism of high vitality, healthy nervous tone, a predisposition to longevity, these are the sort of qualities which among the physical factors one imagines as fundamental. As regards mental traits, regard would probably be paid to a high order of general intellectual capacity, rapid responsiveness and keen sensory discrimination. Temperamental and moral qualities, so far as they could be tested,
should be taken into consideration. In addition to satisfying such tests, it should be required that the superior male should have
distinguished himself by actual aphievement in some field of human effort, for instance, in science, art, government, or exploration. That conspicuous personal achievement is in

At this point one may meet the objection general correlated with hereditary gifts

that eutelegenesis means breeding human seems extremely probable. The qualification

beings like animals. Exactly the contrary is of achievement, however, would be some-

the case. Eutelegenesis means that, instead thing more than a eugenic test. If eugenic

of reproduction being the blind consequence selection is to overcome egotism and inertia

the inequality of men must be demonstrated

* EUGENICS RzVIEW, I934, xxvi, 257.

in a completely convincing fashion. So long

EUTELEGENESIS

I25

as selection between classes is concerned that it would appear absurd for a man to feel

must be exceedingly difficult, if not imposs- jealous of one with whom his wife enters into

ible. But to pick out a few superlative no consciously personal and emotional con-

individuals who, by the exercise of their tact whatever.

gifts, have conferred immeasurable benefits Much is likely to be said about the possi-

upon their fellows, and thus won honour in bility of the putative father feeling that the

their eyes, is to put selection in a very different eutelegenetic child is in a real sense his own.

light. There is no dishonour or humiliation There is reason to believe, however, that in

in accepting, in common with the multitude so far as the paternal sentiment rests upon an

of men, the position of second best to the instinctive basis, it is entirely a matter of

ideal. Thus eutelegenesis might render a association. The germinal continuity of sire

highly stringent selection acceptable to the and offspring could not possibly have been

general body of men.

appreciated in the mind of the anthropoids

The information in the hands of the from which man arose. Hartland* has shown

eutelegenetic organization would form the that ignorance of the dependence of birth

basis on which prospective parents would upon sexual intercourse was general in

exercise their choice. No personal contact primitive man. Various Australasian and

between the putative parents and the superior Melanesian peoples have retained their

men chosen would be either desirable or ignorance until modern times. Definitely

necessary. The investigation of the genetic paternal behaviour patterns, however, are

qualifications of the superior men who were present in these cases. Even in apes and

willing to co-operate would necessarily in- monkeys adult males display a friendly and

volve them in certain inconveniences. But if protective attitude to the infant members of

a eugenic conscience and aspiration may not their group, and this seems a rudimentary

be found in the intellectual leaders of men, it form ofpaternal behaviour. That association

must be vain to seek it elsewhere.

plays a major part in evoking the paternal

An important work of the organization sentiment in civilized society is supported by

would be the keeping of records and pedi- facts relating to child adoption. So far as the

grees. If for no other reason, this would be instinctive basis of the paternal sentiment

necessary to avoid conflicting with the is concerned, therefore, it would appear

marriage laws regarding consanguinity. Rea- that eutelegenesis would leave it un-

sons of expediency would render it desirable affected.

to obviate the marriage of half-sibs through a As regards the ideological aspect of pater-

eutelegenetic father. On such lines as these, nity, the putative father might feel himself

I suggest, eutelegenetic reproduction might bound to the eutelegenetic child in an even

be applied to humanity.

deeper sense than if the child were derived

Objections and difficulties would appear to materially from himself. For, conjointly

centre chiefly round a possible reluctance on with the mother, he might feel himself to

the part of the ordinary man to delegate, so have created, by the deliberate exercise of

to speak, his procreative functions. Mascu- his will and thought, a being in whom his

line egotism and jealousy have undeniably ideal aspirations were embodied. In coming

played an important part in sex relations, to understand its true relation to its creative

both animal and human. In mankind, how- father a unique gratitude and love might be

ever, these impulses seem extremely variable evoked in the child towards those who had

and anthropology yields many examples given it the most precious of all gifts, a

where they have been attenuated or sub- splendid hereditary nature.

merged. Ethically, jealousy must be regarded The question of how far the ordinary man

as a quality appropriate to the animal rather and woman might be disposed to accept

than to the human. " Ily a dans la jalousie plus eutelegenesis is considerably elucidated by

d'amour propre que d'amour," said de La

Rochefoucauld. In relation to eutelegenesis, * Hartland, E.S., I909. Primitive Paternity.

126 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

a recent inquiry in the U.S.A. by J. H. combining high moral worth with sound

Caldwell, who collated the experience of 200 physical development.

physicians in regard to inquiries made by In a short paper, the treatment of the far-

sterile married couples as to the possibility reaching questions raised by eutelegenesis is

of artificial insemination. He concluded that necessarily brief and inadequate. Much

the total of requests for artificial insemina- might be said for the view that the re-

tion with donated sperm in the U.S.A. was orientation of custom and tradition de-

between i,ooo and 3,ooo a year and that manded must be immensely difficult. I

these showed a tendency to increase, par-
ticularly during the last few years. He estimated that Io,000 to 20,000 was prob-
ably the annual potential demand if the possibility were more generally known and physicians were prepared to do the work. When actual progress in eugenics is so painfully slow, can eugenists afford to throw

believe that none of the obstacles are entirely insuperable.
If egotism, prejudice and the blind behaviour pattems inherited from our animal ancestors are destined for ever to dominate sex and parenthood, then indeed eutelegenesis has no chance. It will be dismissed as contrary to common sense and human nature, as an idea capable of taking root

away the possibilities arising out of situations only in the minds of cranks and perverts.

of that kind?

But if mankind comes to realize its impera-

It is just to disclaim here a priority in the tive mission to create out of itself something

idea of applying artificial insemination to the infinitely nobler and better, if sex can be

purpose of racial progress. That would envisaged as the instrument of a profoundly

appear to belong to Marion Piddington who,
about the year I9I6, published a pamphlet called Scientific Motherhood, in which artificial insemination was advocated as a means of populating Australia, and creating a race

religious purpose, if mankind can perceive the full implications of the truth that biologically, as otherwise, we are members of one body, then eutelegenesis will become a new evangel. And in applying it to the creation of its children, mankind will

* Caidwell, J. H., 1934. Scientific American, March
I934, 124-5.

journey, with pride and joy, along a short road to superman.

C)

'ugenics Review, VoL DCVI, No. 2

