H. FABRE
Vice-President of the Movement Franfais pour le Planning Familial
Contraception versus Abortion*

IT IS A GREAT HONOUR for me to address an The arguments of Father de Lestapis are

IPPF Congress for the first time. Our French based principally on the examples of Sweden,

organization is young. It was founded in 1955, Japan and the United States of America. They

thanks to the foresight and courage of my have been adopted without any serious study

friend Dr. Lagroua Weill-Halle. Our experience by the opponents of the French Movement for

is therefore of recent date, and I have no Family Planning.

pretentions to teach you anything about the Even our Minister of Health has used this

relationship between contraception and abortion bogey. To a Senator who was demanding the

in the world at large. It is a subject you know legalization of contraception he answered:

well, having dealt with it many times at your The reduction of the number of abortions is meetings. If I am able, in spite of this, to bring doubtless a highly desirable objective. But the

some new elements to your notice, it is because example of other countries does not in any way

I give contraceptive advice in a Roman Catholic allow one to assert that a greater diffusion of

country, where we daily come up against contraceptive methods will enable this end to be

preconceived ideas and principles, considered attained. Thus in a Scandinavian country where

by some to be indisputable. It is one of these preconceived ideas that I wish to discuss to-day.
There are 40,000 doctors in France. Only
just over 200 prescribe contraceptive methods. As to the others they make do with telling women "fend for yourself" or "make your husband sleep in the cellar!" Although they are becoming more and more ill at ease about this negative attitude, they persist in refusing

contraceptive propaganda is free, the number of known abortions increased seven times, between 1938 and 1957, whilst that of family planning consultation centres increased in the same proportion.
The Scandinavian country where contraception has apparently caused such disasters is Sweden. Let us therefore have a look at what has happened there.

contraceptive facilities for two major reasons:

The first is the fear of contraceptives leading Sweden

to debauchery. Although this argument may be of great interest-and quite refutable-we shall not discuss it here, because it does not enter into the scope of to-day's study.
The second reason was put forward by the Jesuit priest, Father de Lestapis, when our organization was formed: the legalisation of contraception has everywhere caused an increase in the number of illegal abortions. This assertion impresses many of our colleagues, and constitutes a serious obstacle to the development
of contraception in the French medical world.

The annual number of legal-and therefore known-abortions, which was 454 in 1938, and 2378 in 1945, went up to 5328 in 1951, and then
fell to 3386 in 1957. What therefore happened between 1938 and 1957?
At the end of 1938, the Swedish Government promulgated a law authorizing contraception on the one hand and extending on the other hand the reasons permitting therapeutic abortion (allowed since 1921 for medical reasons onl,, it was now authorized for medico-social, humanitarian and eugenic reasons).

* A paper read at the Fourth Conference of the In 1946, an amendment permitted the inter-

International Planned Parenthood Federation: Region ruption of a pregnancy if, "when taking into

for Europe, Near East and Africa, London 8th-1 lth June 1964. The Proceedings of the Conference will be published by Excerpta Medica.

account the physical and social circumstances of the woman, there are reasons to foresee that

21
THE EUGENICS REVIEW, March 1965, 57, 1.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

her physical or mental condition would be seriously affected by the birth of the child and by the responsibilities arising therefrom". As a result, the motive "poor state of health" was called on more and more to justify interruptions of pregnancy (21-8 per cent of these were carried out for this reason in 1947, and 50 7 per cent in 1950).
Then, from 1952 onwards, the government and the Swedish medical body, worried by the constant increase in legal abortions, put on the brakes, and the number of refusals immediately began to increase. As for contraception, on the other hand, the number of family planning consultation centres has continued to increase since 1938.
Contrary to the assertion of our Minister of Health, if the number of legal abortions has been multiplied by seven since 1938, contraception cannot be held responsible for this. The Swedish Government and doctors wanted this increase. Why? Because they were hoping (whether rightly or wrongly is not the question) that by legalizing a greater number of abortions the number of clandestine abortions would decrease in the same proportion. It is obvious that there is no connection between the legalization of contraception and the increase of known abortions.
Japan
Let us now see what has happened in Japan. Father de Lestapis asserts: " Let it no longer be said that abroad contraception is a prophylactic against abortion. In the case of Japan, it is quite the contrary".
After the war, Japan, defeated and with an economy in ruins, had to support on a territory reduced by 40 per cent a larger population than before the war. "Never in modern times" writes Professor Okasaki, "has the problem of population and its subsistence arisen in such an acute form."
Lacking confidence in economic recovery alone, the Government decided to limit the birth rate. Hence the "Eugenic Protection Law" of 1948. This law authorized contraception and legalized abortion as well. There is nothing surprising in the fact that it should be an

emergency solution, the easy solution (i.e. abortion) which first showed results: nothing surprising that the number of interrupted pregnancies should rise from 246,104 in 1948 to 1,128,231 in 1958. But yet again, we are not called upon to judge here either the intentions or the decisions of the Japanese Government. We can only observe that, on the demographic plane, the legalization of abortion was a success, since from 1947 to 1959 the gross birth rate was reduced by 50 per cent. But yet again, contraception had nothing to do with this.
Still dealing with Japan, Father de Lestapis quotes the results of two inquiries carried out by Mr. Tatsuo Honda, Chief of the Research Department at the Tokio Institute for Research into Demographic Problems. According to Mr. Tatsuo Honda, 39 per cent of the women who underwent abortions did so before using contraceptive methods, whereas 59 per cent of them already practised contraception at the time of their abortion-hence Father de Lestapis deduces:
. . .it is much easier to go from contraception to abortion than from abortion to contraception.
Another sociologist, Mr. Riallin, after studying the same investigations, declares that:
. . . the normal process is the recourse to contraception after an abortion, because that operation is unpleasant enough to make one anxious to avoid undergoing it again.
How can one explain that Father de Lestapis and Mr. Riallin, making use of the same statistics, arrive at diametrically opposed conclusions? It is because the latter studies the figures as a scientist, whereas the former, although Professor of Family Sociology, looks at them as a moralist-and has once and for all formed his opinion of contraception. So why should the figures not support his own argument?
Indeed, it is nowhere stated in the investigations of Mr. Tatsuo Honda that the 59 per cent
of women referred to had abandoned contra-
ception. They were in fact women who, although practising birth control, had become pregnant. The figures supplied by the Japanese demo-
grapher do not lead to the deduction that

22

CONTRACEPTION VERSUS ABORTION

contraception facilitates abortion, but that number of illegal abortions is 20 per cent of

unsuccessful birth control favours abortion. the total number of pregnancies, whilst in

Research carried out in Japan in 1959 shows France, a country where contraception did not

that, out of a hundred couples wishing to avoid exist at the time Father de Lestapis' study

pregnancy:

appeared, they were estimated at 50 per cent!

29-9 per cent practised periodic abstention
4-7 per cent used diaphragms or caps 8-5 per cent used spermicidal jellies 4'6 per cent used spermicidal tablets 37-7 per cent used condoms

And yet the birth rate is higher in the United States than in France. This is therefore because there are more uninterrupted pregnancies occurring on the other side of the Atlantic than in France. To revert to the figure of speech of our opponent, there are more cars in circulation,

These figures show that, in 1959, few women and yet road accidents are less numerous. It is

used effective methods, and that periodic because, contrary to the assertion of Father

abstention was most in favour (do not let us de Lestapis, the drivers are more skilled and

forget that Ogino was Japanese). It is not very more prudent, and because the use of contra-

surprising therefore that the failures of birth ceptive methods has produced a favourable

control should have been very numerous; the influence on the number ofclandestine abortions.

59 per cent of women who had abortions were,

in reality, only victims of illusory contraceptive methods. What Father de Lestapis is in fact

France

questioning is the effectiveness of contraceptive As far as we are concerned, our experience is as

methods. And in this particular, I am entirely yet too recent for us to be able to reach definite

of his opinion.

conclusions. It is none the less true that our

brief experience has allowed us to catch a

United States of America

glimpse of the successful results of contraception. By its very existence, it has allowed us

As for the United States of America, the to avoid a considerable number of abortions.

question was discussed at length in 1959, at the Let me explain: women who had decided to

Congress of Arden House. The opponents of interrupt their pregnancy finally decided against

contraception have again raised the points this when I assured them that it would be their

debated at this Congress, and have widely last, that after the birth I would give them the

quoted all those who made reservations about possibility of using an effective contraceptive.

the favourable influence of contraception on Furthermore, I have studied a group of 375

the number of abortions, in particular Drs. women who were using a diaphragm and a

Stone, McLane, Kinsey, Kolb, Goldstone, spermicidal cream, and who came to me for a

Nelson, Taylor and Donnelly. This allows them check-up between 1st January and 1st September

to declare purely and simply that even in the 1963. (I have not chosen a more recent period

United States contraception has caused an because after October 1963 a defect in the

increase in the number of abortions.

manufacture of our cream resulted in many

Father de Lestapis admits "that under a pregnancies.)

regime of legal contraception, it is possible that there are fewer interrupted pregnancies, owing to a lesser number of pregnancies occurring, rather like the decrease in car accidents during
the war, which was due to a shortage of petrol

270 of these women had been practising contraception for at least a year.
96 for at least two years. 9 for at least three years.

and to restrictions on traffic, and not to the They had in all 660 children between them,

greater skill and prudence of the drivers." and admitted having had 142 miscarriages:

However, how can one accept this reasoning, eighteen of them were pregnant. Of these

knowing that in the United States, country eighteen pregnancies, four had been deliberate,

of contraception, pessimists estimate that the one was due to using a diaphragm without

23

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

cream, the thirteen others were the result of repeated pregnancies endanger the health of

conception arising through the non-use of a the couple and the equilibrium of the home,

contraceptive during the so-called safe period, then even the most intransigent compromise

(three of them during menstruation, four arguing that theirs is a special case and that it

immediately after, and six immediately before is not only their right but also their duty to use

the estimated date of the next menstruation.) an effective contraceptive method, even if it is

They had practised contraception regularly forbidden by their religion. Why therefore

and correctly during the rest of the menstrual should we be more dogmatic than the Catholics?

cycle. Why should we place religious convictions in

It is certainly true that the number of cases the forefront of our considerations if those

and the duration of the use of contraceptives directly concerned, when faced with reality,

considered in this study are not very significant. relegate these convictions to second place?

They do nevertheless point to an interesting Certainly a couple must be free to make their

conclusion: nearly all the failures in contra- own choice, but it is up to us to enlighten

ception were due to the belief in the periodic them, and to guide them towards the most

infertility of women.

effective method. And if, in spite of everything,

For more than thirty years, moralists in our a couple considers that religious convictions

country have taught that periodic continence is leave them no alternative but periodic con-

the only contraceptive method consistent with tinence, then we must give them all the explana-

nature-and doctors have praised its effectiveness. tions necessary to reduce the inefficacy of this

And for more than thirty years unwanted method as far as possible. In any case, we must

pregnancies have followed unwanted preg- warn them of the risks they are taking, because

nancies, and abortions have followed abortions. a woman is fertile during the whole of her

Faced with this fiasco, moralists and doctors menstrual cycle, including during menstruation.

will not retract, and now recommend the Such should be the leitmotiv of our propaganda.

temperature method. After the abortions of the If we wish to combat abortion effectively, we

calendar, those of the thermometer now appear. must not only make reliable contraceptives

Faced with this imposture, what is our own available to women, but also convince them

attitude, as doctors of the French Movement that they must use them continuously. For the

for Family Planning? A great number among Ogino-Knaus method is responsible for millions

us believe that the choice of a contraceptive of abortions, and we must adopt a definite

method must depend, for each couple, on their attitude on this, before the myth of the thermo-

health, their conjugal habits, the standard of meter causes millions of others.

their education, their intellectual level, and

also their religious convictions. They readily

conclude that certain couples should have recourse to local or "per os" contraceptives,

Efficacy of Different Methods

whilst others would manage quite well with In order that my investigations should not

periodic continence. This way of looking at solely reflect my own personal feelings, I have

things is, in my opinion, extremely dangerous. tried to support them by asking the opinion of

Certainly, we must take different elements into two sets of people:

account-far be it from me to think of neglecting (1) The 260 French doctors of the French

psychological factors, but religious convictions Movement for Family Planning, who prescribe

should only be taken into consideration in contraceptive methods.

exceptional cases. Experience shows that in (2) 2,250 specialists in gynaecology and

fact the great majority of Roman Catholics, obstetrics spread over twelve countries. I was

when faced with reality, accept contraception refused the names and addresses of specialists

quite readily. High principles are unshakeable in eastern countries; Poland was the exception,

when one is unmarried, or when one has only a thanks to the kindness of Dr. Bednarski, Deputy

reasonable number of children, but when Minister of Health.

24

CONTRACEPTION VERSUS ABORTION

I put several questions to these doctors, but But the first sample shows that, in the United

I will only deal with two here:

States as in France those who believe that

What is your opinion of the efficacy of the contraception has an unfavourable influence

Ogino-Knaus method, the temperature method, on the number of illegal abortions are in the

the combination of cap and spermicide, and minority (in the United States 16 1 per cent

the ovulation inhibitors?

of the doctors who expressed an opinion, in

Table 1 summarizes the replies received so France only 1 8 per cent). These replies also

far from doctors in the U.S.A.-eighty-two show that the best results are obtained with

TABLE 1

ovulation inhibitors, and the combination of cap and spermicidal cream-that is, just those

Very Not very No reliable Reliable reliable opinion

U.S.A. (82 replies)

Ogino-Knaus

method

1 12 38 31

Temperature

methods forbidden by our opponents, and that periodic continence is not very reliable-that periodic continence which our opponents persist in advocating. It is not at all surprising therefore,

method Cap+

2 19 54

7

TABLE 2

spennicide

42 30

0 10

No Decrease in Increase in No

Ovulation

influence abortions abortions opinion

inhibitors

72 0 0 10 U.S.A. 31

21

10 20

FRANCE (66 replies)

FRANCE 1

52

1 12

Ogino-Knaus

method Temperature
method Cap+
spermicide Ovulation
inhibitors

3 0 56 7 that unwanted pregnancies and abortions should 5 32 19 10 be so numerous in our country!
Einstein declared that we are living in sad 58 8 0 0 times, when it is more difficult to break down 52 7 1 6 a prejudice than to split the atom. It is in any

case deplorable to realize that though a man is

replies to 536 questionnaires sent, and from free to marry or remain single, though he even

prescribing doctors who are members of the has the right to divorce, at least in most

French Movement for Family Planning- countries, he is denied by some the right to have

sixty-six replies to 260 questionnaires. (A further children as and when he wants them. In short,

222 questionnaires were sent to gynaecologists it is distressing to see the freedom of the

and accoucheurs in France, and were con- individual still hampered by deeply-rooted

temptuously ignored: only fourteen replies were prejudices. It was eventually admitted that the

received.)

earth is round and that it revolves. It will one

Table 2 shows the replies to the second day have to be admitted that freedom to plan

question: the influence of contraception on a family is an undeniable right. Dr. Senior's

clandestine abortions.

prediction that contraception will take the

The complete results of this inquiry will be place of abortion, just as abortion has replaced

published later, if enough replies are received. infanticide, will then become reality.

25

