THE PHYSICAL BASIS OF MIND
And the Diagnosis of Mental Deficiency
Being the substance of two addresses delivered to members of the Eugenics Society, tn association with the Psychology and Education Sections of the British Association for the Advancement of Science at the Bristol Meeting of the latter, on September gth,
1930.
By PROFESSOR R. J. A. BERRY, M.D., F.R.C.S., F.R.S.E.
Director of Medical Services, Stoke Park Colony, Bristol.

M AN alone possesses a mind and -which is its undoubted physical in-

psychology is the science of mind. strument, and it is still easier if we

The science of mind determines study the simple, rather than the com-

human conduct. Psychology should, there- plex. In the mentally defective we

fore, enable us to control our conduct both have such relatively simple material, and

through our understanding of ourselves and hence their study forms the best introduc-

through that of the motives and actions of tion to the phenomena of mind as correlated

others. " That Psychology has never with the brain and nervous system, as also

reached this plane of function," says God- to those aberrations of the brain and mind

dard, "needs no proof." If Goddard be commonly known as insanity. Mental defi-

right the explanation is probably to be ciency is thus neither a disease nor a cur-

sought in the fact that modern psychology able disease. It is just an arrest in the

has, perhaps, too completely dissociated normal growth and development of the

itself from known facts in the development, brain, with a corresponding and consequent

functions, and disorders-both structural and lack of intelligence and mentation, and a

functional-of the brains of animals and bodily and sexual development closely ap-

man, for " who does not feel," asks God- proximating to normal. A child of six

dard, " that the average graduate from a years mental age with a six-year-old body

course in academic Psychology is merely a is normal, but a mind of six in a body of

more or less successful juggler with psycho- twenty is something very different. Adult

logical terms?" On the other hand, Dr. sex development with the consequent strong

Sherlock tells us that " the dependence of instincts induced thereby must obviously

mentation on the integrity of the brain is modify the mental make-up of even the

universally accepted." Even those non- normal, and still more of the mentally defec-

medically trained psychologists who admit tive; and any science professing to study

the truth of Dr. Sherlock's statement, the phenomena of the human mind should

usually attack the problems of mind from take all these factors into consideration and

the most complex and difficult angle, base its conclusions on known facts about

namely, that of the highly developed and the brains of mammals and man. The real

intelligent adult. As a natural result, and essential relationship between brain and

there has been much confusion, many con- mind cannot be seen with the naked eye,

troversies have arisen, and the development but what the eye cannot see, the micro-

of the science has been slow.

scope reveals, and the intimate and actual

Now it is unquestionably easier to under- correlation between the minute. cells of the

stand an abstract concept like mind if brain and the phenomena of mind are as

we understand' the concrete thing-brain real as are the relations of the atoms, elec-

'7'

I72 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

trons, and molecules of the physicist to the instances, profoundly alter its whole men-

physical world around us.

tality. In quite a large proportion of

any average population brain growth ceases

THE STAGES OF DEVELOPMENT

at about this level, and the individual passes

Every normal human individual passes, in his bodily, mental, and sexual development, through various well-known and easily recognizable stages, which are as follows:

on into adult life as one of the so-called dull normals.
VIII. YEARS OF ADOLESCENCE.-During the several years succeeding the onset of pubertv, say up to about the twentieth year, the brain growth should complete its deve-

I. MALE AND FEMALE GERM PLASM. lopment and so attain its full maturity, but,

Heredity. Probably 8o to go per cent. of as stated, in an appreciable number of the

primary mental deficiency is caused by a population this last 8 per cent. of brain

bad heredity.

growth does not take place at all, but ceases

Il. NINE MONTHS INTRA-UTERINE LIFE. at the level of puberty.

--From the fertilized ovum are developed IX. THE ADULT YEARS.-From the time

the bodily or somatic cells, the reproductive cells, and the nerve cells or neurons.

of completion of brain growth until such time as death or senile dementia destroys

III. BIRTH.-The sex and brain cells are or obscures the individual's intelligence or

here in a very rudimentary condition, so the mind.

child is, at first, an unconscious, reflex, X. THE CONCLUDING YEARS OF SENILITY

mindless automaton, incapable of either the reproduction of its species, or of purposeful action or volition.

AND OLD AGE.-During the closing years of an average long life, the reproductive cells of both male and female undergo a process

IV. YE4RS OF INFANCY.-From the first of dissolution and gradual death, so that

to the fourth years of life. During these before the occurrence of general death there

years the development of brain cells is ex- has occurred a localized one of the sex cells,

traordinarily rapid, and many neuroblasts as a consequence of which the individual is

or embrvonic brain cells become converted, no longer capable of the reproduction of his

under the influence of environmental fac- species. Exactly the same may occur with

tors, into fully developed and functioning the brain cells, which undergo, with increas-

brain cells, hence the dawn of intelligence. ing age, a gradual dissolution, and the indi-

V. YEARS OF CHILDHOOD.-From about vidual's mentality may become so altered as

the fourth to the eleventh years of life. to cause us to speak of his condition as one

All avenues, particularly sight and hearing, of senile dementia or physiological lunacy.

lead to the brain, and the influence of en-

vironment is now very strong. The home THE MEANING OF SANITY

is as powerful an educational factor as the school, but life is the greatest of all.
VI. A YEAR OF PRE-ADOLESCENCE.Usually about the eleventh year, during which brain development slows down slightly, to make way for the onsetting maturity of the reproductive organs.
VII. THE YEARS OF PUBERTY.-During both the normal and the abnormal, these years, usually about the twelfth and thirteenth, are periods of stress and danger. Powerful new impulses now commence to pass into the child's brain and, in manv

Insanity is thus, from a physiological standpoint, as inseparable from human life as are birth and death. We come into the world no better than the idiot, and we go out of it, provided our bodily cells outlive our reproductive and brain cells, in a state of physiological senile dementia. Simply expressed, every normal individual, who lives long enough, passes through three mental stages-unsanity, sanity, and insanity-and these three stages are indisputably correlated with the actual state of the microscopic structure of the brain itself.

THE PHYSICAL BASIS OF MIND

There is great and pressing need for a more "C crimes." He thus does not react to his

educated public opinion on the phenomena environment in the manner regarded as nor-

of insanity. In its widest sense, insanity mal by normal people and by the laws

is a normal concomitant of human life. In framed for the social protection of those

its narrowest pathological sense it is a re- normal people. Crime and mental defi-

proach to our wilful misunderstanding of ciency thus go hand in hand, and so human

the laws of nature. We should surely do society, by its continued neglect of eugenics

better to cease to look upon insanity as a and the fundamental truths of heredity

disease, and rather regard it as an inability and the laws of life, breeds its own

to react to the human environment in the criminals.

manner regarded as normal by normal

people. This inability to react to the en- MENTAL SCIENCE AND THE LAW

vironment in the normal manner is usually the result of one or other of three main It is unhappily only too true that to-day, general conditions-an embryological lack even in England, the study of mental dis-

of proper brain development; a premature order and the advancement of mental science

dissolution of brain cells; or, in the more evanescent and therefore usually curable
insanities, of some toxic or similar cause producing ill-health of the cerebral neurons.
Mental deficiency is thus not a disease at
all. It is a premature arrest of normal brain growth and development, and probably go per cent. of all mental deficiency is develop-
mental in origin; that is to say, the damage is done before birth, and cannot, therefore, be cured after birth. Consequent, presum-
ably, on a defective germ plasm from a rotten heredity, the fertilized ovum, in its manifold sub-divisions to produce the thousands of millions of cells which make up the human body, does not produce a sufficiency of incipient brain cells or neuroblasts, to give, after birth, the numbers of neurons necessary for a normal reaction to the en-
vironment. It is, however, now fairly well
established that those brain cells-the polymorphic cells of the infra-granular cortexwhich preside over the more purely animal
functions of the human body, such as selfpreservation and sex, are often and naturally quite well developed, whereas the pyra-
midal cells of the controlling supra-granular cortex are the very ones which are most lacking. Consequently, the defective of the higher grades tends to gratify his animal instincts quite freely and so frequently

are hampered and impeded by a variety of unfortunate causes. Professor Haggard of Yale University says, " the treatment of mental disease is not so well developed as the treatment of other diseases because insanity has only recently been recognized as a medical problem. Even to-day the diagnosis of insanity, unlike the diagnosis of any other disease, involves the decision of a Court of Law. Presumably this ancient custom is retained because insanity deprives a man of his freedom and property. But a man may also be deprived of his freedom on account of leprosy or other infectious disease. The Law Courts are not asked to pass an opinion upon each case of smallpox or measles. In such cases medical decision is final."
In England, progress in mental science is still further impeded by the obsoleteness of the legal conception of insanity, which dates back to I843; bv the almost universal ignorance of the most elementary laws of nature governing brain, mind, sanity, insanity, and unsanity, by the public pronouncements of popular pundits on mind and brain and other problems of which they are clearly most profoundlv ignorant, and lastly by a species of grave suspicion of the mental expert and all his works. Once the people of this countrv can be educated to the more elementarv facts governing the absolute dependence of a healthy mind on a

comes into conflict with the law for various healthy brain, progress in mental science

forms of theft and sexual so-called will be increasingly rapid.

I74 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

TYPES OF ARRESTED MENTALITY

ratepayers of this country some £3,000, and

I. THE IDIOT.-The lowest type of arrested mentality recognizable in English
Law, though not necessarily by medical and embryological science, is the idiot, defined by Act of Parliament as " one so grossly defective in brain development as to be un-
able to guard himself against common physical dangers." Brain growth is here arrested either just before birth or just afterwards. Idiots are, as a consequence, usually speechless, hopeless, and helpless. Fortunately most of them are sterile, though this is not always the case. Clinically, they tend to fall into two types-the apathetic and the excitable. The latter are apt to be dangerous and are usually very destructive.
As illustrative examples of idiocy I take two inmates of Stoke Park Colony:
Case i is a girl aged 7 years (No. 2427). She is a microcephalic idiot, with a head

are likely to cost as much again before we have finished with them. And we could show worse than these, for some human idiots are such stunted, mis-shapen, hideous, and bestial specimens of morbid humanity, as to arouse feelings of horror and repulsion rather than of pity or levity. Unfortunately those tender-hearted humanitarians who raise a howl of protest at the mere mention of sterilization or the still more kindly lethal chamber have never seen these things and so do not realize that the human body without
a brain is something worse than the beasts
of the field-and be it remembered that I could quote even more terrible examples than these pathetic and unfortunate sisters.
II. THE IMBECILE.-The imbecile, in
English Law, is a person in whose case there exists mental defectiveness not a-
mounting to idiocy yet so pronounced that they are incapable of managing themselves or their affairs, or in the case of children,

about the size of a twelve-months-old baby. of being taught to do so. The hard and She is speechless, helpless, unable to feed fast line drawn by the law between the Idiot

or do anything for herself whatsoever. We and the Imbecile does not, in actual fact,

cannot carry out any tests as she is incap- exist. The one type passes insensibly into

able of understanding the simplest direc- the other and the differential diagnosis is

tions. She will not grow out of it, and if not always easy. Speaking generally,

I could cure her I would.

brain growth in the imbecile is arrested

Case 2 is a girl aged 5 years and 7 months shortly after birth, somewhere during the

(No. 2432). She utters only meaningless first four years of life, that is, in the in-

syllables, and is speechless and helpless. fantile stage of normality. Tmbeciles can

She, too, will not grow out of it. Once an usually do simple jobs under supervision,

idiot, always an idiot, because brain growth but are unable to perform sufficient work to

is prenmaturely arrested and the damage has contribute appreciably towards their own

been irretrievably done before birth.

support. The development of the faculty

As a proof of the statement that the child of speech is invariably late, and the vocabu-

does not grow out of it, I may refer to two lary a poor one. They cannot maintain a

other inmates, sisters, aged IS and I9 years rational conversation for more than a very

respectively, Cases 3 and 4 (Nos. 2290 and few minutes. On the other hand, a few im-

229T). Both are speechless, useless, apa- beciles are exceedingly voluble in conversa-

thetic idiots. They are only capable of tion, though the matter is childish and in-

meaningless movements and of making in- consequent. There is thus a pouring out

articulate noises and screaming fits. They of words without ideas, an echoing of sounds

have no interest in anvthing whatsoever, which have been heard, with little or no

and, however ironical it may sound or seem, knowledge of their meaning. Imbeciles have

these sisters have had all the therapeutic usually no standards of morality in any

advantages of the provisions of the Mental sense or meaning of the word. They lie

Deficiency Act of I9I3. At the most mode- without embroidery, are often sly and cun-

rate estimate, these sisters have cost the ning, always in trouble, and possessed of

THE PHYSICAL BASIS OF MIND

I75

pronounced immoral and anti-social tenden- normals. But careful examination and

cies, just as nature made them. This is scientific test and measurement show that

because the pyramidal-celled supra-granu- this is not the case. At least two-thirds

lar layers of the brain cortex are imperfectly are microcephalic, whilst another sixth are

developed, and there is thus no restraint macrocephalic. In other-words mental de-

over the animal instinctive reflexes of the fectives tend to have abnormal heads and

body. brains and so scientific measurement reveals

Case 5 is an example of a juvenile im- facts not obvious to the naked eye of either

becile. A girl aged 9 years and 9 months the doctor or the layman, and certainly

(No. 2435). She is a low grade small-headed never to the erroneously proud parent. This

imbecile of the voluble type with a limited retardation of head and brain growth is also

vocabulary. Her speech tends to the nor- corroborated by the nerve reactions of the

mal infantile one of echolalia, that is, she child. In some mentally defective children

repeats the last sounds or syllables heard there is a general diminution of activity.

just as should the normal infant of from 2I They are heavy, stolid, tardy in response,

to 3I months. She is mischievous, excit- and laboured in all their movements. In

able, and very destructive. Her combined others, on the contrary, all movement is in

Binet-Porteus intelligence quotient is only excess. They cannot sit still; they are

17, instead of from 85 to ioo. Her reason- easily distracted from the task in hand;

ing ability is absolutelv nil.

they are full of tricks, habits, and man-

Case 6 is another, but older example, of nerisms, because nerve impulses tend to

imbecility-a girl aged IT years I month traverse the same well-worn channels to

(No. 2426). She also is a small-headed, low which, by reason of their defect, there are

grade imbecile. She has no conception of too few alternatives. Co-ordination of

colours, is physically over-developed, but movement is slowly and laboriously ac-

mentally only an infant. She is the pro- quired, and the net result of all this dis-

duct of the modern looseness of thought ordered muscular activity from diminished

about the freedom and liberty of human or altered nerve energy is a peculiarity of

beings to breed, for her father was a dement balance, movement, and physiognomical

and her mother an ament.

expression which is very characteristic.

III. THn FEEBtLE-MINDED.-In English Speech has often been acquired late, and late

Law, the feeble-minded are persons in acquisition of speech by a child is an in-

whose case there exists from birth or from variable and important clinical suggestion

an early age " mental defectiveness not a- of an imperfectly developing brain. Even

mounting to imbecility, yet so pronounced when speech is acquired by the mentally

that they require care, supervision, and con- defective child it is often very imperfect and

trol for their own protection or for that of unintelligible to everybody but the doubt-

others." Feeble-minded children, as well less doting mother, whose imagination is

as adults, differ so profoundly in the degree a gifted one. The chief defects consist of

of their mental under-development, and in a thickness and indistinctness of utterance,

the environmental factors derived through an imperfect articulation of consonants, and

sight and hearing-the two great avenues the like.

for good or evil to every brain-to which Feeble-minded children are imitators

their deficient brains are subjected, as to rather than originators, and as their actions

make it practically impossible to generalize are usually along the lines of least resist-

as to their physical or mental characteris- ance, they are easily led, and still more

tics. Each case is a study in itself. The easily led astray, and so often become anti-

lower grades closelv approximate to, and social in their reactions to their environment

cannot be distinctly separated from, the im- and their fellows. Criminals are thus

beciles. The higher grades are commonly readilv recruited from the ranks of the

mistaken for normal, especially by the dull feeble-minded. All feeble-minded children

I76 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

are lacking in the logical, and most of them
in the aesthetic, sense. In a fortunately
small proportion there is, in addition, a deficiency or perversion of all moral sense. They lie, steal, and are sexually grossly
immoral; that is, they obey the unrestricted
dictates of nature without any powers of
repression whatsoever, for what nature has
denied, that cannot they do, and they are, as a consequence, without the slightest com-
punction or realization that they are doing
anything seriously wrong. Dr. Tredgold also states that some feeble-minded persons
will make utterly unfounded accusations
with a considerable amount of detail and appearance of truth. They are not un-
known even in the witness box.
Whilst some of these reactions approximate closely to those of the Moral Defective of the I927 Act, it is to be specially remembered that they are only in strict accord withi the laws of nature as regards self-preservation and the reproduction of the species. All animals, man included, conform to these laws, but the normal human
being is the only creation of nature endowed with a pyramidal-celled brain of control
over these passions. In the feeble-minded these same cells are insufficiently developed for the purpose, and thus they naturally give way much more readily and more fre-
quently to the purely animal instincts of the
body and so come into collision with the law. The responsibility is nature's rather than the individuals, but just as necessity knows no law, neither does the law appear to know
any nature. It is not for one moment to be imagined or believed that this is any plea for the abolition of punishment for the crimes of the feeble-minded or even the normal. It is rather but a suggestion that our methods of dealing with defectives, criminals, and the like, might be capable of improvement, and it is open to doubt as to who really are the fools-the feeble-minded or those who bury their heads in the sands of an obsolete ignorance and refuse to recognize them.
Whilst feeble-minded children differ from each other very considerably in the degree and nature of their deficiency, as also in

their temperament, disposition, and general behaviour, they all have at least two features in common. One, obvious to almost everyone, is their inability to cope with the stresses and strains of everyday life without assistance from others, and the other, revealed by the microscope after death, and during life from logical deduction from observed tests and measurements has been summarized in the exact words of that great English authority, Professor J. Shaw Bolton of Leeds: " In all such cases there is a subnormal development of the brain cortex which, except in the severer grades, is limited to the pyramidal cell-layer of the cortex, and a brain weight below that of the normal average. . . . I trust that future attempts to deal seriously with the incidence of mental disease will treat the subject, not as a branch of infectious disease, or at any rate a toxtemia, but as the greatest of the degeneracies." These words written in I9I2 may suggest some food for thought, and I can safely leave to my readers the answer to the problem, " Is this same degeneracy today, in I930, a canker gnawing at the very vitals of the English people, or is all well with us?"
It is thus clear that in the life cycle of the ament, i.e., the mentally defective person, we have an epitome of all the main varieties of mental disorder. Beginning with a defective brain, he shows early signs of mental instability and imperfect nerve function, passes through various forms of so-called, but miscalled, insanity, and finally ends in a premature dementia, that is, an almost complete loss of the little mental faculty he ever possessed. Incidentally, the mental defective reproduces, just like a slow-moving cinema picture, the mental life history of us all, and thus is of interest to us all.
THE DIAGNOSIS OF DEFICIENCY
It is obviously impossible in the present state of medical science to examine the brain of a living patient, and to tell for certain thereby whether or not neuronic development is imperfect; so a variety of physical, mental, psychological, and ' intelligence

THE PHYSICAL BASIS OF MIND

tests ' have been devised to be carried out on capacity of an individual consciously to&ad-

the living child with that very objective. just his thinking to new requirements "-

Their success in combination has undoubt- the feeble-minded have no such capacity.

ably been very great, but before proceeding Again, intelligence may be regarded as con-

actually to describe them it may be as well sisting " of a general adaptability to new

to ask ourselves what we mean by " intelli- problems and the conditions of life and en-

gence."

vironnient," which appears to be a good

working rough measure of intelligence, be-

WHAT IS INTELLIGENCE?

cause those people who are best able to adapt

Intelligence is a matter of a sufficiency of
normal healthy neurons or brain cells correctly linked together into arcs and chains. Education, on the other hand, is largely a matter of environment and of suitable opportunities for the development of the neurons possessed. One of the commonest errors is to confuse intelligence and education, and to attribute the apparent lack of intelligence to a defective education. " It is probably true," says Goddard, " that most people whose shortcomings we account for on the ground of lack of education are really lacking in intelligence." Those who have the intelligence, that is, the necessary brain neurons for the purpose, usually acquire the education in one way or another-if not through schools, colleges, and universities, then by travel, business, and contact with the world and its affairs. Conversely, the individual who is lacking in intelligence, that is, again, the necessary neurons, can never become educated in any wide sense. He may have a memory for facts and accumulate a large amount of non-correlated information, but he makes little or no practical use of it, and shows little or no judgment and good sense in the ordinary affairs of life.
It is not easy to define intelligence, but

their thinking and their actions to the most elaborate situations are the most intelligent; while those of less intelligence, although able to adapt themselves to the ordinary conditions of life, are confused and rendered helpless by the more complex situations. Still lower are those whom James says are " nonplussed by all but the very simplest situations." Now the ability to live an independent existence, to make a living, and to conduct one's self with reasonable propriety in a modern community involves a certain amount of this ppwer of adaptation, and there is a minimum below which one cannot succeed. That point is usually taken as marking the line between the normal and the feeble-minded. (Goddard.)
Most school teachers and educationists of to-day are familiar with the well-known Binet tests, or some modification of them, and employ them as a means of estimating the child's intelligence. Some even go farther and attempt by means of these tests alone to establish a diagnosis of feeblemindedness. This seems to be neither legally correct nor scientifically sound. English law insists on the certification of a mental defective by a fully qualified medical practitioner, and very properly refuses to sign away a child's libertv on the results of a single test or a single opinion.

however it may be defined, it is certain that The method now to be outlined, devised

the mentally defective have not got it, and it is equally certain that the reason why they have not, is because they are lacking

some years ago by Professor Porteus and myself, complies with the foregoing legal and scientific conditions. It seeks through-

in a sufficiency of normal cerebral neurons to give it. If, for example, intelligence be defined as an " ability to adapt one's self to one's environment or to new situations " it is certain that the feeble-minded are lacking in such abilities. If Stern's definition

out to associate the observed clinical facts with the state of development of the brain cortex. It is correlated with the cortical
investigations of Bolton, Watson, Mott, Wilson, and others. It is founded on an
examination of some Io,ooo normal children

of intelligence be accepted as " the general and nearly 2,ooo abnormal children; on the

I78 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

physical examination of Doll, Smedley, and observed facts it only remains for the expert

others on both children and adults, and on to interpret them in accordance with known

the many thousands of examinations made medical and neurological science.

in almost all parts of the world by the Binet I now propose to illustrate the methods I

and Porteus tests, and lastly on clinical ex- employ for the diagnosis of cerebral insuffi-

perience gained in hospitals, juvenile and ciency or for the normal and intelligent

criminal courts, children's welfare depart- child by working them out on a concrete

ments, and the like.

case, a woman aged 32 years 6 months, and

lThis method is equally applicable to the an inmate of Stoke Park Colony (No. 926).

normal as well as to the abnormal and is at She is the eldest of a tainted family of nine

least worth a trial in child guidance clinics with a familv history of mental deficiency on

and those dealing with the so-called problem both the father's and the mother's sides.

child, who as often as not is either a poten- Let us now, in imagination, follow her into

tial genius misunderstood by his less gifted the testing laboratory. I first have her head

parents, or more probably an unstable high measured, and find that her length of head

grade feeble-minded person. Differences of is I77 mm.; or only that of a normal child

mentality are, of course, fruitful sources of of io years. Her maximum head breadth

human misunderstanding.

is 136 mm. or that of a normal child of 6

That any diagnosis of mental deficiency years, whilst her head height is I2I mm. or

in a child should be made early seems to me that of a normal child of 4 years. From

a national necessity, because the high grade these figures and the use of the Pearson-Lee

feeble-minded child seldom reacts normally mathematical formuLe, her cubic capacity

to his surroundings, and may develop, con- of skull and brain comes out at II4I cc.

sequent on his mal-developed brain and in which is only that of a normal six-year-old

accordance with his environment, anti-social child. She is, therefore, distinctly micro-

reactions, which may lead him or her to cephalic, and already a danger signal has

crime, prostitution, and strife-and thus to been held out to the examiner, who knows

become a social menace and a nuisance.

that at least two-thirds of all mentally defec-

tives tend to be microcephalic. But the

ELIMINATING THE PERSONAL FACTOR

examiner also knows, or should do, that small-headedness is not necessarily asso-

It is commonly stated and believed that ciated with feeble-mindedness, and so, at the

figures can be made to prove anything. moment, he only regards the facts elicited

When wrongly used, as they mostly are, as a warning to look carefully at all those to

this is doubtless true, but we forget there follow.

is a science of statistics; and the figures Before passing on to these facts yet to be

used by Porteus and myself are the results of a double scientific check and are calculated from the true means with their standard deviations and probable errors, and

discovered on the patient under discussion, a few words of explanation may be given on two points which may make what is to follow still clearer.

Sir Francis Galton's percentile methods. These last are clinically of much value, as

As a brain of the mentally defective person is always under-developed to a greater

thev enable us to establish a direct biological comparison between the child to be examined and the known normal standards for normal children of the patient's own age, sex, and social standing. Thus Nature is made to tell her own story, and the examiner's personal beTiefs, opinions, fads, and theories, are cut clean out and do not

or less degree, there are naturally fewer brain cells than in the normal, and even many of these remain and persist in a small, rudimentary condition, as can be seen under the microscope. The brain weight thus tends, as Professor Bolton says, to be less than normal, and the brain smaller. As we cannot weigh the brain of the living sub-

enter into the problem at all. From the ject, we are compelled to resort to measure-

THE PHYSICAL BASIS OF MIND

ment and calculation to ascertain its ap- expressed, this woman is only as tall as a

proximate size and state of development, normal I4-year-old girl, and as heavy as a

and the information so gained is then corre- normal i6-year-old girl.

lated with known facts about the minute

structure and functions of the supra- and infra-granular layers of the brain. It is

NEURONS AND VITALITY

sufficiently obvious that the smaller brain One of the great functions of a properly

of the mentally defective will not require developed nervous system is the gene-

such a large box-the skull-to contain it, ration of energy, but mentally defective

and hence about two-thirds of all defectives persons are known to be lacking in a

and mentally abnormal people have small, sufficiency of normally developed neurons,

microcephalic heads and brains. That all consequently one of their great clinical

have not, is due to complications from other characteristics is defective vitality. There

factors, most of which are, however, well are not enough neurons to generate a suffi-

established and known.

ciency of energy, and the feeble-minded dis-

As regards Galton's percentile methods play this in many ways. Langdon-Down,

for statistics and comparative biology, the for example, has shown that many Mongo-

recorded observations, whatever they may lian imbeciles lose a large amount of the

be, are divided into tenths, with the lowest little intellectual energy they ever possess

observation at zero, and the highest at ioo. in the winter, and go, in short, through a

This at once affords the range of the dis- species of winter hibernation. Again, low

persal of the series of observations. The grade defectives, though they can easily

50 percentile, or half-way mark, gives the manage to wheel heavily loaded barrows, or

median or average of the observations, to lift heavy weights, almost invariably fail

whilst those falling at the two extreme ends badly when asked to grip the dynamometer.

of the percentile scale are obviously the " In the former case they are using the

potentially abnormal ones-either abnor- powerful muscles of the back and legs, in

mally small or big, according to their place the latter they are asked to concentrate their

at the respective ends of the scale. In the nerve energy on a particular effect, and this

patient before us the cubic capacity of brain the under-neuroned defective is usually un-

is so small that she falls at the - io percen- able to do. Strength of grip has, therefore,

tile, which means that she has a smaller a high diagnostic value inasmuch as 84 per

head, by ten places, than those previously cent of all mentally defective persons fail

recorded. We thus now know that she falls to reach the normal average " (Berry). In

quite below previously recorded figures for the rough and ready test of asking a feeble-

head measurement for females of her own minded person to grip one's hand as tightly

age and social standing, and, as she has only as possible, this defective vitality or lack of

the head size of a normal six-year-old child, energy is equally obvious. For almost pre-

it may be said that, on this count, she is cisely the same reason, the defective usually

some fourteen years retarded.

fails equally badly at the wet spirometer

Reverting now to the patient, as the corre- test, where he is asked to blow into the in-

lation of brain weight or size with bodily strument as though he were expanding a

physique is of some importance and clinical significance, I proceed next to ascertain her

miniature gasometer, and at least 85 per cent. of defectives fail to reach normal standards

stature, both standing and sitting, and her weight-all measurements being recorded in the metric system. She shows a retardation of six years for stature, and four years for weight, the respective percentile figures being 9, 8, and 21-all of which, it will be noted, are distinctly subnormal. Differently

with this physical test. Professor Dryer of Oxford has also pointed out the great medical significance of this test as an assessment of physical fitness. But the mentally defective person shows his defective vitality in still other non-measurable ways. He
has an increased predisposition to illness,

i8o THE EUGENICS REVIEW

readily contracts disease, is an unfavourable regard, and indeed use, these tests not as

subject for anesthetics and surgical opera- intelligence tests at all, but as an indication

tioIns, and his physiological powers of resist- to me, as a mental physiologist, of what has

ance are so much below par that disease gone into the child's brain over its receptor

usually quickly proves fatal.

or sense neurons, and of what comes out on

Let us now apply these tests to the the other or effector side. To me, and to

woman before us. Her grip with both hands those who think with me, these Binet and

is distinctly subnormal, showing a retarda- Porteus tests, when so regarded, are much

tion of four years with percentiles of 15 for more illuminating than any ' intelligence '

each hand. We therefore see that, as she is test. When so tested, the present patient

equally strong with both hands, she is pre- shows a Binet I.Q. of 70; a Porteus I.Q. of

sumably ambidextrous or could be. Her 52, with corresponding percentiles of io and

spirometer test, on the other hand, is above I. This gives her a psychological mental

the normal average, giving a percentile age of ii years by the Binet, and 8Y4 by the

figure of 85, which, as stated, is the excep- Porteus.

tion rather than the rule of the defective- As I was actulally collaborating with Por-

though, curiously enough, Stoke Park in- teus when he was perfecting his now well-

mates are giving a better reading with this known maze puzzle tests, I can express my

vital, capacity test than did a series of entire agreement with him when he says,

Australian defectives. Of more importance, " a Binet I.Q. of 70 or less may be regarded

however, than these observations is the fact as the first presumptive evidence of feeble-

that the patient's grip tests are corrobo- mindedness, but by no means as a final

rative of the lack of energy consequent on diagnostic proof. This is almost univer-

an under-developed brain and nervous sally conceded, yet we find study after

system, and are absolutely confirmatory of study, presumably directed towards the

the suspicions already aroused by her pro- problem of what does and does not constitute

nounced microcephalv.

feeble-mindedness, quoting a Stanford-Binet

We next proceed to apply to her the Binet I.Q. as if it were adequate to determine the

and Porteus tests. Psychologists, espe- status of the subjects of the investigation.

-cially educational ones, have invented and The practice appears to be on all hands to

devised an extraordinary number of these repudiate such a method by diagnosis and

so-called ' intelligence tests,' and in the just as generally to adopt it." Porteus is of

United States.their names and numbers are the further opinion, with which again I

almost fabulous. We do not use them, be- agree, that a combined Binet-Porteus initelli-

cause they are not standardized. It is gence quotient is of more significance than

easier to invent new tests than to stan- either taken separately, and that all those

dardize them, for this means a lot of labo- who register a combined Binet-Porteus I.Q.

rious work without the kindly glamour of below 75 may be said to be at feeble-minded

the limelight. Non-standardized psycholo- levels. In the patient now before us this

gical or other tests are useless for medical combined I.Q. has the significant reading

purposes, for the first consideration is that of 6i.

the performances with the proposed tests of As we now have all the facts elicited by

the normal child must be known before thev these cerebral, phvsical, neurological, and

can be used for the comparative examination psychological tests and measurements of this

of a patient. If the latter cannot be directly patient, the medical expert is in a position

compared with the normal child of his own to proceed to their interpretation. But

age, sex, and social standing, these tests are before doing so let us recapitulate what

useless. This is not the case with the well- nature has told us about this patient.

known Binet and Porteus tests, commonly Her head is very microcephalic, only as

referred to as ' intelligence tests '-a term, big as that of a normal child of six

personally, I have always disliked, for I years.

THE PHYSICAL BASIS OF MIND

i8i

In physique she has only attained the vation, and of the reproduction of the

level of about the normal girl of fourteen species. Almost every crime on the Statute

years of age.

book will be found, on careful examination,

In nervous energy she is deficient and can to be an offence against one or other of these

only register to about the level of a i6-year- natural laws; but at long last we are slowly,

old girl.

but surely, beginning to understand that

Her mental age by the Binet test is ii there are many unfortunate, under-de-

years, and by the Porteus, 8Y.

veloped human beings so lacking in the num-

On every possible count, except one--the bers and efficiency of their controlling brain

spirometer test-she is markedly sub-nor- cells as to be quite unable to comply with

mal. Her percentile figures bring out her the laws laid down by their more normal

sub-normality even more strikingly, for fellows for the regulation of civilized society,

they are naturally more accurate than this or to understand the importance of their so

estimate from chronological years.

complying.

Here then is an adult woman of 32 years The diagnosis of this case is now quite

of age, with a brain only as large as that of certain. The patient is a microcephalic or

a girl-child of 6 years, and the mental capa- small-headed low-grade feeble-minded per-

city of one of ii years. Physically, her son. The prognosis is that, left to herself,

bodily growth has proceeded a little farther, she will, given the environment of ordinary

to somewhere about the I4-year level. Sexu- city or rural life, become a thief and a pros-

ally, she is at the adult level. Here, there- titute, or at least the mother of many legiti-

fore, is a striking example of that inequality mate or illegitimate feeble-minded children.

of cerebral, physical, and sexual growth That she will conform to one or both of the

which is so characteristic of the feeble- two great laws of nature is absolutely cer-

minded and makes them such a social tain. Nature will not be denied.

menace when at liberty to exercise their un-

controlled animal instincts. But to the trained neurologist

this

THE FAMILY HISTORY

examination has revealed something more. But members of my own profession may

It has made it perfectly clear-because say, as indeed may others, this is all very

every fact fits in like the pieces of a puzzle well, but you have told us nothing about

-that her brain is lacking in a sufficiency her family or previous history. Exactly,

of neurons, and that this insufficiency must because that is precisely the position in

chiefly affect the pyramidal cells of the con- which English law puts the expert to-day,

trolling supra-granular cortex. In the and many of us are compelled to furnish our

normal individual, it is this layer which, diagnosis without such family history. So

according to Watson, Shaw Bolton, and the perhaps my readers will now better appreci-

late Sir Frederick Mott, controls the instinc- ate the reasons for all this attempted scien-

tive animal reflexes of the infra-granular tific accuracy in eliciting facts about the

brain. In this patient that control is largely patient which cannot be controverted.

lacking and is certainly inefficient physio- Though I am still not in possession of all

logically, consequently it is to be expected, the details about the patient's family his-

at least by the expert, that with the sexual tory which one would like to have, we can

passions of the adult and the insufficient fortunately produce sufficient to satisfy us

control of a child of six, there will be trouble of the accuracy of both diagnosis and prog-

in one or other or both of two directions- nosis-established, be it remembered, on

that is, unless a beneficent control is exer- nature's facts without any family history.

cised by somebody. Every living human There is mental deficiency on both sides.

individual, no matter who or with what Her paternal grandfather and uncle were

brains, must conform, during life, to the both defectives and several on the mother's

two great laws of nature-that of self-preser- side have been sexually immoral. The

i82 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

patient was late in acquiring speech, but agree with a distinguished member of this

now speaks clearly with a limited vocabu- Society, Professor MacBride, when he

lary. By those in daily attendance she is says, " the outlook for the nation is black

described as dishonest, untruthful, restless, indeed," for " unless the birth-rate of these

fidgety, and vain. She is markedly im- people is restricted the British nation as a

moral and addicted to many sex practices, virile people is doomed." But this not-

and, even her parents refused to keep her withstanding, modern British democracy

at home on account of her behaviour with appears to be backing the wrong horse, for

her brothers. It is surely unnecessary to I understand here in England we are lay-

pursue the family history further. It. must ing odds of 93 to I2 against the fit-that

be evident to even the most biased that we is, this country is spending £93 per head

now have to hand methods capable of per annum on the defectives, and only £12

' spotting ' juvenile criminals in advance of per head per annum on the normal child,

their crimes, and hence the importance of and the former are breeding freely, whilst

early diagnosis. As regards the present the latter are becoming more restricted.

patient it is of some interest to note that Surely it does not need another Cassandra

she was originally returned as a " moral to warn us of our fate?

imbecile," though the fact that the so-called Despite all that I have here said, no stu-

moral imbecility results from low-grade dent of the human brain can be altogether feeble-mindedness with the consequent re- a pessimist, for notwithstanding the mani-

version to the primitive laws of nature, rather than the more artificial ones of man,
seems to have been missed-but then many of the laws of civilized human society are at variance with those of nature.

fold follies of mankind, there is a greater even than man, and that greater power is slowly, but surely, fashioning a mighty implement-the human brain and mind. With the passage of a few more geological

THE OUTLOOK-AND THE ODDS

ages, that work will doubtless be perfected, and then we shall cease to talk nonsense

I may conclude on two notes-one of about mind and seek only the truth, which

pessimism, the other of optimism.

is, that mind is the product of brain, and

No one who has studied the problem of the better the brain the better the mind.

mental deficiency can fail to realize the Remove that brain, even in its present im-

gravity of the position into which we are perfect state, and the soul of man is but the

rapidly drifting. Personally, I entirely dust of the fields.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXII, No. 3.

