THE DECLINE IN THE BIRTH-RATE

A Study of the Biolo,ical Effects of Emancipation of the Peasants
By Dr. med. WILLY WAGNER-MANSLAU
(Danzig-Langfuhr)

T HIS study may begin appropriately diminish. It is not surprising that the

by an examination of the following statistics for France do not show these condi-

table, modified from Woytinsky's tions with equal clarity. During the French

Wel in Zahlen.

revolution, and the subsequent Napoleonic

TABLE I

INCREASE OF POPULATION PER 1,000 INHABITANTS

State

Peasants i8io- I820- 1830- 1840- I850- i86o- 1870- I88o- I8go- 19o0Emanci- I820 1830 1840 I850 i86o 1870 :|880 i890 1900 i910 pation

Russia

Germany

...

Great Britain . ..

France ...

...

I86i 1807
I789

70 72 50
148 II2 iiI 8o
171 150 I13 25 47 69 51 45

40 105 130

40 -

_-

64 78 137 74 134 I51

56 88 io8 1O9 115 95

27 7 II 37 17 20

Had the figures in this table increased wars, France undoubtedly suffered much

after i8io, they could not have been used greater losses of life than all her enemies.

for the present purpose, because the increase These losses of marriageable men were bound

might have been due to advances in sanita- to lower the birth-rate in France more than

tion and general hygiene. Since, however, in the enemy countries. Besides, in Table I

they decrease rapidly, they can only repre- the figures for France only begin with the

sent a considerable decline in the birth-rate. third decade after the peasants' emancipa-

This fact is of extraordinary importance. tion. Thus, the biological consequence of

For the environmental influences now gener- the liberation of the peasants-namely, an

ally recognized by scientists as dominating increase in population-is not shown to the

factors in producing the decline in the birth- same extent in France as in Germany;

rate certainly did not exist in the first half the table, however, indicates quite clearly

of the nineteenth century. So we see that the second stage of the gradual decrease in

environmental influences are not the essential population up to the year I870.

cause of the fall in the birth-rate; they are

only of secondary importance.

CONDITIONS IN ENGLAND

Table I shows that to account for this It seems contradictory to this principle

phenomenon we must look for hereditary that at this period England had by far the

factors and link them up with the emanci- largest increase in population, though there

pation of the peasants. We see that, in was no actual emancipation of her peasants.

Germany and Russia, this emancipation The explanation is that the important factor

was followed by an exceptionally large in the course of the above-mentioned events

increase in population, which gradually is not peasant emancipation itself, but the

diminished again during the following five fact that this new freedom means a sudden

or six decades. From that time the record abolition of century-old restrictions, and

fertility of the Russian people begins to opens to the masses of the people new

'93

194 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

possibilities for educational development as in Germany, freedom was only granted to

and thus brings about many readjustments the peasants in consideration of large mone-

in social strata. The biological benefits tary payments. When the head of a house-

accruing from the emancipation of the hold died, his children generally decided to

peasants are a result of these social changes. sell the estate in order to avoid a forced sale.

Of course, similar biological consequences Much of the estate was mortgaged, and the

may ensue if a race is submitted to analogous necessity to sell put the vendors at a serious

social changes of the same importance, but disadvantage. The descendants of these

arising from different causes. As a matter of families, being thus left without any means,

fact, changes of the same kind have occurred had either to become agricultural labourers

in England. In I769, Watt invented the or to migrate to the towns. As the towns

steam-engine, Arkwright the spinning-jenny were not in a position to absorb all the new-

and the power-loom; Adam Smith ex- comers, wages were consequently lowered.

pounded his new economic theory on the free This social upheaval had the effect of bring-

development and movement of men as the ing together the urban proletariat and the

main source of wealth in a State. During bulk of the descendants of families with many

this period of industrialization, the majority children. In this way the industrial

of independent craftsmen, small traders and proletariat was enriched with highly fertile

manufacturers were economically ruined. elements, and consequently proletarian

Thus England, too, at the beginning of the couples were liable to have more children

nineteenth century, experienced widespread than before the peasants' emancipation. Of

social changes. Besides which, during the necessity these changes meant an increase in

Napoleonic wars, the losses of life suffered by fertility over the whole nation.

England were by far the smallest of all the

nations concerned. Hence it is not surprising FLUCTUATIONS IN JAPANESE FERTILITY

that we find, as a biological result of all these It is interesting to note the fluctuations in

happenings, that after the Napoleonic wars fertility amongst the Japanese people. In

it was in England that the greatest increase a paper on Haushofer's Japan, Kara Lenz

in fertility and in population took place. writes*: " For centuries her population re-

RUSSIA

mained between 26 and 33 millions." Since the restoration of I87I, however, her popula-

In Russia, similar though less widespread tion has doubled and now amounts to 65

changes occurred as a result of the Napoleonic millions. The exact figures are shown in

wars, and especially of the Continental block- Table II, also taken from Welt in Zahlen.

ade. These led to economic ruin and the social decline of numerous families; and

TABLE II

inevitably the families so affected were BIRTH-RATES PER I,000 INHABITANTS IN JAPAN

mainly those with many children. This

brought about an increase in fertility. But Period Per iooo Period Per Iooo

as Russia was an agricultural country, only

smaller sections of the Russian people (those
employed in trade and industry) were involved in these changes. Thus Table I shows us that the increase in the birth-rate after
the Napoleonic wars in Russia was not

I870-I880
I88I-I89o I89I-igoo
I90I-I9IO
I9rI-I9I6 I9I6 ...

... 25-I
... 27.I 290
... 32.4
... 33.5
... 32.7

1917 ...
I9I8 ... 1919 ...
1920 ... I921 ...

... 32.4 ... 32.2 ... 3I.6
... 36.2
... 35.I

nearly so large as in England or as in Russia

itself after the peasants' emancipation, which, It seems that the fluctuations in fertility

occurring in an agricultural country, affected were altogether different from ours; in fact,

a greater number of people.

they took the reverse course. If the theory

At the same time, the same economic and

biological forces were at work. In Russia, * Archiv far Rassenhygiene, Vol. XXVII, P. 4.

THE DECLINE IN THE BIRTH-RATE

195

that the decrease in the birth-rate depends FERTILITY AND ECONOMIC STATUS

on environmental influences is right, the The Tokugawas had gained supreme power

greater increase in population in Japan as Shoguns. The Mikado thus held only a

should be due to more favourable conditions. secondary position. In i868, the Shoguns

As a matter of fact, many writers have were overthrown and the power of the Mikado

strongly maintained that the conditions were was restored. From the reign of the Toku-

more favourable. They have stated that it gawas originated a class of approximately

is the right spiritual attitude of the people, two million noblemen, called Samurai, who

industrialization, adherence to religion and began to dominate the cultural life of Japan.

ancestor worship that are the causes of the In the restoration of I87I, the privileges of

rise in the birth-rate in Japan. It is not, the aristocracy were abolished. " The large

however, a sufficient explanation to talk of number of minor Samurai lost their privileged

a right or wrong spiritual attitude. Actually, position. In order to avoid disturbances,

this explanation implies, in other words, a pensions had to be paid to many among their

favourable or unfavourable set of conditions. number, and the State had to support

As far as industrialization is concerned, it 400,000 families." (Krause.) The same

undoubtedly exists to-day, but it did not author states: " All class differences as well

exist at the time of the sudden increase in as slavery were abolished, and marriage re-

fertility in Japan. Woytinsky states that in strictions for the lower and upper classes were

I922 private enterprises of a factory type rescinded. A complete and general equality

(counting only those with at least five em- of individuals was established in Japan."

ployees) gave employment to 2,225,76o per- Naturally, for the social ascendancy of the

sons. But, as in i922, Japan already had nobility a certain amount of initial working

over 50 miflion inhabitants, it is inconceiv- capital was required. At all times this could

able that such a relatively small portion of be accumulated most easily in families with

the population could have brought about few children. It follows that, mainly from

such important changes in the birth-rate of the start, the descendants of such families-

the whole people. Moreover, the sharp rise namely, not very fertile elements-were able

had taken place thirty years before, at a time to rise in the social scale. On the other hand,

when the industrial population was consider- noble families with many children were

ably smaller.

losing chances of accumulating the necessary

The adherence to religion, morals and initial capital. Their descendants were often

ancestor-worship, on the other hand, might forced into a lower social class. The aristo-

be quite a plausible explanation. In Our cracy was incessantly losing descendants of

Fatherland Japan, Inazo Nitobe writes that large families, that means highly fertile

the spiritual attitude of the Japanese did elements.

not change for centuries. Undoubtedly this That this really happened in Japanese

attitude is more conducive to having large history cannot be shown directly in figures,

families than the German. But if one con- but can be seen in the Japanese Laws. In

sidered it the main reason for the sudden Our Fatherland Japan, Nobuschige Hozumi

increase in fertility after I87I, the question reports that by I6I5 many noble families had

arises at once: why, with the same spiritual akeady died out in consequence of the strict

attitude prevailing for centuries, was the administration of the Adoption Laws. These

fertility of the Japanese people in past Laws caused so much disaffection that they

centuries so low that the population hardly were frequently revised till the end of the

increased at all ? Thus, religion alone cannot rule of the Tokugawa Shoguns. That shows

suffice to explain satisfactorily the sudden that the extinction of noble families was not

increase in fertility. On the other hand, the an infrequent, but, on the contrary, a very

assumption that this increase was due to common, event. According to Yamamoto

hereditary factors at once leads to a thorough Genshichiro: " Sons of rich families were

understanding of the process.

only adopted by leading Hatamoto families

i96 THE EUGENICS REVIEW
because of their money." At the time of the among the Boers, the French-Canadians, and Tokugawa the Japanese aristocracy, because the American and Russian Mennonites up of its low fertility, was continually filling the till about I870. gaps in its ranks with sons of rich families The irregular sexual relations of the less who, themselves, were generally not very fertile nobility with the lower classes of the fertile. From all this we can conclude that population had made themselves felt very there has been a very low fertility among the considerably in former centuries in Germany. Japanese aristocracy, at least since i6oo. The German population had just about
doubled during the nineteenth century. Had THE ARGUMENT APPLIED TO GERMANY the increase been the same during former
Needless to say, the existence of such a centuries, the German population about numerous but not fertile aristocracy must I300 would have amounted to only 8oo,ooo, affect the qualities of a nation. Take, again, which is certainly wrong. Thus, the increase for a moment, the case of Germany. All of the German population after i8oo was over the country the houses of the nobility far higher than before and occurred, as shown were close to the dwellings of the serfs. in Table I, mainly after the peasants' Inevitably this led to extra-marital sexual emancipation. As the standard of general relations between the noblemen and the hygiene was not much higher at the beginning
daughters of the serfs (jus primcz noctis) of the last century than it was before i8oo,
which resulted in numerous pregnancies. all attempts to explain this change in fertility The descendants of such relationships in- about i8oo with the change in infant herited half of their qualities from the mortality and deaths from epidemics must fathers; and as these fathers usually com- fail. Furthermore, all the environmental bined more than the average intelligence influences nowadays regarded as an explanawith a disinclination to have many children, tion did not exist at that time; so there these irregular relationships resulted in an remains only one explanation, that is, improvement of the whole race, but at the hereditary influences, and more specifically, same time in damping down the fertility of the decrease of fertility caused by the illicit the lower classes. The illegitimate children relationships between the less fertile nobility joined the ranks of the lower classes and and the lower classes. passed on the qualities of their fathers. Generally speaking, persons with a high THE ANALOGY WITH JAPAN fertility are born only if both parents are This factor has operated still more powerhighly fertile. Therefore, not only must the fully in Japan. The Japanese population children of the less fertile nobility have been was practically the same size as that of relatively infertile, but also the descendants Germany, but the Japanese nobility was of these illegitimate children. The outcome much more numerous than the German. of all these separate factors must again have There were two million Samurai, and been a decline in the fertility of the lower certainly the sexual desires of Japanese men classes. The more frequently tendencies to- were not different from those of Germans. wards low fertility were in this way intro- This is borne out by the existence of the duced into the lower classes, the more would geishas, and further by complaints about the their fertility be decreased. If, in a peasant brutality and immorality during the time of society with a primitive non-capitalistic the Samurai, and the abolition of marriage economic system, these sexual relations with restrictions between higher and lower classes a relatively infertile noble class did not exist, during the restoration. Baron Suyematsu the highly fertile elements, because of their admits all this frankly when writing in Our quicker increase, would very soon outnumber Fatherland Japan about matrimonial fidelity. those less fertile in the rural population. Now the increase in population in Japan was The consequences would be an excessive very slow before the restoration. The avergrowth of fertility, as has been observed age number of children per family reaching

THE DECLINE IN THE BIRTH-RATE

I97

adult age must have amounted to just over farms were very small and were worked by three. Thus, the Japanese population of hand, so that the descendants of families thirty million must have consisted of about with many children were still able to comsix million families. Of these six million pete and thus to marry. Naturally, the posfathers, two million were Samurai; in other sessing classes were now marrying in their own words, every third Japanese man was an class, and in consequence the landless people aristocrat. In view of these figures it has to had to do the same. These marriage relationbe admitted that the existence of such a ships, however, were more favourable to the powerful aristocracy, selected from among the fertility of the country as a whole. The same people because of its low fertility, was really social forces were at work as in Germany, the fundamental factor in decreasing the and had made the possessing classes a selecfertility of the whole Japanese people. Even tion of relatively infertile elements, and the if only a proportion of the Samurai in every landless classes a selection of highly fertile generation had illegitimate children, there elements. Partly as a consequence of these would pass into the lower classes the dis- changes, and partly because the effect of the inclination to produce a large family. By Samurai in decreasing fertility had also dismaking all citizens equal in the eyes of the appeared, a remarkable increase in general law, these relations were stopped at once and fertility was due to take place after the almost entirely. At the same time two classes restoration. developed amongst the agricultural population of Japan: (I) the landowners, and (2) the SUMMARY landless tenants (see Tables III and IV below). The reason of the decrease in the birth-rate
Before the restoration nearly all the land is the following: After the peasants' emanciwas owned by the nobility, but worked by pation a few outstanding persons formed the peasants who rented it. By I9II-according advance guard in raising the status of the to Table III-the land was almost exclusively intelligent sections of the lower classes. In owned by small proprietors who farmed it this struggle for superiority naturally all themselves, or rented it to tenants. These weapons were employed which seemed at all
TABLE III
THE DISTRIBUTION OF LANDED PROPERTY IN JAPAN

Number of Less than

More than

Year

landed
proprietors

O*-5 Tscho*

5-i Tscho I-3 Tscho 3-5 Tscho 5-IO Tscho IO-5o Tscho 50 Tscho

I9II ... 4,903,866 2,322,938 1,258,649 IgI6 ... 4,858,829 2,362,1I4 1,I92,I03
1921 ... 4,852,692 2,395,984 1,I74,276

883,775
884,943 879,785

267,173 254,460 228,748

126,9I2
I20,346 12I,695

41,500 41,382
47,927

2,919
3,48I
4,277

TABLE IV THE NUMBER OF PRIVATELY OWNED AND RENTED FARMS IN JAPAN

In thousands

In per cent.

Year Nufmabremsr of Privately Rented vaPtaerltylyopwrni-ed Privately Rented vaPtaerltylyopwrni-ed

owned

and partly owned rented

and partly rented

I9II ...

5,420

1,762

1,502

2,156

32 5

27'7

39.8

I9I6 ...

5,458

I,696

r,525

2,237

31I1

27.9

4r.o

I92I ..| 5,456 I,669 1,555 2,232 30-6 28-5 409

* i Tscho = o gg Hektare.

198 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

suitable for the desired purpose: not only population, these estates increased continu-

intelligence, diligence and thrift, but also- ally in value, without any effort on the part

which proved to be very successful-restric- of the owner. Besides, impoverished noble-

tion of the number of children. This last men were always in a position to marry rich

factor increased in importance with the in- women from the bourgeoisie. It is well known

creasing need for capital as well as intelli- that in this way large fortunes were continu-

gence as an aid to rising in the social scale. ally transferred from the bourgeoisie to the

In the first generations, of course, there were nobility. All these considerations made the

still a number of very large families in the social decline of the daughters of noblemen

higher classes. But as the cost of education extremely difficult, particularly if they were

increased, these families were economically of the richer and more powerful families.

ruined, and these fertile elements were The wealthier the family and the higher it

gradually eliminated from the higher classes. was in the social scale, the more able it was

In consequence, the lowest social class con- to resist social decline. The ruling houses

tained the greatest number of highly fertile and the nobility even expressly prohibited

elements, while, on the other hand, the upper intermarriage by means of laws concerning

classes became less fertile as the gulf between equality of birth. Thus the higher the

them and the lower classes widened. From a stratum within the nobility, the smaller the

biological point of view, the highest stratum loss of very fertile elements suffered, and in

of the former bourgeoisie is the newly created consequence we find the strange fact that the

nobility. And I mentioned in the beginning course of fertility in the old nobility was

that I found the lowest fertility of all in this exactly the opposite of that in the bour-

section of society.

geoisie. For the highest stratum of the old

An entirely different and in fact opposite nobility has the highest fertility, and the

development was in the fertility of the old lowest stratum has the lowest fertility.

nobility. This consisted of six strictly de- This whole process of change was in the

fined social strata. In its ranks, as in the main completed by the end of the War.

other classes, the process of selection took Even if the War had not interfered, public

place. Here also daughters of families with opinion would gradually have changed in

many children were moving down the social favour of the " two children system "; as it

scale. The lowest stratum of the old nobility is, it became easy to convert the mass of

is not the lowest stratum in the upper classes. people to this system in view of the starva-

Below it comes the new nobility and the tion period that followed the War. Biological

bourgeoisie. Thus, the daughters of large were thus strengthened by environmental

families, in their uninterrupted social decline, factors. In fact, with the elimination of

became members of the new nobility and the biological influences the forces of environ-

bourgeoisie. As there was no barrier to keep ment have a clear field. Towards the end of

them in the lowest stratum of the old nobility, these racial changes, the more the various

there could not be such an accumulation of strata approach a stage of relative infertility,

very fertile persons in this section as in the the more will their fertility be determined

lowest section of the bourgeoisie. Altogether exclusively by environmental factors.

there were many reasons which were liable If the inherited desire for children is

to prevent social decline of members of the equally strong among rich and poor, or,

nobility. A member of the bourgeoisie had more correctly, after these racial changes, is

to rely nearly exclusively on his personal equally weak, then the rich may follow their

ability for the maintenance of his social inclination, while the poor of necessity must

position. But the social position of the deny themselves even this modest desire.

nobility was dependent on inherited social This situation is becoming apparent nowa-

prestige and frequently on wealth (consisting days in Germany, where the well-to-do in-

of land) as well as on intelligence. It is well deed have very few children, but nevertheless

known that, solely through the growth of more than the poor.

Eugenics Review, Vol XXV. No.

