THE INFLUENCE OF DISEASE UPON RACIAL
EFFICIENCY AND SURVIVAL.1
By JAMES ALEXANDER LINDSAY, M.D., F.R.C.P.
(Professor of Medicine in the Queen's University of Belfast).
DISEASE usually presents itself as a problem for the individual. Its racial aspects have been far too little studied and are still very imperfectly understood. It is not easy to get a clear answer to such obvious and important questions as the following: Does a destructive epidemic leave a nation impoverished not only in numbers but in vigour, or cleansed and rejuvenated by the elimination of its biologically unfit members? Is endemic disease, still prevalent alike in civilised and uncivilised communities, a factor of selection or of degeneration? Is the individual who has passed successfully through one of the infections modified biologically in any way by this experience, and if so, is there any evidence that he transmits this modification to his descendants? Our view of many questions will be modified according as we incline to the view that disease acts selectively, as a biological detergent, or destructively as a biological contamination. Civilisation, it is now generally admitted, runs counter to natural selection and tends to reduce it to a nullity. The lower animals and savage man are constantly exposed to the ravages of famine, of war and of disease. Civilised man protects himself successfully against famine and limits the operations of war. Disease remains, altering its character no doubt from age to age, but always present and always potent. According to some, it is the only factor of natural selection of real importance under the circumstances of modern life. I propose to subject this theory to scrutiny and analysis, not in the hope, or with the purpose of overthrowing it, but simply to point out its limitations and to suggest that the problems arising in this connexion are of quite extraordinary
1A Paper read at the Paris Meeting of the British Institute of Public Health.

102 EUGENICS REVIEW.
complexity, and that we must be on our guard against any attempt to solve them by one-sided and sweeping generalisations. It may turn out that disease is a factor both of selection and of deterioration, that the two elements are inextricably intertwined, and that conclusions drawn from the study of one disease, or group of diseases, may require correction by reference to other diseases and other groups of disease.
It is not difficult to see why the subject of disease as a racial factor is still so obscure. Accurate diagnosis and the correct record of disease are of comparatively recent date. Ancient and mediaval medicine, e.g., the Hippocratic canon and the works of the Arabian physicians, may still be studied with interest and profit, but we cannot be sure we have the right clue to the correct interpretation of such records, or that we can identify their descriptions in terms of modern pathology. A crucial case is afforded by the Great Plague of Athens in the opening years of the Peloponnesian War. We have a minute description of that pestilence from the pen of one of the greatest of historians-Thucydides--who was himself a sufferer, but vivid and detailed as is his account, it is quite impossible to say with certainty what the true nature of the visitation really was. Grote's description of it as "an eruptive typhoid fever, distinct from, yet analogous to, small-pox " only provokes a smile from the medical reader.
Again, among the many causes-religious, political, economic-which have been assigned for the decay of the ancient civilisations of Greece and Rome, no historian has really faced the question how far biological causes, and in particular disease, contributed to that downfall, though this point of view has recently begun to attract attention. Neither Gibbon, nor Mommsen nor Grote raises this problem, nor does the most recent authority on the subject, viz., Seeck, in his valuable work, " Geschichte des Untergangs der Antiken Welt," show any true realisation of its importance. The data relative to the subject are without doubt scanty and obscure, and we are left largely to conjecture or somewhat hazardous inference from facts which have riot been collected with the view of throwing light upon this particular problem. But some broad conclu-

THE INFLUENCE OF DISEASE UPON RACIAL EFFICIENCY. 103
sions are clear enough. There is evidence to prove that malaria first became a serious epidemic disease in Greece in the fourth century B.C., having been introduced in all probability from Asia Minor. The allusions to the subject in the Hippocratic writing and in Plato are somewhat obscure, but there can be no doubt that the disease became rife in the succeeding centuries, and it is a fair subject for enquiry how far the moral and economic decadence of Greece at this epoch was the result of, or was at least accelerated by, a disease so pernicious and so farreaching in its effects as malaria. The history of Italy and of Sicily under the Roman dominion and subsequently suggests a similar line of reflection. We have isolated instances in early times of armies perishing or being decimated by disease, such, for example, as the failure of the Carthaginian invasion of Sicily in the time of the elder Dionysius or the collapse of the Sicilian Expedition of the Athenians under Nicias. But Sicily up to the time of Cicero was one of the great granaries of the Empire, and enjoyed great prosperity under a long succession of rulers down to the time of the Norman dynasty. How far its modern condition is due to war, social upheavals, deforestation, and over-taxation, and how far to the effects upon the national physique of the ravages of malaria is a question which has never been thoroughly worked out. The desolation of the Roman Campagna and of large tracts of Southern Italy is undoubtedly due in large measure to malaria. The chain of events has usually been of this nature-war, misgovernment, and economic causes have caused depopulation. Depopulation has led to a neglect of agriculture and to large tracts of land going out of cultivation. Uncultivated land has bred disease. Disease has caused further depopulation, and so we get the vicious circle.
There is abundant evidence that plague played an immense r6le in determining national and. racial issues from the second century of our era down to later periods. To this subject I shall return. History requiries to be revised in the light of the teachings of biology.
In essaying the difficult task of endeavouring to appraise the racial influence of disease, it will help us to a clearer recognition of the facts if we mark off our subject into certain more

104 EUGENICS REVIEW.
or less natural divisions. It must be understood that I can attempt only a slight sketch of a vast problem, and that in many instances it will be my duty to posit problems rather than to formulate conclusions. For the purposes of this paper I might be permitted to divide diseases into the following groups, viz. :
(i) The true pestilences, of which the most typical examples, are plague, cholera, typhus fever, small-pox, and influenza. These diseases are characterised by their capacity for wide dispersion and pandemic prevalence.
(2) The infective diseases of infancy and childhoodviz., measles, scarlatina, whooping cough, diphtheria, which form a natural group regarded from the racial point of view.
(3) Infective diseases of world-wide prevalence, of which
the classical example is tuberculosis.
(4) Endemic diseases, such as malaria and enteric fever. (5) Infective diseases depending on direct contagion,
e.g., syphilis.
(6) Diseases of doubtful causation, e.g., rheumatism, gout.
The history of the true pestilences in the British Islands is
somewhat as follows: From the year of the Black Death, 1348-49, plague was the grand infective disease of the kingdom for more than 300 years down to the sixth or seventh decade of the seventeenth century. It was always present and destructive,
and it rose to epidemic proportions about once in each generation. It was attended by an enormous proportionate mortality, varying from 50 per cent. to 8o per cent. of persons attacked. It was essentially a disease of the poor, of insanitary dwellings and slum quarters. It cut off periodically about one-fifth or one-fourth of the population, including only an insignificant proportion of the well-to-do. " Its broad effect," says Dr. Creighton, " was to cut off the margin of poverty as if by a periodical process of pruning." It is clear from these facts that plague was in some degree at least a factor of selection.

THE INFLUENCE OF DISEASE UPON RACIAL EFFICIENCY. 105
Plague died out in England and in all the principal cities of Western Europe in or about the seventh decade of the seventeenth century. It was succeeded by typhus fever and smallpox, which were the principal infective diseases in England during the eighteenth century. These diseases showed some points of marked contrast. Typhus fever was a disease related to insanitary houses, over-crowding, cesspools, intra-mural graveyards, to gaols, ships, and armies. It was almost innocuous in presence of healthy homes, good food, and hygienic occupations. Small-pox was no respecter either of persons, ranks, or conditions. Practically every person exposed to contagion, unless protected by a previous attack or after Jenner's discovery by vaccination, became affected. The mortality from both these affections was high. It seems probable that typhus fever, like plague, had a considerable selective influence, while this cannot be predicated of small-pox.
The chief pestilences of the nineteenth century were cholera and influenza, the former falling chiefly on the first half of the century, the latter chiefly on the second half. The modern history of cholera dates from the outbreak in Lower Bengal in I8I7. It obtained a footing in Europe for the first time, so far
as records show., in I829, and there were serious epidemics in
England in I832, I849, I854, and i866. Like plague and typhus fever, cholera showed a marked preference for insanitary areas, and its ravages mere mainly among the poor. Its racial influence, however, was probably almost inappreciable. It excited much alarm by its novelty, its sudden onset, its terrifying symptoms and its high mortality, but it was a comparatively rare visitant and the total loss of life to the nation was comparatively insignificant. Thus in the great epidemic of I832 England lost 2,O000 lives out of a population estimated at 13,800,000, and Scotland lost 9,500 out of a population estimated at 2,300,000. These losses can hardly have had any effect upon the stock of the nation. Cholera, was, indeed, a friend in disguise, as cholera epidemics gave the first great impetus to sanitary reform in Great Britain and Ireland.
Influenza presents many points of contrast to the diseases already discussed. It shows no preference for insanitary areas

I06 EUGENICS REVIEW.
or for poor populations. It spreads independent of class, locality, habits or occupation. Nothing in the environment protects from its assault. But while the attack rate is practically independent of circumstances, it is quite otherwise with the death-rate. The disease is comparatively innocuous to healthy persons in adolescence and early adult life, while it causes a considerable mortality in young children, and it is deadly to the aged, the asthmatic, and the phthisical. Thus in the great epidemic in England in I847, during the three worst weeks, influenza raised the death-rate in the age of childhood 83 per cent., in the age of manhood IO4 per cent., in old age 247 per cent., whereas the deaths between 15 and 25 were but little raised by it, and those between io and IS hardly at all. While it is difficult to gauge accurately the class incidence of influenza, the evidence seems to suggest that in some visitations at least it has fallen more heavily upon the rich and well-to-do classes than upon the poor. It has been remarked that after epidemics of influenza the public health has been sometimes unusually good. This was the case in England in 1782 and in I803, and perhaps in some later epidemics.
To estimate the racial effects of influenza is difficult. In so far as it is deadly to the aged and to the subjects of pulmonary disease, its effects would seem to be selective. But experience shows that its effect upon the individual is that of a nerve poison and a vital depressant. The low average mortality which has followed some epidemics of influenza is most probably explained as depending upon the large mortality which the disease involves for the aged and for persons of low vitality, whose premature decease lightens the mortality tables of subsequent years. There is no sufficient evidence, however, to suggest that the great recurring epidemics of influenza in the
years I89o-94 have permanently depressed the stamina of
European nations.
II. THE INFECTIVE DISEASES OF INFANCY AND CHILDHOOD.
It is a most interesting subject for enquiry what is the net biological effect upon the race of these diseases. How far do they pick out and eliminate children of feeble physique who are

THE INFLUENCE OF DISEASE UPON RACIAL EFFICIENCY. 107
unfitted to survive? How far do they destroy children who, but for the accident of infection, would have become vigorous men and women? Is the child who has passed successfully through one or more of these affections braced and invigorated by the experience, or, on the contrary, vitally impoverished? Or, is recovery from these affections without appreciable influence upon the after life-history of the individual? These questions have seldom been asked, and at all events they have not received any authoritative or final answer. I do not pretend to answer them except in the most tentative fashion, and the more we reflect upon the facts cognate to this subject the more shall we be impressed by the extraordinary complexity of the subject.
Let us consider some of the obvious facts in connexion with this subject and enquire in what direction they point. Measles is the most universal disease of childhood at the present day. Probably not less than 98 per cent. of children suffer from it. It is more virulent now than it was in the eighteenth century, when Heberden reported it as so mild that a physician was seldom employed. While all classes are practically attacked equally, the mortality is insignificant among the rich, but very serious among the poor. The general health has much influence upon the mortality, the feeble succumbing easily, the vigorous seldom. The disease owes much of its importance to its proneness to be followed by sequelae, especially phthisis and mesenteric disease. The general health is seldom improved, and frequently impaired, by an attack of measles.
Scarlatina presents some points of contrast. The attack rate is much lower than that of measles, many persons escaping permanently, in spite of repeated exposure to infection. The mortality is at present very low in all classes of society, but the disease in past times has shown extraordinary variations of virulence. Mortality depends more upon the type of the epidemic than upon the peculiarities of the individual. An attack often leaves troublesome sequelae, and the general health is seldom improved, often impaired.
Whooping cough is now at the head of the infectious diseases of childhood in Scotland, and shares with measles the

I08 EUGENICS REVIEW.
first place in England. It has little, if at all, declined during the past century. Few persons are naturally immune. Mortality is largely dependent upon social position and general health. Amongst the poor, the ill-nourished, the rickety, the
poitrinaires, and the neurotic the mortality is very heavy. Diphtheria is but little dependent upon social position, or
hygienic surroundings. The attack rate is much lower than that of measles, scarlatina, or whooping cough. The mortality, formerly from 30 per cent. to 40 per cent. has been reduced to
half that figure or less by the use of anti-toxin. Social position and the general health have relatively little influence upon the
death-rate. We are thus confronted with a very complex series of facts.
So far as it is possible to see our way in a very obscure problem, it would seem that the infectious diseases of infancy and childhood have a double operation. They undoubtedly remove a large number of children of defective vitality who, if they had survived the fatalities of their earlier years, would at a later period have swollen the death-roll of tuberculosis and other maladies. But it is not less evident than many good lives are also sacrificed. Nature, if one may be permitted to personify her operations, does not carry out the weeding process on any uniform plan. The tares are not destroyed without damage to
the wheat. Several of the older epidemiologists were of opinion that
the increased virulence of measles and scarlatina in England in the first half of the nineteenth century was due to the decline of small-pox. Their theory was that the child who had passed successfully through small-pox had undergone a hardening process which increased its resisting power to other maladies. We know from the testimony of Lettsom that in the later years of the eighteenth century most children born in London had small-pox before the age of seven. But the facts seem capable of a simpler explanation than that involved in the above theory. The infectious disease which comes first in the order of time will be attended by the highest mortality because it eliminates the biologically unfit. That place was once taken by small-pox, later by measles, scarlatina, and whooping cough.

THE INFLUENCE OF DISEASE UPON RACIAL EFFICIENCY. 109
III. THE INFECTIVE DISEASES OF WORLD-WIDE PREVALENCE, e.g., TUBERCULOSIS.
No medical question has received more attention in recent years than the cause, modes of propagation, and methods of prevention of tuberculosis. The disease is responsible for about one-seventh of the mortality of all ages and for nearly one-third of the mortality between the ages of it and 35. It is a ubiquitous affection, no country or race showing any decided immunity, but it is especially the scourge of urban populations, of overcrowding and poverty, and of unhealthy occupations. The disease is now on the decline in nearly all civilised communities, and in England the mortality has been reduced by not less than 50 per cent. in less than half a century. It is noteworthy that this decline began soon after the repeal of the Corn Laws, and was co-incident with a rapid improvement in the social condition of the lower classes-improvement in food, housing, clothing, and other matters. How far that decline has been accelerated by better knowledge of the causation of the disease, by segregation, and by improved methods of treatment is not easily determined, and is still a matter of controversy.
The racial significance of tuberculosis raises some most difficult questions which are still unsettled. The disease certainly " runs in families "-to use the popular expression-but how far that is explained by special proclivity and how far by propinquity is still debated. It attacks by preference those who are of feeble physique, but the exceptions to this rule are numerous and significant. Not seldom it carries off the most intellectual of men and the fairest of women. It is especially the scourge of civilisation, and finds its explanation largely in the consideration that the human race is still imperfectly adapted to the conditions of civilised life, of which the life in cities is one of the main features. It is well known that when some of the primitive races come to reside in cities they are decimated by tuberculosis. This is true of the Laplanders, the Kirghiz of the Russian Steppes, and the Red Indians of North America.
It would seem that tuberculosis is, in the main, a factor of destruction and not of selection, that it is dependent mainly upon imperfect adaptation to the conditions of civilised life,

I I0 EUGENICS REVIEW.
that it can be successfully controlled by measures directed to the improvement of social conditions and the promotion of a higher
level of nutrition.
IV. ENDEMIC DISEASEs, e.g., MALARIA AND ENTERIC FEVER.
Something has been said of the part played by malaria in relation to the ancient civilisation of Greece and Rome. It is a factor of enormous importance in the modern world. To take one example-it is reckoned that in Italy there are two million cases of malaria annually with an average mortality of 15,000, and that the loss to the nation from the disease runs to many millions of lire per annum. Malaria devastates vast areas of territory in tropical and sub-tropical lands, and is the chief obstacle to the spread of civilisation in many of these regions. It has repeatedly baffled the hopes of statesmen and modified the course of history. Its cause is now known, and its extinction is well within the capacity of medical science and practical
statesmanship. Malaria is, in the main, destructive and biologically viti-
ating, rather than selective in its effects. In many malarious districts practically every person is affected, and its prevalence is a cause of profound racial degradation-physical, intellectual,
moral and economic. A very interesting biological experiment is involved in the
fate of British settlers in the malarious districts of West Africa. Miss Mary Kingsley informs us that they may be divided into four classes as regards their susceptibility to malaria, viz.: -
(a) A very small class who permanently escape infection. (b) A slightly larger class who resist infection for six
months or longer.
(c) A very large class who get repeated slight attacks, and finally a bad attack, to which they succumb.
(d) A considerable class who die within a few weeks of
landing.
These facts throw some light on the problem of immunity. Malaria would appear to be a case where the injurious
effects of disease upon the race are at a maximum, and the
selective effects almost inappreciable.

THE INFLUENCE OF DISEASE UPON RACIAL EFFICIENCY. I I I
Enteric fever as a racial factor presents some important and interesting problems. It is especially the sourge of new and rapidly-growing communities, and has intimate relations with defective hygiene and an imperfect water supply. It is not closely related to class or economic conditions, nor does it attack by preference the biologically unfit. There is evidence to show that residents in districts where the disease is prevalent acquire a certain degree of immunity, while new-comers into an infected area are very liable to attack. Enteric fever, like tuberculosis, is a disease of civilisation and of urban life, and it can be controlled by two expedients-viz., by measures to cleanse the soil from feecal contamination, and by the provision of an adequate supply of pure water.
A consideration of the facts does not suggest that enteric fever is in any strict sense selective in its effects. It is in the main a factor of deterioration and of destruction.
V. INFECTIVE DISEASES DEPENDING ON DIRECT CONTAGION, e.g., SYPHILIS.
The racial influence of syphilis is a subject with many ramifications. I can only touch it very lightly. For the purposes of the present paper, it may be said that its selective influence is practically nil, its deteriorating and destructive influence highly important, but controlled by the well-known law of reversion to the normal. The syphilitic virus is one of the most pervasive of racial poisons, and its evil influence is not easily exaggerated, but its capacity for perpetuation is limited. It dies out in two or three generations.
VI. DISEASES OF DOUBTFUL CAUSATION, e.g., RHEUMATISM, GOUT.
It may suffice to say of these that they are important factors of racial deterioration, while their selective influence is slight or perhaps almost nil.
This rapid survey of the field of disease in its racial aspects suggests to us that the influence of disease upon the human family is two-fold-in part selective, eliminative, detergent; in part vitiative and destructive. We see clearly that there are no

11I2 EUGENICS REVIEW.
hard-and-fast rules, that the generalisations drawn from the study of one disease may be wholly inapplicable to another disease, and that the same malady may in various circumstances have diverse operations. It remains to consider briefly a few of the general problems arising in the course of the present
discussion. Does an attack of disease which is fully recovered from
without sequehe, leave the constitution of the patient fortified, deteriorated, or unaffected ? This question has never received complete solution, and probably does not adinit of any general answer. In the days when small-pox prevailed, physicians inclined to the view that the general health was in many cases better after an attack than before. The same view was held by many observers with regard to typhus fever. But the contrary would seem to be the case in regard to measles, enteric fever, and influenza. All these diseases tend in various degrees to depress the general health and in particular to increase the liability to infection by tuberculosis. Pneumonia, on the other hand, seems to leave the subsequent general health unaffected.
Is there any evidence to sustain the view that infective diseases tend to replace each other, and that the suppression of one of these maladies stimulates the activity of another? This is a very serious question for sanatarians. When small-pox and typhus fever were rife in the British Islands, measles, scarlatina, and diphtheria were either not very prevalent or relatively mild. Graves, writing in I836, affirmed that typhus fever, then very prevalent in Dublin, had almost banished all other forms of infective disease. Thucydides records that during the great plague of Athens there was an extraordinary scarcity of other disease. The decline of scarlatina in England about the middle of the last century was co-incident with the rise of diphtheria, which received a definite place in the British mortality tables for the first time in the year I859. The recent decline of tuberculosis has coincided with a wider prevalence of pneumonia. These facts may be variously explained. They are at all events
highly suggestive. Has the activity of an infective disease any definite relation
to the duration of its prevalence in any community? There is

THE INFLUENCE OF DISEASE UPON RACIAL EFFICIENCY. I 13
abundant evidence that an infective disease, introduced for the first time or after a long interval, into an unprotected community exhibits peculiar virulence. The classical examples are the great epidemic of measles in the Faroe Islands in I846, and in the Fiji Island in I875. But the converse theory, that a nation long exposed to any infective malady tends to develop an immunity to it, cannot be accepted without large reservations. If this theory were universally true, we should witness a steady and continuous decline of all infective diseases of long prevalence in any locality. But this is far from being the case. Typhus fever is almost extinct. Small-pox is successfully controlled. Tuberculosis is rapidly declining. But there is no good evidence that scarlatina, measles, whooping cough, or diphtheria is declining. Further, many infective diseases show periods of quiescence followed by periods of active virulence, not attributable to any known causes, and such phenomena are not easily reconciled with the operation of a law of gradually acquired racial immunity. The fact of selective immunity is not to be denied-perhaps the best example of it is the resisting power of the negro against malaria-but this law does not apply equally to all infective diseases; its operation is very obscure; it may be in various ways contravened. I am inclined to hope that a selective immunity against tuberculosis
is being gradually evolved. The transmutation of acquired into inborn immunity by any race is denied by some, and the
proof is difficult. The relation of the subject of this paper to Eugenics might
be thus defined. In so far as disease is a cause of racial deterioration, the Eugenist is interested in its prevention and elimination. In so far as disease is a factor of selection, the
Eugenist is committed to the enquiry how that selective influence operates, what are its laws, how it can be controlled to secure the maximum of racial advantage.

