FAMILY PLANNING: THE PAST AND THE FUTURE*

By MRS. MARGARET A. PYKE

ALTHOUGH my lecture is called Eccleston Square which were first kindly

" Family Planning-The Past and lent to us in I934-and Dr. Davidson's

the Future," I do not intend to bore laboratory was in Wimpole Street. I think

you with long accounts of the past-telling our staff then numbered about ten, with two

stories about your past is always much more or three outside organizers. Now we occupy

amusing for the teller than for the listeners- four floors at 64 Sloane Street (and are hardly

so my history will be brief and sketchy and contained therein) and have a staff of

I shall use the past mainly as a yardstick twenty-five, with eight part-time outside

for the present.

organizers. Our expenditure in the I949

It is well known that the credit for financial year was just under £7,ooo-

opening the first birth-control clinic in this last year it was nearly £I6,ooo. We had

country belongs to Dr. Marie Stopes. That then sixty-four branches, running seventy-

was in I92I, and Walworth started in the eight clinics between them. Now we have

same year. There were, I think, fewer than II0 branches, with I30 clinics-and last year

twenty clinics when the Family Planning these clinics saw about 50,ooo new patients.

Association (under the title of the National Letters to Headquarters asking for help and

'Birth Control Association) was started in advice have gone up from 4,800 to between

1930 to co-ordinate the work of the five eight and nine thousand a year.

separate organizations which then concerned

themselves with problems of birth control. Work with Hospital Boards and Health

All these, with the exception of the Construc- Authorities

tive Birth Control Society, of which Dr. An interesting feature of the extension of

Marie Stopes is president, are now fully the organization side of the work is the

absorbed i? the Family Planning Associa- co-operation established with local health

tion. authorities and regionalhospital boards. In

The National Birth Control Association I930, we thought our main tasks would be to

had one object-t9 advocate and promote induce the Ministry to widen the terms of its

the provision of facilities for scientific contra- original memorandum (allowing local health

ception. During its twenty-two years of authorities to provide contraceptive advice

life the Association has changed its name and for nursing or expectant mothers who needed

its objects from birth control to family it on medical grounds) and to persuade

planning. The main result has been the local health authorities to make the fullest

development of work in the field of involun- possible use of their powers. Now, it is often

tary sterility. Nearly all F.P.A. branch the local health authority which asks us

clinics tackle this problem to a greater or less to start a clinic and a type of joint action

extent and Dr. Davidson will tell you of his prevails in many places today. The local

work, particularly on male infertility.

authority or regional hospital board hires

or lends to us premises (with equipment) on

Postwar Growth

which a branch of the F.P.A. can run a

The postwar growth of the Association clinic. Frequently it also makes a grant or

has been very rapid. In I949 we were, owing pays fees for cases which it refers to the clinic

to the generosity of the Eugenics Society, and sometimes even its staff is employed at

still occupying the three rooms at 69 the clinic. This arrangement greatly facili-

* A paper read at a Members' Meeting of the Eugenics Society on October 2ISt, I952.

tates the formation of an F.P.A. clinic to which all married couples can come, and, at

197

i98 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the same time, the local health authority repeated every year. The manufacturer

ensures that its own patients are treated at must produce the formula and must agree

far less cost than if it had to set up a clinic to abide by certain conditions which are

of its own. At the present moment, of our designed to secure ethical behaviour by firms

130 clinics, eighty-nine are held on local and to prevent the advertisement of

health authority premises and nine on unjustified claims. All literature produced

hospital board premises. Sixty-one local by a firm is examined and any advertise-

health authorities make direct payments to ment or leaflet or other statement about a

our branches and I07 refer cases to us. product on the list must be submitted to us

Sixty-two have their own clinics and out of for approval before it is published. The

the total of 200 authorities there are only British Medical Journal, the Lancet and the

six in England, twelve in Scotland and one Pharmaceutical Journal consult us before

in Wales which have taken no action to accepting any advertisement of a contra-

implement the various memoranda issued ceptive. Our biggest fight has been to get

by the Ministry of Health. I think we may one phrase included in all advertisements of

claim that this position is largely due to chemical contraceptives. It is natural for

twenty years' steady concentration of effort manufacturers to wish to advertise their

by the F.P.A.

products for use alone but it is the opinion

of the F.P.A. Medical Sub-Committee that

Training at Clinics

for maximum safety a chemical contra-

F.P.A. clinics have also been pioneers ceptive should be used with a barrier. We

in providing training in contraceptive tech- all hope very much indeed that this will not

nique. Training facilities in medical schools always be so and that the perfect contra-

are improving but our clinics are almost the ceptive may not be far away, but that has

only opportunity for doctors, medical not happened yet. There may be many

students and nurses to acquire practical people who prefer to use a chemical alone

experience. The F.P.A. has drawn up and we naturally do not wish to interfere

requirements for training clinics and an with individual choice but we want to ensure

increasing number of our branches is reaching *that this course shall not be adopted in the

the standard necessary for recognition as a belief that it is the safest possible method.

training centre. Trainees include many Hence our insistence on the phrase about

overseas visitors who are frequently sent to us maximum safety. The only exception could

by the Ministry of Health and other official be in the case of a product which appears

bodies. At some medical schools F.P.A. to offer greater possibilities, and has passed

doctors lecture to students and, in at least our tests, and which is described as experi-

one medical school, attendance at an F.P.A. mental.

clinic is an essential part of the students' The F.P.A. approved list is, I think, the

curriculum.

only means by which medical practitioners

(and others) can discriminate between the

Approved List

many contraceptive preparations now upon

One of the most important achievements the market and it is accepted as a guide by

of the Association is the approved list of other bodies-we were told recently of a

contraceptives. This is a list of those contra- manufacturer who was refused a licence to

ceptives which have passed certain tests, export his goods because they were not on the

some of which were originally devised by F.P.A. approved list.

Dr. J. R. Baker when he was working for

the Birth Control Investigation Committee Publication

under the agis of Dr. Blacker and the A greatly increased activity since the war

Eugenics Society. Tests of any product has been the production and sale of litera-

(whether chemical or rubber) are carried ture. Problems of Fertility, by several authors

out on samples bought at random and are and intended for the medical profession, was

FAMILY PLANNING

published under the auspices of the F.P.A. nearly one-sixth, £2,500, came from branches.

and, apart from reports of various confer- Apart from o200 from the L.C.C. Sunday

ences, we have published seven of our own Cinema Fund, the rest of our income, which

booklets for sale in branch clinics and to the was seven-tenths of the whole and amounted

general public. We also now have our own to over £II,ooo, was earned.

quarterly journal Family Planning, not yet

so large or imposing as the EUGENICS Need for the Work

REvIEw, but we hope its growth will be rapid I would like to devote a few words to the

and lusty.

need for the work of the F.P.A. Apart from

opposition to the whole idea of birth control

Conduct of Affairs

there are, I think, a good many people who

The policy of the Association is laid down are, at best, indifferent. Two reasons are

by its members and branch delegates at the given for this indifference. The first is that

annual general meeting and its business is the battle is won, particularly since the

conducted by the executive committee and publication of the Report of the Royal

appointed sub-committees. The executive Commission on Population; the second is

is composed of elected members, members that clinics are superfluous because everyone

appointed by the ten federations into which knows what to do and anyone can go to a

branches are grouped and co-opted members. chemist. Tied up with this is the suspicion,

The sub-committees are finance, organiza- I think, that the movement is largely

tion, general medical, clinics medical, sub- feminist, even sometimes that women doctors

fertility, ethical, statistics and public want to cash in on giving birth-control

relations. We are proud that many dis- advice to women patients.

tinguished people have consented to serve With regard to the first of these reasons,

on one or other of our sub-committees. the Report of the Royal Commission made

Federations of branches hold meetings at recommendations which could have been

which they can discuss many clinic problems drafted by any of us. They were excellent

and receive reports from members of the and they were comprehensive but no attempt

executive committee. The impulse given by has been made to discuss the Report in

the branches to the extension of the Associa- Parliament, let alone implement any of its

tion's work has increased enormously since recommendations. I think the Report has

the war and all now aid the finances of their had an effect-but mainly because the F.P.A.

Headquarters office by annual payment of has quoted it far and wide to medical officers

15s. per head for every new patient seen. of health, chairmen of regional hospital

We are now welded into a solid organization boards and organizations up and down the

with a unity of purpose which greatly country. Ever since it came out we have

increases both our momentum and our made it our business to publicize it. The

weight.

Roman Catholic hierarchy condemned the

recommendations relating to the provision

Finances

of contraceptive advice within the National

Our finances reflect the changes of our Health Service and directed Roman Catholics

times. In I939, four-sevenths of our income " to do all in their power by lawful means

came from charitable subscriptions and to prevent the implementation of these

donations and one-tenth from the Eugenics proposals." No, I do not think anyone can

Society. A theatrical gala performance and fairly say that the battle has been won.

bridge tournament raised about half the As regards the proposition that " everyone

latter amount and the total contribution knows what to do" I think that the data,

from branch clinics was £I3. Last year, one- even though not statistically compiled, are

eighth of our income was subscribed in this case unassailable. One small para-

(curiously enough the actual sum, £2,000, was graph in a Sunday paper durintg the last war

almost exactly the same as in I939), and brought over 5,ooo requests for our

200 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

booklet Practical Advice on Birth Control. with unhappiness and disharmony caused

As a result of a short article in the Daily by an ignorance of sex matters which some

Mirror last year saying that for a fee of 2s. members of this audience might find it bard

the F.P.A. would answer individual inquiries, to credit. One instance was that of a couple

more than 3,0OO letters arrived at Head- who came for sub-fertility advice and whose

quarters. And we cannot possibly keep marriage had never been consummated. ThE

pace with the demand made upon us to start field of sex difficulties in marriage was not

new clinics. These come from the areas one the F.P.A. sought to enter, but we have

themselves, they are not initiated by us, had to because married couples who come

and we cannot meet them because we cannot for advice on family planning are so often

afford more organizers.

then in the mood to tell their personal sex

It is true, of course, that patients at troubles and to ask for help in those also.

clinics are mostly women and that they are

usually fitted with caps, although instruction Our mitations

in the safe period and the best use of condoms I have told you some of what I regard as

and sheaths is also given. It is our opinion our achievements but that does not mean

that married people should be in a position we are not well aware of our lirritations. I

to choose which method of contraception think most of these are due to pressure of

they prefer and that medical advice ought to work and lack of money. Apart from

be available for those who decide that thewife medical and nursing staff, most of our branch

should take the precautions. Undoubtedly clinics are largely staffed by voluntary

this method is preferred by a great many workers and they are all run by voluntary

husbands as well as wives and, in our committees. I think this has been a big

opinion, it should be as widely accessible as factor in their success, not only because in

the chemist's shop. It is not a matter of this work keen interest and warmth of

urging one method rather than another but sympathy are essential but also because a

of making all available.

voluntary committee does not lose interest

I think that there are some who do not or depart from its principles and standards.

grasp the wide ramifications of family The policy of a local health authority can

planning. Those who have no problem and (and sometimes does) change with its staff.

those who are capable of solving their own Clinics have been discontinued and follow-up

difficulties do not perhaps realize the help- visits on behalf of an F.P.A. clinic by a health

lessness and the ignorance of a very large visitor have been stopped because a sympa-

number of our fellow human beings. When thetic medical officer of health moved else-

preparing a memorandum for the Royal where or an unsympathetic one was

Commission on Marriage and Divorce, I read appointed. And there is no uniformity

the section of letters received at the office about a local health authority clinic unless,

asking for birth-control advice because the of course, its staff have been trained by one

writer felt that fear of pregnancy was of our branches, as they frequently are. We

threatening the marriage. Both husbands have found throughout our history that

and wives had written. On one day alone experienced voluntarycommitteesandtrained

three such letters had arrived; the purport voluntary workers are invaluable. But we

of all was summed up by one writer: " My are the first to admit that such a system

husband and I are very much in love and has its weaknesses. Over 50,000 new

long to carry on as normal as possible but patients each year should be a valuable

we are so afraid of having any more babies." source of data probably unobtainable else-

And in the sub-fertile marriage, too, there is where, but data, to be of any value, must be

often an underlying or even open fear that statistically sound. There is the rare clinic

the lack of children will ultimately break up worker whose eye lights up when the word

the marriage.

statistics is mentioned but usually it seems

Family planning clinics are also familiar to induce either the most acute distaste or a

FAMILY PLANNING

20I

puzzled bewilderment. Now I do not want of those who are working in what might

to suggest that it is essential always to be as become related fields. This is again, of

thorough as one report in which it was course, largely a matter of finance and I

thought necessary to state that " the failure think that it is incumbent on all those who

to maintain conjugal relations while living are concerned about problem families,

together will also result in a falling off in the juvenile delinquency and the possible dys-

average pregnancy rates," but it is rare that genic effects of a differential birth-rate to

the figures of an amateur inquiry are combine with the family planners in exploring

unassailable.

every possible source from which grants or

Recently we carried out a study of the other assistance might be forthcoming.

rate of persistence of our patients in The need to solve our own problems and

attending clinics. Thirty clinics co-operated perfect our organization in this country is

and thanks to the most patient, careful and the more urgent since the world population

tactful work by Mrs. Rachel Conrad and her problem is one that will surely have to be

helpers a very interesting and useful report solved within the next fifty years or so.

was compiled. However, this one simple However much the supply of food and other

question necessitated an immense amount of necessities may be increased, ultimately the

work and when we recently consulted a dilemma remains. Without family planning

medical statistician as to the possibility of and with social service and modern medicine,

carrying out clinical trials, it was reckoned numbers must sooner or later catch up with

that it was useless to attempt the inquiry supplies.

unless we could have the services of a trained Great Britain has lost the lead she once

statistician and probably two assistants for held in many international fields, but in the

clerical work. The cost was reckoned at field of family planning she is probably the

something like £I,5oo a year for two or most advanced of all the big countries. Here

three years.

we have no laws against birth control and

we have only a small proportion of the popu-

What of the Future ?

lation (between 6 and 7 per cent) pledged

And now what of the future ? The most to opposition on religious grounds. Though

obvious need is to start new clinics since our clinic service is not adequate it is far

there are still large tracts of country where more nearly so than in any other country,

there are none at all. There is also much to and I do not think that any other country,

be done to secure implementation of the except Sweden, could have produced the

Royal Commission on Population's Report Report of our Royal Commission on Popula-

and we are well aware of the need to examine tion or could marshal such strong and dis-

our own work and data, to improve its tinguished support for a national policy of

quality and to estimate its results.

family planning.

But the most urgent need of all is a simpler But our potentiality creates our duty and

and cheaper method of contraception. For we must hasten to perfect our knowledge

this, research on an infinitely wider scale and experience so that we may have some-

than any in existence at present will probably thing worthy to offer to the world when at

be required. We must find out how to make last it faces the fact that man's power to

the best use of existing facilities, how to lower his death-rate will destroy him unless

extend these and how to enlist the services he learns also to control his birth-rate.

Eugenics Review, VoL XLIV, No. 4

