CORRESPONDENCE

The Eugenics Society is not responsible for opinions expressed by correspondents

CORRECTION

Almost all members of the Society will agree

Internal Factors in Evolution by L. L. Whyte

Mr. Whyte twice misquoted his reviewer in

the letter which was printed in these columns in

December (1965, 57, 208-9): "or of sickle trait"

should read "or for the sickle-cell trait". "It

would have been better if this book had never

been published" should read "It would have

been better if this book had not been published".

The reviewer does not maintain that the book

would never have been useful in the past, only

that is not useful at the present time.

It is much regretted that these misquotations

were not corrected before Mr. Whyte's letter was

printed.

EDITOR

with this thesis and welcome Professor Titmuss's initiative. The correct principle is that once a child is born the community must do its best to minimize any medical, social or educational handicaps to which the child is prone because of either genes or family environment.
Professor Titmuss's second and more controversial thesis, mainly set out in the first
article, is that the present system of tax allow-
ances for children is not in the public interest.
It encourages those with larger incomes to have
larger families and this is undesirable at a time when Britian is experiencing a western-type pop-
ulation explosion. Such families tend to set the
fashion. He wrote:

All the evidence points in fact to a rise in

THE POPULATION EXPLOSION
To the Editor, The Eugenics Review

the average ultimate family-size of women
married at all ages under forty-five. What may also be significant is that fertility rates have

Sir,-Under the general heading of "The Popu- increased most sharply in the more middle-

lation Explosion" two articles by Professor class, non-manual regions of the country,

Richard Titmuss appeared in The Times last and among women married over the age of

October. The first was entitled "Child Endow- twenty-five. In the taxable income range of

ment Reappraisal?" and the second "Plan for £5,000 and over in 1962-63 about 22 per cent

Children in Poverty". Professor Titmuss, a of all children for whom tax allowances were

member of the Eugenics Society's Council, had claimed were in families of four or more.

two theses of much interest to eugenists. One Nearly half were in families of three or more.

thesis, that of the second article, was the need On the face of it, these seem high proportions

for further help for children in low income for the upper-income classes. They are

families. He wrote:

probably surprising figures to those who, in

Quantitatively, the underprivileged family the 1940s and early 1950s were deploring the

of to-day is predominantly the family of three, decline in family size among these classes.

four or five children. The primary cause of In consequence the projected increase in popu-

their hardships is to found in low earnings. lation for the next thirty-six years was two-and-

A secondary cause of child poverty is due to a-half times as large as in the last thirty-six years.

the absence of a father, or to the fact that the He continues:

father or mother is disabled, seriously handi- For this to happen in one of the most

capped, or chronically ill.

densely-populated and congested countries of

and went on to propose that:

the world could present any government with

One possible answer might be to reduce tax appalling problems of urban planning and

allowances by stages and to increase family renewal, land use, housing and traffic manage-

allowances. But could the latter be raised to ment, to say nothing of the difficulties of

levels adequate for poorer families without staffing the schools, the hospitals and many

the cost to the Exchequer becoming prohibi- other services. The physical and psychological

tive? An alternative approach is to extend the disciplines required to maintain any semblance

benefit of the tax allowance to those below of environmental and social order might well

the tax-paying level, and to accompany this diminish the applicability of market principles

measure with a series of other changes in the in various sectors of the economy. There can

structure of benefits and subsidies.

therefore be few thoughtful observers pre-

53

CORRESPONDENCE

pared to support public policies to encourage larger familes-particularly among those sections of the population who tend to set standards of family building habits. As has been pointed out in the editorial columns of the REVIEW the word "explosion" is an exaggeration. The long term excess fertility is perhaps of the order of 10 per cent, an average family size of 2-4 to 2 5 instead of 2-2. This is about 100,000 births per year. Gross emigration, welcome to Australia and Canada, is now of the order of 200,000 individuals peryear,balancedby an immigration of much the same order. Much of the excess fertility could, if this was thought desirable, be simply met by a more restrictive immigration policy. Most members of the Society will, in contrast to Professor Titmuss, welcome the modest increase in average family size in the middle class (an increase which even now is perhaps only sufficient to raise their fertility to replacement level) and will reject the implication that the more fortunately situated have been wrong to have more children. The tax allowance figures Professor Titmuss quotes are compatible with an average family size of only 2-2, if, as is probably the case, most families are complete by the time the father achieves a taxable income of £5,000 a year. The 1961 Census fertility tabulations, when these are at last published, will show what the real state of affairs is; but the additional cost to the Exchequer of the modest increase in family size in the middle classes should be comparatively trivial.
Much more important is that the children in these largely successful professional families will be helping out of all proportion to their numbers to solve "the difficulties of staffing the schools, the hospitals and many other services". It is very much in the public interest that those parents, whether "better-off" or not, who have the will and the gifts to raise two sons to become a good engineer and doctor, and two daughters to be a good school-teacher and nurse, should not be discouraged from making the attempt.
It is, however, unlikely that resourceful parents would be much influenced in their family planning by any reduction in tax allowances for children. The fears that have been expressed that an increase in the family allowances to the poor would lead to an increase in the size of their families are probably likewise not justified. The eugenically and socially desirable, and ethically correct, way of achieving a reduction in average family size is to bring family planning services, as part of the National Health Service

(where necessary by domiciliary visiting on the

lines pioneered by Dr. Peberdy and Dr. Morgan)

to all. This will extend to the poorest the know-

ledge already available to the more privileged,

and enable all parents to decide the size of their

families. Once all families are planned, it is to

be hoped that average size will be close to re-

placement rate; but it is also very much to be

hoped that the quartile of the population most

competent as parents, whether their income is

high or low, should plan a family size well above

replacement rate.

C. 0. CARTER

Institute of Child Health,

Guilford Street, London, WC1

GERMINAL CHOICE
To the Editor, The Eugenics Review
Sir,-With all due respect for Dr. H. J. Muller's great ability and contributions and as a fellow geneticist who is well aware that genetic betterment of our species is both possible and desirable, I would like to make a few comments bearing on the thesis expressed by him in the letteroriginallywritten forTheScientificAmerican and printed in THE EUGENICS REVIEW 57, 101104.
The crucial points are: (1) what qualities are desirable and should be selected for? (2) what is the genetic basis for these qualities? (3) how can these qualities be assessed quantitatively?
(1) It is by no means self-evident that the list given by Muller: fellow feeling, wisdom, mental and bodily vigour and longevity are the most important or most useful, however attractive in a humanitarian kind of way they may appear. What are we aiming at? Peace on earth, less suffering, full bellies all round, high living standards, high creative output, increasing control of our immediate and distant environment, more techniques, technicians and technologists and many other goals could be mentioned. They demand different approaches and selection for different qualities which in some instances may be radically opposite in nature. There is, further, another character which may be of great importance, that of plasticity or behavioural flexibility. Individuals possessing this character in well-developed measure, would be more than normally trainable and/or retrainable. This would clearly be of importance in, for example, a society where automation was continually replacing men.
(2) With the exception ofintelligence we know rather little about the personality characteristics

54

