EUGENICS IN THE AGE OF CROWDING *
By G. C. L. BERTRAM, M.A., Ph.D.

Introduction
T HIS paper is an attempt to help perspective, rather than present facts, and to draw attention to possibilities.
It includes an hypothesis which may have
a modicum of novelty. We live in an age of enormous and un-
precedented human population increase. This mass proliferation of our own species is now moderately well appreciated as a fact
by educated people, but its extent, causes, repercussions and time scale are not. This
paper seeks to help understanding of the repercussions. We must assume that, in matters such as this, wisdom will ultimately prevail and, if we would but use the faculties which we have received from our ancestors, that we can still in large degree be masters of our fate. If we do not make this assumption life becomes unpromising indeed, both for the individual and collectively.
The thesis of my argument is this in brief. In differing ways and according to our several capacities, in life we strive-some for money, power and material advantage, others more idealistic and discerning for something much more-while the multitudes struggle without conscious awareness of that for which they strive. I shall attempt, first, an acceptable definition of our goal in life-for without a conscious objective most else has little meaning. I shall then pass to the actual facts of to-day's world crowding with a multitudinous mass of our own species. I shall explain that this proliferation, in terms of our goal in life, in general has no obvious advantages yet many clear disadvantages. I then propose to enlarge upon what I believe to be a valid, if novel, hypothesis concerning the direct effects upon the individual of high population density, drawing parallels from other species. Further disadvantages of crowding thus emerge.
* A paper read at a Members' Meeting of the Eugenics Soci3ty on January 22nd, 1958.

The reality of optimal populations will then be enlarged upon, having regard to the many revelant facts, and keeping in mind our goal. After that I shall explain the inevitability of the ultimate limitation of populations-by means which can be described on the one hand as distasteful chance and on the other as acceptable deliberation.
In so far as I hope you will have been convinced of the essential truth of the argument, I shall then proceed to assume that acceptable deliberation is the choice in the limitation of our species. At that point comes the change from considerations of quantity to those of quality, for the limitation can be simply numerical, or eugenic in intent. For the eugenic aspect to be pursued, two particular attributes or facilities must be available, the one contraceptive and the other educational. And finally, into this setting, intrudes the extraordinarily difficult matter of artificial insemination-with problems and possibilities far in advance of that parochial little stir which now ruffles opinion in this Christian island in connection with subfertility.
Objective
Much is meaningless, in many walks of life, without the consciousness of a worthy objective. The United Nations' assertions about human rights speak of certain of the essential freedoms without which worthy; goals can scarcely be achieved by individuals or groups. The goals themselves need separate definition, and that is very difficult indeed. Still we must try and, I believe, many throughout the world, and of varying religions, will subscribe to an objective defined in some such terms as these. We seek to provide that every individual shall be a loved and wanted child, with a good genetic inheritance, and born into circumstances that will allow it to develop to the

4' THE EUGENICS REVIEW, April 1958. 50, i

42 T

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

full all the capacities with which- it is en- dominates our lives (even if many are too

dowed, physical, mental and spiritual; and blind to see it). Let us hope that " sapiens "

that there shall be freedom for the individual is not so great a misnomer that this human

to use those capacities, in happiness, and in fruit will but burst in chaos and rot.

the service of God and man according to the This is not the place to enlarge upon the

dictates of the individual conscience. That relationships between numbers and food and

definition will, I think, serve our present resources. That has been admirably and

purpose, but even so it is still in a sense a authoritatively set out in one of the largest

mere statement that we want to polish the reports that PEP has yet published-World

tools-what the tools then shall do we still Population and Resources, I955-a project

have not defined, but into those deeper made possible by grants from the Eugenics

realms we have no present need to go. But Society and the Nuffield Foundation. I will

I would like to know-a research topic for simply quote two sentences from that report

some brave enquirer-the environmental (p. 43): " The prospects for the next thirty

and genetic components of a conscience. years, and thereafter, are extremely problem-

Here is still more scope for identical twin atical. . . . A thoroughly optimistic view has

studies.

no honest foundation, while the reverse is

Implicit in what I have just said is equality useless, for it would kill that vigour, en-

of opportunity. I need not here expand on thusiasm and faith upon which, in the last

the growing frequency and folly with which resort, all progress depends."

equality of opportunity is mixed with a This is the place, however, I suggest,

muddled equalitarianism which quite falsely briefly to describe an Oriental city of to-day

assumes that all men are born equal- so as to imprint upon your minds the con-

though very few indeed will extend their trast between the facts of life and that goal

folly from the human to the equine and towards which we agree we strive. A compar-

assert that all racehorses are born equal. ison with other species is also necessary.

I hope I have been able to indicate suffici- The greatest mammal and bird colonies

ent of the objective in life for our present of the world I have seen, or some of them-

purpose-sufficient so that we can attempt the fur seals of the Pribilof Islands, the

to judge whether we are more, or less, likely ringed penguins of Deception Island, the

to be able to approach the objective having guillemots of Bear Island, and likewise the

regard to changes in population, both seething multitudes of fish of Southeast

absolutely and from the point of view of Arabia. All these and many lesser sights

density in limited areas. The genetic aspects have filled me with wonder, eagerness,

will be for consideration later.

interest, desire to wait and watch, and the

most stimulating satisfaction. Individually

Crowding: The facts
We live in days of Primate efflorescence, so far as Homo sapiens is concerned. The scattered small numbers of human kind throughout the world in past millennia have burgeoned with astonishing suddenness-a world doubling in the last eighty years and now with already 43,ooo,ooo a year net increase,* the next doubling may be completed almost within this century, but a generation and a half. This mushroom expansion, this human explosion, now truly

and in company those animal hordes were occupying just those natural niches to which
they were precisely fitted and adjusted by evolution and inheritance. The health and happiness of each individual was at its summit-so far as human judgment is valid. Life seethed yet soared to its specific peak. All were temporary breeding congregations.
So tragically different, so devastating, so degraded, are the generality of the larger Oriental human communities. There the individual is debased, biologically and spir-
itually, and personal health and happiness

* This is the figure given on p. 2 of the United are meagre ghosts of what they should be.

Nations Demographic Year Book for I956.

For me the slow descending flying boat

EUGENICS IN THE AGE OF CROWDING

43

alighting on the river, was like the hideof the
,bird watcher, allowing sights and panoramas in mass and in intimacy, obtainable in no
,other way except the hovering helicopter. I could see the tiny forms scuttling or squatting, singly and in groups, on what seemed at
first sight to be the surface. They appeared black and shapeless, as they moved among the straw windbreaks and shelters. Further
examination showed deep crevices with more creatures moving at several levels, in and out of holes and along the bottoms of the
cracks. As descent continued, panorama diminished as local magnification increased. The dull midget forms became myriad, dark
and disordered, below, around and upon the
cliffs and arid crags of countless 'acres of
brown brick buildings, split by one great sluggish stream, a great river that shall be
nameless here. This huge mammalian colony
was filled with myriads of our own species, breeding men, women, and children in their
hordes. And in me it evoked nothing but horror, sadness, and deep thankfulness that I personally, by temperament and fortune, was a member of a less gregarious section of my species from a more northern land.
In that great colony there was no beauty; there was no joy; there was simply life in reproductive spate. Despite squalor and under-nourishment, wretchedness and disease, life proliferated. There specific human substance increased apace, unplanned, unhealthy, unwelcome to thinking men and
surely too to God.
In fact that colony was the poorest section of a huge capital city, over which the flying boat flew low to settle upon the bosom of the great river whose flow of water is ultimately responsible for this sad surge of human life. This part of the man colony is a region of five-storey tenement dwellings, with shelters on their roofs, and here, it is said, human reproduction per acre is the highest on the whole world's surface. Here six acres of reproduction are piled upon one of mother earth. A population of over IOO,OOO per square kilometre has been estimated for the
most crowded areas.
Excess fertility and gross mortality, hope and despair, youth and disease, dance in a

mad whirl together. But fertility leads the rout. She leads until some pestilence, famine or other horror, pulls her down into that
whirl for a space before again she rises. So it will continue until man takes thought, controls his breeding in the interest both of the individual and of the race, has regard for inherited talents and not quantity alone, and consciously strives for value and not for volume.
Surely none of us can regard such an
urban mass as admirable? It has arisen: for it no one has consciously striven as for a goal. By its development what has been gained?-another large black dot on the population map of the globe; IOO,OOO tons of extra co-existing human flesh; a huge habitat for parasites; a vast maw into which runs an ever-flowing but insufficient stream
of foodstuffs and other products of the earth. Dignity, contentment of spirit, health,
education, sufficiency for active mind and
body, all are rare or absent. And that is not
to denigrate the brave activities of missionaries, teachers, health workers and the rest who, through their fate or their dedicated idealism, strive to sweep back and purify the flooding torrent with little brooms of zeal. Their task is hopeless while the numbers bound. The breeding proliferation surges, and those ending their brief time among this
human midden are carried away to the ancient burial grounds on the periphery. The law has wisely decreed that burial shall be within twenty-four hours of death, and the number of keening funerals in the streets is noticeably higher after a night of rain in the cooler season-so tenuous is the hold upon the thread of life to which so many of our kind so desperately cling.
Whatever the simplicity, the harshness, the rigour and the earthiness of the primitive rural community, yet grows there some little dignity, quiet closeness to the soil, and a kind of symbiosis with other species of animals and plants, a recognition of the seasons and the stars, a continuity between the generations. The primitive rural community, whether hunters, fishers, pastoralists or tillers of the soil, is no well-loved paradise for its inhabitants, yet it is, I

44 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

believe, very far removed from the hellish of strict proof, that great numbers now make

squalor of the urban mass.

for wars far more than they are needed for

Turning now from all too horrid reality to defence in wars. The apt analogy now

abstract considerations, let us remember between nations is too often that of great

that in general the Primates are few in trees planted too closely so that their

numbers, living in small scattered groups and branches interlock, each damaging the other.

family parties. A big colony of baboons may Markets for mas$-produced material

perhaps run to several hundreds, and perhaps objects we may all too often be. But surely

a troop of monkeys in the treetops is some- that can scarcely be claimed as an admirable-

times of like size. But the great apes, our and positive reason for human multiplication.

closest relatives, are all family people.

Undoubtedly his abundance is the outstand- Great Disadvantages

ing peculiarity of man when we compare him with all the other mammals, and this
feature is astonishing indeed among the Primates. Of course our own species has many other oddities which surprise and
fascinate those uho care to look, and not only in the realms of speech, the making of fire, the progress of religion and altruism, indeed the attributes of Man-who all too often thinks he is God.

The fact remains-quite obviously once
educated minds have been directed to this area of thought-that the immense human numbers and proliferation of to-day have
great disadvantages in terms of our objective. Great numbers indeed quickly swamp even considerations of objective and render the approach difficult indeed.
A little consideration will quickly bring to mind a considerable variety of disadvantages

No Advantages ?

connected with great numbers of human kind. There is no need here to enter into

It is indeed difficult to descry positive detail over most of them.

advantages in immense numbers of human High population in any region results in

beings contemporaneously alive. Certainly special pressures upon the environment,

there is a threshold population the building both biological and mineral, producing a host

up to which is advantageous. Fine buildings, of concomitant difficulties and unfortunate

certain classes of manufactured goods, uni- circumstances ranging from soil erosion and

versity centres and culture, a ferment of flooding, to silting and water shortages.

ideas, all depend for their production upon Though some of these troubles could be

a population big enough to provide the avoided by greater use of the knowledge we

labour, the variety, the abilities, the urbanisa- already have available. High population

tion and the leisure for their growth. But that density, too, provides the opportunity for

threshold has long been achieved in a suffici- huge disasters, by flood, starvation or pesti-

ency of places in the world now that systems lence. With great numbers the latitude is

of communication and record are available. less when the rare extremes arrive of

When weapons are relatively primitive, environmental variations.

and even when weapons are more advanced Is it too cynical to suggest that much of

and require huge labour forces for their the great upsurge of human numbers in the

production, large human populations may long run-if there is one-will be regarded

-seem, desirable in a regrettable sort of way. as having been the mere production of virus

But this is the mere provision of cannon fodder? We know all too well how agri-

fodder and its support. This kind of human culturally the growing of pure stands leads

proliferation has no positive and admirable to paradise for pests of every kind. Yet, of

advantage if we remember our agreed course, control of pests by noxious pesticides

objective in life. Are we past the days when is little different from the now regular police

the mere multiplication of the urban is control of human mobs with tear gas-

required to withstand the barbarian hordes though the police use lower concentrations

from afar? More likely is it, though difficult so as not actually to kill.

EUGENICS IN THE AGE OF CROWDING

45

We move into the realms of subjective the size of population to which a benevolent

judgment and personal emotion.. It must dictator would properly limit the people of

surely be reasonably clear that at low the world, or of a single land. But passing

population densities it is personally expedi- mention is essential of the optimal popula-

ent to exist in reasonably co-operation with tion, both as a concept and as an aim.*

one's fellows and associates: then, as popula- Most must already recognize that there is a

tion density rises, soon a threshold may be difference between the maximum population

reached past which, in large degree, it which can be supported and the best or

becomes expedient deliberately to compete optimal population. For any particular

and attempt to overshadow one's fellows. standard of nutrition and material well-being

A special disadvantage at the personal chosen as desirable, there must be an

level, springing from the abundance of the optimal population. The optimum may be

human hordes, is the ever increasing problem assessed on a world or a regional basis, and

of finding solitude. Few of the wise would it will vary in the course of time with

deny the need-that, for the full development changes in environmental factors, productive

of many personalities, a degree of solitude potentialities, technical skills, crop varieties,

and contemplation away from the many and the development of mutual trust between

in community with earth and other species, nations, transport facilities, and so on. But

is at times essential. Yet already the world at any particular date there must be in fact

probably contains many more than an optimal population (or perhaps an optimal

i,ooo,ooo,ooo people who have never been range of population). Any departure from

alone to the extent of being even a hundred the optimum will inevitably be accompanied

yards away from others. Yet, can our agreed by some degree of misery or reduced-

goal be attained without at least the well-being.

opportunity for solitude?

So far, however, the exponents of the

It is apposite to quote from Gerald Heard theory of the optimum in population have,

a striking passage from his Man the Master: in general, thought of the optimum only in

Few sights so quickly staunch humitarianism terms of food or economic advantage.t But and stun humanism, as the mere sight of too in fact there must, of course, be an optimal

many human beings-just seeing how many population corresponding to whatever feature

human beings there actually are. The spate
of life proliferating along the Ganges: the fecund density which spreads in China like a fungous growth mantling even the broad rivers

or criterion may be considered especially desirable or significant. Many feel that food and material wealth alone afford an incom-

themselves; there the actual triumph of the plete and inadequate basis for human

life force, the actual biological achievement of advance. Thus it comes. about that con-

Homo sapiens, stir neither loyalty nor hope.... There is an awkward disregarded balance
between quantity and quality.... Beyond sufficiency, plenty simply collapses into glut.

sideration must be given to problems of value-that is to say once more to thoughts about the objectives of life. If our objective,

And life, too, the most precious of possessions, as already described, is acceptable and

it also can be debased by the cheapening caused by unrestrained, unbalanced quantity.

worthy, then populations-eventually we
must hope-will come to be limited in

Another possibility-take communism- accordance with it. The proper optimum is

the debasement of the individual's worth in likely in fact to be very different from an

favour of the mass-Is communism an in-

evitable concomitant of increasing numbers? * A part of these paragraphs is quoted from the

There may well be a close connection here. Certainly it is foolish to disregard this

author's Population Trends and the World's Biological Resources. Eugenics Society Occasional Papers, No. 5.
1948.

possibility.

t Plato in his Laws shows himself to have been well

aware of the value of an optimal population. For a

Optimal Populations

city-state he placed the optimum at 5,040 citizens. His chief criterion was happiness, an attribute which

It is not the purpose here to dwell upon

he well knew not to be directly proportional to economic affluence.

46 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

optimum determined solely on a basis of food or material well-being or so-called economic advantage. This matter of opportunity for solitude may be important here. Our present concern, however, is simply to stress that the concept of an optimal population is valid; that it must become a deliberate aim; and that it is likely to be very different *from the maximum population which might be supported in life, if not in happiness and
wisdom.
Direct Crowding Effects
I want now to put forward an hypothesis which, if true, must be of great importance and significance for humanity in these days of monstrous population increase. In an Occasional Paper of this Society I first touched briefly upon this matter nine years ago in a section entitled " The Possible Effect of Population Density on the Individual." I now want to enlarge a little on that. We are here dealing with a realm which might, loosely, be regarded as intermediate between genetic and environmental, but which I conceive to fall well within Galton's definition of eugenics as " the study of factors under social control which may improve or impair the racial qualities of future generations."
We are all well aware of what has been called crowd psychology, the short term effect upon the individual and upon the mass, resulting from temporary crowding and heightened emotion. Panic, religious fervour, a lynching, a battle, may all be regarded as demonstrating something of the short-term crowd effect. One may go further, and suggest that this short term crowd influence upon the individual, the enhanced excitement and the merging of the individual's consciousness of self in the mass emotion, has had survival value-in times past if not in times present. In our day, dictators are masters of the art of twisting mass emotion to political anrd fiendish ends.
Turn now from short term to medium term crowd effects. Some years ago Dr. Frank Fraser Darling did some research upon the success of the breeding effort of ,gulls in colonies of varying sizes. There has

I believe been later criticism of his work on several grounds, but its general point was that breeding seemed to be more efficient in the sense of survival, and more precisely simultaneous, in the larger colonies than in
the small. There was the suggestion that the larger aggregations so raised the total of sexual excitement that advantageous simultaneity was achieved.
Likewise in the seals it might well be
argued that crowding-that is to say gregariousness-is correlated from species to species with enhanced sexual effort and excitement and simultaneity of pupping. Again, these features presumably have survival value. Likewise it may well be that with a good many colonial or semi-colonial mammals and birds, the co-presence of increased numbers of individuals produces a useful mutual stimulation.
If, now, longer term influences are sought they may be found in plenty. For example, it is well known that the lemmings, of both the great northern land masses, in their populations follow a short cycle of years of rise and fall, and that on occasion the peak years are accompanied by remarkable phenomena. These little timid noctumal and solitary creatures, living up in the hills and on the northern tundra, in times of great population increase become bold, travelling by day and gregarious. The whole behaviour of the individual changes. Charles Elton in his Voles, Mice and Lemmings* gives some remarkable examples of lemming migrations and the massing of other rodents and their changes of behaviour. He says " . . . when the numbers are great, the lemmings go out over the lowlands, crossing fields and lakes and rivers and passing through busy towns, until those that survive reach the coasts" and there they enter the sea and drown. The few survivors repopulate the original upland habitat.
Likewise locusts, upon which much experimental work has been done, have a solitary and a migratory phase, transition from the first to the second taking place at a moderately well defined level of population density. At the change the locusts lay down fat, and
* Oxford. 1942, at pp. 2I3-4.

EUGENICS IN THE AGE OF CROWDING

47-

develop the thoracic muscles, the activity emigration)-that population density itself

increases, and finally a mass migration produces in ourselves results which we would

occurs. Here there seems to be evidence of a seek to avoid if we were fully conscious of

definite density threshold.

them. Surely if there be truth in what I have

The larger mammals, too, can provide suggested, we have here the strongest

interesting examples. Instances have been possible reason for deliberately helping to

known, more particularly with the spring- prevent human populations rising too high

buck .of south-west Africa, where populations -quite apart from the relationship of popula-

have built up over a period, presumably of tion with resources. We get, too, a most

abnormally good rainfall for a few years. important new outlook upon the reality and

Then comes a mass outbreak, and these the desirability of optimal populations.

solitary timid creatures, banded together These matters I feel to be well within our

into an astonishing boldness, have been purview as eugenists.

known to march as a mass through a modern

city, and to have pursued their way even to Inevitability of Limitation

the ocean and a watery grave like the However we must return from the curiosi-

lemmings.* Comparable, but of differing type, are

ties of personal and mass behaviour to considerations of the broad canvas of world

certain phenomena observed when popula- population and its proliferation. We are not

tions of rats are allowed to build up with here concerned with any assessment or proph-

ample food but in a limited space. Apparently at a certain stage there suddenly

ecy about how many people the world might theoretically support contemporaneously;

appear previous non-existent " crimes " like rape, murder and cannibalism.

nor with the standards of diet and material resources which may or may not be available;

Are we ourselves to be presumed to be nor with the rate of technological progress

immune from these phenomena which influ- which may translate potentiality into fact;

ence other mammals when crowded together? nor with the betting as to whether optimal

I suggest that, truly, we neglect them at populations will ever be achieved. All that is

our peril.

needed here is simply to stress that quite

These phenomena-of which there seem inevitably there must be some level of human

to be plenty of incipient examples among population where increase will stop (if only in

ourselves-can by no means be described as the extreme and absurd sense that presum-

admirable by those who have any feeling for the dignity and worth of individuals. They

ably individuals will always need and want to be able to lie down as well as stand up close-

are mass phenomena, inimicable alike to packed side by side).

wisdom and conscience. Indeed, they are In fact, of course, all species of animals

surely to be avoided by deliberate effort. Yet, I suggest, at the present time these

are limited in their total long before this stage is reached-normally in fact by density-

factors and phenomena become progressively dependent factors of one kind or another.

more expectable, visible and horrible. There Likewise human population limitation is is a world-wide mounting of excitement; in quite inevitable within a smallish number of

the close-packed cities of the Orient a minor stimulus will provoke a riot; the urban crimes

generations. But it can take place in one or other of two possible ways, which we may

of rape and murder, with excessive sexual call and contrast as acceptable deliberation

excitement, are everywhere in evidence. That is my hypothesis -that actual

and distasteful chance. These two are long likely to be in operation together.

population density (beyond some level which Thus we may now point an interim

will itself I suspect be related in some degree conclusion. Human numbers continue to

to standards of living and opportunity for increase at an unprecedented rate; in terms

* Walter Heape, Emigration, Nomnadism. Cambridge, I931.

Migration

and

of an agreed goal for human endeavour, the advantages in great increases are indeed

48 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

hard to find; while the disadvantages are in the absence of significant aid of contra-

quite evident to those who are willing to cept-ives, the Indian immigrants are out-

observe. Ubiquitous population limitation breeding the indigenous people, and will soon

is inevitable in the long run, which in fact be quite dominant in those islands. This is

really means at most only a few generations happening without physical struggle, under

hence. The mode of that limitation may be a benevolent Government umbrella, and is

distasteful chance, the old-fashioned method, the result, both of the environmental

and/or acceptable deliberation. And if circumstances of to-day and of the inherent

acceptable deliberation is to be the mode, differences between the two groups.

matters of quality, eugenic matters, equally As pressure of numbers mounts, so we may

inevitably arise in highest degree. The expect the small good-doers-those able to

process is at work already.

remain most active on the more humble diets

Chance I have described as distasteful, -gradually to dominate. The island Japan-

which is perhaps an understatement for ese, gregarious, small, good-doers, may

pestilence and personal ill, under-nourish- already demonstrate the shape of things to

ment and struggle-and perhaps other come-the results of differential reproduction

factors which some still call the acts of God. under natural pressure-that is to say by

Personally we all seek to avoid such factors distasteful chance. They have already come

as the sole arbiters of human numbers.

to the fore numerically in relation to the

Yet if that be so, we are in fact agreeing rest of the Pacific Ocean peoples-by

that deliberation is and should be our uni- differential success in reproduction.

versal aim in the inevitable limitation of On the other hand, if we would but take

human numbers. Acceptable deliberation it, we have the opportunity to approach and

means conscious contraceptive effort, by face the inevitable limitation of human

methods and mechanisms which are not yet numbers by our " power of preventing many

perfect-though improvement is spectacular kinds of suffering " and replacing distasteful

in the perspective of fifty years, and the chance by " other processes that are more

optimists speak of " pills " just around the merciful and not less effective." " This "

corner.

to continue the quotation from Galton, " is

Of greatest significance, then, becomes the precisely the aim of eugenics."

precise distribution and result of the ulse of We have the clear opportunity to act

the tools which permit acceptable delibera- during the next few decades-two or three

tion-and that means the extent and degree generations at the most-which means

of differential reproduction and survival- essentially within the lifetimes of some

between individuals of varying inherent already born-to act in such a way that

attributes, and between what we call races, human numbers shall regularly be limited

peoples and nations, likewise of varying by means other than the " natural" ones

inherent attributes. These are hard difficult which we seek to avoid because they seem

facts for the quite near future-indeed they cruel and arbitrary. We may say that we

are already in operation to-day.

have already the contraceptive tools-even

if not yet of the best-and now how shall we

Differential Reproduction

use them-for we neglect them at our peril. An example is already provided by that

The continuation of the primeval system same Japan, overcrowded and fast breeding

which we are now terming distasteful as she is. Registered abortions now run at

chance-itself of course involves differential over a million a year and total abortions at

success in reproduction. That has always perhaps twice that figure. Abortion is an

beens so and we have it still all over the uncomfortable and backward mode of limita-

world to-day except in the most advanced tion, and the Japanese Government is

nations. Without making any subjective fostering its more sensible contraceptive

judgements, it is a fact that in Fiji to-day, alternative. What now happens is that

PROBLEMS IN THE AGE OF CROWDING

49

consciousness of the facts, and the improving availability of contraceptives, is making it already fashionable for leading and able
Japanese, so it is said, deliberately to refrain from having children-in patriotic zeal. The
dysgenic effects may quickly become immense. A possible outcome, a reaction, to this position I will return to in a
moment.
I want now simply to focus attention on this present dilemma in human affairs-to help the appreciation of the facts-in the
belief that acceptable deliberation in the inevitable limitation of human numbers, is
more probable with understanding than
without it. The only alternative is that horrible chance-through the agency of strife, hunger and pestilence-which all mankind seeks strenuously to avoid. These abundant abortions serve but to stress the
fact that deliberation is insistent as an
alternative to chance.
I will make brief reference to a few further points, though they refer to matters of -tremendous significance. If limitation is to be by deliberation, at once, as so often in human affairs, we enter the realms of that everlasting, unavoidable and indeed neces-
sary, struggle between freedom and control. How shall the deliberate and global control of numbers be brought about in a world filled with such varying peoples, races and nations, by diverse group loyalties, aspirations and sovereignties, by such differing desires, abilities and consciences?
We are on the threshold, too, of the supreme eugenic opportunity. If there is to be-and indeed there must be-the widest limitation of the total numbers of our species born each year, then surely soon there will be growing recognition that those who are to be born shall be of good genetic quality. Certainly we cannot-even if we were to be so stupid as to try-certainly we cannot exclude the eugenic implications and opportunities once deliberation becomes widely linked with population limitation. Remember all the time that deliberation is in itself a form of freedom-freedom from irrational chance. But-to over-simplifythe eugenic aspects of deliberation can tend

to be negative or positive in their incidence
as is clear to-day in that section of the world which already breeds largely by deliberation. In these realms of freedom and control, and
of negative and positive eugenic opportunities and possibilities, there is an immense
scope for an understanding of reality which
so far is extremely rare. The eugenic
potentialities, within the limits of a proper but educated personal freedom, are great.
Others might feel that personal freedom in these matters should be subjugated in some degree to an overriding national eugenic
policy. If sovereign rivalries continue unabated, the logic for such a subjugation
would be strong, however distasteful it may
to us at present seem.
A further range of genetic opportunities,
which mankind may or may not wish to. follow, has now been amply demonstrated by the Milk Marketing Board. We must consciously face the facts, the implications and the possibilities of what is now technically
possible, and what some, somewhere, might deem it nationally expedient to do. We must remember that our own consciences, in our own island setting, may indicate
prohibitions which seem curiously restrictive to those reared in another clime.
If a totalitarian state, with conscious purpose and central control, were to embark upon a thorough-going policy of genetic change for its population, making full use of artificial insemination, there is surely little doubt that it could soon outstrip nval nations in, for example, the competence of its technical manpower-with all that that
implies in national rivalries. We rapidly approach dilemma indeed-dilemma locally in this United Kingdom where many wish to condemn A.I. completely, even in its parochial connection with sub-fertility-dilemma on the world scale where the use of A.I. (even apart from totalitarian direction) might possibly become the patriotic, acceptable and fashionable mode of production for one's nation of a greater proportion of the more able at a time when deliberate limita--
tion of the total is unavoidable.
To those imbued with Christian doctrine this may seem a far-fetched and most-

50 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

distasteful possibility: to others it might integrating many factors, I hope I have

seem a splendid patriotic duty.

shown to be real. The local optimal popula-

One may ponder the question whether tion has almost certainly been exceeded

settled international life, if ever it is to come,' already in an extensive proportion of the

will require not only agreement to refrain world.

from the manufacture of nuclear weapons I then put forward an hypothesis about

but, also, from centralised positive eugenics crowding effects, suggesting that there is

by means of A.J.? Apart from such obvious direct application to our own species as to

potential national rivalries in eugenic others. These crowding effects, in enhanced

advance, we have here the conflict as it were personal excitement, do not aid the dignity

between the code of the eugenic amateur of man, and they may well be very danger-

and his professional counterpart.

ous. They cannot be regarded as encouraging

Conclusion

in relation to our human objective. The inevitability of population limitation

I conclude with this brief summary.

was then stressed-either by the continued

In order to keep perspective in a difficult action of factors making up distasteful

world we require an acceptable and worthy chance which we seek to avoid-or by

objective. I have tried to define such an acceptable deliberation. Whichever, or both,

,objective in terms which may be acceptable of these two modes may operate in limiting

to those of differing loyalties, outlooks and human numbers, it is differential reproduction

religions. Only so may we have a fixed point which is the prime concern-both quantita-

relative to which we may properly attempt tively and qualitatively one might almost

to judge the world to-day and to-morrow, say politically and eugenically. These things

and the wisdom or otherwise of our present must be treated in great degree as inevitable,

activities.

and they present their own dilemmas. And

A quite fundamental aspect of to-day is the perfection of the techniques of artificial

our tremendous human breeding prolifera- insemination do but further sharpen those

tion-a crowding which is doubling world dilemmas, personally, nationally and inter-

population in as little as fifty years. Such nationally.

crowding seems to have no admirable or P.S. Approximately ten weeks have

positive advantages, and many demon- elapsed between the delivery of this address

strable disadvantages in terms ofourobj ective. and its publication. During that time world

'The concept of an optimal population, population has increased by 8 million people.

