SIR BERNARD MALLET

Two Appreciations of His Work and Character

T O-DAY the Eugenics Society is mourning the loss of its President,
Sir Bernard Mallet, K.C.B., who died on October 28th, at the age of seventy-
three, in his own home. Many members will miss him personally, whilst the Coun-
cil and the office staff will do so especially keenly.
He became a member of Council in I9I8 and succeeded Major Darwin as President in I928. He was not simply a figurehead,
just a name upon the letterpaper, but a working part of the organization. He rarely missed a meeting and was constantly at the office, ever ready to help and give advice wherever it was sought.
So keen was Sir Bernard's interest that even when laid up by illness in his bed he received officers of the Society and continued the work. During his life he held

many important public offices and thereby gained a wide knowledge of the world; and it is therefore peculiarly significant that he should have devoted so many years and
such energy to eugenics and population problems. He had great faith in the future
of the race, but only if truth with regard to it comes to be faced. He was no ostrich; he believed in analytical investigation, and in then placing the results before the general public, in the hope that a course of chosen progress along right lines would be followed. Hence he gave freely of his energy and of the time which many thought he had already earned for peaceful enjoyment on his retirement.
He finished his life and died in voluntary harness-an example to others.
G. M. CHAMBERS.

W HEN endeavouring to place on record the severity of the loss
which our Society has sustained by
the death of Sir Bernard Mallet, I feel that I cannot but begin by alluding to what I myself have lost, and that is an exceptionally warmhearted and sympathetic friend with a quite
unforgettable charm of manner. His thoughts were hardly ever concentrated on himself, and the same qualities which gave rise to
such widespread affection were certainly also of great value to the Society.
The concluding words of Sir Francis Galton's autobiography, these being probably his last utterances concerning eugenics, run as follows: " Natural selection rests upon
excessive production and wholesale destruction; eugenics on bringing no more individuals into the world than can be properly
cared for, and those only of the best stock."
What was intended to be conveyed by these words was, I have no doubt, that eugenic
reforms must be based on science, and that

until such reforms have been widely adopted, mankind will continue to suffer an
enormous amount of unnecessary misery. That Sir Bernard was a keen advocate of
scientific progress is proved by the prominent part which he played in initiating the International Union for the Scientific
Investigation of Population Problems, whilst his biological knowledge was quite sufficient for his purposes. As to the reforms needed, he no doubt realized that the main difficulties to be faced in the future will be to induce men and women to adopt unpopular views and to make the personal sacrifices needed to rid the world as far as possible of the suffering due to the presence of the unfit in our ranks. It is, therefore, to the point here to note that Sir Bernard worked for many years both in connection with the Charity Organisation Society, with a London Hospital, and as a member of a Borough Council, all these being schools where the never-ending

271

272 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

misery due to faulty inboriU qualities is time. He found Mr. Twitchin in his
being constantly demonstrated. As to his " beautifully situated villa, high up over charitable work, it has been authoritatively Nice and overlooking twenty miles of

stated that " probably no man living combined in himself so much first-hand know-
ledge and experience of " day to day case work, finance, and administration.
Turning to the means of attaining the results at which we aim, folly and prejudice will always remain our worst enemies, and in fighting them character tells more than detailed knowledge. All advocates of social

sea line, besides magnificent mountain views"; this villa now being a white elephant in the possession of the Socioty.
Sir Bernard told me that his host was "shrewd, alert, pleasant and hospitable," and that he gave him information about
" the intensive campaign now being started about sterilization " by our Society, many other subjects bearing on eugenics also

reform are sure to encounter great difficul- being discussed for over two hours. I ties, and of these Sir Bernard met his full received no account from Mr. Twitchin of share. In all practical matters he was no the pleasure given to him by this visit, but doubt greatly assisted by the knowledge he I am sure that this was solely due to the gained at the Foreign Office, the Treasury, fact that his sudden and fatal illness as Registrar-General, and in connection with occurred shortly afterwards.

the Political Economy Club, of which he When re-reading the numerous letters was a leading spirit. And when it is received from Sir Bernard, from which the remembered that he had served as Presi- above extracts have been made, I have

dent of the Royal Statistical Society and been forcibly struck by the evidence which had written several important books, they afford of the great interest taken by including two volumes on the British him in every activity of the Society and Budgets, it will be realized that very few in all projects for further advances, all of

men have had at their command such wide which can be studied in the numbers of

and varied experiences.

our REVIFW issued during the four years

Some of the peculiar difficulties which he of his presidency. I am also thus

had to face arose from the receipt of a reminded that before he accepted the presi-

large bequest by the Society soon after he dency he wrote to say that the more he

became its President. The first accounts appearing in the papers considerably exaggerated the amount to be received, and even the original estimates based on facts proved to be faulty because the legacy was largely invested in Australia, then in the throes of a great financial crisis. Thanks largely to the wise guidance of Sir Bernard in this matter, all went as well as could possibly be expected, and I mention it partly to enable me to give in detail one instance of the trouble taken by our President when he thought that the Society's

thought of it the less he liked it, implying that the post could be better filled by someone else. After his election he reminded
me that he had only consented to serve " under much kind pressure," and later on he declared that he should be " quite glad
to slip out " of it at the next annual meeting if that could be done without causing inconvenience. It is certain that he only
undertook this onerous task out of a strong
sense of duty, and that the beneficial influence which he exercised on those who

interests might be involved.

worked with him in many fields was

Our benefactor, Mr. Twitchin, who had largely due to his self-forgetfulness. Those

been giving the Society £i,ooo a year for of us who have had the good luck to be

some time before his death in I930, was his colleagues will ever retain pleasant

living in the south of France in the spring memories of his kindly aid and courteous

of that year, and when Sir Bernard was in consideration whenever difficulties had to

that neighbourhood he took the initiative be faced.

in getting into touch with him for the first

LEONARD DARWIN.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIV, No. 4.

