Contents

Notes of the Quarter

page

CONTENTS OF THE EUGENICS REVIEW-JAPANESE

FERTILITY-INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION OF UNI-

VERSITY WOMEN, CONFERENCE, 1965-THE STATE

OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE, 1965-QUALITIES OF

FREEDOM-THROMBOSIS AND THE PILL-PRIMATE

FOSSILS IN THE FAYUM-SUCCESSFUL STRATEGY

1

The World Population Conference, Belgrade, 1965 Peter R. Cox, John Peel and Clifford J. Thomas
Population Control in Japan: Lessons for India T. J. Samuel Notes and Memoranda Reviews of Books Other Notices. Periodicals Differential Marriage: Some Facts Prom the Press Cuttings Correspondence

7 15 23 28 39 41 49 51 53

THE EUGENICS SOCIETY is not responsible for statements made or opinions expressed by authors of articles, reviews and letters.
PUBLISHED Quarterly, Oliver and Boyd Ltd., Tweeddale Court, High Street, Edinburgh.
PRICE: 17s. 6d. (U.S.A. $3.00) per copy and 60s. (U.S.A. $10.00) per annum, post free. Issued free to Fellows and Members of The Eugenics Society.

Galtonia candicans, which is reproduced on the front page of the cover,
is a flowering plant named in honour of Sir Francis Galton in 1880 by Professor J. Decaisne of the Paris Museum of Natural History

THE
EUGENICS REVX EW

THE
EUGENICS
REVIEW
Volume LVIII
(Volume XXXIX, New Series)
I966
Published Quarterly for the Eugenics Society by OLIVER AND BOYD LTD., 14 High Street, Edinburgh i

PERIODICALS

THE AMERICAN JOURNAL OF HUMAN GENETICS May 1965, Vol. 17, No. 3.
Identification of the Mongolism Chromosome by DNA Replication Analysis by JORGE J. YUNIS,
ERNEST B. HOOK and MARY MAYER.
Labelled thymidine incorporated into DNA during the replication period was studied in leucocytes from patients with "regular" Down's syndrome and from carriers of the G/D and G/G types of translocation. Three late-replicating G chromosomes (designated G1, and probably No. 22 by the Denver classification) were found in "regular" Down's syndrome, and a late replicating G chromosome was translocated in the G/D carriers. In G/G carriers only one arm of the translocation chromosome was labelled over the whole length suggesting G1/G2
rather than G1/Gj. Chromosomes of the D group
were similarly identified.
The Frequency of ABO-Incompatible Combinations in Relation to Maternal Rhesus Antibody Values in Rh mmnd Women by G. H. VOS. When the maternal Rh antibody is not very strong, father-mother and mother-child ABO combinations show the normal random distribution, whereas there
were fewer ABO incompatible matings in the group of mothers with high antibody titre.

Recessive Genes in Severe Mental Defect by w. J.
DEWEY, 1. BARRAI, N. E. MORTON and M. P. MI.
Segregation and consanguinity analyses yield information about possible recessive factors in heterogeneous conditions such as those grouped under "mental defect". Study of two samples of severely retarded patients with normal parents (excluding mongols and a clearly exogenous group) led the authors to define two types: "high risk" anp "sporadic". Genetic load theory predicts the high segregation frequency and high inbreeding coefficient in high-risk families: the load is probably maintained by mutation at the rate of about 1*7X 10-5 per locus per generation.
Genetic Variation and Evolution of the Carboxylic Esterases and Carbonic Anhydrases of Primate Erythrocytes by RICHARD E. TASHIAN.
Primate species within any one of the four main higher categories share certain features of their zymogram patterns. But there still remain enough differences between species within each group to "shed light on some phylogenetic problems". For instance, a distinct pattern was found for gibbon, supporting the separation of gibbon from the great apes already suggested on karyology and serology. Further, there is a similarity in the esterase patterns for man and the great apes (excluding gibbon) commensurate with the resemblance in their serum proteins.

Distition of Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase Electrophoretic Variants in Different Tissues of Heterozygotes by DAVID LINDER and STANLEY M.
GARTLER.
Tissues, including epithelium, blood cells and three different tumours from thirty-four Negro females were analysed for G6PD electrophoretic band patterns, in an attempt to identify cell clones arising from X chromosome inactivation. The somewhat contradictory results could be explained by early inactivation followed by cell mixing or by later inactivation followed by differences in growth rate of the two cell types.

The Gm and Inv Groups of Indians from Santa Catarina, Brazil, by F. M. SALZANO and ARTHUR
G. STEINBERG.
Haptoglobin and Transferrin Types of Indians from Santa Catarina, Brail by F. M. SALZANO and H.
ELDON SUTTON.
As well as reporting the frequencies of these plasma protein types, the authors review all work published to date relating to American Indian and Eskimo populations and discuss the usefulness of the systems in studying gene flow.

Estimation of Prevalence under Incomplete Selection
by I. BARRAI, M. P. MI, N. E. MORTON and N. YASUDA.
Formulae are derived for estimating the prevalence of a rare recessive condition. Restricting the sample to multiplex families, i.e. families with two or more affected, prevalence may be estimated on the basis of a negative binomial distribution of family size.

July 1965, Vol. 17, No. 4.
Blood Group and Serum Protein Differences in Some Central Austalian Aborigines by E. M. NICHOLLS,
H. B. M. LEWIS, D. W. COOPER and J. H. BENNETT.
Phenotypes not previously encountered in the Australian aborigines were discovered during this survey, for instance Kell+, B+, and Gm(b+).

41

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Differences in tribal affiliation were found to be closely associated with gene frequency differences both between and within various localities.
The Rh Antigens of Anthropoid Apes in Relation to Rh "Deletion" Phenotypes by B. BOETTCHER, G. H. vos and JUDITH HAY. Probably gibbon red blood cells have antigens of the RhD and C series which are qualitatively different from those of humans. Thus the concept for the genetical control of the Rh system of a basic precourser substance which is modified by successive action of the D gene, C gene, etc., is not contradicted by certain findings in the anthropoid apes, as had been thought.
Comparison of Gm(f) with Gm(b2) (Gm(bw)) and a Discussion of their Genetics by ARTHUR G. STEIN-
BERG.
In the light of further study, the author concludes that Gm(f) represents a rediscovery of Gm(b2). He believes the Gm system can be explained on the basis of alternative alleles at a single locus.
Linkage Between the X Chromosome Loci for Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase Electrophoretic Variation and Hemophilia A by SAMUEL H. BOYER
and JOHN B. GRAHAM.
Absence of recombination between these two loci in seventeen instances where this was possible indicates close linkage. This may mean that the order of loci on the X chromosome is Xg ... deutan ... Gd ... AHF, rather than Xg ... Gd ... deutan ... AHF, assuming that the loci controlling G6PD variation and G6PD deficiency are closely linked, if not identical.
The Genetics of Angiokeratoma Corporis Diffusum (Fabry's Disease) and Its Linkage Relations with the Xg Locus by JOHN M. OPITZ, FRANK C. STILES,
DAVID WISE, R. R. RACE, RUTH SANGER et al.
The evidence for X-linked inheritance of this condition is summarized. Linkage studies indicate that the loci for Xg and Fabry's disease may be within measurable distance of each other, certainly it would be worth while testing more families.

Heterozygous ABH Secretor and Susceptibility to Rheumatic Fever by c. s. CHUNG, E. L. PITT and
T. D. DUBLIN.
A group of families in each of which at least one parent was rheumatic was analysed for secretor status. It had been suggested that people carrying the nonsecretor gene (se), either in single or double dose, were more susceptible to rheumatic fever than homozygous Se/Se persons, but there was no support for this theory from the present study.
Studies of Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase Activity ofIndividual Erythrocytes: The MethemoglobinElution Test for IdentificationofFemales Heterozygous for G6PD Deficiency by JOHN C. GALL, GEORGE J.
BREWER and RAYMOND J. DERN.
The new test here described is "cumbersome and time-consuming" but offers a much more sensitive and reliable method of detecting females heterozygous for G6PD deficiency than previous tests. Even in pedigree-proven heterozygous Negro females specially selected for their normal red cell enzyme activity, it was possible to detect a subpopulation of unstained cells by this method. Most "normals" showed less than 2 per cent unstained cells. The findings are compatible with functional mosaicism for X-borne genes on the Lyon hypothesis.
September 1965, Vol. 17, No. 5 A Case of Primary Amenorrhea with a Translocation Involving Chromosomes of Groups B and C by
JOSEPH D. MANN, AINA VALDMANIS, SAMUEL C.
CAPPS and ROBERT H. PUITE.
Clinical features are described in an eighteen-year-old schoolgirl presenting with primary amenorrhoea. The karyotype in this case shows translocation between chromosome number 5 and (probably) one of the X chromosomes. Here the abnormal X may be the active one in all cells, in contrast to selective inactivation of the abnormal X in cases of isochromosome of the long arm, or ring X.
The Duffy Blood Group System in Caucasians: Evidence for a New Allele by BRUCE CHOWN,
MARION LEWIS and HIROKO KAITA.
A new allele, Fyx, in the Duffy system is reported.

Segregation of the Ellis-van Creveld Syndrome as Analyzed by the First Appearance Method by c. c.
LI.
A new method is described of estimating the probability of a child being affected in sibships with this condition reported by McKusick. It is shown to be about 87 per cent as efficient as the maximum likelihood method.
42

The Effects of Inbreeding on Tooth Size in Japanese Children by JERRY D. NISWANDER and CHIN S.
CHUNG.
With increasing inbreeding, the variance of tooth diameter increases but the mean diameter remains unchanged. Environmental causes other than those associated with socio-economic level are probably involved.

PERIODI CALS

Sources of Quantitative Variation of the Human A Antigen of Erythrocytes by F. J. GRUND BACHER. People of subtype A1 showed a much stronger A antigen than those of A2; the A antigen was weaker in A1B and A2B individuals than in those of A1 and A2 types; a lower mean antigen strength was found in females than in males. Study of the A1 antigen among relatives showed that about 50 per cent of the variation in its strength is attributable to genetic variation.
Familial Short Arm Deficiency of Chromosome 18 Concomitant with Arhinencephaly and Alopecia Congenita by IRENE A. UCHIDA, K. N. MCRAE, H. C. WANG andM. RAY. A mother and her two children all showed deletion of the short arm of chromosome 18. All three subjects were mentally retarded and the mother as an infant showed similar development and appearance to one of her children; in addition she had life-long alopecia. The other child was grossly abnormal, with arhinencephaly, etc.
Heredity and Line A of Palmar Dermatoglyphics by
EDWARD V. GLANVILLE.
The number of dermal ridges between triradius d and the A line gives a quantitative estimate of the direction of this line. Degree of correlation between relatives can then be estimated: as expected it is high for monozygotic twins and about 0 5 for both parent-child and sib-sib comparisons.
Red Cell Acid Phosphatase: Racial Distribution and Report of a New Phenotype by ELOISE R. GIBLETT and NANCY M. SCOTT. The gene responsible for this new phenotype is designated Pr, the order of associated enzyme activity being Pc>Pb>pa>Pr. There is some evidence from study of families with children showing Down's syndrome that the acid phosphatase locus is unlikely to be on chromosome 21.
Torus Mandibularis: A Genetic Study by c. c. JOHNSON, R. J. GORLIN and V. E. ANDERSON. About .7 per cent of the population were found to have these benign exostoses of the lower jaw. There was an appreciably higher incidence in first-degree relatives of index patients, with more women affected than men. When both parents showed the condition about half the children were affected. The authors favour a dominant gene with 100 per cent penetrance in females and 70 per cent penetrance in males.

Quantitative Studies on A2, Sickle Cell, and Fetal Hemoglobins in Negroes with Mongolism, with Observations of Translocation Mongolism in Negroes by E. DAVID WEINSTEIN, DONALD L. RUCKNAGEL and MARGERY W. SHAW.
This report deals with a further attempt to identify loci on chromosome 21 by looking for increased gene-dosage effects in those with Down's syndrome (trisomy 21). Negro patients were selected so that abnormal haemoglobins with the sickle cell trait could be assayed. The only significant finding was that of a raised foetal haemoglobin level in seven mongoloids, thought to be a nonspecific effect. Thus there was no evidence from this study that the p, y or a haemoglobin loci are located on chromosome 21. HELEN BLYTH
ANNALS OF HUMAN GENETICS August 1965, Vol. 29, Part 1.
Two Diffusion Distributions in Genetics by w. J.
EWENS.
A confusion between two types of distribution in the literature of mathematical genetics is defined and discussed.
Genetical Studies on a Variant of Human Lactate Dehydrogenase (subunit A) by R. G. DAVID9ON, R. A. FILDES, A. MARY GLEN-BOTT, H. HARRIS and
ELIZABETH B. ROBSON.
A rare lactate dehydrogenase variant is described. Electrophoretic and family studies are consistent with the hypothesis that individuals with this phenotype are heterozygous for an autosomal gene which is concerned with the synthesis of the "A" subunit.
An Analysis of ABO, MN, Rb, Hp, Tf and G-6-PD Types in a Sample from the Human Population of the Lecce Province by G. MODIANO, A. S. BENERECETTI-SANTACHIARA, F. GONANO and G. ZET, A. CAPALDO and L. L. CAVALLI-SFORZA.
Data on the above systems in the tip of the heel of Italy are presented and discussed.
Sex-linked Ichthyosis by c. B. KERR and R. S. WELLS. It is claimed that sex-linked ichthyosis can be distinguished clinically from other types of ichthyosis although the evidence is not presented here. Heterozygous females are unaffected, and there is evidence of linkage with the Xg blood group. The frequency of the condition is about 1 in 6,000 males.
The Inheritance of Liability to Certain Diseases, estimated from the Incidence among Relatives by
D. S. FALCONER.
A method is developed for deriving the correlations between relatives of individuals with some disease

43

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

with multifactorial inheritance from the increased incidence among the relatives. The method is based on the assumption of an underlying, normally distributed "liability" to the disease, and can be used for estimating heritability. Four examples from published data are analyzed by this method.

The Meaning of the Associations between Blood Groups and Disease by J. H. EDWARD.
A threshold model for the interpretation of the association between blood groups and disease is proposed and discussed.

A Note on Fisher's Theory of the Evolution of Dominance by w. J. EWENS.
The mathematical basis of Fisher's theory of the evolution of dominance is criticized and it is concluded that dominance is unlikely to evolve in the way suggested by Fisher.

Partial Deletion of an X chromosome by L. ATKINS,
BERTA SANTESSON and H. VOSS.
A case is described of a girl with short stature and ovarian agenesis caused by deletion of the short arm of an X chromosome. Autoradiographic studies showed that this chromosome replicated late in mitosis.

A Criterion for testing Contagion in Time and Space

by D. E. BARTON, F. N. DAVID and MAXINE

MERRINGTON.

A criterion for testing the association in space and

time is applied to data on three diseases. The results

show strong association in measles and poliomyelitis

but not in acute lukaemia.

M. G. BULMER

etiology very questionable "as long as the concepts and diagnosis of schizophrenia remain inconsistent and heterogeneous".
Differential Fertility in Rural Hindu Community by
G. B. SAXENA.
The author states that the object of the paper is to assess, "on the basis of the primary data collected from certain selected districts of Uttar Pradesh (India), the extent to which the social and occupational factors affect fertility". Owing to the caste system a person's position is entirely determined by birth-any change to another level being impossible. Thus the study of fertility by castes is "not only interesting but also revealing". An inverse relation was noted between caste and fertility.
Congenital Malformations and Season of Birth: A Brief Review by JOHN C. BAILAR andJOAN GURIAN. According to the joint authors, seasonal cycles in births of infants with certain congenital malformations have been demonstrated "beyond any reasonable doubt" but many questions regarding which malformations are involved, how great are the variations, what are the direct causes, etc., remain unanswered. The present paper provides three extensive tables, one on congenital malformations of the central nervous system, one on the cardiovascular system and one on the musculoskeletal system.
The Changing Pattern of Population Concentration in Indian Cities by s. MITRA. This paper is a recondite exposition of "Zipf's formula" and "Pareto's equation" and is unintelligible to the non-specialist.

EUGENICS QUARTERLY September 1965, Vol. 12, No. 3.
Fertility and Family Planning Among Non-white Married Couples in the United States by ARTHUR
A. CAMPBELL.
Figures revealed that the family planning practices of the non-white population differed widely from those of the white population but until recently no information was available on the control of fertility among the non-whites. The author of this paper has amassed sufficient data to enable several valid deductions to be made.
On the Genetics of Schizophrenia by ARNOLD R.
KAPLAN.
The lack of any very precise definitions on this subject and the divergence of "selected diagnostic data" renders the value of any simple theory on its
44

Jews, Genetics and Disease by R. H. POST. An appreciation of a paper of this title which appeared in the Hebrew Medical Journal for 1962 by Louis B. Brinn and which discusses twelve hereditary diseases which appear to be more frequent among Ashkenazi Jewish populations of Western Europe and the United States than in neighbouring populations.
Book Reviews: Animal Genetics. Frederick B. Hutt. The Ronald Press Co. New York, 1964. 546 pp. Described as presenting more knowledge about heredity in relation to domestic animals than can be found in any previous books. The Concept of Race. Ashley Montagu (editor). Free Press of Glencoe. New York, 1964. 270 pp. The reviewer suggests that a better title for this book would be "A Treatise on Scientific Coon Hunting"

PERIODICALS

since the various papers appear to have been written that small differences in relative degrees of con-

with a view to discrediting an elsewhere well-praised traction of similar-sized chromosomes may cause

work by Carleton Coon entitled The Origin of large differences in their position within the group,

Races.

as determined by length and/or arm ratio.

Pregnancy, Conception and Heredity. Eric Weiser.

(Translated from the German by Therese Pol.)

Blaisdell Publishing Co. New York, 1965. Both the

original text and the translation receive the severest

criticism from the reviewer-who concludes with

the remark that "this book is not recommended

reading for anyone".

c. w. USHER

JOURNAL OF MEDICAL GENETICS June 1965, Vol. 2, No. 2. Congenital Hereditary Lymphoedema by JOHN R.
EASTERLY.
A family with congenital hereditary lymphoedema is described. Simple autosomal dominant transmission with complete penetrance but variable expressivity is proposed. The previously reported pedigrees are reviewed and analysed genetically. No linkage could be demonstrated between the lymphoedema and blood group antigens, haptoglobins, PTC-tasting and rate of INH inactivation.
Foam-cell Reticulosis of Mice: An Inherited Condition Resembling Gaucher's and Niemann-Pick Diseases by
MARY F. LYON, E. V. HULSE and C. E. ROWE.
The occurrence is reported in a strain of CBA mice of an inherited lipid-storage disease. Lipid containing foam-cells replace the lymphoid tissue of the thymus and Payer's patches. Chemical and histochemical investigation suggest that the lipid may be a complex of lysolecithin and cholesterol. The disease appears to be inherited as an autosomal recessive. The name and symbol, foam-cell reticulosis, fm, is suggested. It is concluded that the disease is very similar to Niemann-Pick disease in man.
The Relative Length and Arm Ratio of the Human Late-replicating X chromosome by AUDREY BISHOP,
MARGARET LEESE and C. E. BLANK.
The human late-replicating X chromosome, identified by autoradiographic methods, was studied in metaphases from blood cultures from eight normal females. The position of this X chromosome as defined by length and arm ratio was found to range over 90 per cent of the X-6-12 group. The lack of correlation between the position of the late replicating chromosome in the group and its absolute length indicates that there was no demonstrable allocycly at the stage of mitosis studied. Comparison of the late-replicating X chromosome and one of the number 3 chromosomes showed that there was no significant difference in the variation in length of these two sets of chromosomes. It was emphasized

Leucocyte Alkaline Phosphatase in Klinefelter's Syndrome by WENDELL W. WEBBER, URSULA MITTWOCH and JOY D. A. DELHANTY. A cytochemical investigation of leucocyte alkaline phosphatase activity in twelve Klinefelter's, and twelve each of male and female mentally retarded control patients is reported. The number of nuclear lobes was counted in the same cells. The mean LAP values was significantly raised in the Klinefelter's as compared with the male controls, but not as compared with that of the female controls. The mean lobe counts of Klinefelter's were lower than those of controls (significant for male, but not for female controls.) It is suggested that in cells with an increasing lobe count LAP activity may fall after in initial rise.
A Genetic Study of Stub Thumbs among various Ethnic Groups in Israel by RICHARD M. GOODMAN, AVINOMA ADAM and CHAIM SHEBA. A genetic study of stub thumbs, carried out among various ethnic groups in Israel, showed no significant difference in the prevalence of the trait in various Jewish communities. Approximately 1 6 per cent of Jews and 3 per cent of Arabs were affected, half of them bilaterally. The sexes were affected equally. Autosomal dominant transmission was confirmed and penetrance was approximately 40 per cent. Unilaterally and bilaterally affected individuals were observed in the same family, but when more than one member of a family was affected unilaterally it always occurred on the same hand. The affected thumb showed a significant increase in the number of whorls.
Smallpox Vaccination: ABO and Rhesus Blood Groups by GEOFFREY J. BOURKE, NOEL CLARKE and EDWARD H. THORNTON. The ABO and Rhesus blood groups were determined in a group of 781 students vaccinated against smallpox. No evidence that an individual blood group is associated with success, or lack of success, in smallpox vaccination was found. In general there was no association between a particular blood group and severity of reaction or in size of lesion or scarring. Some exceptions regarding severity of reaction have been demonstrated and commented on.
Confirmation of Association between ABO Blood Groups and Salivary ABH Secretor Phenotypes and Electrophoretic Patterns of Serum Alkaline Phosphatase by DAVID A. PRICE EVANS. A random sample of British blood transfusion volunteers was studied in respect of ABO blood

45

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

groupings, electrophoretically distinguished serum alkaline phosphatase bands and salivary ABH secretor substances. The results show the association of the serum alkaline phosphatase bands and the ABO blood group and salivary ABH secretor polymorphisms. And confirm that the British population studied give the same results as that of the Swedish and Brazilian populations studied previously.
Resistance ofA/Jax Mouse Embryos with Spontaneous Congenital Cleft Lip to the Lethal Effect of 6-Aminonicotinamide by MARC GOLDSTEIN, F. CLARKE
FRASER and KATHERINE ROTH.
About 15 per cent of the embryos of the inbred A/Jax mouse strain are born with a congenital cleft lip. When pregnant A/Jax mice are treated on day
1% of gestation with a dose of 6-amino-nicotinamide
that kills a high proportion of embryos, most survivors have a congenital cleft of the lip. Evidence is presented to show that these are the embryos with spontaneously occurring cleft lip. The findings are discussed.
Chromosome Mosaicism in an Indian Child with Down's Syndrome by AMALA CHAUDHURI and
K. C. CHAUDHURI.
Chromosome studies on an Indian boy with Down's syndrome disclosed mosaicism. One cell line had the chromosome complement of a normal male, the other had a chromosome complement of 47 and disclosed regular trisomy for a chromosome in the group 21/22. The correlation between proportions of the cell lines and phenotypes is discussed.
A Probable Case of Incomplete Trisomy of a Chromosome of the 13-15 Group by J. ISHMAEL and K. M.
LAURENCE.
A patient is described having some of the clinical manifestations of trisomy 13-15. Chromosome studies disclosed a chromosome complement of 47 with trisomy for a morphologically abnormal chromosome. The abnormal chromosome is satellited and is approximately the same size as a 21/22. Taking into account the clinical manifestations the authors conclude that the abnormal chromosome has most probably arisen from a gross deletion of a 13-15.

September 1965, Vol. 2, No. 3.
Duchenne's Muscular Dystrophy and the Xg Blood Groups: a Search for Linkage by HELEN BLYTH,
C. 0. CARTER, V. DUBOWITZ, A. E. H. EMERY, JUNE GAVIN, H. A. JOHNSTON, V. A. MCKUSICK, R. R. RACE, RUTH SANGER andPATRICIA TIPPETT.
Members of fifty kindred in which X-linked Duchenne's muscular dystrophy occurs were tested for the Xg blood groups. Twelve provided useful linkage information. Two showed the mild and ten the severe form of the dystrophy. Analysis by the lod score method gave no indication of measurable linkage between the gene for Xg and the severe form ofthe dystrophy. This supports the results ofprevious workers. Insufficient families precluded any conclusion regarding linkage between Xg and the mild form of the disease.
Incidence and Family Aggregation of Major Congenital Malformations of Central Nervous System by
ELSPETH M. WILLIAMSON.
The incidence within Southampton borough, 195862, of anencephalus was found to be 2-0 per cent, spina bifida 3-2 per cent and hydrocephalus 0 9 per cent. A study of 101 index patients and their families showed that: the occurrence of spina bifida and anencephalus was associated with a normal mean maternal age, was increased with primiparity, was low in social classes I and II, and showed a female preponderance. Recurrence in the same family was generally that of the same abnormality, but anencephaly did occur in the fraternity of a spina bifida index patient. A risk of 1 in 18 to sibs was found. Maternal relatives were affected at a higher rate than expected. In the known monozygous pair of three available sets of twins, only one of the pair was affected.
Familial Occurrence of Myxoedema by PETER F.
HALL.
In thirty-eight patients with proven myxoedema, five had relatives with the disease. These five families contained fourteen patients suffering from myxoedema, in addition to the propositi. It is concluded that the findings are compatible with sex-influenced recessive inheritance of myxoedema in these families. The possible genetic association of myxoedema with hyperthyroidism and non-toxic goitre is discussed. Also the role of environmental factors.

Karyotype-Phenotype Correlations in Gonadal Dysgenesis and their Bearing on the Pathogenesis of Malformations by MALCOLM A. FERGUSON-SMITH. A comprehensive review article on the correlation between karyotype and phenotype in gonadal dysgenesis. 46

Copper Content of Hair in Normal Families and those with Wilson's Disease by KATHLEEN GIBBS and
J. M. WALSHE.
A study of the copper concentration in the hair of forty normal subjects, twenty-four patients with Wilson's Disease and forty-one of their close relatives is reported. No significant variation in copper

PERIODICALS

content was found between the three groups nor did chelation therapy alter this in the hair of the patients. The mean copper content of hair for the males and females is given. Also notes of its relationship to hair colour.
Blood Groups and Urinary Micro-organisms by R.
CRUZ-COKE, L. PARADES and ANA MONTENEGRO.
A sample of 727 patients admitted to hospital was "marked" with three autosomal loci, ABO, MN and Tt. Urines were cultured to assess the association of these genes with bacteria in vivo. Significant associations were found between individuals with blood group B and Esch. coUl. Also between nontasters to phenylthiocarbamide, and Strep. faecalis.
Association of Leukaemia and Blood Groups by
ROBERT SHIRLEY and R. G. DESAI.
In relation to the incidence of A and 0 blood groups, 4,360 cases of leukaemia have been studied, and the data analysed statistically. No statistical relationship was found between acute and chronic leukaemia, individually, and blood type. However, blood group A seemed to preponderate significantly when the leukaemia cases were considered as a whole.

Ovarian Dysgenesis and Presumed Isochromosome of the Long Arm of X by MICHAEL J. REE.
Two phenotypic females with gonadal dysgenesis and presumed isochromosome for the long arm of X are reported. The clinical features agree with those described by previous authors. The association between abnormalities of the X chromosome and antibody production is discussed.

Changes in the Chromosome and Haemoglobin Patterns in a Patient with Erythro-leukaemia by D. J.
WEATHERALL and s. WALKER.

The haematological, haemoglobin and chromosome

pattern have been studied in a patient with a con-

stitutional hypoplastic anaemia during transition to

an acute erythroleukaemia. In the preleukaemia

phase chromosome studies showed frequent breaks

and increased secondary construction zones. No

foetal haemoglobin was present. After leukaemic

transition a line of cells containing foetal haemo-

globin appeared and a line of cells trisomic for a

large chromosome, probably a No. 6, was noted.

The possible interrelationships of these observations

are discussed.

DAVID MANTLE

Patterns of Initiation of DNA Replication in Cultured Cells from Human Females by BARID B. MUKHERJEE
and A. K. SINHA.
A study of the pattern of initiation of DNA replication in cultuired leucocytes from five normal females, using tritium-labelled thymidine, is reported. The onset of DNA synthesis was not simultaneous in all chromosomes. Labelling early in the S period showed that: both homologues of chromosome No. 1, one each of chromosomes 2 and 3, two chromosomes ofgroup 4-5, five to nine chromosomes in the group 6-12+X, two chromosomes in the group 13-15, three to four chromosomes in the group 16-18, only one in the group 19-20 and none in the group 21-22 were labelled. One chromosome each in the groups 6-12+X, 13-15, 16-18 and 21-22 appeared to be the last chromosomes in the whole complement to begin replication. It is suggested that the observed asynchrony of labelling chromosomes of the same morphological group may provide a method of identifying a number of individual chromsomes. Some other sequelae of the observed asynchrony are discussed.

POPULATION STUDIES July 1965, Vol. 19, No. 1. An Approach to the Study of Fertility in Nigeria by
E. VAN DE WALLE.
The author derives fertility information from the data collected at the Census of 1952-53, and produces indexes for the various provinces. Estimated gross reproduction rates vary from under 2-75 to over 4 0, but the severe limitations of the material are emphasized.
Some Problems of International Migration Statistics -An Australian Case Study by C. A. PRICE. This paper comments on the factors that should be taken into account in collecting migration statistics. For instance, whether all movements leading to a stay of a year or more should be combined or whether they should be further analysed into settlers, residents or visitors; and whether place of birth or citizenship should be preferred as a criterion. The author disagrees with the recommendations of various international conferences on such matters.

Familial Occurrence of Trisomy 1618 by MIECZY-
SLAW WENDER, JERZY KOSOWICZ, JAN STEFFEN and BOZENA ZGORZALEWICZ.
Two adult sisters with some of the signs and symptoms of both D and E trisomies are described. Chromosome studies in both cases revealed a modal number of 47 with an extra chromosome in the group 16-18.

Husbands' vs. Wives' Responses to a Fertility Survey
by DAVID YAUKEY, BERYL J. ROBERTS and
WILLIAM GRIFFITHS.
After making an investigation in East Pakistan in which husbands and wives were both interviewed, the authors are concerned as to the extent of disagreement between the spouses in the answers they
47

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

give to questions about the use of contraceptives, unsuccessful pregnancies and whether currently pregnant at time of interview. They do not feel that the wife is necessarily more reliable than the husband in their responses.
Parameters of the Menstrual Cycle by WILLIAM H.
JAMES.
After a mathematical and statistical analysis the author (i) tests the theoretical efficiency of the systems of Ogino and Knaus, (ii) discusses the recent work of Tietze and Potter and (iii) suggests a new "rhythm method" which he claims is less demanding and more efficient than that of Ogino.
An Analysis of Reproductive Patterns in an American Isolate by MINDEL C. SHEPS. This report relates to an anabaptist group that is believed not to practise limitation of family size. Birth intervals average less than two years. Postpartum infecundability is relatively short, in spite of a custom of long lactation, possibly because the health and nutrition of the isolate are at a high level.
A Case Study of Birth Interval Dynamics by R. G.
POTTER, J. E. GORDON, M. PARKER andJ. B. WYON.
An analysis of the intervals between births into (a) post-partum amenorrhoea, (b) the menstruating interval extending from the end of the post-partum amenorrhoea to next conception, (c) gestation time, and (d) pregnancy wastage. Figures are given for the mean lengths and variance of these periods, according to age, based on the Khanna Study.
November 1965, Vol. 19, No. 2. Recent Mortality Trends in Latin America, Asia and Africa by G. J. STOLNITZ. This interesting article surveys the general trend of the death rate in low-income areas during the past thirty years or so, and places some emphasis upon (i) contrasts with earlier falls in mortality in highincome countries, (ii) causes and (iii) consequences. The author's conclusions differ to some extent from current sociological views, in that he regards both causes and consequences as at least partly unrelated to social and economic development. For instance he finds that the pace of such development is not well correlated with the rate of improvement in expectations of life, and that the change in population age-distribution brought about by mortality declines is neutral in relation to the balance of producers and consumers.

Economic Science and Population Theory by A. L.
LEVINE.
An account of the recent efforts of economists to construct theories of relationships between demographic change and economic advance. These have referred in particular to (a) mature economies, e.g. in the work of Keynes, Hansen, Orcutt and Rivlin, and (b) developing countries, with some emphasis on the conditions for a decline in fertility.

A Programme to Control Fertility in Taiwan by L. P.
CHOW.
The family planning health programme in Formosa, begun in 1964, is largely based on IUCDs, which have been received by the general population with enthusiasm. The author is hopeful that significant reductions in the national birth rate can be quickly achieved.

Social Strategies of Family Formation: Data for
British Female Cohorts born 1831-1906 by JUDAH
MATRAS.
A study of British fertility statistics, based on the censuses of 1911, 1946 and 1951, analysed by age at marriage and according to whether or not, in the author's estimation, fertility control was attempted. The subdivision in respect of control is arrived at by comparing the actual family sizes achieved with what might have been expected if there had been no control.
The findings of this study are that the proportions of controllers to non-controllers radically changed during the 75-year period, the percentage of controllers being 20 at the beginning and 70 per cent at the end. During this period marriages became earlier and the proportion childless fell somewhat. Strategies of family-formation varied a good deal between socio-economic groups (and also within them).

Extended Family Obligations and Education: A Study of an Aspect of Demographic Transition amongst Ghanaian University Students by 3. c.
CALD WELL.

At the University of Ghana, 300 students were asked

questions about the financing of their education and

other monetary obligations to relatives, and their

attitudes towards these in relation both to their own

plans for family size and to the national social

welfare system. Most of them had received assistance

and would be supporting not only their own wife

and children, but also other relatives. Most believed

that it would advantage them to restrict their own

family size.

P. R. C.

48

FROM THE PRESS CUTTINGS

"WORLD'S GROWING POPULATION continue their research in those aspects of

THE WORLD'S POPULATION jumped 60,000,000
in a year to a total of 3,220,000,000 by mid-1964, according to a United Nations report.
The report, one of a series issued quarterly
by the UN Statistical Office, said Asia was still by far the most populous of the continents with

reproductive biology which offer promise of practical applications to fertility control....
The Ford grant will apply for five years. It brings to $64,700,000 (£23,108,000) the foundation's support of population studies in several parts of the world."

1,783,000,000 people.

-The Times, 2nd December 1965.

Europe followed with 440,000,000, Africa had

304,000,000, North America 286,000,000, the

"US MAY ASSIST TURKS IN

Soviet Union almost 228,000,000, South America BIRTH-CONTROL PROGRAMME

162,000,000 and Oceania 17,100,000. Mainland China's population was estimated
at 686,000,000. India was the second most populous nation with 471,624,000, the report said. Third came Russia and the United States was fourth with 192,119,000.
Indonesia was the third most populous nation in Asia with 102,200,800 people although Pakistan was close behind with 100,762,000. Nigeria's 56,400,000 people were the most of any African country.
In South America, Brazil led with 78,809,000 inhabitants.
In Europe, West Germay was populated by 56,097,000 people, Britain 54,066,000, Italy
60,955,000 and France 48,417,000."
-Glasgow Herald, 6th November 1965.

THE US ADMINISTRATION iS considering,
sympathetically, and is likely to approve shortly, a request from Turkey for $3 5m. worth of aid
for Turkey's birth-control programme. If granted, the loan would mark a turning
point in the US's attitude towards birth con-
trol.... Until recently the Administration's policy
was not to become involved directly in birth-
control programmes. It did provide funds for demographic studies and the training of medical personnel, but any requests for direct assistance were channelled to private groups such as the Population Council.
However, the way towards a more direct approach became clear last January when President Johnson hinted at such a change in his

State of the Union message. He promised to

"$14m. GRANT TO AID STUDY OF 'seek new ways to use our knowledge to help

HUMAN FERTILITY

deal with the explosion of the world's popula-

THE FORD FOUNDATION has announced a
grant of $14,500,000 (£5,180,000) to establish a centre in New York for the international study of human reproduction and fertility control.
The grants are $8,500,000 (£3,036,000) to Columbia University to establish an international institute for the study of human reproduction, and $6,000,000 (£2,144,000) to the Population Council to expand its biomedical laboratories.
The international institute . . . will place primary emphasis on clinical research into fertility, sterility and the reproductive process.

tion'. This spring, the Agency for International
Development (AID) made clear that requests for technical assistance in family planning would now be sympathetically received by the adminis-
tration.... Either because AID did not over-publicise its
offer or because few countries have embarked on official birth-control programmes, the response so far has been very small-the one request from Turkey, although discussions are apparently in progress with India and Pakistan.

Its concerns will include psychological and sociological as well as purely physiological

-Financial Times, 22nd December 1965.

studies . . . the director will be Dr. Howard Taylor, for nineteen years head ofthe department

MOROCCO

of obstetrics and gynaecology at Columbia. "A THOUSAND BABIES are born each month at

The biomedical laboratories, directed by Dr. Rabat's overcrowded maternity hospital....

Sheldon Segal at Rockefeller University, will As things are Morocco can neither support

51

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

its work force nor find enough schools for its (which supposes enough foreign exchange to buy

children.

some rice and wheat in addition to America's

Already the population numbers 13,834,000 6m. tons), the reduction in the total available

and is likely to double in twenty years. By the will be only 4m. tons....

end of this century experts reckon it will be Beyond that there is the ineluctable surge of

44,000,000....

population, which requires an additional 2m.

There are 3,600,000 children of school age, tons of grain a year to keep pace with it. In the

and only 1,300,000 at school. By 1985 there will five years of the third plan, which ends next

by 7,600,000 children looking for school places, year, India's population will have increased by

and nearly half the population will be too young about 55 million. The third plan's target was a

to provide for themselves.

production of 92m. tons of food grain this year:

In an attempt to arrest the population growth instead there will be at the most about 84m. tons.

King Hassan is studying a document drawn up The failure of the monsoon has been a cruel

by experts, on birth control and contraceptives. added blow. But the difficulties of 1964-65, a

But birth control is a controversial subject in year ofbumper harvests, show that the approach-

a country not only faithful to the decrees of the ing troubles are not just incidental; it is not a

Prophet but what people think he had in mind. matter of ill-fortune. By all the signs India has

However, one expert said: 'Our religion does entered a period of food scarcity which will be

not forbid intervention before conception. So prolonged for as long as it takes to revolutionize

the use of The Loop could not be opposed on agricultural production-which would require

religious grounds.'

in turn profound changes in social and political

The King and many of his ministers are in attitudes. ..."

favour of birth control.

-The Times, 15th November 1965.

If the report is accepted a programme to en-

lighten the population will probably be started next year."

"RATS WITH MINDS OF HAMSTERS

-Daily Mail, 22nd November 1965. RATS INJECTED IN the lower abdomen with

ribonucleic acid (RNA) from the brains of

"INDIA FACES LONG PERIOD OF

hamsters have shown a disposition to do what the hamsters had been trained to do. The experi-

FOOD SCARCITY

ment is reported in the proceedings of the

THE BARE ARITHMETIC of supply and demand shows plainly that there is not going to be enough food to go round in India next year, and recent

National Academy of Sciences by Dr. Frank Babich, Dr. Allan Jacobson, and Dr. Suzanne Bubash of the University of California in Los

experience even in relatively good years has shown that this country is not able to sustain equable distribution in times of scarcity. The failure of the monsoon, added to the perilous

Angeles. They were following up the theory that learnt
data-a name or a skill-is retained in the brain as a result of slight changes in the pattern of

straits of population and food into which India had already entered, means that 1966 is going to be a year of strain on the Indian society and polity....
The Food Minister, Mr. Subramaniam, has estimated that the kharif (autumn) crop will be about 3m. tons less than it was last year. In-

RNA molecules.... In their preliminary experiments the scientists
injected rats with RNA from the brains of other rats and discovered a tendency in the second group to do what the others had been trained to do. They then tried the same process between rats and hamsters, a similar but distinct species."

dependent specialists put the decline at more

-The Times, 2nd December 1965.

like Sm. or 6m. tons, or about 10 per cent of

the crop. The damage of the monsoon failure does not
end with the kharif crop. The next crop of the harvest year, the spring or ravi crop, will be harmed too....
This year the total of domestic food grain must be expected to be between 83m. and 84m.

IUD "KEEPING UP WITH the steady flow of new initials is difficult, but recent examples have
helped me to realize that many of my patients in the birth control clinic who ask me for an IUD are in fact making a UDI."

tons. If imports, can be kept at the same level

-The Lancet, 20th November 1965.

52

The Eugenics Society
President *Sir Robert Platt, Bart., M.SC., M.D., F.R.C.P. Honorary Past Presidents Sir Alexander Carr-Saunders, K.B.E., M.A., LL.D.
Professor Sir James Gray, C.B.E., M.C., SC.D., F.R.S. Sir Julian Huxley, M.A., D.SC., F.R.S. Vice-Presidents *G. Ainsworth Harrison, M.A., B.SC., D.PHIL. *Mrs. V. Houghton *W. M. Keynes, M.A., M.D., M.CHIR., F.R.C.S. Eliot Slater, M.D., F.R.C.P., D.P.M. Professor J. M. Thoday, PH.D., F.R.S. Sir Gerard Thornton, D.SC., F.R.S. Honorary Secretary *Professor A. S. Parkes, C.B.E., SC.D., F.R.S.
Honoray Treasur *Professor J. E. Meade, C.B., F.B.A., M.A. Honorary Librarin tP. R. Cox, F.I.A., F.S.S. Membea of the Council G. C. L. Bertram, M.A., PH.D.
L. Farrer Brown, C.B.E., B.SC.(ECON.), J.P.
*tC. 0. Carter, M.A., B.M., F.R.C.P. tProfessor Sargant Florence, C.B.E., M.A., PH.D. Professor E. Grebenik, M.sC.(ECON.) Professor F. Lafitte
*tH. Lehmann, M.D., SC.D., F.R.C.P., P.R.I.C. tLady Lewis, M.D., M.R.C.P. tJohn Peel, B.A. Mrs. M. A. Pyke, O.B.E. J. A. Fraser Roberts, C.B.E., M.D., D.SC., F.R.C.P., F.R.S. J. M. Tanner, M.D., D.SC. Professor R. M. Titmuss Professor C. H. Waddington, M.A., SC.D., F.R.S.
Generl Secretary Miss F. B. Schenk Assistant Secretary Mrs. D. E. King
Editor Mrs. K. Hodson
* Members of the Executive and Finance Committee. t Members of the Editorial and Library Committee: Mr. D. R. Brothwell, also serves on this Committee.
THE EUGENICS SOCIETY
69 Eccleston Square, London SWI

Contents

March 1966, Volume 58, Number 1

Notes of the Quarter

page

CONTENTS OF THE EUGENICS REVIEW-JAPANESE

FERTILITY-INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION OF UNI-

VERSITY WOMEN, CONFERENCE, 1965-THE STATE

OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE, 1965-QUALITIES OF

FREEDOM-THROMBOSIS AND THE PILL-PRIMATE

FOSSILS IN THE FAYUM-SUCCESSFUL STRATEGY

1

The World Population Conference, Belgrade, 1965

Peter R. Cox, John Peel and Clifford J. Thomas

Population Control in Japan: Lessons for India T. J. Samuel

Notes and Memoranda

Reviews of Books .

Other Notices .

**.

Periodicals

*..

Differential Marriage: Some Facts

From the Press Cuttings

*..

Correspondence

7 1-5 23 28 39 41 49 51 53

PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY OLIVER AND BOYD LTD., EDINBURGH

