WELFARE AND POPULATION*
By the Right Rev. E. W. BARNES, Sc.D., F.R.S.
Bishop of Birmingham

W E have created the Welfare State. skill; a convalescent home. All free of

It is a great achievement. For the charge. To the joyful mother the record

first time in our history the whole seemed too good to be true.

population of the country is in a position to get adequate medical attention. Everyone should be able to receive care of general health, together with provision for defective teeth and eyesight. There is also available expert care for infant and child welfare. So far as possible, life will be made tolerable for
the aged. In no other country does such

Now for the other side of the picture. In the great days of Elizabeth the population of England and Wales was probably rather more than 4 million. In i8ii it had risen to IO million. By I900 it was over
30 million. It is now estimated to be more
than 44 million.
We are over-populated. We cannot produce enough food for our people, even though

large-scale provision exist, though doubtless the fertility of our land has been artificially

our lead will, in due course, be followed increased. We have to buy large, and ever

elsewhere.

larger, quantities of food from abroad. As

As regards the individual citizen the policy we all know, the task, for a virtually bankwhich has thus created the Welfare State is rupt country, is most difficult. right. It deserves and has received almost Malthus, a Cambridge don, saw a century

universal Christian and humanist approval. and a half ago what could be the result of an

But social reforms create new situations in unrestricted increase of population. The

which new and sometimes very troublesome crisis which he foresaw was averted by problems arise. Some such problems now emigration. There were still large empty emerging are worth our careful attention. I spaces of the earth ready to receive our

give examples.

people, especially in North America and

Many a West Indian island is to-day a Australasia. Also a vast industrial developcrowded slum. Children born survive if they ment took place in Britain. By good fortune are vigorous; each one that dies relieves we were ahead of other peoples. We sold the

congestion. Naturally such inhabitants as goods we made in increasing amounts and can claim 'British citizenship are coming consequently could buy ever-increasing here in large numbers to avoid such conges- quantities of food. The nineteenth century tion and to enjoy the benefits of the Welfare was our golden age. Now the vacant spaces

State. Other peoples come here; Eastern pedlars
throng our street markets; our fame has
gone out into aIl the world. Three months ago my wife and I were at a

of the world are nearly full. The competition of other countries is formidable. We look like being permanently the paupers of the English-speaking world. We need to restrict
our population.

city in central France. The chambermaid at the hotel had a daughter learning hotel work in England. She told us of her. I sum up the story in isolated words and phrases. Appendicitis; an operation with the best surgical

The instinct that population-increase is good-be it of a family, of a city, or of a nation-is so strong as to be all-prevailing.
It is embedded in the religious traditions of most races. Despots use it to increase their

* Address by the Bishop of Birmingham at a luncheon of the Rotary Club, Birmingham.

armies. Politicians, to whom patriotism is a valuable asset, point proudly to increased

93

94 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

numbers. And yet our population is now too
large, and must be diminished. Will it fall under the working of the Wel-
fare State ? Obviously not, without teaching
which will be unpopular, coupled with practical measures which will arouse indignant opposition.
In reducing the population we must preserve the better stocks in the population
and hinder the increase of the worse. Now I do not mean preserve the rich and
get rid of the poor. We need to preserve the good-living, honest, hard-working classes in our people, whether they be rich or poor. But we need to get rid of the slovenly, vicious, idle wasters of the community. Unfortunately the Welfare State is only too likely to encourage their increase.
A challenge will come from those who do
not believe that good and bad qualities are alike inherited. Such people say that if you mate members of a bad stock and put them to live in a first-class housing area sound citizens will be produced. I wish it were true; it would make our social problems so much easier. But all our leading eugenists in the Western world assert that it is untrue. Analysis of facts in the light of the fundamental discoveries of Mendel and Morgan shows that bad stocks propagate bad stocks. At least 90 per cent of feeble-mindedness is inherited. A time is quickly coming when sterilization of the unfit will have to be essential in our social organization. Such sterilization may well be, in fact, the complement of the Welfare State.
I know that there are those who say that

bad stocks evolve in slums where dirt and
disease are rife. I have met two or three
Members of Parliament who believe it. In
Russia the belief is orthodox Soviet genetics,
associated with the name of Lysenko. But
even I, in spite of the beliefs attributed to
me, do not think that the Soviet leaders are
always right! We must get rid of our slums;
we must give all possible help to the poor and unfortunate; but we must not let the
Welfare State spoil, rather than improve, the quality of our population. You cannot " gather grapes of thorns or figs of thistles,"
as was said by a very great Teacher. What is to be done ? I merely put the
problem: I cannot give a solution. We must limit immigration, whether from India, South Africa, the West Indies or East Europe. We must educate our citizens to have smaller families. We must have medically controlled
sterilization of the unfit on a large scale. Many are beginning to think that medi-
cally - controlled euthanasia for defective infants should be an element in our social policy. I have met mothers of such children who have been thankful when death has brought release. W7hat should be the Christian attitude to these questions, what the attitude of the humanist ?
All over the world population is now increasing dangerously. Our moral prestige is still so high that other peoples tend to follow our example. Are populations to increase everywhere till an explosion comes and the miseries of atomic warfare end for a time the anxieties of starvation. Think on
these things.

SOCIETY OF COMPARATIVE LEGISLATION
For the promotion of knowledge of the course of legislation In difrent countries, more particularly In the several
parts of His Majesty's Dominion*, nd in the United States."
PNesid&nt: The Rt. Hon. Lord MACMILLAN, G.C.V.O. Chairman of the Executive Committ.: The Rt. Hon. Lord Justice COHEN Editors: Professor F. H. LAWSON, D.C.L. Sir CECIL CARR, K.C.B., K.C.,
assisted by Sir ARNOLD McNAIR, KC., and Professor H. C. GUITERIDGE, K.C.
Honorary Secrtary: E. H. WALL, Esq.
Annual Subscription - - - ONE GUINEA
Address: 18, NORTHUMBERLAND AVENUE, LONDON, W.C.2
EugenicsReview, VoL XLI, No. 2

