x z0
8o

Ca Ga Cd
CA
0CN Cd d or o
0a4
0U,9
0
I
E;4

n Z
o C)

0 r--

0

qA

0
_1 C\J >-
0 C\j

0o 0)

SIR JULIAN HUXLEY
M.A., D.Sc., F.R.S.
Education and the Humanist Revolution*

W HAT IS EDUCATION ? DorothyParker once said that it was casting sham pearls before real swine. But this splenetic out-
burst is hardly fair, and could only represent the views of a harassed and overburdened teacher in a difficult neighbourhood. My grandfather, Thomas Henry Huxley,9 once defined an educated man in the following famous passage:
That man, I think, has had a liberal education who has been so trained in youth that his body is the ready servant of his will, and does with ease and pleasure all the work that, as a mechanism, it is capable of; whose intellect is a clear, cold, logic engine, with all its parts of equal strength, and in smooth working order; ready, like a steam engine, to be turned to any kind of work, and spin, the gossamers as well as forge the anchors of the mind; whose mind is stored with a knowledge of the great and fundamental truths of Nature and of the laws of her operations; one who, no stunted ascetic, is full of life and fire, but whose passions are trained to come to heel by a vigorous will, the servant of a tender conscience; who has learned to love all beauty, whether of Nature or of art, to hate all vileness, and to respect others as himself.
Elsewhere, in the same address, after enumerating the biased arguments of the politicians, the clergy, the manufacturers and the capitalists, he wrote with deep feeling of education's central mission of enlightenment:
A few voices are lifted up in favour of the doctrine that the masses should be educated because they are men and women with unlimited capacities of being, doing, and suffering, and that it is as true now, as ever it was, that the people perish for lack of knowledge.
But I want to treat education as a social pro-
* The ninth Fawley Lecture delivered by Sir Julian Huxley, M.A., D.Sc., F.R.S., on November 22nd, 1962, It is printed here by kind permission of the author and
of Southampton University. A shortenedversion appeared
in Nature, No. 4862, January 5th, 1963.

cess. For me, education is an organ of man in society, whose basic function is to ensure the continuity and further advance of the evolutionary process on earth by the transmission and transformation of tradition. It exists in rudimentary form in higher vertebrates, but only becomes of major importance in our own species, where it transmits the knowledge, the skills and beliefs, the attitudes and ideas which are necessary for the maintenance, achievement and development of man in society. Much of education in this broad sense is unorganized, acquired through Press and radio and public meetings, or through individual self-education. Here I shall confine myself to organized systems of education (though clearly these can be so planned as to encourage and gear in with various kinds of unorganized education).
Education and Evolution To look at education in the perspective of evolution is good for many reasons. Firstly, it shakes us out of over-preoccupation with the multitude of specific and immediate difficulties that beset us. Secondly, it provides a necessary corrective to the tendency of our neotechnic industrial civilization to think and plan in terms of quantity rather than quality-a tendency which is having unfortunate effects on education, both on subject-matter (think of the emphasis on the physico-mathematical sciences and technology as against the life and earth sciences and conservation), on curriculum (think of the emphasis on subjects which can easily be examined in), on evaluation (think of the emphasis on examination standards and marking systems) and on methods (think of teaching aids). Finally, while stripping education of much sentimental and idealistic mystique, it gives new dignity and im-

8i

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, July 1963, 55, 2.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

portance to the whole educational process, new and germ-cells, and often overriding it. As a

inspiration for all those engaged in teaching, new result, man has moved across a critical threshold,

clarity to the aims and principles of education. the threshold from the biological to the psycho-

Education involves the transmission of ex- social phase of the universal evolutionary pro-

perience and its results across the gap from earlier cess. In this new phase, evolution is manifested

to later generations. There are three stages of its primarily in cultural change, secondarily and less

evolution, two of them pre-human. In the most primitive, transmission bridges only one genera-
tion-gap between parents and offspring. This stage is found most obviously in carnivores like

obviously in genetic change in constitution. To take one example, only negligible genetic change in man's intelligence or other capacities have taken place since the Neolithic period (and quite

fox or lion, where the young animal, after a period of self-education by play, learns to hunt
by accompanying one or both of its parents. The second stage is marked by the beginnings
of tradition, a set of social habits peculiar to a

possibly since Cro-Magnon times), but almost incredible changes in his cultural apparatus and
achievements-religion, art, science, law, technology, literature, social organization and the rest.

single population, which endures through a number of generations. Rudiments of such prototradition are found in various social mammals
(and perhaps a few birds); but the most striking example is that of the Japanese monkey, Macaca fuscata, summarized by Dobzhansky in his book, Mankind Evolving:3 in this species, each monkey colony or social group has its own traditional food-habits, but these are occasionally modified by adventurous innovations, which take two or three years to spread through the group. Here
we see how even a proto-tradition can evolve by incorporating new elements. But it involves no
real educational system-no special arrangements for educating the young animals in and through the tradition.
The third stage is found only in man. It is the stage of a truly cumulative tradition, based on conceptual thought and communicated by artificial or arbitrary symbols that have to be learnt, as well as by imitation and by simple signs that are genetically determined. As the tradition grows more complex and its symbolic system of communication correspondingly more elaborate, organized education becomes necessary as part of the machinery for its transmission down the
generations.

One of the novel characteristics of the psychosocial phase is its new tempo of change. Not only is cultural evolution much faster than biological, but it shows acceleration. In the lower Paleolithic it took perhaps 100,000 years to effect a major cultural change; in the early civilizations a few hundred years; and now barely a single decade-bringing new problems for education.
And yet, in spite of this new speed of change and of the astonishing new achievements that it has permitted, we must remember that man is an
extremely recent phenomenon. Man asa hominid in the broad sense, including the ape-man Pithecanthropus and his immediate ancestors, cannot be much more that a million years old, and a million years in the perspective of life's two and
three-quarter thousand million years is less than
half a minute out of a twenty-four-hour day; while the whole of civilized man's history has all been compressed within one tick of the cosmic clock. What is more, he is a sadly incomplete phenomenon. He is an unfinished type, needing a great deal of improvement before he can
qualify as a satisfactory product of evolution and do his cosmic job properly. And human individuals are all too obviously unfinished when they are born into the world: they need radical

improvement before than can qualify as satis-

Cultural Evolution

factory social beings and perform their functions

Cumulative tradition based on conceptual in life adequately. And their improvement as

thought and true symbolic language provides individuals, as well as the improvement of man

man with a second mechanism of continuity and as a type, depends to an important extent on the

change-in other words of inheritance and evo- improvement of education.

lution-superposed on the primary genetic- Improvement during biological evolution is

evolutionary mechanism of his chromosomes manifested in the improved construction, work-

82

EDUCATION AND THE HUMANIST REVOLUTION

ing and behaviour of animals and plants. As Ideas, of course, grow out of our experiences,

Darwin pointed out so clearly in his great book, both external and internal, but differ a great deal

it is the inevitable result of the blind and non- in what may be called their scientific or objective

purposeful agency of natural selection, which validation. Where detailed and scientific valida-

operates via the genetic mechanism of trans- tion is meagre or not available, ideas can still

mission and transformation, the gene-complex exact strong psychosocial effects: for instance,

in the chromosomes.

the idea of monotheism, or of personal salvation

Improvement during human evolution, on the through religious faith or sacred ritual. But in the

other hand, is manifested primarily in cultural long run those ideas will prevail which are scien-

terms, in the organization, workings and achieve- tifically validated and are backed by a mass of

ments of human societies and cultures. It is established factual knowledge.

brought about primarily by the collective agency The psychosocial process is a cybernetic one,

of psychological and social forces which we may full of feedback mechanisms, so that new ideas,

conveniently label as psychosocial pressure, and and the new knowledge of which they are the

this operates via the psychosocial mechanism of vehicles, not only must operate within the con-

transmission and transformation, which includes temporary idea-system, but will modify it. Thus

tradition in the broad sense, the diffusion of ideas the basically new idea of domesticating food-

and cultural products, and, of course, education. supply by growing crops interacted with the

We are only beginning the detailed scientific general ideas of the time and became part of a

exploration of these basic agencies and mech- general ideological framework concerned with

anisms of human evolution, but some broad agricultural prosperity, fertility ritual and sacred

principles are emerging. Those most relevant to priest-kingship, which in turn modified social

my subject are these. First, that it is the general structure.

idea-system, the ideological pattern of ideas and Major advance in evolution takes place in a

knowledge, values and beliefs, which essentially series of steps, by means of a series of dominant

characterizes human societies and cultures, and types, each new one embodying an improved and

indeed is the prime determiner of their social therefore successful pattern of organization, with

organization, their material substructure and the older ones often persisting in an inferior

their achievements. The psychosocial process is position and reduced numbers. During biological

a unitary one, simultaneously and indissolubly evolution, what is improved is bodily organiza-

both material and mental, in which the material tion-of structure, function and behaviour. A

machinery and the social structure are constantly fish has a higher organization than a worm, a

reacting back on the ideological pattern. But worm than a jelly-fish: during the last 300 million

mind dominates the process, and it is the ideo- years, amphibians, reptiles, mammals and finally

logical pattern which is primary.

man succeeded and largely replaced each other

Secondly, with the extension of our under- as dominant types of land life. But in human

standing of the psychosocial process now and in evolution, what is improved is psychosocial

the past it is becoming clear that everything in organization-the organization of thought and

human history which deserves the title of ad- beliefs, of knowledge and ideas, and of the cul-

vance or progress, every improvement or hope tures and social systems related to them. The in-

of improvement of the human lot and man's dustrial national type of organization is higher

hard destiny, has sprung from the discovery and than the literate barbaric, that in turn higher

dissemination of new knowledge and new ideas. than the illiterate tribal. Magic, myth, poly-

Let me clarify this point a little. I am using daemonism, monotheism, science, succeed and

idea in a broad and loose sense to cover beliefs largely replace each other as dominant patterns

and values as well as general and scientific con- of human thinking.

cepts. Ideas are real phenomena, part of man's The knowledge explosion of the last hundred

psychosocial equipment. Before new factual years since Darwin is giving us a new vision of

knowledge can become effective it must be or- our human destiny-of the world of man, and of

ganized, incorporated in, or related to an idea. man's place and role in the world. It is an evolu-

ER-D

83

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

tionary and monistic vision, showing us all reality idea-system of the next and critical phase of

as a self-transforming process. It is a monistic psychosocial evolution.

vision, showing us all reality as a unitary and What are the implications of this new pattem

continuous process, with no dualistic split be- of thought and belief? In the first place, the

tween soul and body, between matter and mind, operation for which he has sole responsibility is

between life and not-life, no cleavage between a natural one, and he must not sit back and ex-

natural and supernatural; it reveals that all pect supernatural aid. Its overriding aim so far

phenomena, from worms to women, from radia- as I can see, must be defined positively, in terms

tion to religion, are natural.

of fulfilment and achievement-greater fulfil-

It will inevitably lead to a new general organi- ment (and therefore less frustration and misery)

zation of thought and belief, and to the develop- for more human individuals, interlocking with

ment, after centuries of ideological fragmenta- fuller achievement (and therefore less muddle

tion, of a new and comprehensive idea-system. and failure) by more human societies. And this

The Middle Ages had a comprehensive vision can only be secured by a better understanding

and a comprehensive idea-system, and so does and a fuller realization of human possibilities.

Marxist Communism to-day; but neither was Further, in pursuing this aim, man must remem-

founded on comprehensive knowledge. To-day ber that he is a part of nature, and must learn to

is the first period in history when man has begun live in harmonious symbiosis with the environ-

to have a comprehensive knowledge of stars and ment provided by his planet, a relation of res-

atoms, of chemical molecules and geological ponsible partnership instead of irresponsible ex-

strata, of plants and animals, of physiology and ploitation. If he is to make a success of his job

psychology, of human origins and human his- as guiding agent for evolution, he must abandon

tory. The knowledge is highly incomplete; new the arrogant idea of conquering and exploiting

and surprising discoveries are being made every nature; he must co-operate and conserve. Here,

year and will continue to be made for centuries too, he must set himself to understand possibili-

to come. But it is comprehensive, in the sense of ties and try to realise them more fully and fruit-

covering every field, every aspect of reality.* fully, but here they are the possibilities not of

Its upshot is clear. Man is not merely the human, but of external nature.

latest dominant type produced by evolution, but If this new view of human destiny is essentially

its sole active agent on earth. His destiny is to be correct, then clearly our educational system and

responsible for the whole future of the evolu- methods must come to terms with it, for, after

tionary process on this planet. Whatever he does, all, education must be concerned with man's

he will affect that process. His duty is to try to place and role in nature, and its raw material is

understand it and the mechanisms of its work- man himself. As I wrote in my Huxley Lecture6

ing, and at the same time direct and steer it in the twelve years ago:

right direction and along the best possible course. The most important, if not the most urgent, task
of our times is the development of a new set of inte-

Evolutionary Humanism
This is the gist and core of Evolutionary Humanism, the new organization of ideas and potential action now emerging from the Humanist Revolution of thought, and destined, I pro-

grative, directive and transmissive mechanisms for human societies and for their continuity down the generations. These must include systems in which the community at large can share-systems of shared interpretation, shared belief, shared activity and shared faith.

phesy with confidence, to become the dominant

A New Educational System

* I should except the field of so-called parapsychology. If the existence of telepathy, ESP, and the rest is firmly established, their scientific investigation could well lead to a revolution in our thinking about the nature of mind. But this is still quite hypothetical, and meanwhile it is our obvious duty to work out the implications of the very comprehensive knowledge we already possess.

Most educational systems are highly resistant to change, because they are controlled by dogmatic religious organizations, or because they are
closely linked with the established social order, or just because of inherent conservatism. To-day we need a radical change of system; and clearly

84

EDUCATION AND THE HUMANIST REVOLUTION

the new system must itself be evolutionary, not complexity and improvement of his material,

change-resistant but change-promoting. It must social and psychological organization, but at the

transform as well as transmit. In part, this can same time by the increasing magnitude of his

be achieved through appeals to morality-by crimes and follies. Children are not a set of uni-

showing growing boys and girls a comprehen- form tabulae rasae but highly complex and varied

sible but high aim in life, making them under- psychosocial organisms engaged on theextremely

stand the moral duty of helping and guiding the difficult task of developing into satisfied and

evolutionary process in a desirable direction. satisfactory members of a social community.

But preaching is not enough: something more The educational process has to cope simul-

practical is needed. If, as I maintain, our essen- taneously with several distinct problems-the

tial aim be greater fulfilment, then the next step imparting of knowledge, practical and theoreti-

in psychosocial evolution must assuredly be from cal; the learning of skills and social habits; the

the Welfare State towards a Fulfilment Society. transmission of traditions and beliefs, religious

A humanist educational system will not only put and secular; the formation of character and per-

the idea of the fulfilment society before children, sonality; moral as well as intellectual develop-

but will provide them with opportunities for ment; and the crucial passage from childhood

actual personal fulfilment in every possible way to responsible adult life.

-through knowledge (I remember Bertrand In tribal societies, there is nothing that can be

Russell once exclaiming, "How nice it is to know called a curriculum. Children gain the knowledge

things!"); through disciplined adventure on they need for the practical activities of life by

mountain or sea; through expeditions and travel; watching and imitating the adults and by actual

through painting and acting and making participation. Punishment is rare. What may be

music; through enjoyment of nature and beauty; called their theoretical instruction, in tribal myth

through fun and games; through inner peace; and morality and in forms of adult behaviour, is

through study projects and organized discus- imparted by selected elders, often with the aid of

sions; through responsible participation in group esoteric and awe-inspiring ceremonies. This takes

activities. It will have a curriculum of experience place during a special period of preparation, cul-

as well as a curriculum of subjects.

minating in a painful and frightening ordeal

In adapting our old educational system to our which usually includes sexual mutilation. There

new vision, a lot of cargo will have to be jetti- is no examination to test their knowledge, only

soned-once noble but now mouldering myths, an ordeal to prove their adulthood; no certificate

shiny but useless aphorisms, utopian but un- to frame and cherish, only the fact of acceptance

founded speculations, nasty projections of our as full members of the tribe.

prejudices and repressions. Thus, man was not Things have changed since then. But we still

created in his present form a few thousand years inflict a painful and frightening ordeal on our

ago. Mankind is not descended from Adam and children, in the shape of a whole series of exami-

Eve, or any other single couple. Children are not nations; and we still celebrate their successful

born with a load of original sin derived from the survival of these ordeals by ceremonial activities,

Fall, nor with a tabula rasa of a mind ready to most elaborately by the solemn pomp of univer-

be inscribed with whatever message educators sity commencements and degree days. Most psy-

wish. There never was a Golden Age, nor a chiatrists, I am sure, would agree that one im-

Noble Savage. There are no pure races, nor any portant reason for the stiffness of examinations

Superior or Master Races. Mind and Body are is psychological-the subconscious desire of the

not separate entities. There are no Absolutes of adult to revenge himself for past ordeals by sub-

truth or virtue, only possibilities of greater know- jecting the young to the same unpleasant trials

ledge and fuller perfection.

to which he himself was subjected: and assuredly

On the contrary, mankind is a single species, the gorgeous robes of the academic procession

which originated from a population of ancestral are worn not only to impress the community

apes about a million years ago. His evolution gathered for the occasion, but as a permitted

since then has been marked by the increasing outlet for donnish egos (it certainly was so for

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

mine!). And yet it is still true, as Professor Elvin4 in ellipses relegated all the fantastic ptolemaic

has pointed out in his chapter on "An Education machinery of cycles and epicycles to the scientific

for Humanity" in The Humanist Frame, that a dustbin, and with one stroke simplified for all

tribal boy's education may be a better prepara- later generations the whole working of the solar

tion for life in a tribal society than is our educa- system. Again, the abandonment ofthe scholastic

tion for life in our vaunted technological society. idea of two conflicting principles of heat and cold

There is need to-day for drastic change. Edu- in favour of the scientific idea of a single scale of

cation must come to terms with Humanism over temperature, was (and still is) a great aid to our

its curriculum, over its relations with society, understanding of physical phenomena.

and over its methods of fostering the develop- Evolution-or, to spell it out, the idea of evo-

ment of personality.

lutionary process-is the most powerful and the

As regards curriculum, the solution is, in prin- most comprehensive idea that has ever arisen on

ciple, simple. The advance of knowledge has at earth. It helps us to understand our origins, our

last given us a unified or unitary picture ofpheno- own nature, and our relations with the rest of

menal reality: clearly the curriculum must reflect nature. It shows us the major trends of evolu-

this unity and itself become unified instead of tion in the past and indicates a direction for our

consisting of a number of unrelated fragments evolutionary course in the future.

called subjects or activities.

Siiice the process of evolution involves the

Simple in principle, but not so simple in prac- constant inter-adjustment of organisms with

tice! The first difficulty is a quantitative one- their environment, the evolutionary idea gives

that the mere growth of knowledge, not only us a new view of our relations with our planetary

scientific but also historical and sociological, is habitat and its resources, and with the other

too large for any single curriculum to unify. organized life-communities with which we share

However, the prime function of education is not it. It gives us a new perspective in time, and a new

to impart the maximum amount of factual in- sense of universal interrelatedness. Above all, it

formation, but to provide comprehension, to unifies our knowledge and our thought. We are

help growing human beings to a better under- part of a total process, made of the same matter

standing of the world and themselves. And for and operating by the same energy as the rest of

this we need what may broadly be called ideas. the cosmos, maintaining and reproducing our-

Ideas in this broad sense are mental machinery selves by the same type of mechanism as the rest

for dealing with bodies of experiential fact, the oflife, unique only in having been pushed further

necessary tools of comprehension. Readers of along life's general road to reach the psycho-

Helen Keller's autobiography will remember the social stage.

dramatic moment when the deaf, dumb and Thus the evolutionary idea must provide the

blind child suddenly realised that "everything main unifying approach for a humanist edu-

has a name". This is the basic idea underlying cational system, and evolutionary biology could

human language and human thought; and for and should become a central or key subject in its

her it was the master key which unlocked her curriculum. As I said in an address to American

latent understanding. Ideas can facilitate under- high school teachers at the Darwin Centennial

standing in boys and girls during their education Celebration at Chicago in 1959:7

just as much as in scientists in their research or Not only is evolution the necessary background

professional men in their careers. But they must for any proper understanding or exposition of bio-

have a sufficiency of facts to work with: in education, the child must be provided with the right mixture of facts and ideas.

logy; but I, with many of my colleagues, feel strongly that biology is the necessary basis for understanding ourselves and nature and our place in nature.
Evolution is important for understanding ourselves

As with material machines, some ideas are as animal organisms, for instance in connection with

better than others-they can handle more apparently disparate phenomena, can bridge larger gaps, can simplify greater diversity. Thus the

food, health, and disease. Evolution is essential for understanding ourselves in relation to our environment and other organisms in that environment-in other words, for understanding human ecology. Evo-

single idea that the planets move round the sun lution is also essential for understanding ourselves as

86

EDUCATION AND THE HUMANIST REVOLUTION

organisms which develop-in other words, for under- patterned assemblage of different vegetational,

standing human embryology and ontogeny; the most spectacular phenomenon in life is the development of adult human beings from microscopic bits of nucleated protoplasm. Embryology links up with an

animal and microbial types, inter-adjusted to give optimum utilization of the resources of a particular habitat. If the dynamic pattern of

understanding of human reproduction and with an relations is interfered with, the entire habitat

understanding of that rather difficult but important subject, the genetic basis of our life. Finally, evolution helps us to understand ourselves as unique organisms equipped with a new method of evolution

and the ecological community living in and on it may be damaged. The most obvious case is deforestation with consequent erosion; another

-cultural evolution-based on the cumulative trans- is the introduction of domestic cattle coupled

mission ofexperience through language and symbols. with reduction of wild herbivores, which may

Embryology, reproduction, and genetics reveal all sorts of extremely exciting facts. "Exciting" is the right word, for knowledge of these facts does excite

disrupt the ecological pattern of savannah and turn it into desert. From earliest times, man has

interest and wonder in our minds. I use the word been interfering with more and more natural

"wonder" deliberately, for I believe that to excite habitats and has exploited their resources more

wonder and interest in the variety and richness of life is important in education. So far as I can see, biology is the best scientific subject for eliciting a sense of wonder and an immediate interest in the

and more pitilessly. He has already converted vast areas of once fertile land, in the Mediterranean and the Middle East, in China and in India, into

strange, the unusual, and the exciting. Biology may arid semi-deserts or treeless infertility. Now that

not stir the interest of all the mechanically minded, his exploding population is subjecting more areas

but it does arouse the interest of a great many children, probably the majority.
Biology has the further advantage that through it

to ever more drastic and more technologically efficient exploitation, he is in danger of becoming

you can enlist the born naturalist as well as the born the cancer of the planet instead of its guide.

laboratory experimenter-the boy or girl who is in- In the educational systems of underdeveloped

terested in the variety and the wonder of things as they are, as well as the child who is interested in finding out how they work. It is no coincidence that all the great evolutionists have had an interest in natural

territories, children should be introduced to science by the biological way of ecology and physiology and their applications in conserva-

history and that most of them started as naturalists. tion and health, not by way of physics and

Too often, perhaps especially in the U.S.A., owing to religious pressure or plain conformist timidity, evolution is not allowed into the curriculum, or is admitted under some specious alias like "racial development"; whereas in the U.S.S.R., in spite of the setback due to Lysenkoism, evolution occupies an important place in
education. But for further facts and ideas on this, I must refer my readers to Professor H. J. Muller's admirable article, "One Hundred Years without Darwinism are Enough"."

chemistry and their applications in technology and industry. And in all countries, ecology is essential as a basis for good land use and productive development.
Man lives in a triple tier of environments, material, social and psychological. Ecology in the customary sense deals with man's relations with the forces and resources of external nature. Social ecology deals with man's social relations, both within and between human societies. And what we may call psychological ecology is concerned with man's individual and collective rela-

Ecology

tions with the forces and resources of his inner

Evolutionary biology provides us with another nature and the environment of ideas, beliefs and

unifying idea of the greatest importance-the ecological idea. Ecology is scientific natural his-

values which he has created and with which he has surrounded himself.

tory; it is the science of relations par excellence

-relations between organisms and their en- A New Curriculum

vironment, and of organisms with each other. It How should the new humanism's evolutionary

helps us to understand how life makes a living. approach take effect in education? The over-

It deals with what is commonly called the riding need is that it should put an end to the

balance of nature. But its central concept is fragmentation of the present system. Education

that of the organized ecological community-a must be comprehensive, in dealing with every

87

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

aspect of life; it must also have a unitary pattern, Biological Sciences' (and see Hurd5) has worked

reflecting the unity of knowledge and the whole- out a remarkable integrated curriculum for High

ness of experience. It must attempt to give grow- School biology, embodying many new ideas and

ing minds a coherent picture of nature and man's methods, and the Gulbenkian Foundation is

role in it, and to help immature personalities doing something similar in this country. But

towards integration and self-realization.

these are sporadic and isolated attempts. The

To give a coherent picture we need, in the first task will only be satisfactorily achieved when we

place, an integrated curriculum instead of a realize that, here as elsewhere, unity brings

patchwork, a curriculum focused on the pattern strength. In a properly unified curriculum, sep-

of man's relations with nature and the psycho- arate subjects will not compete for prestige and

social process, instead of on separate aspects of place, but can reinforce each other.

nature like physics or botany, and on separate This could give a new dynamic to the educa-

aspects and activities of man like literature or tional process. Children in general have a natural

history.

interest and curiosity: they want to know more

Once we begin to think along these lines, we about this strange and wonderful world, about

find that different "subjects" can link up with and human life and how to live it, and to find out

reinforce each other. Physiology links up with what it all means. If their education is designed

chemistry and heredity, ecology with geography, to help them in this instead of setting up a num-

soil science with agriculture and meteorology. ber of hurdles in their way, they will enjoy it, and

The study of development leads on to biological will become willing co-operators instead of re-

evolution; evolution, in turn, links back to luctant or obstructive victims. And education

geology, astronomy and cosmology, and on to will acquire a new social dynamic: from being

man's origins, to archeology and human history. merely a preparation for life, it will become an

History, in turn, links up with economics, social integral part of life, an instrument of man's

studies and citizenship. Art and architecture, law evolution.

and morality, science and technology, are best The other prerequisite for a humanist educa-

treated as functions of man in society: they, too, tion is that it should help children to realize more

evolve and accordingly profit by being treated of their capacities, and to develop into well-

historically, not merely as separate and complete integrated personalities. For this, in addition to

packages of facts and principles.

the integration of subjects, we need an integra-

Just how to plan and introduce such a curri- tion of activities. The educational system must

culum is a matter for the educational profession. set itself not merely to surmount obstacles-to

Of course, it will not be easy, in face of the com- bypass frustration, to overleap apathy, to resolve

petitive claims of traditional subjects and estab- conflict-but to provide opportunities for active

lished university departments on the one hand, living, for satisfying achievement, for feeling

and on the other hand of the portentous growth significant, for fulfilment. This again will not be

of factual knowledge and theoretical scaffolding, easy. Apart from difficulties of staff and facilities,

notably in the sciences, but also in the humani- and the difficulty of linking school life, home life

ties. It will mean scrapping a great deal of dead and social life, there is the difficulty of time. Once

wood and dead weight: it will mean some sacri- more, however, it not only must, but can be done.

fice of specialists' amour propre and curricular Here again, unification leads to mutual rein-

claims: and it will take much ingenuity and a forcement. So-called extra-curricular activities

great deal of goodwill. But it must be done, and can be made to serve curricular ends, and vice

I am sure that it can be done.

versa. Children, in general, have a natural desire

Indeed, the process is already beginning. to achieve, to exercise their capacities, to count

Medicine is throwing overboard a mass of un- for something in life. If they find that their edu-

necessary anatomical detail: universities are cation is designed to help them in this instead of

introducing first-year courses of general studies: treating them as temporary inmates, to be dealt

sixth forms are taking steps to correct earlier with by a combination of bribery and punish-

over-specialization: the American Institute of ment, they will become willing participants.

88

EDUCATION AND THE HUMANIST REVOLUTION

A further important implication of the evolu- and more of any visible variation will be genetic

tionary-humanist approach is that the mind- in origin.

bodies the educator has to deal with are not all All these points are highly relevant to our sub-

alike. Far from it! They are extremely diverse: ject. Thus, it is no good training a colour-blind

in technical terminology, they exhibit a high child as a painter or a signalman, or trying to

degree of variance, both genetic and non-genetic. give mental defectives the same educational

treatment as normal children.

Environment and Heredity

Perhaps the most surprising recent modifica-

Unfortunately, ideological warfare between the tional change in man has been the secular trend

environmentalists and the hereditarians is still rampant over all the broad territories of the

towards earlier maturity, summarized by Dr. J. M. Tanner in his book, Education and Physical

social sciences, including the domain of education, with the environmentalists still maintaining

Growth,12 which has been going on in Western countries for over a century. The onset of

a vigorous offensive campaign. In order to bring the two parties together, the biologist must point

puberty, as measured by the age of girls at menarche, has been advanced by some four

out that their dispute is as silly and nonsensical as that between the Bigendians and the Littlend-

months every decade, from over seventeen years in 1850 to about thirteen years to-day. This is

ians in Gulliver's Travels. The simple and funda- correlated with a marked acceleration of growth.

mental fact is that neither environment nor During every decade of the seventy years since

heredity is the more important. Both are neces-
sary: and all characters of all organisms are the result of theirjoint effect. When organisms differ, whether children or chrysanthemums, their

systematic measurement was undertaken, Western adolescents have become bigger and heavier
by about one inch in height and four pounds in weight; and maximum stature is now achieved by

differences may be due either to differences in the age of sixteen to seventeen in girls and environment-the conditions in which they have eighteen to nineteen in boys, as against nearly

grown and developed-or to differences in heredity-their genetic outfit of chromosomes and

twenty-five in 1850. Whatever its cause (which must certainly be sought in environmental fac-

genes. But the share of either party in the com- tors, such as nutrition and healthy upbringing),

bined operation may differ markedly in magnitude. Thus, the share of genetic determination is

this trend has various interesting consequences for education. Thus, boys' schools are faced with

high in mammalian hair- and eye-colour, in human colour-blindness and various forms of

a shortage of trebles for their choirs; and an average boy of fifteen is likely to be taller and

mental defect, while that of environmental modi- heavier than his woman teacher, and is pretty

fication is high in size in flowering plants, or
health and physique in human beings. One of

certain (on the basis of Kinsey's findings) to have stronger sexual urges. And the average girl of

the most striking effects of the last war in Britain fifteen is now physiologically and psychologically

was the notable improvement in the physique a woman. The adolescent crisis, with all its prob-

and mental energy of children, especially in the lower income brackets, due to the special rations

lems, has been shifted to an earlier age, and educational systems must adjust themselves to this

of milk and vitamins that they were given-and fact.

this, of course, has had obvious implications for

their education.

Genetic Differences and Education

If a diversified population is made genetically Then there are various kinds of genetic difference

uniform, as when man makes pure strains of for the educational system to cope with. There

dogs or wheat by inbreeding and selection, more are large quantitative differences ingeneral intelli-

and more of its visible variation will be modifi- gence, from potential genius to mental defect.

cational, due to differences in the environment. There are also large quantitative differences in

Conversely, if its environment is made more uni- the genetic rate of mental development, notably

form, as when an unselected strain of plants is between quick learners and rapid developers on

grown in carefully controlled conditions, more the one hand and slow learners and maturers on

89

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the other (this, of course, has nothing to do with world it is a severe handicap. However, the

modificational changes in rate, such as the trend modem world has found a way to circumvent the

to earlier maturity I have just discussed). More genetic handicap, by correcting the defect with

research is needed to determine how far rapid spectacles: by this means the abnormalisbrought

learning is correlated with general genetic intelli- within the range of the normal.

gence and with high final performance, and My second example concerns schizophrenia.

whether slow learning may not sometimes give This disordered condition of mind, which all too

more solid later achievement; but clearly our often leads to certifiable insanity, affects nearly

educational system must take account of these one in every ten of all human beings, in every

differences.

country and in every type and level of culture.

There are also qualitative differences in the Recent work shows that it almost certainly has a

way children's minds handle the raw materials of genetic basis, and is due to a metabolic error

experience,* notably between visualizers, audi- which (among other things) causes the discharge tory types, concrete manipulators, and abstract into the blood of an abnormal compound related

verbalizers: the traditional verbal type of educa- to adrenalin. This interferes with the working of

tion is not very good for visualizers. Then there a very important bit of the brain's machinery for

are differences in creativity and in the capacity building up the chaos of sensations into an for absorbing and regurgitating academic know- orderly system of perceptions. The confirmed

ledge. The two are not by any means always strongly correlated-indeed, a recent American study has come out with the sweeping assertion that "the class standing of a student has no correlation with his performance in later years", and

schizophrenic's perceptual world is a disorderly one, not unlike that into which a normal person makes a brief entrance by way of mescalin or lysergic acid.
The educational relevance of this is becoming

that the U.S. educational system, based as it is evident. The genetically schizoprone child begins

on scholastic achievement, may actually be elimi- to manifest overt schizophrenia when the dis-

nating some of the best creative talent.

orderliness of his perceptual world throws him

And there are psychosomatic differences, of thoroughly out of gear with the ordered "nor-

anatomy and temperament. After Sheldon's work, mal" world of his fellow human beings and his

not even the most aprioristic theorist could expect society. As one might expect, this usually hapthat a skinny ectomorph would react to the edu- pens during the adolescent crisis. Psychiatrists cational process in the same way asa comfortable are busy devising chemical tests for the schizo-

endomorph with perhaps double the ratio of guts phrenia-provoking compound in the blood urine to muscle and a radically different pattern of and psychological tests for its effects on the perhormones being squirted into his bloodstream. cept-building functions of the brain. These tests

The problem is how to be educationally fair to could best be carried out in the school. And then the whole range of these and other variant psy- the schizoprones could be given special education-

chophysical types. Here, as in so many fields, the al treatment designed to correct their defective

abnormal may shed light on the normal. Let me picture of the world and reconcile it with that of give two examples of abnormality and how their normal fellows. They need corrective specsociety can deal with it. Myopia-short-sighted- tacles for their defect of inner vision, as myopic

ness-is mainly genetic in origin: in a form children need them for their defect of external

severe enough to be a handicap in ordinary life if uncorrected, it occurs in well over 1 per cent of human children. It may have been of selective value during early stages of man's history, when fine craftsmanship was needed and craftsmen
were kept out of the fighting; but in the modern

vision. For many, perhaps most of them, this should not be too difficult. Meanwhile, the possibility of lifting the heavy burden of schizophrenia from the shoulders of humanity is a notable challenge to the educational profession.
The general challenge of human diversity re-

mains. Man is the most diverse and variable of

* For a general discussion of this subject, see Huxley, 1962.85

all organisms-variable anatomically and physiologically, intellectually and temperamentally,

9o

EDUCATION AND THE HUMANIST REVOLUTION

genetically and environmentally. And a large mands an increasing number of men and women

degree of diversity is a source of strength to of great ability and high competence to run

human societies, especially to high civilizations. them. It should be a prime duty of our educa-

Successful psychosocial evolution demands a tionalists to meet this demand. For this, genetics

variety of gifts, temperaments and talents. A and education must join hands. We need a com-

humanist society needs men of action and men prehensive selection system to catch as many

of thought; scientists and artists; brain-workers potential geniuses and top people as possible,

and labourers; saints and policemen; adven- and, once caught, we must give them an education

turers and stay-at-homes; eccentrics and estab- designed to help and permit them to realize their

lished civil servants; leaders and led.

capacities to the full. Failure to do this will lead

It would be a good thing if the numbers of the to a running down of national efficiency and

too abnormal and the too defective could be re- national achievement. It will also be a lamentable

duced, those of the more intelligent and more waste ofthat most valuable ofallhumanresources,

gifted increased; and perhaps one day eugenics mental and spiritual power, and will prevent

will get busy on this.* Meanwhile, the problem many potential geniuses from developing their

is how to utilize the existing and potential diver- precious talents.

sity of people to the best advantage of society In doing justice to human variety, education-

and of themselves. As Dwight Ingle has written, alists will be accused of encouraging an elite, and

individuality must be a parameter of the educa- of aiding new class differences. That must be

tional process.

faced. Nature is not egalitarian; societies must

The Texan anatomist, Roger Williams,'6 who always be stratified in some way; and, whether

has done more than anyone else to establish the you call them an elite or anything else, outstand-

full range of man's anatomical and physiological ing people are needed at the top.

diversity, has proposed Free but Unequal as the

motto ofa modern society. Freedom in inequality Human Development is a good basis for an educational system to work Since education sets out to promote the right

on: but as a goal for it to work towards, I would development of human beings, a proper under-

suggest Varied Excellence. In any case, educationists must assuredly
struggle against conformism and must resist the imposition of all dogmatisms, including their own. They will remember that cultural and individual diversity is precious in itself, and will strive for vivifying variety and against monotonous mediocrity. They will try to ensure that the more gifted children are not bored and frustrated by being kept back to the level of the average, the less gifted not made to suffer by being pushed

standing of the developmental process is important both for educators and for their political masters. Development is a natural process and
must be studied as such, not in the abstract or scholastic terms of some presumed intrinsic vital
principle or ideal purpose, nor merely in terms of its elements and origins, real of postulated. In
regard to human (and animal) behaviour, the reductionists are still very vocal. Orthodox
psychoanalysts spend most of their time searching for origins, overzealous behaviourists and

beyond their capacities. They will try to provide a neurologists proclaim that mind does not really range of opportunities to meet their pupils' range exist or is merely an epiphenomenal resultant of of aptitudes. But they will hold fast to the matter, the Skinnerian school asserts that humanist vision of variety in unity, and will en- nothing but learning is of much importance in

deavour to provide a common ground of thought and action, a unitary vision and framework of ideas which all human variants can share.
One point deserves special consideration. The increasing complexity of modern societies de-

behaviour. We must beware of all such "nothing-but-
tcry". Whenever anybody says or implies that something is "nothing but" something else, or is explicable "merely" in terms of its elements or

origins, we can be quite sure that he is wrong. In

* See my Galton Lecture, "Eugenics in Evolutionary Perspective" (Huxley, 1962).8

opposition to reductionism I suggest eductionism as a rallying cry to constructive thought. It

ER-E

9'

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

means that when we are considering any deve-
lopment process of biological or human develop-
ment (including, of course, evolutionary as well
as individual development), we must begin with
its operative function-its organized end-result
and how well or badly it works in the business of
life. Then we can analyse it into its elementary
components and search for its origins. Finally, we must study the operation of the process itself to find out how it educes its end-result out of its original components-in more general terms, how it actualizes its potentialities. Only then shall we be in a position to set about improving it.
The first and obvious fact about human development is that it is not a mere unfolding of a miniature model; the developing human being passes through a series of radically different stages-infancy, childhood, boy- or girlhood, adolescence, maturity, each of them demanding different educational treatment. Yet many educational systems have insisted on treating the child as a miniature man, and others as so much blank or plastic material, to be written on or moulded at the educator's will.
In reality, the development of man, like that of all other organisms, is what biologists call epigenetic. It is a cybernetic process full of feedback mechanisms, and produces both complexity and emergent novelty. The modern science of development has shed the title of Embryology in favour of Epigenetics.
To-day we are beginning to explore the mechanisms by which the genetic code inscribed in the chromosomes of the egg is translated, through the co-operative interaction of the genes and their environment, into bodily and mental organization, and are discovering various of the principles at work. One of the most important of these is what Waddington15 has called the canalization of development into a number of channels, each leading in a definite direction towards a specific kind of end-result, while any departure from their "right" course is automatically corrected. They thus have a high capacity for self regulation-perhaps self-direction is the better
term.
Such processes Waddington calls creodes, meaning, by creode, "a pathway of change" which is equilibrated, in the sense that the system tends to return to it after disturbance. Some

creodic systems provide alternative but sharply
distinct pathways: thus, the creode concemed
with the development of our reproductive organs
can be switched by means of the sex-hormones
into one or other of the pathways leading to
normal male or to normal female organization.
And, of course, many creodes can be somewhat
deviated by the environment without giving an abnormal result: sunlight can deviate our skincolour from pale to dark, exercise can lead to
muscular development. Other creodic canalization systems may be
more plastic and permit the organism to wander
off in various directions over the developmental landscape. This applies especially to the behaviour-systems of higher vertebrates, whose learning capacities permit them to adjust their activities to their experience; and most notably to that of man. The creodic system concerned with human behaviour is so widely and deeply plastic that it not only provides for an extensive range of wandering and branching in later stages of development, but can be radically influenced at its early roots and in the main trunk of its
growth. It has to integrate competing and even con-
flicting basic drives and desires into some sort of wholeness. Integration can be prevented by depriving the child of some basic ingredient for his psychosocial development, as John Bowlby2 has shown with maternal deprivation. It can be traumatically distorted by internal conflict culminating in repression, which then leads to the projection of one's own guilt and repressed aggression
outward on to others, or sometimes inward on to oneself. An excess load of infantile guilt may
produce anything from a cruel superego and a harsh and unforgiving morality to an inferiority complex and an over-meticulous conscience. A load of sexual guilt at adolescence coupled with frustrating failure to achieve satisfactory social adjustment may lead to an amoral and asocial bored indifference, to a retreat from the social world into neurotic depression or, at the other extreme, to an assertion of the ego's significance by violent and anti-social actions: meaninglessness is the parent of delinquency. Clearly educational systems cannot supply psychoanalytic treatment, nor can they take over from parents the job of looking after the early development of

92

EDUCATION AND THE HUMANIST REVOLUTION

their babies. But they can do much to correct behavioural bonds have a genetic built-in basis,

infantile distortions, to bypass adolescent frus- but only develop to full effectiveness through

trations, and to replace meaninglessness with some sort of learning under the impact of ex-

significance. They can do so by providing oppor- perience. Thus, the original basis ofthe offspring-

tunities for fulfilment and satisfaction in all sorts of ways, and, in particular, through activities which make boys and girls feel that they matter that they mean something to themselves and
other people. In general, educators should try to provide
children with what I may call integrative creodes -developmental processes which will steer themselves towards more effective integration of knowledge and behaviour. This does not just mean the "moral education" that conventional educational systems aspire to give: it means pro-

parent bond in monkeys, as Professor Harlow has shown, is merely the experience of something soft and furry: but to convert it into an operationally effective bond between a mother and her offspring, a long further chain of reciprocal ex-
periences is needed. Secondly, close and intimate relations between
individuals usually involve an element of hostility, and therefore of aggression as well as of attraction. This is true of the relations between members of a mated pair as well as between

viding children with more effective systems of members of a social group, and often between

canalizing their own moral, intellectual and parents and their young. Thus, in what is often

spiritual development.

misleadingly called the courtship of birds, the

How to achieve this aim properly is a matter attitudes of the mates as they approach each

for much research and experiment, though clearly other are the resultant of a mixture of attraction,

a good deal can be done to avoid frustration by attack, and escape. As ethologists like Lorenz10

providing channels of fulfilment within the edu- and Tinbergen"3 have so beautifully shown,

cational system. Group projects can obviously these attitudes have then been (metaphorically)

help in giving a feeling of signifiance. But we seized upon by natural selection and turned into

want to know what sort of project and what formal displays serving as moves in the repro-

type and size of group gives what degree of signi- ductive game. Or, to take an example from a

ficance to what kinds of boys and girls. Already, mammal which (like man) is both social and

both sociologists and ethologists are busy study- fierce, fights between wolves are prevented from

ing the general problem of social groups and leading to a really serious outcome by means of

their working; the time is ripe for educators to a special ceremonial attitude. If a younger and

combine with their colleagues in tackling the weaker wolf is in grave danger during a fight, he

special problem of the role of groups in educa- crouches and presents the vulnerable back of his

tion. head to his more powerful enemy; and this auto-

matically inhibits the aggressive urges of the

Group Behaviour

attacker. The basis for this socially valuable bit

Ethology is giving a useful lead, by studying the of behaviour is built-in to the genetical equip-

formation and function of behavioural bonds in ment of the species.

animals. In higher vertebrates, such as geese, All such behaviour has been largely ritualized

jackdaws, monkeys and chimpanzees, such -turned into formal activities of functional

bonds involve emotions: so they do in ourselves, value; and my third point is that in this process

but in ourselves they can be reinforced by em- of ritualization, the element of aggression is

pathy, which seems to be present only in rudi- made to serve some useful purpose, whether by

mentary form in animals. They include the bond redirecting it against other objects or by utilizing

between parent and offspring, the pair-bond tying its energy in the performance of the bonding

mated birds together, the gregarious bonds in ceremony. Rituals are thus methods for trans-

bird flocks or caribou herds, the social bond forming frustrating conflict situations into bio-

operating in a wolf pack, rookeries or baboon logically significant activities. Clearly, something

communities.

similar could be achieved in education. Many

Some important points are emerging. First, all conflicts could be acted out in ritual form, many

93

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

activities could be given added significance by the educational profession should devote a great

putting them in a formal setting.

deal of thought and energy to understanding the

nature of that crisis and devising methods to

The Adolescent Crisis

meet it. As a result of the knowledge explosion of

All primitive societies cope with the adolescent the last hundred years, the evolutionary process,

crisis of their young people by elaborate rites de in the person of post-Darwinian man, is at last

passage laden with significance. Can our over- becoming conscious of itself; it is time that the

intellectual and over-technological societies not educational process, in the person of the educa-

devise something similar? Could not all the tional profession, should become conscious of

adolescents of one age-group be called on to itself as the essential psychosocial organ for

undertake some challenging individual exploit, transmitting and transforming human culture.

as with the boys at Gordonstoun? Could not A first step, it may be suggested, would be the

another age-group be called on to embark on establishment of an Education Council, on a par

group adventures and projects; and yet another with the Arts Council, the Medical and Agricul-

to undertake some sort of service to the com- tural Research Councils, and the D.S.I.R.,

munity? Could not the end of school life be though with its own special functions. If the

celebrated in a more formal and expressive way Government were chary of giving it the same

than now?

financial aid as the other Councils, the educa-

The broader question proposes itself: cannot tional profession ought to set it up on its own,

the passage to the adult stage be linked with the confident that, once in being, it would speedily

larger community of the nation and the world, in prove itself and attract official support.

something which would really deserve the title of The overriding question for such a body to

a national, or even international, service? The consider would be this: how can education help

rudiments of such a service are there, in organi- in bringing coherence, significance and direction

zations like the Peace Corps, the Organization for into our chaotic, fragmented, and bewildered

Relief and Development, and the Youth Con- world? It could do so in two distinct but inter-

servation Corps, in exploration societies and dependent ways, one primarily concerned with

travel studies. We should get on with the job of knowledge and the handling of outer experience,

seeing how to link them all up in some flexible the other with personality and the handling of

and imaginative scheme which would give out- inner experience. The first aims at providing a

lets for many types, would provide some sense of meaningful picture of the outer world and a

significance and direction to many chaotic lives coherent pattern of ideas to help in understand-

and would become an important part of the ing it and our relations with it: The second at

country's educational system.

promoting the development of a meaningful and

In this, as in many other ways, our education coherent inner world, and providing a pattern of

could be made a more integral process, and the activities and opportunities to help in achieving it.

split between its two functions of intellectual in- Various projects of this sort are already being

struction and professional training on the one initiated. Thus, the Gulbenkian Foundation is

hand, and moral education and character-for- organizing a series of conferences on education.

mation on the other, which began over two The Universities Quarterly contains a report on

thousand years ago with the rise of the Sophists proposals made at one of these conferences, for

in Greece, could be bridged.

a Social Science Research Council which would

tackle the problems of higher education in

An Education Council

Britain. The new University of Sussex is hoping

Education, in spite of all the hot air expended in to undertake a large-scale research investigation

lip-service to its importance, still has an unfor- of its own operations. And we have had the

tunately low status in our competitive techno- provocative Crowther Report.

logical world. Yet it has a crucial and very special An obvious and immediate task is to hammer role to play in helping the technological world out the details of a general curriculum which, as

through its present crisis. If it is to raise its status, I have suggested, would reflect the unitary vision

94

EDUCATION AND THE HUMANIST REVOLUTION

provided by modern science and learning. ing understanding as well as knowledge, and of

Sample text-books should be prepared, and con- assessing creativity and general capacity as well

sideration given to teaching aids and to learning as academic performance; another might look

through projects. Such a curriculum would by- into ways of preventing the growth of anti-

pass the split between Sir Charles Snow's Two rational ideas and superstitions; another would

Cultures; its very unity would give it a new deal with the question of teaching aids ;* and yet

dynamism, with sciences and humanities rein- another with the problem of ensuring an ade-

forcing each other instead of being driven into quate supply of top-level minds for the nation's

mutual hostility. Critics like Dr. Yudkin claim business, administration and culture.

that this is impossible and would involve "the The second major study would be concerned

falsely optimistic idea of an age of Leonardos". with inner development-how the educational

On the contrary, I believe that it is perfectly system could encourage the growth of integrated

possible to give every normal boy or girl a personalities, at war neither with themselves nor

general understanding of what science and his- with society. Such a system would bypass the

tory and literature and industry are about: this split between intellectual and moral education.

could be achieved by the age of fifteen or sixteen In order to achieve this, the educational process

though it would be much easier if secondary edu- must help in the resolution of inevitable conflicts.

cation were extended to seventeen or eighteen. It must provide opportunities not only for enjoy-

And the first year or so of college or university ment, but for fulfilment of many kinds, especially

life should supplement necessary specialization for consolidating the boy's or girl's identity and

with some reasonably advanced study of comple- for achieving a sense of significance. Such a study

mentary fields. Throughout, there would be em- will be difficult. It will involve calling for help

phasis on the role of concepts and techniques of from a whole range of ologies-anthropology,

thought and expression as mental tools and ethology, psychiatry, child psychology, physio-

machinery enabling one to comprehend external logy. It will involve facing the problem of evil

reality more readily and more satisfactorily; on and what theologians call original sin, and re-

projects as well as on customary instruction; and conciling some violently opposed points of view.

on making the process of learning and under- But if it is successful it could lead to new con-

standing enjoyable.

ceptions of the functions of education and a

In relation with this major theme, one sub- revolutionary overhaul of its methods. It could

group might study examination systems, with also enable education to affirm its importance as

particular reference to devising methods of test- a transformer of society as well as a transmitter

of culture; for the products of such a personally

* Some years ago when I visited the Great Mosque of Kairouan, the oldest university in the Westem world, I saw not only the traditional method of instruction, groups of students listening to a learned man by a pillar in the mosque itself, but was also shown with pride the modern improvements, in the shape of little classrooms round the great courtyard, each equipped with a blackboard. I had

fuffilling education would undoubtedly press for the establishment of a real-life Fulfilment Society.
Then there is the exciting territory of nonverbal and non-intellectual education to be ex-
plored and exploited.t There is the problem of

never before realized the revolutionary impact that this teaching aid must have had on the educational process. I suspect that the impact of our modern teaching aids-

education's link with the arts.+ Our educational system is now being called on to supply the

films, closed-circuit TV, radio relays, and teaching nation with large numbers of scientists and tech-

machines will be even more revolutionary.

nicians; should it not be required to furnish a

t For an imaginative treatment of this subject, see Aldous Huxley's Utopia, Island; and for an interesting experiment in art appreciation and art education, in which pupils learn to grasp the "perceptual unity" of a painting or a situation when illuminated for a tenth of a second, see Hoyt Sherman's Drawing by Seeing.

similar quota of artists, architects, sculptors, decorators and designers? There is the question of giving schoolmasters (and, of course, schoolmistresses) opportunities for research and creative work. There is the tricky problem of tests

+ As a recent exhibition at the U.S. Embassy in London intelligence tests, open-ended tests, aptitude tests,

demonstrated, the study, appreciation and practice of art are now becoming an integral part of American programmes of higher education.

personality tests. There is the problem of how far the practice of meditation can replace or supple-

95.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

ment formal religious services, prayer periods
and scripture lessons. And there is the world problem. The world has
become one defacto. It must achieve some unification of thought if it is to avoid disaster (let alone proceed to political unification), and this can only come about with the aid of education. We must remember that two-fifths of the world's
adult population-700 million grown men and women-are still illiterate, that the world's provision for education at all levels is lamentably inadequate, and that the underdeveloped countries are all clamorously demanding more and better education.* Britain, as an ex-colonialist country and the senior partner in the Commonwealth, has a special responsibility for meeting these demands. Unesco is also doing a great deal in this urgent matter.
Beyond all these and many other particular problems there is the great question-mark of socalled Adult Education. With the combination of more automation, compulsory leisure, and greater spending power, we shall soon be faced with the task of extending our educational system to meet the needs of the entire adult population. Education in the ordinary limited sense seems destined to become only a part of a comprehensive and continuing process. Perhaps we should look forward to the establishment of a National Education Service. In any case, the prospect opens up all manner of exciting possibilities, which it is the duty and the privilege of the educational profession to explore.
Obviously, university Departments of Education will be required to enlarge their functions, and they will become the academic agencies of the country's educational system. By fully establishing the claims of education to equal rank with other subjects in the university curriculum, both as a field for research and a course of study as well as a training for a job or a career, they could do much to improve its public image.
But these are matters of detail. For, make no mistake, the basic task before the educational profession to-day is to study and understand the
* There is some danger of regarding education as a
panacea for emergent nations. The cost of the immediate
educational facilities demanded is often too high. Attention should also be given to schemes for economic development, which will enable an adequate educational system to be set up eventually.

evolutionary-humanist revolution in all its ramifications, to follow up its educational implications, and to enable as many as possible of the world's growing minds to be illuminated by its new vision of human destiny.
It is a strange and rather disturbing fact that in the one-volume abridgement of Toynbee's
monumental Study ofHistory'4 there is only one
short section on education, dealing merely with the impact of modem democratic theories on the subject. If the educational profession rises boldly and successfully to meet the challenge of the new knowledge and the new vision which it reveals, new histories of mankind will not only devote much more attention to education as a major function of man in society, but will single out our age as the historical moment when education was reorganized as an integral part of the psychosocial process, and became pre-eminent among all the agencies concerned with human destiny.
REFERENCES 1. American Institute of Biological Science, 1962. Bio-
logical Science Curricular Study.
2. Bowlby, John, 1957. An Ethological Approach to Research in Child Development. Brit. J. Med. Psychol., 30, 230. 1958, The Nature of the Child's Tie to His Mother. Int. J. Psychoanalysis, 39, 1.
3. Dobzhansky, Th., 1962. Mankind Evolving. Yale Univ. Press.
4. Elvin, Lionel, 1961. "An Education for Humanity", in The Humanist Frame, ed. J. S. Huxley. Allen and Unwin; Harpers.
5. Hurd, P. Dett. 1961. Biological Education in AmericanSecondarySchools 1890-1960. Amer. Inst. Biol. Sci.
6. Huxley, Julian, 1950. Ideology and Scientific Knowledge, (Huxley Lecture), in New Bottles for New Wine. Chatto and Windus; Harpers, New York, 1957.
7. Huxley, Julian, 1960. Evolution in the High-school Curriculum. School Review, 68,164. Univ. of Chicago Press.
8. Huxley, Julian, 1962. Eugenics in Evolutionary Perspective. Eugen. Rev., 54, 123.
9. Huxley, Thomas Henry, 1868. A Liberal Education and Where to Find It, in Science and Education, Essays, Vol. 3, 1893. Macmillan.
10. Lorenz, Konrad, 1952. King Solomon's Ring. Methuen.
11. Muller, H. J., 1959. One Hundred Years without Darwinism are Enough. School Sci. and Math., April, 1959.
12. Tanner, J. M., 1961. Education and Physical Growth. Univ. of London Press.
13. Tinbergen, N., 1950. The Study of Instinct. Clarendon Press.
14. Toynbee, Arnold, 1947. A Study of History (onovolume abridgement). Oxford Univ. Press.
15. Waddington, C. H., 1957. The Strategy ofthe Genes. Allen and Unwin.
16. Williams, R. J., 1953. Free and Unequal. Univ. of
Texas Press.

96

