REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS.

I69

different models. This case still requires a great deal of explanation, but concerning the facts there can be no doubt " (p. 348).
In considering this most interesting and remarkable example of mimicry it must be remembered that every one of the different mimetic forms resembles a dominant model, which also serves as a centre of mimetic attraction for other species, occasionally Papilios, but generally remote from this group. Furthermore, there can be no doubt that all the geographical races of dardanus with mimetic females form a continuous syngamic community, and that the forms of each race tend to infect the adjoining race or races. In this way we may probably account for the existence of the hippocoon form in Natal, where its model is rare, and its spread, although in smaller numbers, westward into the south of Cape Colony, where the model is unknown. Such an explanation only accounts, however, for a part of the problem; for there is no doubt that the majority of the mimetic forms are developed in relation to the relative conspicuousness and abundance of the local models. E. B. POULTON.
Hobhouse, L. T. Develop*ment and Purpose; an Essay towards a Philosophy of Evolution. London. Macmillan and Co.; r913; price ios.; pp. xxix., 383.
THOUGH Professor Hobhouse is not one of those philosophers who dread and despise scientific facts, his volume will appeal primarily to those who can enjoy a sustained effort of philosophic reasoning. It may be regarded as essentially a criticism of the notion of evolution, and its learned, laborious, and thorough discussions are intended to lead up to the conclusion that " the conception of a conditioned purpose as constituting the core of the world-process " is " probably true " (p. 368, 372). This conclusion, and the author's ways of arriving at it, will probably provoke abundance of those destructive dialectics in which philosophers excel, but it will be more profitable here to consider rather how far Professor Hobhouse has cleared up the scientific notion of evolution, and removed the scientific objections to it which often suggest themselves.
If Professor Hobhouse is found to have contributed to these two objects,
the scientific reader will readily pardon the severe abstractness of his argument, which hardly ever descends to the concrete, and the inconclusiveness of a proof which only aims at determining what must be, if certain notions of ours really and truly apply to reality, without being able to assert positively that they do.
It is, however, a little disappointing to find how much Professor Hobhouse omits. He nowhere discusses, e.g., whether the term " evolution " is not a misnomer, or perhaps a way of begging a difficult question. Verbally it is suggestive of " preformation," and has often been held, especially by philosophers, to commit science to the belief that nothing can be " evolved " which was not previously " involved." But it may be doubted whether this is really its scientific meaning, and whether the facts to be described would not be better apprehended in terms of " epigenesis." For in " evolution," as biology understands it, " accidental variation " seems an essential feature, and a source of real novelty. But if scientific evolution implies novelty, it contradicts all the metaphysics which have assumed that being is a fixed quantity and that change and time must be ultimately unreal. It will not do to slur over this antagonism by an ambiguous use of " evolution."
Again, it can hardly be denied that " evolution " has come to imply " progress "; but how far is this belief scientifically tenable? There is not a little about the known facts to suggest that the reality of evolution may be a creation of human bias and really an illusion. We believe in evolution because we shut our eyes to the facts that there is always some degeneration as well as progression, and nothing apparently to prevent degeneration from prevailing at any time. Every species lives in constant danger of extinction, and the most intelligent societies are not

170 EUGENICS REVIEW.

exempt from this. Indeed, it is part of the case for eugenics that the

most highly civilised societies have in fact so organised themselves as to

promote their own degeneration, and whether eugenics can stave this

off remains to be seen. This precariousness of progression further rein-

forces a horrid doubt, which is first suggested by what we know of the

probable rarity of the conditions under which life organized like ours

could exist in the universe, and of the risks of the colossal collisions

which generate " new stars," viz., as to whether such progression as has

occurred on earth may not be merely accidental; if so, the evidence

of terrestrial progress would be insufficient to warrant its exaltation into

a cosmic principle or even its future continuance on earth. At any rate

not even the extremest pragmatist would dare to endorse Professor

Hobhouse's hope that in the event of a solar catastrophe the human race

would contrive to migrate to another system.

In face of the facts it surely needs large drafts on the "will to

believe " for philosophers to maintain that the world which science re-

veals is " rational " in any humanly intelligible sense, and it seems im-

possible to dispose of the interpretation that the course of events is

casual and purposeless. The most that can be contended is that as the

facts can be, with more or less supplementation, fitted also into the oppo-

site hypothesis that there may be a purpose in the world, it follows that

we are not compelled intellectually to accept either, and are therefore free

to choose the alternative which we prefer. And this invincible relativity of

our ultimate theories to human prefereences might perhaps be rendered more

palatable to a rationalist, if he would only remember that, after all,

" chance," " design," " mechanism," and " teleology " are all notions which

we have excogitated for the analysis of events, and observe that none of

them work perfectly.

As regards eugenics, there is only one passage in which Professor Hob-

house touches on this topic (pp. 9-IO). After (somewhat unfairly) accusing

" the strict spirit of biology " of condemning social -sympathy as a

noxious variation and " waging war for a couple of generations on such

schemes of social and political amelioration as tend to peace and equity

between nations, co-operation between classes, and mercy and tenderness

for the weaker brethren," he admits " that the trend of biological opinion

now is to interest itself in the artificial selection of types for reproduction

as a civilised substitute for the elimination by natural forces of those

who cannot stand on their own feet." This admits, at any rate by implica-

tion, that elimination must go on, that conscious selection can hardly be

as harsh as natural, and that a society which is organised to realise a

biological ideal is not unlikely to be better than one which has no aim at

all, or madly strives to frustrate the fundamental laws of organic life.

If all the sentimental sociologists of the old school could be similarly

got to see the folly and wickedness of social institutions which debase

the race and imperil its continuance, the cause of eugenics would

speedily be won.

F. C. S. SCHILLER.

Sehuster, EDGAR, M.A., D.Sc. Ezugenics: A Science and an Ideal. The Nation's Library. London. Collins; 1913; price IS.; Pp. 264.
IN this volume an attempt has been made, so we are told in the preface, "to give an account of the meaning of the word eugenics, the aims of
those who advocate an eugenic policy, and the more important of the problems which confront them," an attempt which has certainly been markedly successful considering the space available. By skilfully gliding over difficult points, an author may create in the reader's mind the wholly erroneous belief that the subject has been completely mastered, in which case his work should be utterly condemned. Or he may frankly rely more on authority than on argument, and may, without creating any such false impressions, give an account of the opinions held by the

