THE HAZARDS OF NUCLEAR RADIATION

Medical Research Council. The Hazards to Man of Nuclear and Allied Radiations.*

HIS important document will be of T interest to many readers of the REVIEW
who have no access to the original publication. The sections relating to genetics are therefore summarized below.
Measurement of Radiation
The biological effects of radiation are closely related to the dose or quantity of radiation received. The dose of radiation might be described as the energy which is absorbed in the small mass of tissue upon which the radiation impinges. After some types of damage by radiation, repair processes take place, and the rate at which the dose of radiation is given becomes an important factor in determining the abnormal biological effect. The effect of a dose of radiation spread over a long period may be much smaller than that of a smaller amount given in a shorter time. On the other hand, with some forms of biological damage, including the production of gene mutations, recovery does not seem to occur and the damage depends on the total dose and is independent of the time in which this dose is given.
The international unit of dosage of radiation is the Roentgen, which is abbreviated to " r ". The intensity of radiation to. which we are ordinarily exposed from our natural surroundings is about O I r per year. The destructiveness of different types of radiation, for example, Alpha and Beta particles, Gamma rays, X-rays, may be expressed in relation to that of the equivalent amount in terms of energy of gamma rays.
Genetic Effects of Radiation
Knowledge of the genetic effects of radia-
* London, 1956. H.M.S.O. Cmd. 9780. Pp. Vii+
I28. Price s5s.6d.

tion is very limited. Any conclusions must be regarded as provisional. There is little
direct information about the genetic effects
of radiation in man, and reliance must be placed on animal experiments. This experi-
mental evidence is itself incomplete, but is
consistent for the organisms which it has
been possible to study, and it is reasonable
to suppose that man will follow the same
general pattern. But animal experiments
cannot be taken as providing a secure basis
for quantitative estimates concerning man.
Ionizing radiations may affect reproduc-
tive cells in three ways; the cells may die, their chromosomes may be broken, or the genes may be caused to mutate. The first, always, and the second usually, will terminate the lineage of the cell affected. Animal experiments show that chromosome fragmentation may occasionally produce repeated malformations or abortions in the descendants, but this will only occur if conception takes place within a few months
of irradiation. The third and most important effect for
later generations, gene mutations, are nearly always harmful. They are very much more common than chromosome breakages. Gene mutations induced by artificial irradiation are not novel mutations. Man has always been exposed to some radiation, artificial irradiation increases the rate but does not change the type of mutation.
There is no known threshold for the induction of gene mutations by radiation, any additional exposure, however small, may be expected to raise the mutation rate if only by a minute amount. Again, no exceptions are known to the rule that the effect in inducing mutations is proportional to the total dose of radiation received, and independent of the rate or intervals at which this dose is given. In making calculations allowance must be made for the fact that it

'59 THE EUGENICS REVIEW, October I956. 48, 3.

i6o THE EUGENICS REVIEW

is the dose accumulated before the average age of reproduction which is important.
Effect of Doubling the Mutation Rate
The effect of doubling, for one generation alone, the mutation rate for a condition such as achondroplasia, where the gene is'dominant, would be to double the number of affected children born to unaffected parents. Such children are the majority since only about one in five achondroplasiacs reproduce. But within five or six generations the number of achondroplasiacs would have returned to normal. The effect of a permanent doubling of the mutation rate would be to cause the incidence of achondroplasia to rise to near double the present level over three or four generations.
With a sex-linked recessive gene such as haemophilia, doubling of the mutation rate for a single generation would lead to a 29 per cent increase in the next generation and then a gradual fall. A permanent doubling would lead to a 90 per cent increase over five or six generations. With a recessive trait such as phenyl pyruvic amentia a doubling of the mutation rate for one generation would lead to only a i per cent rise in the next generation, a further small increase over the second generation and a slow return to the previous level. A permanent doubling of the mutation rate would cause a slow rise of about i per cent per generation and so about a 50 per cent rise over fifty generations. To estimate the rate of effect of permanent doubling of the mutation rate on separate groups of diseases it is necessary to determine what proportion of them are due to single genes.
Mental Defect
About half of the instances of severe mental defect are estimated to be due to single genes, the majority recessive.
Mental Illness
The genetic background of the two common types of psychosis, schizophrenia and manicdepressive psychosis, is uncertain. But

since genetic predisposition plays some part it is to be expected that the number of cases would slowly increase until the limiting value of about twice the original number was approached.
Blindness
About three-quarters of all blindness of early onset can be attributed to hereditary causes and about half of this to single genes.
Effect of Increased Mutation Rates on Hereditary Traits showing continuous Variation about the Normal
Most of the variations between human beings is not discontinuous in the sense that the population may be divided into many normal and a few pathological individuals; it is continuous with imperceptible gradations over a wide range. The hereditary portion of this variation is believed to be due to the combined action of many genes which supplement one another in producing their effects. In theory the basic effect of an increase in mutation would be to increase the amount of variation, to raise the number of extreme types at the expense of the central types. The little information aVailable suggests that only a small fraction of the heritable variation seen is due to new mutations. A permanent doubling of the mutation rate would therefore only very slowly lead to a doubling of the heritable variation.
With intelligence, a quality showing continuous variation, the effect of a permanent doubling of the mutation rate would lead in the long run over hundreds of generations to a three- to five-fold increase of the numbers falling short of an I.Q. of 70, the level which is conventionally taken to be the minimum requirement for normal schooling. There would not necessarily be a corresponding increase in the proportion of highly intelligent, as experience with experimental animals suggests that an increase in variation produces a disproportionately large increase in the direction

THE HAZARDS OF NUCLEAR RADIATION

i6i

opposite to that which natural selection has are radiation induced, so that the doubling

been pushing the character. In man natural dose for humans will lie between I5 and i50

selection has presumably been operating r, perhaps between 30 and 8o r. It is empha-

towards an increase in intelligence.

sised that if an individual receives such a

doubling dose there is little risk to his own

descendants. A fraction of a population

Observation on Human Populations can, without significant risk to their progeny,

exposed to Radiation
The Atomic Bomb Casualty Commission

receive doses which would be serious if applied to the whole population.

in Japan followed the results of 8o,ooo

pregnancies to women in Hiroshima and Nagasaki in the years following the atomic

Sources of Background Radiation

explosions. They found no evidence of any The chief sources of natural radiation are:

genetic effect on the offspring of men and cosmic radiation, amounting to about o0o28

women who had received highl doses of r per annum to the gonads at sea level,

radiation when compared with controls. terrestrial radiation from radio-active ele-

The possible exception is that there were ments in rocks varying according to local

changes in the sex ratio of the children born geology, 0o034 r to the gonads per annum,

to those who had been heavily irradiated.* and internal radiation from the radio-active

There were not many individuals who elements in the body, oo023 r to the gonads

survived high doses, and from the nature of per year. In sum these sources amount to

the evidence a doubling of the congenital little short of o-i r per annum-that is,

malformation rate and a 50 per cent rise in 3 r over thirty years.

stillbirth rate following exposure of one or

other parent to 200 r might have escaped

detection.

Radiation from the Appurtenances of

Civilization

The Radiation "Doubling Dose" for Human Mutation Rates
In animals, spontaneous mutations are not due solely to radiation and so it cannot be assumed that an extra amount of radiation equal to that received naturally could double the mutation rate. It may well be that the amount of mutation due to radiation and the amount due to other causes varies from one gene to another. Natural radiation over about thirty yqars, which is approximately the average age at which an individual reproduces, is about 3 r. The Japanese data do not contradict a doubling dose as low as 3 r but could more easily be accounted for if the doubling dose is higher. Evidence from insects and mice tentatively suggests that from 2-20 per cent of human mutations
*At Copenhagen in August 1956 at the First International Congress of Human Genetics, Professor J. V. Neel reported that information from further pregnancies did not confirm this change in the sex ratio.

The average amount received to the
gonads from diagnostic X-rays is about 0-022 r per annum, about a fifth of that
received from natural sources. The amount received from radiotherapy is considerably less but cannot be assessed. Wearing a luminous watch gives about o-oI r to the
gonads and an average dose from this source is o-ooI r per annumr. Television sets contribute on the average much less* than o-ooI r per annum. Occupation risk, including that for those working for the Atomic Energy Authority, contributes an average of 2-5 r per annum to the individual man and woman actually exposed, but an average to the gonads of the whole population of about 0'002 r per year. In sum the population in this country receives about an extra 25 per cent radiation in addition to that received from natural sources, the most important contribution coming from diagnostic radiation.
The contribution of atomic and much

i62 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

more important the thermo-nuclear devices exploded hitherto to the gonads of people' in this country is likely to be O.OOI-o.002 r in the next fifty years. Continiuous explosions at the rate of those over the past few
years would give an individual in this
country only about an average of o'ooI r per annum. But an increase in the rate of explosions of thermo-nuclear (hydrogen) bombs would increase this amount correspondingly.

Other Changes from Thermo-nuclear
Explosions
Apart from the genetic dangers the most obvious risk to health is from the accumulation of radio-strontium in the bones. A continuation of firing at the present level would lead to an accumulation of about iooth of the estimated safe dose.
C. 0. CARTER.

IN THE OCTOBER I956 NUMBER OF
PHYSIOLOGICAL ZOOLOGY
Edited by Thomas Park, University of Chicago
ANTIGENIC TRANSFORMATION AS ADAPTIVE RESPONSE OF PARAMECIUM AURELIA TO PATULIN, RELATION TO CELL DIVISION
By MARY L. AUSTIN, DOROTHEA WIDMAYER, and LOLA M. WALKER, Department of ZoOlogy and Physiology, Wellesley Col1ege, Wellesley, Massachusetts
CHROMATOGRAPHIC DIFFERENCES BETWEEN MALES AND FEMALES IN DROSOPHILA MELANOGASTER AND THE ROLE OF THE X AND Y CHROMOSOMES
By ALLEN S. Fox, Department of ZoOlogy, Michigan State University, East Lansing,
A Michigan
MODIFICATIONS OF TYROSINASE ACTIVITY DURING THE EARLY DEVELOPMENT OF RANA PIPIENS EMBRYOS
By Richard N. Stearns and Lester Goldstein, Department of P4ysiology, Albert
Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York
AUDIOGENIC CONVULSIONS IN MALE RATS BEFORE AND AFTER CASTRATION AND DURING REPLACEMENT THERAPY
By WILLIAM BEVAN and RALPH MCC. CHINN, Department of Psychology, Emory
University, Georgia
PHYSIOLOGICAL ZOOLOGY is published quarterly in January, April, July and October.
Subscription 75s. per volume plus postage 4s. Single copies 22s. 6d. plus postage ls.
THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS, 5750 Ellis Avenue, CHICAGO
Agents in Great Britain: CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS, Bentley House, 200 Euston Road, London, N.W.I

