THE EUGENICS SOCIETY

T HE Annual General Meeting was held at 69 Eccleston Square, S.W.i, on Tuesday, June I7th, I94I, at 4.30 p.m.
In the absence of the President, Mr. B. S. Bramwell occupied the Chair. The Business Secretary read the notice convening the Meeting.
MINUTES. The Minutes of the Annual General Meeting held on Tuesday, May 28th, I940, which were contained in the Annual Report, and included in the April issue of the EUGENICS REVIEW (copies of which were distributed at the Meeting), were taken as read and signed as correct.
ANNUAL REPORT. The Chairman presented the Annual Report, briefly outlining the main activities of the Society during the past year. The formal adoption was seconded by Mr. Titmuss and was carried unanimously.
STATEMENT OF ACCOUNTS AND BALANCE SHEET. The Honorary Treasurer presented the Statement of Accounts and Balance Sheet for the year ended December 3ISt, I940. These were unanimously adopted.
APPOINTMENT OF HONORARY OFFICERS

AND COUNCIL FOR THE YEAR I94I-2. Following the procedure of I940-I, it was agreed that the Honorary Officers and Council should remain as appointed at the Annual
General Meeting held on May i6th, I939,
with the exception of Sir Charles ArdenClose, whose resignation had already been reported and accepted, and that the Emergency Committee for the ensuing year should consist of the following: The Lord Horder, Mr. Cecil Binney, Mr. B. S. Bramwell, Mr. C. F. Chance, Miss E. Corry, Hon. Mrs. Grant Duff, Mr. W. T. J. Gun, Mrs. E. M. Hubback, Dr. A. J. Lewis, Mr. R. Martin, Mr. R. M. Titmuss.
ELECTION OF AUDITORS FOR THE YEAR I94I-2. It was proposed by Mr. Gun, seconded by Mr. Martin and carried unanimously, that Messrs. West and Drake be re-elected.
A vote of thanks, proposed by Mr. Martin to Mrs. Grant Duff for her work in connection with the informal luncheons which she was organizing, and congratulations upon the success of the speakers whose services she had been able to secure, was carried unanimously.

ANNUAL REPORT, 1941-2

In this Report the accounts relate to the period December 3Ist, I940, to Deceniber 3ISt, I94I. The rest of the Report covers the period from March 3ISt, I94I, to March 3Ist,
I942.
The Report has deliberately been made as brief as possible owing to the present difficult conditions, but the work of the Society has been carried on, and is epitomized as follows:
Problems of Population.-During the year I940-I Dr. R. R. Kuczynski continued his work on Colonial Population problems. The book, which is expected to run to about

one million words, is to be published soonprobably in America. The demographic problems of the Colonies have never before been studied, and Dr. Kuczynski's work will therefore be of great value and importance. It will be recalled that this investigation has been made possible by a grant from the Carnegie Corporation of America.
Dr. Elsas, who has been investigating the relationship between Population problems and Housing, is shortly to have a book published (based on the first part of his work) by Messrs. P. S. King. Publication has been
made possible by a guarantee from the

39

