DIVORCE AND ILLEGITIMACY.
By MAJOR LEONARD DARWIN.
IN the last issue of this REVIEW Mrs. Gotto discussed in a very interesting manner those eugenic considerations which should be held in view in reconstruction, and I need hardly say that I find myself fully in accord with the principles therein enunciated. Unfortunately, when it comes to the practical application of these principles we part company to a certain extent, at all events as regards certain questions connected with Divorce. In the following observations I fear I may wander somewhat too far from the eugenic path, and it may be as well to say quite plainly that my remarks are no more to be taken as an official pronouncement on the part of the Society than was the case with the article to which I am in a measure replying.
The Matrimonial Clauses Bill, which Mrs. Gotto wishes us to support, would give the right of obtaining a Divorce to those who had been legally separated for three years, whilst it would permit those who had voluntarily separated for that period to apply for a Divorce. Mrs. Gotto would prefer the period to be five years, and in that view at all events I agree. Unfortunately the Bill at present says three years. Now it is exceedingly difficult to foretell the result of any such enactment. At present legal separation is, I understand, sanctioned by our Judges, not when the demand seems to be the result of a mere quarrel, but only when there has been serious matrimonial misconduct; and if this attitude of the Judges were to be maintained, Divorce would not be obtainable except in these circumstances. But if there should be in the Act no clear indication of the intention of the Legislature in regard to the nature of the causes of separation justifying Divorce, and if there should be in future any progressive lowering of the national standard in regard to the marriage tie, would not the Judges slowly follow in the wake of public opinion ? In these circum-

DIVORCE AND ILLEGITIMACY.

297

stances might not Divorces become not only immediately but also progressively easier to obtain?
The aim of the eugenist is to promote parenthood amongst the higher types, and to check fertility in inherently inferior homes; and when considering the possible effect of this legislation, the first question which naturally arises is whether more or less children would be born as the result of the proposed reform, and whether the excess or defect in children would be above or below the average in civic worth. This is no easy matter to decide. The incapacity to live with a selected partner indicates some serious defects in character, and those divorced as a consequence of separation would therefore be likely to be, on the whole, below the average in worth. On the other hand, it may be claimed that the married, as a whole, are above the average of the nation, since by selecting the married we exclude all who are living with mates to whom they are not married. Thus even if we should conclude that more children would be born as the direct result of this reform, or of parents who had been divorced under the Act as the result of separation-and this is not at all certain-some might argue that the result would be eugenic, and others that it would be dysgenic. Mrs. Gotto no doubt urges that in many cases 'A separation is due to definite defects, such as insanity or criminal tendencies on the part of one partner, and in such cases it is surely in every way beneficial to the community that the fit partner should have the option of re-marriage." But here again we cannot say for certain whether the fit partneror rather the more fit partner-would be above the average of the whole community. Moreover, if we look to recurrent insanity, for example, as being a defect the inheritance of
which is greatly to be dreaded, no one who has read the pathetic account of Charles Lamb's periodical tramps to the workhouse with his sister, when voluntarily going into confinement, would wish that a man should desert his wife in like circumstances. The best men and women in many cases would, whilst avoiding parenthood, cleave to their defective partners, thus leaving it to the less courageous to make separation a ground for Divorce. No doubt Divorce from the unfit will in some cases prevent

40o8 EUGENICS REVIEW.
parenthood by the unfit, and no doubt also Divorce would open jut a wider and better field of choice to those perforce separated from their criminal, insane, and otherwise unfit husbands or wives. On these grounds a good eugenic case may be made for gross unfitness being made a ground for applying for Divorce.' But this is not the proposal under consideration.
If we pass on to consider the indirect eugenic results of the proposed reform other important consequences have to be held in view. If more forethought were to be exercised in the
choice of partners in marriage, it is generally conceded that the results would be eugenic, because the less fit would in these
circumstances less readily find mates, and would therefore multiply more slowly. Even this conclusion may, however, be challenged on the ground that any external means of promoting forethought as to marriage would check marriage amongst the naturally prudent to a greater degree than amongst the naturally careless.2 In any case the result of more careful selection being exercised would be that the better types would tend to mate together to a greater degree, and that the inherently fit would be more clearly differentiated from the inherently unfit, a result also generally held to be eugenic in its ultimate consequences. Assuming that more careful selection is to be desired, how is it to be
promoted? To ensure that every indilvidual should feel more
keenly than at present that the marriage contract is one of an enduring and binding naturewould undoubtedly produce tendencies in the desired direction, and this result, it will be seen, can be striven for by two somewhat conflicting methods.
In the first place the marriage bond might be strengthened by making the legal tie of such a nature as to be breakable with
greater difficulty than at present. Granting the eugenic value of
care in marriage selection, to whatever extent, this care would be
See also Vol. IV., p. 373 of this RRvIEw, where this subject was discussed by me under the initials "X.Y.Z."
2 It is indeed conceivable that on these considerations might be founded a eugenic argument in favour of making divorce more easily obtainable. Such an argument would,
however, be quite inconsistent with the arguments brought forward by Mrs. Gotto. Moreover, the prudence which would be eugenically fostered by making the miiarriage contract very easily breakable would be but a selfish prudence ; for the children's interests are, on the whole, far best promoted by making marriage a contract, only to be broken with great difficulty. The prudence which favoured a breakable union would also probably favour a childless union, thuis rendering this selective favouring of this quality less probable.

DIVORCE AND ILLEGITIMACY.

299

diminished by any weakening in the legal marriage bond, to that extent the proposed reform would act in a direction contrary to that thus seen to be desirable. The Matrimonial Clauses Bill would, if passed, certainly afford new facilities for Divorce, and it follows that it would therefore produce a certain dysgenic tendency. On the other hand the marriage bond might be made more binding, by being enforced by a more effective social sanction; and that this would be the result of the proposed legislation is, as I understand, the basis of the case in its favour as far as eugenists are concerned. No doubt excessive punishment, especially when it goes beyond the sanction of public opinion, often wholly fails to lessen crime; and such reforms as the abolition of hanging for sheep stealing have had the effect of diminishing crime. In the same way the granting of further facilities for Divorce, by making the law coincide more accurately with the opinion of the public, might have the effect of increasing the respect for and the duration of the marriage tie, and -consequently the care taken in selection. The question is, would it do so, or would the loosening of the legal bond produce an opposite effect ?
The number of Divorces obtained in different countries seems to vary in accordance with the facilities offered; and if this be so, it would appear that the weakening of the legal bond generally overpowers any concurrent increase in the social sanction to marriage. No great weight should, however, be attached to this fact as the basis of an argument against the proposed reform, and that for several reasons. Divorce abroad may be obtainable with less difficulty than is legal separation in England. Then again, it is not very difficult to juggle with Divorce statistics. Finally, Divorce might become more frequent at the same time that marriage, when it was contracted, became a more permanent arrangement. This could, however, only result from a diminution in the number of irregular unions contracted previously or subsequently to marriage. It should be noted that it is a mere truism to state that greater frequency of Divorce might be accompanied bya diminution in the number of illegitimate unions, because if all unions, however short, were to be legitimatised, then there would be no illegitimate

Soo EUGENICS REVIEW.
unions whatever. In view of these doubts it is perhaps more to the point to endeavour to estimate the probable results of this reform without reference to other countries.
The immediate effects of this proposed legislation, even if it fulfilled all the hopes of those eugenists who support it, would be to diminish the number of illegitimate unions whilst at the same time increasing the number of households in which would be found a parent who had been divorced from another partner; that is, of households where the children, or some of them, would be able to point out as their legitimate parents one, two, or more men or women living elsewhere with other partners. Where a man or woman would be living with children not his or her own, the effect would be to lessen the force of any arguments that might be addressed to the young in favour of restraint in sexual matters. The boy might say to his father or mother, or might feel it if he did not say so: "You could not stand it for more than a short time with your first mate. You had a trial shot, and why should I not do the same? And moreover if I do so, the less tightly I tie myself up the more prudent it will be." Such a mental attitude, combined with the knowledge of the greater ease with which Divorces could be obtained, would result in the young members of these mixed households being themselves more ready, not only to marry more rashly, but also to enter into illegitimate connections. And as mental influences amongst the young are very contagious, the effect would be by no means confined to the households primarily affected. On the other hand, the reduction of the number of illegitimate households would result in a corresponding rise in the tone of the children there being reared. We have here a difficult balancing of good and evil effects to consider, the result depending, in my opinion, very largely on the length of the period of separation which is held to justify Divorce. If it were made as short as three years, then I greatly fear that the result would be a general progressive lowering of the national standard in
regard to sexual matters; and, if so, the benefits expected to be felt as resulting from a diminution in the number of illegitimate unions would be outweighed by the injury done

DIVORCE AND ILLEGITIMACY.

301

by the increase in the number of mixed households. It is unnecessary here to dwell on the social evils likely to attend any lowering of our standard in sexual matters. In regard to the racial results to be anticipated besides those already suggested, it should be noted that if short trial trips became fashionable, it might become to be widely held that to have no children for the first few years of married life would be a wise precaution. Would not any tendency in this direction be highly dysgenic?
In reply it may be urged that the numbers affected by this legislation would be small, "approximately a quarter of a million," and that such harmful results are not, therefore, to be anticipated.' But how can this number be estimated? The number of persons affected by legal separation orders may be known; but who can tell how many couples have merely quarrelled and lived apart for more than three years? Still less can we estimate the numbers of those who, having quarrelled in the first year or two, re-unite or continue to live together, the law being as it is, but who under other conditions might appear in the Divorce Courts. We are told that "the change in legislation would only affect those who wished to secure their freedom and re-marry." Even putting aside all the children and others indirectly affected, there are, I believe, great numbers who now only temporarily wish to secure their freedom, but who under this reform would insist on Divorce and re-marriage.
It may perhaps be urged that under our existing legislation the guiltless as well as the guilty must suffer. This is, however, an inevitable result of sin. There has in recent years been a great wave of noble humanitarianism, but, as is often the case with progressive movements, the pendulum has swung too far in certain directions. The rising generation seems to hold that no one, neither the guilty nor the guiltless, should suffer when sins have been committed, whereas such
I In a circular dated August i6th, 19I7, issued by the Marriage Law Reform Committee, suggesting that " a period of years of complete separation should be sufficient to authorise the annulment of the marriage at a nominal cost," it is stated that there is " evidence that there are nearly a million persons who are in this condition and cannot find the money to get divorced."

302 EUGENICS REVIEW.
suffering is in accordance with the laws of human progress. If the swindler is much petted when he comes out of prison, others will be more likely to follow his lead. If the innocent wife and children of the swindler are made as " well-to-do " either by State contribution or by forced levies from relations as if no crime had been committed, the same consequences would follow. Your swindler is not wholly selfish, and if he knows that a successful swindle will benefit his family, whilst detection will result in suffering to himself only, he will be far more likely to risk it. The stain of sin must fall on the whole " social unit " to a certain extent if sin is to be adequately repressed; and this is as true of illegitimate unions as of any other offence. And in considering such unions it must always be remembered that there is hardly ever any immediate uncertainty as to who is the mother of a newly born baby, whilst there is often great uncertainty as to who is the father.
In view of these considerations, the outline of the Norwegian legislation mentioned by Mrs. Gotto seems to be open to criticism, though a full knowledge of the text of the Act might show that my remarks are inappropriate as far as that legislation itself is concerned. Taking the last clause first,
we read that " (3) the child shall inherit from its father and
his relatives as if it were born in marriage." Would the word "legitimate," if included in wills and deeds, have the effect of excluding the illegitimate? As our law now stands, certainly it would do so; and, no change in this respect being made, this enactment would cause very little change in the
position of illegitimates, because care would in future nearly always be taken thus to exclude all but legitimate offspring.
In all probability, therefore, in order to prevent the intentions of the Legislature thus being frustrated, the word " legitimate," and all other expressions limiting inheritance by illegitimates, would be made to be inoperative by legislation; and I here assume that that would be the case. But if so, property would often pass to illegitimate relatives in a way that testators would strongly deprecate. Again, does " the father " only mean a father proved to be so by due legal process in his lifetime?
Or, this law being passed, might any number of illegitimate

DIVORCE AND ILLEGITIMACY.

303

offspring arise to quarrel for the spoils after the death of a man who had, for example, left his money to be divided equally among his children ?
As to clause (2), namely, that " the child shall be brought up and educated according to the conditions of whichever of its parents is most well-to-do," this, in connection with the third clause, raises questions both narrow and wide. If a prostitute can entrap a young man of property, and either become or pretend to become the mother of his child, she would get an enormous prize as a reward for her skilful handling of the affair. Would not such unions become more common than they are, and would not the effects be dysgenic? Again, from the racial point of view, is it desirable that the offspring of illegitimate unions should be brought up to lives similar to those of the more or to those of the less well-to-do of their parents? The descendants of illegitimate unions are, I myself have no doubt, on the average inferior in civic worth to the descendants of legitimate unions; and as it will make for the future progress of the world that the higher social levels should be filled by the more fit, it seems to me on the whole advisable that the illegitimates should remain in the lower levels.
But why should not all rise to the top ? Why should we punish the innocent illegitimate ? To illustrate a certain confusion of mind which seems to commonly exist on this topic, take an extreme case, but one which would not infrequently happen under the proposed reform if our laws of inheritance remained as they now are in other respects, namely, that of an illegitimate son succeeding to a large entailed property. Would not the equally innocent legitimate son thus cut out be quite as much punished as would be the illegitimate child who would not inherit as the law now stands? And would not the legitimate child be more likely to be eugenically superior? There is only a limited amount of inheritable wealth to be passed on from one generation to another. If one gets more,another must get less; and it isexceedinglydifficult to sayeither how this inheritable wealth would best be distributed, or whether it should be distributed byr a rigid rule of law regardless of the

304 EUGENICS REVIEW.
wishes of the testators, who necessarily are better acquainted with the circumstances and needs of the particular case.
As to the first clause in the Norwegian Act, which enacts that " the illegitimate child shall have the right to take its father's name," as English law now stands an illegitimate child directly he ceases to be a child can take any name he likes. Whilst the infant is an infant, the father and the mother can call it anything they like; and as a man, if he acknowledges himself to be the father, may sign the Registry at the entry of birth, I presume in that case the child would be called by his name. If we were to allow the parents' name to be entered without his or her consent, difficulties would have to be faced, and to illustrate them I again take an extreme case. If a man were somehow to obtain a new-born baby, and if he were to register it as the offspring of himself and a woman whose reputation he wished to injure, he might deal her a deadly blow. Surely all women should be protected from such a crime by its being made impossible for any man to register a child in their names without their consent. The converse crime of trying to palm off a child on a man is by no means unknown, and would become far more common if such an Act were passed; and surely it is but equally just that a child shall not be registered in a man's name without his consent. Does our law impose any limitations beyond this?
I believe not. The Norwegian legislation, I am informed, seeks to compel
the mother to declare the name of the father before the birth of the child. We feel that nothing would have induced Hester, in Hawthorne's " Scarlet Letter," to have named the father of her child, and whatever we may think of the conduct of the erring minister, her denunciation of him would, rightly or wrongly, not have seemed to us to be an admirable act. The English Registration Act declares that " in the case of an illegitimate child no person shall, as father of such child, be required to give information " concerning its birth. Whether this enactment is framed with an unjust regard for masculine demands, or whether to avoid probable abuses, I could not say without further enquiry. If the mother were forced to give

DIVORCE AND ILLEGITIMACY.

305

the name of some man as that of the father, the true illegitimate father, who would not infrequently be a scoundrel, might offer her monetary and other inducements at a time when she was both weak and impressionable to give some other man's name in place of his own, in the hope that he would be able to disappear into space by the time that her trial for false declaration was likely to take place. Duly safeguarded, some enactment tending to force a disclosure of the man's name might nevertheless be very beneficial.
The crying need for mothers of illegitimate children seems to me, however, to be something wholly different to all this. What is needed above all things by this unfortunate class is the certainty of being able to obtain such an allowance as a Court may order the father to pay. These Norwegian pro-. posals, as far as I can now see, would not increase that certainty. In this direction, and in order to secure an increase in the inadequate and unjust scale of allowances now in force, I would gladly welcome reform. The illegitimate mother is often prompted to become a prostitute because the money paid to her by the father, even when it is regularly paid, is wholly insufficient to enable her to maintain a home for her child, and that her ruin should thus be completed is socially, and probably eugenically, harmful.
In conclusion, what I desire to urge is that in entering on the reconstruction campaign the primary aim of the eugenist as such should be educational; that is, to endeavour to make the public more able and willing to think eugenically on all social questions. If this be so, we should select for endorse-
ment by our Society only such reforms as could be supported by indisputable and easily intelligible eugenic arguments, and we should fight shy of proposals where the racial benefits alleged ar4 obscure and remote. We should also demand a considerable
extent of agreement amongst ourselves as to the immediate or environmental consequences of the reforms we endorse as eugenically desirable; whereas there appear to exist clear-cut differences of opinion amongst us as to the actual effects of the existing laws of marriage. Many eugenists unquestionably would warmly welcome several reforms that have recently been

3o6 EUGENICS REVIEW.
suggested in these matters. But not a few of us fear that the Divorce Law Reform now before the country would tend to demoralise the nation by lessening the regard in which marriage is held, whilst any legislation which aimed at, or seemed to aim at, whitewashing illegitimacy would be harmful. Should we not concentrate rather on the many proposals about which we can all agree ? We all desire, I believe, that the illegitimate mother should receive far fairer and humaner treatment than at present, though it must be such as to encourage illegitimacy as little as possible. We are all, I cannot doubt, in complete agreement in wishing to make the father feel the full responsibility of parenthood in cases of illegitimacy; for, if this result could be obtained, there would be a great decrease in the number of births due to temporary and ill-considered unions. So little thought is usually given to the more important qualities of partners selected for such casual unions that the children must inevitably be below the average in civic worth; hence to diminish their numbers will have consequences beneficial to the race. We are all agreed, lastly, that the quality of births is vitally important in any society, and that no policy could be more short-sighted than one which deteriorates quality for the sake of a mere hope of increasing quantity.
LEONARD DARWIN.

