COLONIAL MEDICAL POLICY IN RELATION TO POPULATION GROWTH
By Professor T. H. DAVEY
School of Tropical Medicine, University of Liverpool

IT is an accepted fact that the greater part on population growth, but there has been

of the continuing increase in the world's little in the past to suggest that they have

population is contributed by under- produced any marked reduction in mor-

developed areas with a low standard of living, in which Western influences are beginning to operate. These territories are in those stages of the demographic cycle which have been described by Blacker (I947) as the early and late expanding phases, and into these cate-

tality throughout the community. The reasons for this failure were, firstly, the small
proportion of the population to which the service was readily available, and, secondly, the apathy of the people who tended to come only when the illness was at an advanced

gories fall most of the British Colonial territories. It is probably correct to state that the transition into these phases from the primitive state, in which birth- and deathrates balance over a period of years at a high
level, has been mainly caused by social and administrative advances, such as abolition of

stage and difficult to cure. It must be understood that the diseases of the tropics are widespread to a degree not realized in civilized communities; for example, in some communities every child from soon after birth until eight to ten years of age suffers continually from malaria.; again, 8o per cent

slavery or inter-tribal warfare and famine of the community may be infected with one relief. To offset the factors tending to save or of the pathogenic worms, and a considerable prolong life those tending to increase the proportion suffer from ill health as a result.

death-rate or reduce fertility have been of
negligible importance. The total effect has
been greatly to augment population growth. In our Colonies the medical services
originated in an attempt to safeguard the
lives of officials and traders, and hence they were mainly confined to the administrative centres. They were primarily curative services for these immigants, and only slowly did they become available to the indigenous people in other towns and the larger villages. When preventive medicine was introduced it combated first the most obvious environmental causes of disease, such as pollution and insect vectors. It was essentially a sanitary service, and only in recent years has pit taken an active interest in other common
causes of ill health such as malnutrition and tuberculosis. The Colonial medical service is, in fact, a replica of the medical organization in civilized communities, with the emphasis on cure rather than on prevention.

It is not surprising that a service which attempted to cure the sick should have been
overwhelmed by the wealth of material
available and that the vast expenditure necessary should have prevented it becoming
sufficiently widespread significantly to
improve the health of the multitude.
One way in which there was some real
progress was in the attack on epidemic disease. It is not possible to calculate the saving of life which resulted from the control
of epidemics among the communities we are considering. Plague, typhus, malaria, smallpox, cerebro-spinal meningitis and other epidemic diseases have, in the past, spread in waves from their starting-point, decimating the population in their path. With freedom of movement resulting from peace and safety the people travelled from infected areas to markets and in search of work, often spreading infection all along their route. The opening up of the country, and with it the

Vital statistics are not available in primi- increase of information from remote areas,

tive areas, which would permit us to deter- enabled the medical organization to under-

mine the effect of curative medical services take the control of epidemics at their start.

I90

COLONIAL MEDICAL POLICY IN RELATION TO POPULATION GROWTH i9i

As an example of the effect of such control contact with minute quantities of the insecti-

one may quote the epidemic of sleeping sick- cides, and so spread of the disease is checked.

ness which spread widely in Northern The following results have been obtained by

Nigeria after this was opened up. As a result their use: malaria has been eradicated in

of the new security the people dispersed from Upper Egypt, Cyprus and part of British

their walled towns and with them sleeping Guiana, while the disease has been brought

sickness spread until it menaced a population under cQntrol and is being abolished in

of some six millions. A survey of the position Ceylon, Sardinia, numerous areas of India,

during the years I930-35 revealed infection- and elsewhere; numerous epidemics of

rates averaging I3.6 per cent among one and typhus and relapsing fever have been

a quarter million people examined stamped out in a few days ; plague epidemics,

(McLetchie, I948); in some districts steady which once spread through the world causing

depopulation was occurring. Control of the death of millions, can be rapidly brought

transmission was attempted by means of the to an end; the transmission of kala-azar and

treatment of all infected persons in the yellow fever in epidemic form is preventable

epidemic areas ; this has been carried on ever by reducing the numbers of the vectors to a

since, and in the years I94I-46 the average level at which only sporadic cases can occur.

incidence of infection was i15 per cent among Insect-borne epidemics, which once, by the

some half million people examined. The mortality they caused, helped to balance the

localization and control of such epidemics has prodigious fertility of primitive populations,

undoubtedly been followed by a reduction in are now being controlled and the inhibitory

the death-rate, and so must have contributed effect they had upon population growth is

to the growth of the population, but the largely removed. It is probably correct to

saving of life in this way and as a result of the say that provided D.D.T. or benzene-

hospital curative services must be small hexachloride are used efficiently and early

compared with the heavy and constant toll none of the diseases listed above can develop

taken directly by the ever-present com- into an epidemic. Moreover, the World

munity-wide diseases such as malaria and Health Organization has proposed to make

malnutrition, and indirectly by the sapping these insecticides readily available to all

of vitality resulting from worm infestations nations requesting them, together with the

and other widespread but not mortal expert personnel to demonstrate them and

infections.

teach their use. In the history of the human

This was, in general, the position at the race there can be few, if any, advances so

outbreak of the second world war. During significant for man as that just outlined, in

this period attention was concentrated on the which a number of the most important causes

elaboration of methods for the prevention of premature death can be controlled or

and cure of disease in the tropics in order to eradicated within a short period of time by

protect the health of the large bodies of the employment of substances which can be

susceptible troops which had to be main- manufactured cheaply and used by personnel

tained there. An advance of outstanding of a low grade of education and training.

importance was the discovery and use of the These insecticides are now, in fact, employed

new insecticides D.D.T. and benzene-hexa- in every major epidemic for which they are

chloride. Many of the community-wide suitable, and increasingly they are being used

diseases of the tropics and sub-tropics are to control endemic insect-borne disease.

insect-borne. These include malaria carried Only one factor prevents their universal

by the anopheline mosquito, typhus and adoption throughout the tropics, namely, the

relapsing fever carried by the louse, plague cost of their use on the requisite scale, and

carried by the flea, kala-azar by the sandfly, often the tropical peasant proves willing to

yellow fever by the stegomyia mosquito, and pay quite heavily for control which involves

much of the dysentery by the housefly. These no work on his part. Other writers, better

insect vectors are killed rapidly by brief qualified, have queried the advisability of the

192

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

widespread use of these extremely potent within a week of birth 72 per cent were from

insecticides, and that subject will not be mothers with malarial placentas and 28 per

discussed here. Similarly it is outside our cent were from mothers whose placentas were

scope to consider whether the rapid control not infected. Walton (1949) quotes infant

of certain diseases may not pave the road to mortality-rates in Freetown for the period

disastrous epidemics. It is, however, the I927-46, and shows that a significant reduc-

object of this paper to estimate, if possible, tion in the infant mortality-rate occurred in

to what extent in the past these diseases of I943 after the commencement of a malaria

the tropics retarded population growth and control scheme in 1942. This low rate was

how far their control will accelerate the rate maintained until I946, when malaria

of expansion.

increased temporarily, and this, together

Though opinions are widely and strongly with other factors, was believed to have

(and often incorrectly) held regarding the caused a transient return to pre-control

direct and indirect effects of various diseases levels. Subsequently, in I947 and I948, the

on the primitive community, it is surprising reduction in infant mortality was continued

that precise data have rarely been collected. and the rates closely approximated those of

In the absence of specific facts an impression I945.

may be formed, more or less accurately, by The island of Ceylon, as is well known, has

comparing the death-rates and other statis- for many years been ravaged by malaria

tical returns from communities before and due to both benign and malignant tertian

after control of a specific disease. The dif- parasites. Within the last few years an

ferences found, after making allowance for extensive malaria control scheme has been

other factors, probably represent the effect carried on which started in November I945

of that disease on the community. One of on a small scale, included a few more areas in

the few diseases for which some figures of 1946, and in I947 was extended to cover

this nature are available is malaria. A few practically the entire malarial part of Ceylon.

workers have tried to estimate the effect of The system of registration of births and

malaria on the community, and some surveys deaths there is efficient, and accurate returns

have been carried out before and after are available since I897. In Table I are

malaria control schemes, the results of which shown the general death-rates of Ceylon for

may be held to represent trends.

the years I936 to I948.

Malaria might conceivably affect the

growth of population in several ways, e.g.

TABLE I

by increasing the infant mortality-rate or the

SHOWING THE3 GENERAL DEATH-RATE FOR CEMYLON FOR THE YEARS 1936-48, BASED ON THE ESTIMATED

general death-rate, by increasing stillbirths POPULATION AND THE NUMBER OF DEATHS REGISTERED

or by preventing conception; some observations on these matters are to be found in the
literature.

Year
1936 1937 1938

Death-rate

... ... 219

... ...

217

... ... 210

Blacklock and Gordon (I925) studied malaria infection in late pregnancy in Freetown, Sierra Leone, and in a series of I55

1939 ... ... 21-8

1940 ... ... 218

1941

... ...

I8.7

1942 ... ... z8*6

pregnancies found no evidence of malaria affecting maternal mortality. There was, however, an effect on the children, as shown
by the fact that of fifty-one children born of mothers with malaria parasites present in

1943 ... ... 214
1944 ... ... 213

1945 ... ... 22-0 1946 ... ... 20'3

1947 ... ... 14.3

I948

... ...

132

the placenta 25*5 per cent died within seven These figures show that an unprecedented

days of birth, while of ninety-three born of fall in the death-rate occurred in I947 fol-

mothers whose placentas were not infected lowing the wide extension of malaria control.

only 5.4 per cent died within the same The Annual Medical Report for I947 records

period. Thus of the eighteen children dying this general fall in the death-rate and notes

COLONIAL MEDICAL POLICY IN RELATION TO POPULATION GROWTH I93

also a decrease in the maternal mortality from 15.5 to io-6 per thousand hve births, and in infant mortality from 141 per thousand in 1946 to ioi per thousand in I947. It was stated that " this big reduction in different mortality-rates is without any parallel in

In many communities where malaria is
endemic the stress of the disease is believed to fall on the infants and young children. It is of interest, therefore, to examine the Ceylon figures and find out what age-groups are most affected by the eradication of malaria.

TABLE II
COMPARING THE AVERAGE DEATH-RATE IN CEYLON DURING THE YEARS 1936-46, BEFORE MALARIA CONTROL WITH THAT DURING I947 AND I948 AFTER CONTROL, IN DIFFERENT AGE-GROUPS

Under 5 5-9

10-I4Under

Age-groups
15-19 20-24 25-3425-34

354435-44

45-54

~~~~~~~~a55nd
over

1936-46 ... 6o05 7 4 3 7 6-i 8.4 9-9 I3.5 191I 74 8

1947 & 1948 ... 47-2 4 2 2-0 3-2 55 6-4 7-1 IIII 42'0

Ceylon or any other country in the world, and These figures show that, although the should be attributed primarily to the efforts reduction in mortality is numerically greatest
of the Medical Department, particularly in in the age-groups under 5, and 55 and over, relation to maternity and child welfare ser- there is, nevertheless, a significant reduction vices and the control of malaria. The attack ranging up to 50 per cent in the death-rate on malaria, which was until I946 the chief in each age-group. It would appear that in cause of mortality and morbidity in Ceylon, Ceylon malaria was a killing disease at all has been achieved by the residual spraying ages and that it also reduced the potential
of D.D.T." Other' factors are listed- fertility of the population by reducing the improved standards of living, development proportion responsible for reproduction. The
of public health conscience, provision of free death-rate in the group aged I5 to 45 school meals, milk feeding centres for infants before malaria eradication averaged 9-4, but
and absence of serious epidemics-which after eradication it fell to 5-6.
contributed to the reduction of these mor- Some corroboration of these figures may be tality-rates, but general experience has found in the report by Giglioli (1948) on the shown that these other factors are incapable results of mosquito control in British Guiana. of producing such a dramatically rapid fall As in Ceylon, malaria was caused by both in mortality-rates though their cumulative benign tertian and malignant tertian para-
effect over a period is well known. The sites, and the death-rate fluctuated considermajor part of the reduction must be accepted ably according to its intensity. In some parts as due to the eradication of malaria. A of the territory the disease was heavily similar result is reported from Mauritius endemic, in other parts lightly endemic and where, according to the Annual Medical subject to exacerbations and even to epiReport for I948, the malaria death-rate for demic waves. The normal excess of births that year showed a decrease of 39*6 per cent over deaths in a healthy area was reported to as compared with I943, which had the lowest be between 26 and 30 per thousand of the figure for the years preceding the beginning population, while in hyper-endemic areas the of malaria control. Again, it was reported excess of births over deaths was only one(B.M.J., I950) that the death-rate in Cyprus third to one-half of this, and in one area
during I948 was one of the lowest in the deaths exceeded births, though even here, world and that the infant mortality-rate had during a remission of malaria, births exceeded fallen from i8o to 70 in seven years, mainly deaths by I9-I per thousand. It was conas a result of malaria control by D.D.T. duded that malaria was the main factor n

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

retarding the natural increment in the There is some evidence that this is true.

Colony's population. Eradication of the Blacklock and Gordon (I925) state that in

disease from the populated coastal region their series of I55 pregnancies, of fourteen

was proposed, and control commenced on a children born dead 714 per cent were of

small scale in I945 and expanded on a pro- mothers with malaria-infected placentas and

gressively increasing scale, which became 28-6 per cent were of mothers whose placentas

Colony-wide in I946. In the coastal area four were not infected. They concluded that, if

districts are available in which births and such a small group could be taken as repre-

deaths are registered, and in them one can sentative, malaria had a definite and impor-

compare' birth- and death-rates averaged tant effect on the production of a high pro-

over the years I938 to I946 preceding con- portion of infant deaths in utero and in the

trol, with a single year after control.

first week of life.

TABLE III COMPARING THE DEATH-RATES IN FOUR REGISTRATION AREAS IN BRITISH GUIANA. BEFORE MALARIA CONTROL

Gill (I940) made a detailed analysis of the influence of malaria on natality with special
reference to Ceylon. He points out that the

DURING THE PERIODS 1938-46 WITH THE DEATH-RATE effect of malaria on natality might differ

FOR 1947 AFTER CONTROL

according to whether the disease was epi-

1938-46

I947 demic, hyper-endemic or endemic. Gill

District

Average

Average Annual

Death-rate

divided Ceylon into five zones characterized by progressive intensity of malaria. His in-

Population Death-rate

vestigation amply confirmed the conclusions

Peter's Hall 20,253 23-2 (range: i6.8-30-7)

12

already reached regarding the effect of malaria on mortality-rates. For example, dur-

Belle Vue ...
Highbury ...
Cotton Tree I____

1I4,729
2,554
15,492

24-9 (range: I7.4-34-2) 28-6 (range:
I 617-39.3)
I5.9 (range:
1IP6-25-8)

20-7 6-9
9.4

ing the period I9OI to I930 the mean deathrate-ranging from 24-8 to 43-0-varied
directly with malariousness, as did also the
infantile mortality-rate, ranging from I3I to I50. Standardizing the statistics on the basis

These figures show that the control of of Zone I, in which malaria was virtually

malaria was followed by a considerable absent, the standardized death-rate became:

reduction in the death-rate; this was especially marked in the Highbury area of Berbice

5I.,5.23I;'4

; II, and

23-8 ; III, 30-4 ; IV, 40-I ;
the infant mortality-rate

V,
as

estuary, a hyper-endemic area in which follows: I, I28; II, I67; III, I94; IV, I69;

depopulation had been going on for some V, 332. These figures demonstrate a striking

years. Over the four registration areas in direct correlation between the death-rates

the nine years before I947 the average annual and the degree of malaria. On analysing the

death-rate was 218, and in I947 was only birth-rate, however, he found little variation

I31.' What is more striking is that the 1947 in the five zones, the range being from 13I to

rates are, with one exception, lower than the I50, though the lowest figure was in the most

lowest figure in the range of death-rates over malarious zone. When standardized, using

the nine years before control, even though in Zone I as the standard,the birth-rates for the

I940 and I94I there was a malaria remission various zones were: I, 40; II, 44.8; III,

owing to drought.

-40.8; IV, 41-7; V, 39.8. The absence of

It is clear from the figures recorded by the significant variation indicated but little

five countries quoted that malaria control effect of malaria on fertility. The natural

is followed by a considerable reduction in the increase of the population, however, varied

death-rate.

inversely with malariousness, with a range

It was suggested earlier that malaria might of + I5-2 to - 53.

reduce the birth-rate by increasing the num- When the monthly frequency of births in

bers of abortions, miscarriages and still- the other zones was compared with that in

births, or by interfering with conception. Zone I, which was regarded as normal because

COLONIAL MEDICAL POLICY IN RELATION TO POPULATION GROWTH 195

malaria was absent, it was found that almost without exception the rates were below normal throughout the winter period and above normal throughout the summer period by an amount which was directly related to the height of the zonal spleen-rate. The total decrease in the birth-rate in the winter period in the malarious zones almost bal-
anced the total increase during the summer period, and the total winter deficit (- I34-5)
was offset by the total summer increase
(+ I40-0). This curious inversion of the
monthly frequency of births associated with malaria was corroborated by figures quoted
from Kenrick in the Indian Central Prov-
inces, and these two examples suggest a close
relationship between the intensity of endemic
malaria and the monthly distribution of
births. Gill also analyses the effect of epidemic
malaria on the birth-rate. The grave epidemic which flared up in Ceylon in I934 caused a large reduction in the birth-rate during the year in which it mainly occurred, and this was followed by recovery of the birth-rate to well above the normal figure in the second year after the epidemic, and by a return to approximately normal in the third year. The examination of the monthly incidence of births during the epidemic showed that the births due to pregnancies which commenced before the onset of the
epidemic were reduced by II*2 per cent during the first nine months, presumably due to premature, still and missed births, i.e. miscarriages and abortions. The effect in the first two months of the epidemic was to increase the birth-rate, presumably due to premature births, with a larger than normal reduction subsequently. Births due to pregnancies which commenced during the course of the epidemic showed an average reduction of 44.2 per cent below the normal expected for those months, with a maximum reduction of 70 per cent. This inverted peak resulted from the cessation of sexual intercourse,
owing to sickness of one or other parent, or to temporary impotence or sterility, or to the early expulsion of the fertilized ovum. The decline was, therefore, due to missed conceptions. Births due to pregnancies which com-

menced after the end of the epidemic were
above the mean except for the first four months, and they returned to approximately
normal in about nineteen months. During
these nineteen months there was an increase
in births of IO per cent above the mean, and
this increase is to be attributed to a tem-
porary increase in the number of pregnant women as a result of missed births and missed
conceptions. There were, in fact, more women in a condition to conceive. He con-
cluded that the gain in births during the nineteen months after the epidemic more
than counterbalanced the loss of births during the first nine months of its course. Hence the decline in the birth-rate over the whole epidemic was mainly due to a reduced frequency during the eight months' inter-
mediate period when it was at its height, amounting to a 44 per cent reduction below normal.
Gill's conclusion was that epidemic malaria markedly reduced the birth-rate but that endemic and hyper-endemic malaria did not appreciably influence the birth-rate in Ceylon; the monthly distribution of births was modified but the birth-rate itself was unchanged. He stated his belief that endemic and hyper-endemic malaria do not in any part of the world cause any appreciable reduction in the indigenous birth-rate.
Gill's conclusions were subject to proof when the possibility of large-scale malaria control was accepted and put into practice. In Ceylon it is reported that the birth-rate has shown no significant change. On the
other hand, Walton (I949) in Freetown found
a rise in the total number of live births recorded in the years following intensive mosquito control. There were significantly more births and more survivals than in previous years. In Freetown, however, malaria is almost exclusively due to the malignant tertian parasite in contrast to Ceylon where it is caused almost equally by benign tertian and malignant tertian; this may have been associated with the difference noted in the result of control. Moreover, in Ceylon living standards are rather higher than in West Africa. In British Guiana where, as already noted, the species distribu-
D

zx6 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

tion of infection is approximately the same rate; epidemic (and possibly endemic)

as in Ceylon and where malaria occurs malaria is responsible for a reduction in the

similarly in epidemic, endemic and hyper- birth-rate owing to failures to conceive, and

endemic forms, Giglioli (I948) has recorded possibly the disease in hyper-endemic and

the effect of malaria control on the birth- highly endemic form has this effect also,

rate. though clear evidence on the point is lacking.

TABLE IV

Malaria is the major medical problem of the

SHOWING IN FOUR REGISTRATION AREAS THE AVERAGE world, claiming its victims annually in mil-

POPULATION AND THE AVERAGE BIRTH-RATE FOR THE lions, and it is important to note that it

YEARS 1938-46 BEFORE MALARIA CONTROL, COMPARED WITH THE BIRTH-RATE IN 1947 AFTER CONTROL

shows its greatest prevalence in the under-

developed communities of the tropics whose

I938-46

I947 potentialities for population growth are

Average

greatest. In these areas malaria has remained

District PoApvuelraatgieon ABninrutha-l
rate

Range

Birratthe-

the main factor in slowing up the growth of the population, and its removal may more

than double the rate of increase. In such

Peter's Hall 20,253 Belle Vue... I4,729 Highbury.. 2,554

31.4 3412
24-7

21-7-37-4 38.8 26-4-39-5 43-6 19-4-35-8 26-7

places as Ceylon and British Guiana, which are at present under-populated, the removal

Cotton Tree1 I5,492 34I 2&5-41-6 41.9 of this check on expansion will not for many

years be followed by land pressure, but where

The effect of malaria control on the birth- population pressure already exists, as in

rate is not shown here with any certainty. India, Java, Kenya and areas of Southern

Results are only available for one year, and Nigeria and Uganda, the widespread control

other factors may have been operating. of malaria is likely gravely to affect an

Moreover, the periodic remissions and exacer- already serious problem. Any factor tending

bations of malaria in that territory have to accelerate the natural growth of over-

shown a considerable influence on the birth- populated areas will cause a deterioration in

rate, as demonstrated in the wide range their standards of living.

noted over the years I938 to I946. That fact Malaria is not by any means the only

itself is significant, since the highest birth- epidemic or endemic disease which is pro-

rates within the ranges of the four districts viding a check on population growth in the

are associated with malaria remissions and tropics. Cholera and kala-azar in India have

the lowest with epidemics or severe endemic decimated large areas.' In Africa sleeping

conditions. Following control of the disease sickness has depopulated great tracts. In

the 1947 birth-rate is higher, with the excep- Northern Nigeria, for example, where a care-

tion of Highbury district, than at any time ful census of the affected area is made before

in the previous ten years. The variation in diagnosis and treatment are undertaken,

the birth-rate inversely correlated with the Lester (I945) reported that a I2 per cent

intensity of malaria, and the possibly accept- decrease in population had occurred as a

able increase in the birth-rate in I947, result of the sleeping sickness epidemic

together suggest that in British Guiana during the years I923-33. On making a

endemic or hyper-endemic malaria does affect survey it was found that 20 per cent of the

the birth-rate. The Freetown and British people were infected, and treatment was

Guiana figures thus do not support Gill's commenced in I933. In the period 1933-43,

statement regarding the effect of endemic as a result of treatment, the population

malaria. Giglioli believes that the great showed a 24 per cent increase. Harding

improvement recorded in I947 is only the (I940), also in Nigeria, found a direct cor-

beginning of a new trend in the vital statistics relation between sleeping sickness incidence

of the Colony.

and the death-rate. Where the incidence of

Malaria in all its epidemiological forms is the diseace was i8*6 per cent the death-rate

undoubtedly responsible for a high death- was 714, where the incidence was 28*6 per

COLONIAL MEDICAL POLICY IN RELATION TO POPULATION GROWTH I97

cent mortality was 84.2. In these areas treat- environment, and that if this balance is not

ment was carried on over the years I933 to maintained man will necessarily suffer.

1943, and during this period there was a There does ntt seem to be any general accept-

25 per cent increase in the population. ance of the idea that problems of disease

Though no accurate statement of the must be considered in relation to the environ-

effect of disease on primitive communities is ment, nor has it been suggested that in one

possible, malaria and other infections preva- area malaria can safely be controlled because

lent in these areas appear to have important the country can immediately absorb a much

effects in stabilizing populations, and many greater population, while in another disease

of them can be easily controlled or eradicated should not at present be combated because

by modern techniques. If these methods to do so would rapidly present a problem of

were to be applied widely over the tropics population pressure. It is clear that Western

the rate of population growth would be influences operating in primitive areas have

greatly augmented. No factors can be already upset the ecological balance and in

expected to operate which, within some fifty some places have caused serious pressure on

years, would act so drastically in retarding the means of subsistence. In the last ten

the increase except malnutrition, famine, years science has placed in our hands the

and warfare on the part of over-populated capacity to save and prolong life, and possibly

communities, which might well attempt to to increase fertility over whole communities.

wrest from their neighbours colonial terri- Moreover, the methods now available can

tories into which they might expand. The control disease with almost incredible speed.

civilized world, through the World Health In the consideration of this problem it

Organization and the Food and Agricultural may be helpful to study the disappearance

Organization, has undertaken everywhere to of community disease in civilized countries.

reduce disease and to raise the standard of It is worthy of note that in this country

nutrition to a certain minimal level. It is preventive medicine was first organized on a

extremely doubtful whether F.A.O. had con- small scale as late as I830, following an

sidered the effect of the activities of W.H.O. epidemic of cholera. Before that date

on the problem confronting it. If the medicine had been personal, i.e. the sick

materials and personnel can be made avail- patient had been treated and sometimes

able, and that is W.H.O.'s function, it is cured, but no medical man had made any

probable that in the vast under-developed rational attempt to prevent widespread infec-

tropics the death-rate can be halved or even tion in the community apart from the segre-

more drastically reduced and possibly fer- gation of individuals suffering from some

tility increased. It is very doubtful whether contagious disease. Nevertheless, though

the standard of nutrition has risen in under- there was no attack on transmission, many

developed areas as a result of F.A.O.'s infections had disappeared or shrunk to small

policy, except in the case of famine relief, proportions. Leprosy had ceased to be a

but there is evidence of a quickening of the problem; malaria, once widespread over

rate of population growth in the tropics as a large areas, had receded to a point where it

result of the introduction of modern medical was of purely local interest and concern;

methods.

helminthic infections were seen only in

In these circumstances it is pertinent to children, and infestation-rates were so low

inquire whether the problem of disease and as to be of minor medical importance. How

population growth is being dealt with in the did the incidence of these infections diminish

proper way. The tendency to departmental- in the absence of any organized campaign ?

ize activities in the colonies so that the They decreased and disappeared over a

medical, agricultural and other problems are period of centuries as a result of the steady

dealt with separately, indicates a failure to rise in standards of living. In this country

recognize the fundamental fact that man is disease control became organized only after

an animal in ecological balance with his the community diseases resulting from pollu-

198 THE EUGENICS REVIEW
tion and an insanitary environment had been medicine is totally unsuited to the needs of reduced by purely social advances. This is the dispersed rural populations in our corroborated by the study of the decrease of colonies and in the tropics generally, where malaria in the United States of America. some 8o per cent of the inhabitants are Andrews (1948 a and b) points out that peasant agriculturalists amongst whom commalaria existed throughout most of the munity-wide disease is the basic medical U.S.A. in the middle of the nineteenth cen- problem. It would be just as absurd to expect tury. Shortly after this it began to retreat a forest tree to flourish if dug up and transfrom the North, and the authorities are agreed planted to a new environment, as to expect that this was due to the effect of improved the medicine of civilized societies to succeed socio-economic conditions and standards of when transplanted into communities such as living. In the upper Mississippi Valley the we are considering here, some of which have recession was spontaneous and independent only reached the developmental level of the of conscious efforts at malaria control. In early metal age. The wise course is rather to the Southern States also economic improve- plant the seed and tend it as it grows to the ment is believed to have been the prime size and form which is determined by the cause of the decrease in malaria, i.e. better environmental influences of soil, rainfall and housing, drainage, home use of insecticides, temperature. Medical organization and techbetter animal husbandry and increased nique in the tropics, if they are satisfactorily industrialization. If economic advancement to solve the problem confronting them, must is accepted as the basic reason for this develop in accordance with the needs of the improvement in health it would seem that in communities served, and the path along the tropics we are trying out a vast experi- which they evolve may lead them far from ment in community disease control for which the form which has been reached in this there is no apparent precedent in the medical country. Western medicine will have its history of civilized countries. In these part to play in the tropics later when disease disappeared slowly, while man all the development has produced industries and time maintained ecological balance with his towns and a society resembling our own, but surroundings. As standards of health at the present time its widespread introducimproved and population increased higher tion is likely to tilt the ecological balance to standards of living were adopted and agri- man's disadvantage. Looking at the situacultural methods became better so that more tion from the demographic angle it is fortupeople could be maintained on the land. As nate that, according to Forrest (1945), only living standards continued to rise the family some I2 per cent of the world's population became smaller. That is the natural and is receiving any large proportion of modern normal evolution of community disease con- health services. If the death-rate were to be trol. Modern medicine evolved in urbanized, reduced markedly and rapidly, malnutrition, industrialized surroundings in response to the which is believed to be prejudicing the health needs of the communities living in that of at least 85 per cent of the world's populaenvironment, and it is still being modified as tion, would be very much more serious. living conditions and standards change. The argument advanced above might be Only recently has preventive medicine begun summarized at this point. Firstly, Western to combat the community diseases of our medicine developed in response to the needs society. On the other hand, the rapid control of urban communities which were already of the prevalent infections of the tropics by showing declining birth-rates. Secondly, chemical and other means leaves the diseases the same as or with the same sort of inhabitants still at subsistence level but with causation as those prevalent now in the a greatly increased rate of population growth, tropics, were brought under control in and the need for encouraging influences Western countries by the elevation of which would tend to stabilize it has not been standards of living before preventive medirecognized. In its existing form Western cine was consciously applied. Thirdly, the

COLONIAL MEDICAL POLICY IN RELATION TO POPULATION GROWTH i99
application of Western medical techniques to the first. The background of the whole a number of the more important diseases in problem of development of primitive conthe tropics is capable of controlling them with munities is poverty in all its aspects. This remarkable speed. These diseases are re- applies as much to the medical situation as sponsible for a large proportion, possibly the to any other. The poverty of their housing, major portion, of the premature deaths in their agriculture, their social customs, all tropical communities, and are at present serve to spread and perpetuate the diseases probably the most important factor in limit- which afflict them, and their lack of capital ing the rate of population growth; their and low standard of education determine the control is likely to lead to an unprecedented type and scope of their health services. expansion of population in the first, second, History suggests that the proper sequence and, to some extent, the third phases of the of events in advancement is that economic demographic cycle described by Blacker development should come first, and with it
(I947). The total population of communities mass education (not necessarily literacy) and
in these three phases amounts to I,833 mil- improvement in agriculture. Results of lions or, excluding the third phase, in which progress in these spheres will inevitably expansion would be less marked, I,347 mil- accrue slowly. Economic development will lions, or 62 per cent of the world's inhabitants. supply the capital for progress in other
Destructive criticism is of greater value if spheres and will permit a raising of standards it indicates or is accompanied by construc- of living. Mass education will cause a desire tive proposals. Before closing it would be for higher standards, will indicate the way to advisable briefly to suggest a general plan, reach them and will, at the same time, the adoption of which would tend to preserve attach a higher value to individual life than the balance between man and his environ- those communities possess at the moment. ment. The discussion of the effect of modern This, one would expect to be associated with medical methods on the death-rate in under- a desire on the part of the parents for a better developed areas and the history of the life for their children and, subsequently, with disappearance of some of the community acceptance of family limitation. Improvediseases in those countries which are now ment in agricultural methods and the introcivilized, indicate that the problem must be duction of new crops would raise the carrying regarded as an ecological one ; that, using the capacity of the land and so would accomterm in its broadest sense, the environment modate the increased population which of these backward communities must be would follow emergence from their primitive regarded not as a collection of separate state. At this stage the function of medical influences, some favourable, some adverse, services would be to hold disease in check so but as a complex of interwoven elements of that depopulation and disabling conditions which the physical unhealthiness of their sur- could not interfere with the advancement of roundings is only one factor. The situation the community; the disorganization resultbecomes dangerous if one element is singled ing from epidemic diseases with high morout for attack without regard to the others tality must be prevented. In the case of and the ecological balance thus upset. If endemic disease where depopulation is occurdisease is prevented before the people them- ring as in sleeping sickness, kala-azar and, selves are prepared to co-operate in its con- in some instances, malaria, the control of the trol by their own efforts, and before prepara- disease is essential for the development of the tions have been made to absorb the increase area. Similarly, such diseases as produce a of population which will result from the high incidence of crippling, for example, saving of life, then, unless the population yaws, must be brought under control. The density is well below the carrying capacity function of the medical service should be to of the territory, the standard of living is enable the population to take advantage of bound to fall within a short space of time, the progress made in other spheres. Much of and the last state is likely to be worse than the disease due to defective environmental

200 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

conditions and to bad social habits can be by the widespread employment of medical

eradicated at low cost with the active co- auxiliaries of good local standing but with

operation of the people and by the education education little better than that of the

of public opinion. Here the health and people amongst whom they will work. The

educational services must co-operate, for if function of these auxiliaries would be to

the community climbs up by its own efforts educate the people to change their enviror-

the advance is permanent. Too much of the ment by their own simple activities and to

progress now made in the less-developed abandon such customs and habits as con-

areas of the tropics is the result, not of an tribute to their ill health. Qualified medical

enlightened public opinion, but of docile staff would be best employed in education

obedience to pressure from above. Such of their subordinate medical staff, in educa-

progress is unlikely to be permanent; when tion of public opinion by constant propa-

the pressure is removed the new practices are ganda, in the control of those epidemic and

abandoned unless public opinion has been endemic diseases which are retarding

educated to demand them. Malaria has been advancement, and in maintaining the health

controlled or eradicated in a number of areas of those engaged in the development pro-

by teams of workers employed by the gramme. The clock, however, cannot be put

central authority and using techniques which back. It would be improper to reduce or

involve only a small degree of co-operation remove Western medical organization from

from the inhabitants. With the.exception of primitive areas -in which it has been estab-

a very small number of places this expensive lished, imperfectly adapted though it may

control must be carried on indefinitely as a be to the physical and social environment of

health measure, because it is not aided by the the people., Political considerations make its

activities of the people themselves and is not maintenance imperative. The organization

integrated into a wider scheme such as land need not, however, be expanded in that form

utilization by drainage.

until circumstances demand it and until

A rise in the standard of living will at first simpler and more effective public health

be accompanied by population growth, but measures have received the active co-opera-

later by a tendency for the birth-rate to fall tion of the people.

progressively. As greater value attaches to In the co-ordinated plan of development

the life of the individual, medicine can afford the territorial funds available should be

to become more interested in his health as allocated to the various activities according

opposed to the health of the community, to a plan which would permit the balanced

because community disease will have been progress of the community, advancement in

largely controlled by the people themselves. each sphere being integrated into the general

Then Western curative medicine with its scheme so that progress would be simul-

emphasis on the individual will be demanded taneous over a broad front, no single activity

and can be afforded. The environment will outstripping the others. Advance would

have changed since, owing to the develop- necessarily be slower than would be desir-

ment of the country's resources, urban con- able ; it would, nevertheless, be progress and

centrations of population will have increased not merely the appearance of progress. The

and some degree of industrialization will have great danger is to attempt to hurry develop-

occurred and so the hospital system will be ment by by-passing some of the stages, but

available to an important proportion of the careful attention, help and education of the

population. This, however, cannot occur in right kind will enable a child or a primitive

the financial circumstances at present obtain- community to achieve as rapidly as possible

ing in primitive peasant agricultural com- the maturity which represents its own full

munities, and until economic development flowering.

and the concentration of the population permit the adoption of such a medical Discussion

organization, progress in this sphere should be Dr. A. S. Parkes, Dr. F. Yates and Mr.

COLONIAL MEDICAL POLICY IN RELATION TO POPULATION GROWTH 20I

J. P. Brander took part in the discussion
which followed at the Members' meeting to
which this lecture was addressed.
Dr. Parkes said: " I already knew some-
thing of Professor Davey's work and views,
and for the last month I have been looking
forward to this occasion. I have not been disappointed. Many of us have begun to wonder whether the present rapid growth of
world population, greatly facilitated by medical discovery and practice, can continue for long without leading to a crisis in food supply or to explosions due to pressure of population in particular areas. In the light of these general considerations Pro-
fessor Davey's remarks about Colonial medical policy seem to me to be most important.
I was particularly impressed by his com-
ments on man as part of an ecological
system, disturbance to any one component of which inevitably has repercussions on the others, comments which I should like to see inscribed on the door of the new Colonial
Office. Professor Davey has emphasised the problems which are arising, and are going to arise more acutely, in the Colonial territories due to rapid increase in population following the application of recent medical discoveries. I need hardly point out that the same thing is happening on a vast scale in many parts of Asia and the Far East. Sooner or later we shall be obliged to co-ordinate medical policy with other practical considerations. This is a terribly difficult problem. It is the ethic of the medical man that life must be saved if only for the gallows, or prolonged if only for months of suffering. In the same way, it is the ethic of medical science that disease must be conquered no matter what risks of war or famine are incurred thereby. In so

far as medical science is unable to deal with everything at once, the logic of the population situation suggests that attention should be given first to diseases that disable rather than to those that kill. Few of us, however, would care to pursue this line of thought very far. On the other hand, few who have studied the matter will deny the urgent need to evolve, within or without existing ethical standards, a co-ordinated and coherent medical-demographical-agricultural policy."
REFERENCES
Andrews, J. M. (I948 a). Present proportions of the
malaria problem in the Nearctic region. Proc. 4th
int. Congr. trop. Med. Malar., 1, 903. (1948 b). What's happening to malaria in the U.S.A. ? Amer. J. publ. Hlth., 38, 931.
Blacker, C. P. (1947). Stages in population growth. Eugen. Rev., 39, 88.
Blacklock, D. B., and Gordon, R. M. (1925). Malaria infection as it occurs in late pregnancy; its relationship to labour and early infancy. Ann.. trop. Med. Parasit., 19, 327.
British Medical Journal (1950). Colonial Health Services. 2, 772.
Ceylon (1948). Adm. Rep. Dir. med. sanit. Serv., 1947. Forrest, W. P. (1948). Health aspects of international
approaches to problems of under-developed areas. Millbank Memorial Fd. Quart., 26, 280. Giglioli, G. (1948). Malaria, filariasis and yellow fever in British Guiana. British Guiana: Med. Dep., Mosquito Control Service.
Gill, C. A. (1940). The influence of malaria on natality
with special reference to Ceylon. J. Malar. Inst. India, 3, 201. Harding, R. D. (1940). The influence of sleeping sickness on mortality in two districts of Northern Nigeria. Trans. R. Soc. trop. Med. Hyg., 33, 483.
Lester, H. M. 0. (1945). Further progress in the con-
trol of sleeping sickness in Nigeria. Ibid., 38, 425. McLetchie, J. L. (1948). The control of sleeping sick-
ness in Nigeria. Ibid., 41, 445. Mauritius (1949). Rep. med. Hlth. Dep., 1948.
Walton, G. A. (I949). On the control of malaria in
Freetown, Sierra Leone. II. Control methods and the effects upon the transmission of Plasmodium falciparum resulting from the reduced abundance
of Anopheles gambia. Ann. trop. Med. Parasil.,
43, II 7.

Eugenias Review, VoL XL Nos 4

