FAMILY ALLOWANCES AND EUGENICS*
By FRANCOIS LAFITTE

Past Attitude of Eugenists

potent means" of altering the differential

IT is well to begin a discussion of the eugenic aspects of family allowances by

birth-rate in favour of the better-off classes. The statement added: " The Society is
strongly opposed to redistribution by means

briefly recalling what has been the of taxation, or to the allowances being made

attitude of eugenists to family allowances in the past. In the years following I9I8, J. M. Keynes was preaching a then popular doc-

a charge on the State, and favours the establishment of equalization pools among the employing bodies of the salaried pro-

trine-that over-population was a major
cause of the last war. A glance at the files of the EUGENICS REVIEW shows that eugenists

fessions and skilled occupations." This was followed in I927 by Parliamentary lobbying
for higher income-tax children's rebates, and

too shared this fear, and were especially for exemption from taxationr of maternity

worried by the excessive fertility of the poorest social classes compared with that

and education expenses. From I928 to I932 I have been unable to find any reference to

of the middle and upper classes. Typical
was Professor Carr-Saunders's review of Eleanor Rathbone's Disinherited Family:

family allowances in the columns of the EUGENICS REVIEW. Interest in the subject was apparently on the decline among

"Miss Rathbone makes out a very eugenists.

strong case in reply to the objection most
often raised, namely, that any form of Family Endowment will encourage an increase of popuLAion among the less desirable classes. We are in complete agreement. It will, on the contrary,
probably tend to lower the birth-rate
among those who now have the largest families, because it is the raising of the standard of living and of the dignity and status of the mother, which more than
anything else helps to stem the devastating torrent of children."

The new knowledge of population trends
which came in the I930's set eugenists thinking of family allowances again-from a new angle. The Aims and Objects of the
Society, adopted in 1934, reaffirmed the principles of the Society's statement of I926 on family allowances. In the following
year the Society set up a Committee on Positive Eugenics, out of which grew the Population Investigation Committee, which,
with David Glass as research secretary, has done such fine work in promoting the study of population trends and of foreign

Typical, too, at the same time, was Professor R. A. Fisher's advocacy of family endowment as a method of raising the birth-
rate of that portion of the population " in which the Eugenics Society has always been especially interested, that portion which is popularly called the upper and middle classes."

birth-rate policies. Out of this work in turn grew the Society's collaboration with PEP in forming the Population Policies Committee, whose task, interrupted by war, was to work out a population policy for this country. Family allowances have been a major topic of study for both of these re-
search bodies.

In 1926 the Eugenics Society adopted an The Eugenics Society has thus sought to Outline of Practical Eugenics Policy, a state- alter birth-date differentials as between

ment advocating " a scientifically designed social and occupational groups in favour of system of family allowances" as the " most the wealthier groups. At first it stressed

* The substance of a paper read before the Eugenics Society on September 24th, 194I.

mainly reduction of the fertility of the " less desirable classes . . . who now have the

67

68 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

largest families"; more recently it has tive correlation has been shown to exist

stressed the need to raise fertility among between a child's I.Q. and the size of its

the " salaried professions and skilled occu- sibship. Early American work gives values

pations." In both cases it has tended to of about -o -30 (cf. Chapman and Wiggins,

believe (or hope) that family allowances I925; Terman, I925; Willoughby, I928).

would be the " most potent means " of More recently Thurstone and Jenkins (I93I)

achieving the desired object. Two big found a correlation of only -o *19. British

questions are here involved: (i) what social work gives quite low values: Pearson and

groups, if any, should be encouraged to Moul (I925): no correlation between in-

have more children ? (2) If we can identify telligence and family size among East

such social groups of desirable parents, can London Jewish children*; Sutherland and

family allowances assist them to more Thomson (I926): about -0*20; Shepherd

prolific parenthood ?

Dawson (I932): between -o -io and -0 20;

Fraser Roberts (1938-39): Up to -o 23

ntelligence Classes are not Social Classes (only 0 *I2 in his largest group, senior

The real problem, of course, is how to
raise the fertility of desirable parents, what-
ever social class they may be in. Let us take the level of mental ability as a criterion of
the desirable parent-it is the criterion most favoured by eugenists. Is there in fact a high correlation between social status and intelligence ? Are the above-average in intelligence below average in fertility ? The evidence in the whole of this field is largely fragmentary, often contradictory. Most of the research until quite recently has been done by isolated individuals on very small, often unrepresentative, groups of schoolchildren. The intelligence tests used have frequently been subjects of controversy; the measurements of social status are commonly unsatisfactory; even the statistical methods employed have often been challenged. It is only in recent years that a few fairly large-scale surveys, employing ade-
quate statistical techniques, have been

elementary children). Must we simply con-
clude that larger families tend to produce less intelligent children to the extent indi-
cated by these correlation coefficients ? We cannot, because we have ignored the third factor-social status. Since both I.Q. and family size may vary with social status, our correlations must be standardized for social status before we can draw any conclusions. Wherever this is done, the value of the I.Q.-sibship correlation is reduced. Thus Chapman and Wiggins give -o 33 for the intelligence-fertility correlation; but this is reduced to -o 27 if social class is held fixed. Sutherland (I929) studied 3,100 children of one social grade alone-Yorkshire miners-and found a fertility-intelligence correlation of only -0 1I3. Sutherland and Thomson and Fraser Roberts admit that lower values result from standardizing for
social status, but give no figures.
Moshinsky's (1939) findings are of great

conducted. Outstanding instances are the interest. In all groups selected for brightness

surveys of Fraser Roberts (3,300 school- (e.g., scholarship holders), children from

children in Bath), Moshinsky and Gray small families preponderated. Fraser Roberts (nearly Io,ooo London school-children), and also found that the fertility of parents of

the Scottish intelligence survey of an entire gifted children was low, whether they were age-group of children (not analyzed by family well off or poor.t But among groups ntot

size or social status).
Three factors are involved: the child's
Intelligence Quotient, the number of its brothers and sisters, and the social status of
its parents. It is no good generalizing from

* Pearson and Moul suggested that this was because most of their children came from Russian and Polish immigrant families whose fertility was still largely unrestricted.
t This finding may be partly due to the fact that a
considerable proportion of working-class children who

a correlation between any two of these factors if we ignore the third. Thus a nega-

win free places never enter secondary schools, because their parents prefer them to go to work. This would tend to favour bright children from the smaller families.

FAMILY ALLOWANCES AND EUGENICS

69

selected for intelligence, Moshinsky found for the stratification of average intelligence

no intelligence-fertility correlation except to approximate towards the stratification of

among junior elementary school-children, classes, there is no real sense in which we

for whom the correlation was -0o23. A are justified in speaking of the " less desir-

split-up of this group according to parents' able classes." There may be a few excepoccupations showed that family size and tions, among professional groups selected for

intelligence were not correlated among the their intelligence, where there might be

majority, but only among children of grounds for special measures to encourage

clerical and commercial employees (-o 24), parenthood. Thus teachers' children come

and of skilled wage earners (-o 27).

very near the top of the average intelligence

There would thus appear to be a slight, scale, while teachers are one of the least fertile

but unmistakable tendency for the above- groups in the community. But eugenists

average in intelligence to be below the cannot adopt as their general strategy an

average in fertility, but it is not at all clear attempt to raise fertility in all the higher

that this tendency is present in all social or social groups as the best method of increasing

occupational groups. If we examine simi- the number of able children in the com-

larly the relation between I.Q. and socio- munity. Moshinsky and Gray (1938) show

occupational status, there is no doubt that that among London children the proportion

the hierarchy of mean I.Q. values tends to of children with I.Q.'s of I30 or more is

correspond to the hierarchy of social and higher among professional workers than

occupational groups. Average intelligence among clerical and commercial workers, and

tends to rise with social status, but again higher among them than among skilled

the correlation coefficients are low. The manual workers. But to increase the number

majority of studies give values up to +025. of able children by 5 per cent would involve

Intelligence differences between families in doubling the birth-rate among professional

the same social class are far more important workers (who contribute only 5 per cent of

than differences in the average intelligence of the total number of able children); whereas

different social classes. Since our chances of it would only involve raising the fertility

predicting a child's I.Q. from its parents' of black-coated workers by one-third, or of

social status are still at most something like skilled workers by one-sixth (because they

nine to one against, we have to accept the contribute 3I per cent of all able children).

conclusion of Evelyn Lawrence's careful They further find that while all upper-class

study (I93I)

children, intelligent or not, receive post-

" It becomes clear that for any definite plans for social reform based upon the differential inheritance of intelligence, social class is not a satisfactory grouping. Either some basis of classification resulting in more homogeneous and more widely
differentiated groups needs to be found, or
we must realize that the only safe unit by which to assess intelligence is the indivi-

primary education, only 30 per cent of able children of skilled workers, only 20 per cent
of able children of unskilled manual workers ever get beyond elementary school. The greater part of the superior ability of workingclass children is simply wasted. It is still far more important to be born to parents well provided with money than to parents well
endowed with intelligence.

dual, or at most the family."

Thus, if the qualities measured by in- Raising Fertility a General Problem

telligence tests are the criteria of desirable It is, therefore, fruitless for eugenists to parents, there are practically no social hunt for social or occupational groups whose

groups which we can single out as desirable parenthood should be encouraged. Our

(or undesirable) parents. The desirable and broad strategy must be, by general measures,

undesirable are to be found in all classes, to encourage healthy parenthood in all

and, although there certainly is a tendency classes, and, by specific measures, to hunt

70 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

out individuals who are undesirable as the fact that 6 per cent of the population

parents. This latter task is essentially a own 8o per cent of the nation's capital.

matter of personal case-work, which can H. G. Wells, one of the first Englishmen

only be done effectively when (a) the neces- to ponder on the significance of the falling

sary case-working agencies have been created, birth-rate, wrote in I906 of

(b) social workers and doctors generally are

" the enhanced sense of the child in

thoroughly trained in problems of human middle-class life. . . . There has come an

heredity, and (c) far more is known about intensified respect for children, an im-

human genetics than at present. Unfor- mense increase in the trouble, attention

tunately we are as yet nowhere near fulfil- and expenditure devoted to them-and a

ment of these conditions-research into very natural and human accompaniment in

human genetics in particular is a neglected the huge fall in the middle-class birth-rate.

subject in this country.

It is felt that to bear and rear children is

Is a system of family allowances one of the the most noble and splendid and respons-

measures we should advocate to encourage ible thing in life, and an increasing number

healthy parenthood in all classes ? In so of people modestly evade it. People see

far as family allowances would tend to re- more clearly the social service of parent-

duce economic inequalities and to increase age, and are more inclined to demand a

equality of opportunity for children-to recognition from the State for this service."

introduce a more equal social environment-
eugenists should welcome them. For greater
equality of opportunity would enlarge our eugenic knowledge, by making it easier to determine which differences between children are mainly attributable to nature, and which mainly to nurture. But I am not convinced that any conceivable system of family allowances can, by itself, go very far towards equalizing economic opportunities,

He added that
" the internal structure of the middleclass family is altering fundamentally with the general growth of intelligence, with the higher education of women, with the comings and goings for this purpose and that, the bicycles and games, the en-
larged social appetites and opportunities of
a new time."

not even if it were combined with decent What was then true of the middle classes

minimum wages, as advocated by Seebohm is to-day becoming true of the intelligent in

Rowntree.

all classes. " Social appetites and oppor-

Nor do I believe that any family allowance tunities " have been immeasurably enlarged

system can by itself do much to alter the since Victorian times, but their fulfilment

basic trend of human fertility. Within the and enjoyment are to be achieved only by

framework of our present economic system abstaining from parenthood. Our civilization

and class structure family allowances are has, in fact, given us a promise, but no fulfil-

bound to be at best a palliative social ser- ment. It has promised us a brave new world

vice, at worst petty bribes to parenthood. of security, a decent standard of lving,

Family allowances by themselves cannot reasonable leisure, a general raising of the

remove the basic social frustrations which cultural attainments of the mass of people.

inhibit parenthood-the aspirations of the Most people to-day believe these things to

mass of people for a fuller, freer life, the force be within our reach. But instead we are pre-

of " social capillarity " in a politically demo- sented with "poverty in the midst of

cratic but economically oligarchic, competi- plenty," unemployment at times of up to a

tive society, the feelings of insecurity en- third of our material and human resources,

gendered by man-made-but apparently mass under-consumption coupled with mass

uncontrollable-" economic blizzards," and destruction of basic necessities, social in-

total warfare. These frustrations are rooted security which breeds excessive thrift and

in the ownership, inheritance, or control of fosters gambling on football pools or stock

property. Family allowances will not alter markets, leisure exploited by commercialized

FAMILY ALLOWANCES AND EUGENICS

7I

forns of passive amusement, and total war- Family endowment means the direct alloca-

fare, of which the fears and frustrations of tion to children of part of the nation's

bewildered peoples were an essential pre- resources-it means that the community,

condition. All the " good things of life " have through the State, shares with parents the

been commercialized, have become alterna- costs of child-rearing. The greater part of

tives to parenthood. Parenthood is now the cost might be met from social resources

merely one among many desirable ways of instead of out of the individual's wages. It

spending money.

might also mean that many things which

In our civilization prestige goes primarily to-day are financial alternatives to parent-

with the ownership of property and con- hood should be withdrawn from commercial

spicuous spending-preferably without con- enterprise and provided communally-

spicuous working to justify it. As long as especially in the field of cultural and leisure

this is so, it will determine the moral tone of pursuits. There are many other species of

our whole society, and men will strive for family endowment which are quite as im-

ownership. Social promotion depends on portant as cash allowances for children. The

striving, in competition with others and often exact scope for cash allowances can only be

to others' detriment, for a higher income or decided by regarding them as one of a series

greater possessions. Social security, too, of measures included in one programme for

depends on climbing the income and pro- the promotion of healthy parenthood by

perty ladder. At whatever rung one starts, family endowment. Such a programme would

the concentration of wealth-mainly by include: (i) Measures to reduce the drudgery

inheritance-into a few hands so handicaps imposed on women by housework and

the mass of people, that it is a ladder best maternity, so that women can take part

climbed by those unencumbered with too more equally in the work, public and social

many children. These basic frustrations to life of the community. Family endowment

parenthood wil have to be removed by in this field is mainly a matter of new social

providing a fuller, more equal life for all, services, especially (a) an adequate housing

by democratizing our economic life. We plan for the whole community (including

shall have to strive for a social order in which rent rebates) to minimize housework, with

social promotion depends on ability and possibly free laundry, window-cleaning and

social prestige attaches to social service. A other services, and (b) nursery schools or

higher income would certainly be the reward day nurseries for all children, holidays for

of conspicuous social achievement, but of parents away from their children, etc.

nothing else. It must be a society in which (2) Genuine equality of opportunity in

one can be poor and yet secure-in which education. This almost certainly involves

failure to distinguish oneself does not mean free education for all and adequate main-

exclusion from an adequate minimum of the tenance allowances for higher education and

material and spiritual goods of life. I do not vocational training of exceptional children.

believe that we shall achieve a lasting rise (3) Free, equal and adequate medical

in the birth-rate without some such social services for all. This is even more important

reconstruction-and that is a matter of than free and equal education, and is again

economic planning and of maintaining full largely a matter of services. The entire

employment in peace as in war. Family population needs not only adequate anti-

endowment is neither an alternative to, nor sickness services. Special services, covering

the main method of achieving, social recon- every aspect of family life from marriage

struction-but it is indispensable for the guidance and contraception to pregnancy

completion of such changes.

diagnosis and freer abortion, are necessary

Possibilities of Family Endowment

to " rationalize " married life on the lines proposed in Sweden.

I regard family allowances in cash as one (4) Many other cheap or free services are

species of the genus Family Endowment. conceivable. Children might eat free at

72 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

school, travel free up to school-leaving age, peace-time, as a measure to ensure that chil-

have free weekly visits to cinemas, theatres, dren enjoy an adequate minimlum of the essen-

concerts, or swimming baths.

tials of healthy growth, children's aLllwances

All this does not exclude direct allowances in kind are preferable to allowances in cash.

to parents. But even here I believe that the There might still be some scope for cash

value of cash allowances has been exagger- allowances, but we might find, as they found

ated. In some respects individual freedom in Russia, that they are mainly of value for

of choice is vital., but with regard to a great the exceptionally large family. In Russia

range of commodities the complete freedom cash allowances begin with the seventh

of choice afforded by money allowances is child; in Britain they might begin with the

not necessary. Why not give each child a fourth. But we must decide on the scope of

pint of milk daily, half a pound of butter or family endowment by free services or by

half a dozen oranges or eggs weekly, rather allowances in kind before we can determine

than pay parents money which they may the scope or type of cash-allowance scheme

spend on such foodstuffs ? There is great we wish to introduce.

scope for children's allowances in the form References

of free distribution of basic necessities. Chapman and Wiggins: Pedagogical Seminary

" Earmarked money," based on the existing children's ration coupons, would have to
be used. Parents would receive in respect of

and Journal of Genetic Psychology (I925), 32, 414. Dawson, Shepherd: British Journal of Psy-
chology (1932), 23, I. Lawrence, Evelyn M.: British Journal of Psy-

each child coupons earmarked for specific chology Monograph Supplement (I93I), 16.

commodities (or groups of commodities). Moshinsky, Pearl: Sociological Review, April I939.

These could be exchanged, without money payment, for definite quantities of milk,

Moshinsky, Pearl, and Gray, J. L.: in Political
Arithmetic (1938). Pearson and Moul: Annals of Eugenics, 1925, 1.

butter, eggs, oranges, cod-liver oil or other Roberts, J. A. Fraser: Eugenics Review, January

necessary foodstuffs. Coupons exchangeable I939, 30, 4.

for certain amounts of clothing or footwear for children might also be issued. Such a system would facilitate economic planning,

Roberts, J. A. Fraser, Norman, R. M., and Griffiths, Ruth: Annals of Eugenics, January
1938, 3, 2. Sutherland, H. E. G.: Journal of Educational

would ensure a definite flow of basic neces- Psychology (I929), 20.

sities to those who need them, irrespective of Sutherland, H. E. G., and Thomson, G. N.:

retail price levels, and would secure to parents many of the benefits of bulk-buying. In war-time, when scarce supplies have to

British Journal of Psychology, October I926, 17, 2. Terman, L. M., et al.: Genetic Studies of Genius
(1925), 1. Thurstone, L. L., and Jenkins, R. L.: Order of

be shared out fairly, I believe such a system Birth, Parent-Age and Intelligence (I93I).

is essential if the purpose of coupon-ration-
ing is not to be thwarted by the rationing of the poor (who include a large proportion of

Wells, H. G.: Socialism and the Family (1906). Willoughby, R. R.: American Journal of Psychology (I928), 40. Willoughby, R. R.: Proceedings of the National

families with children) by rising prices. In Academy of Science (I1928), 14.

Eugenics Review, Vol. ,. No.8.

