THE
EUGENICS REVIEW

Editorial Offices: The Eugenics Society, draw precisely this conclusion. On the con-

69 Eccieston Square, London, S.W.2. trary, they painted a picture of Germany,

(Telephone-Victoria 2091.)

young, vigorous and prolific, cramped within

Editor for the Society-Maurice Newfield.

its narrow borders by a hostile Empire, senile, decadent and neither able to populate

"Eugenics is the study of a,encies under its territories itself nor willing to let the

social control that may improve or impair regenerate German people do so. The account

the racial qualities of future Aenerations they gave of our demographic position may,

either physically or mentally."

with a few minor reservations, be described

as accurate: the Nazis have never hesitated

to tell the truth when it has suited their

purpose. But they were rather less accurate

NOTES OF THE QUARTER*

in their account of themselves.
The fact is, as D. V. Glass pointed out in his scholarly study of Population Policies and Movements,* that the German birth rate,

WrrE can learn a great deal from the
wartime trend in the German birth
rate. The figures are, of course,
most revealing when set against the demographic background of pre-Nazi Germany and of the period between the Machtergreifung in I933 and the outbreak of hostilities in I939; and particularly when their development is compared with what must have been hoped for as a result of the measures for
promoting fertility which, from the start, formed such an important part of Nazi policy.
For a political party with Lebensraum emblazoned on its banners, the demographic situation in I933 was most unpromising. It was evident, from official and unofficial estimates alike, that a continuance of the existing balance of births and deaths would leave Germany, well before the end of the century, with plenty of Lebensraum to spare. Needless to say, the Nazis themselves did not

like that of most other European countries,

had fallen fairly continuously since the third

quarter of the nineteenth century. From the

high level of 39 * 2 per thousand in the period

I876-80, it declined to 31i6 per thousand in

I9o6-Io, and reached the low figures of 15.:1
in I932 and I4.7 in I933. (Our own birth

rates fell from 35 5 in the 'seventies to I4*4

in I933.)

Putting the matter in terms which show

more plainly the decline in real fertility, the

German net reproduction rate fell, in under

6o years, from I-448 to o 698. The critical

years were I924-6, when a rate below unity

was recorded for the first time and Germany

entered the rapidly growing ranks of

countries whose numbers were fated to

decline. By the time the Nazis came to

power, its replacement rate had fallen lower

than that of any European country except

Austria.

**

*

* Owing to unavoidable delays in the publication of the REVIEW various items, including comments on Regulation B33, the Beveridge Report and R. R. Kuczynski's paper on The New Population Statistics, must be deferred for the next issue. We apologize to contributors and correspondents whose material is held
over.

The picture can be filled in by the further statistical material supplied in Mr. Glass's
study,j but this rough outline wiU at least
* Oxford University Press, 1940. t Oc. Cit., pp. 269-3I3.

8i

82 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

explain why the struggle for Lebensraum 7 9 per thousand of population-did give

had to be supplemented by one to secure the place in I933 to a boom in marriages, reach-

future generations of Germans to live in and ing in I934 the extraordinarily high figure of

defend it. Admittedly, the economic induce- II 2 per thousand, which more than com-

ments to parenthood were not as lavish as pensated for the deficit during the slump.

they might have been. Still, they included, Again, these economic advantages must

among other measures, the granting of themselves have counted for little in com-

interest-free marriage loans, repayable by parison with those which followed the sudden.

instalments spread painlessly over eight expansion of heavy industry, particularly of

years, and cancellable by fractions of a the part concerned with the vast programme

quarter of the original sum on the birth of of rearmament which the new government

each child; changes in income tax and in had initiated so promptly and with so little

property and inheritance taxes to the ad- publicity. The reduction of unemployment,

vantage of large families; encouragement from nearly five million to approximately

by the Government of existing schemes for goo,ooo, must have done at least as much as

family allowances and the sponsoring of new the direct economic inducements to parent-

ones; replacement of employees under 25 hood to increase the number of marriages

in various enterprises and public offices by and their productiveness. Finally, it is worth

fathers of families; provision of free places bearing in mind that, with the return of

in middle and higher schools, and other millions of men to regular employment,

forms of educational assistance; and ex- there began the Kinder, Kuche, Kirche

tension of the Weimar programme of rural campaign for squeezing women out of in-

settlement: all of which must have amounted dustry and the professions. " A job will

to a pretty impressive total in a country not bring happiness near, the home alone

fresh from the extreme economic depression is your proper sphere,"* proclaimed a

of I930-2. This point is worth a moment's typical slogan of the time; and, as jobs for

attention, if only as a corrective to the view women became scarcer, must have done

sometimes put forward that the Nazi bribes so to an ever more receptive audience.

to fertility did not really amount to much.

***

They were numerous, they sounded good on The derogation of Nazi' incentives to

paper and over the ether, they seemed to parenthood, and penalties on sterility, fails

transfer the economic burden of parenthood also to take account of the fact that these

from the family to the State; but, in all were but elements in a far more compre-

their barmecidal diversity, they could not be hensive population policy, in which persua-

compared, in plain monetary terms, with the sion and, naturally, repressive legislation

single unpretentious measure proposed in played a very large part. When all the

this country-the provision of five shillings instruments of propaganda in the control of

a week for every dependent child in the the totalitarian state speak with one voice,

family.

the exhortation does not, and could not be

There is, of-course, some substance in this expected to, fall on deaf ears. Neither the

criticism; but it does not take account of all rewards nor the blandishments, moreover,

the facts. To begin with, to many of the were directed exclusively to those who had

couples (according to Burgd6rfer there were altogether some 330,000 of them) who

gone through the formality of getting married. WVhole generations of unmarried

through unemployment or low wages had women would not, said Das Schwarze Korps,

postponed their marriage until better times, be condemned to sterility through the moral

even small economic advantages, coupled as prejudices of musty philistines; and this

they were with promises of greater pros- lofty sentiment was reflected both in a

perity to come, must have seemed ample nation-wide propaganda and in the exten-

reason for not waiting any longer. And, in fact, the depressed marriage rate of I932-

* Kirkpatrick, C. (I939) Women in Nazi Germany,
London; quoted by Glass, D. V., op. cit.

NOTES OF THE QUARTER

83

sion, by an ever increasing number of be assumed that the decline was general

municipalities, of economic assistance to throughout the country. To quote again:

illegitimate children, provided only that the " Suppose, for example, that the Lubeck

parents had announced their intention in data apply fairly well to the whole of

advance and the authorities were satisfied Germany. This would mean that in 1932,

that the father had been chosen with due when abortion was most frequent, there

regard to his health and, it goes without would have been about 655,ooo abortions

saying, Aryan origin. The Nazis realized as compared with I,007,798 births (including

from the first that traditional moral atti- still births). The Lilbeck statistics show a

tudes could be weakened by an unremitting fall in the ratio of abortions to normal births-

appeal to the highest moral motives. Psy- from 65 per I00 in I932 to .I4 per I00 in I938.

chologically shrewder in this respect than If we suppose that the total number of

the democracies, they based their propaganda pregnancies in Germany had rermained at

on the assumption that ordinary men and the I932 level, but that abortion frequency

women will do for God what they would had fallen at the Liibeck rate, there would

never do for Mammon. Their one blunder have been over i,4oo,ooo live and still births

in this campaign was in choosing, as the in I938. Even after allowing for the propor-

impersonal end to be served, the need for tion of still births, this would have meant

creating more man-power for the armed more live births than were actually produced

forces of the future. If only they had hit in Germany in I938. So if the suppression of

upon a more congenial motive, the demo- illegal abortion has been as successful as it

graphic trend since I933 might have been is said to be, that by itself would account for

very different.

the increase in births in recent years."*

***

***

What measure of success the Nazi popu- We must be careful not to read too much

lation policy did achieve may be attributed into the table of birth rates in the decade

very largely to those of its elements which I929 to I938. It shows a close correlation

were concerned with the suppression of birth between low rates and the world slump, and

control propaganda and instruction, restrictions upon the sale of contraceptives, and the vigorous enforcement of the law against abortion. This last factor is regarded by

Live Births in Germany (including Saar Territory from 1935)

Live Births per

Live Births per

Year i,ooo population Year I,OOO population

Glass* as the most potent of all. It is at any I929 17.9

1934 i8*o

rate indisputable that the " psychic rebirth " of the German people, to which in Nazi

I930
I93I

I7.5
i6-o

I935 i8-9 I936 I9g0

propaganda upward movements in the birth 1932 I5.I

I937

i8-8

rate are usually attributed, has operated in I933 I47 I938 I9 .7

a highly selective manner. Thus, it is significant that "of the 6I5,630 marriages con- between higher and rising rates and the

tracted in I933 and still in existence on development of Nazi policy. It does not

"December 3ISt, I936, 2I9,334, or 36 per cent, had borne only one child each, and 240,793, or 39 per cent, had borne none. Of
the 722,764 marriages contracted in I934 and still in existence. at the end of I936, 287,288, or 40 per cent, had borne only one
child each, and a further 328,295, or 45 per
cent, had not borne any children."t On the other hand, the abortion rate declined considerably in all the big towns and it may

show how far, if to any considerable extent, the upward trend was due to national socialism as such, how far to the improved economic position of the country resulting from the policy of rearmament, how far to the various elements in the Nazi population policy. And of course it does not show whether the change represents a permanent reversal of a trend that had persisted for over half a century or merely a sharp notch

* loc. cit., p. 3I2. t ibid.

* ibid.

84 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

in a curve that, sooner or later, would take a downward course again. All that can be said with confidence is that up to the war the Nazi drive for population made an appreciable advance; though apparently it did not reach its objective of a net reproduction rate well above unity. Still, to have pushed the
rate up from o 698 in I933 to very little
short of the full replacenient level in I938 was not bad going; even if it was not a complete victory it hardly deserves to be described-as it was recently by a correspondent of The Times (in what was in general an unexceptionable and, indeed, brilliant
communication)-as a " signal defeat."* For the better ordering of our own
demographic future we must be quite honest about this. We do not compromise in our detestation of Nazi policies and of their objectives by admitting that some components of these policies were well conceived and could with advantage be incorporated into policies of our own. We reject such measures as the suppression of birth control
or the enforced domestication of women not because they are ineffective but because they are barbarous; but that is no reason why we should not estimate the demographic consequences of marriage and household loans, family allowances, free education, and other expedients for mitigating the economic deterrents to parenthood; or why we should not consider how and on what basis a propaganda campaign for more and larger families
* October 5th, I942.

should be conducted. We know that the Nazi appeal for more soldiers did not strike a responsive chord in every mother's breast.; but are we sure about what we have to offer in the way of moral inducements ourselves ?
***
How has the war affected the German birth rate ? According to the correspondent of The Times the figure for Greater Germany stood at 20 4 in I939 and remained at that level in I940. In I94I the birth rate fell to i9.i, which represented a loss of ii6,ooo live births; and the decline continued, more steeply, in the first four months of I942, when there were I20,000 fewer births than in the corresponding period of I939. If, as seems probable from a study of the birth rates which prevailed in 62 towns of Greater Germany up to July I942, the same trend persisted throughout the year, the total loss of births (taking 1939 as the standard year) must have amounted to 450,000.
It is too early yet to estimate the significance of this relapse; the correspondent of The Times may be right in holding that " the war has already inflicted on Hitler a crushing defeat in the Nazi battle of the birth rate," but a guess is not a diagnosis, and for that we simply have not the data. All we can say now, comparing crude oirthrate figures, is that the Nazi demographic trend does not seem at the moment as favourable as our own. The number of live
(Continued on page I04)

THE EUGENIST
COME, human dogs, interfertilitateBlackfellow and white lord, brown, yellow and red!
Accept the challenge of the lately bred Newfoundland terrier with the dachshund gait.
Breed me gigantic pigmies, meek-eyed Scots, Phlegmatic Irish, perfume-hating Poles,
Poker-faced, toothy, pigtailed Hottentots, And Germans with no envy in their souls. ROBERT GRAVES.

I04 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

NOTES OF THE QUARTER
(Continued from page 84)
births in England and Wales during the June quarter of I942 was the highest recorded in any quarter since that of June I930. The figure was I67,557, representing a birth rate of i6 2 per thousand, compared with I4-3 per thousand in the same period of I94I. In short, our demographic trend

has changed for the better in a period in which Nazi fertility has declined.
A birth rate of i6-2 is still well below replacement level, but that we should have
reached it in the fourth year of war is reason for real if restrained optimism. We shall
know later, when more facts are available about the distribution of the births, whether
in I942 we turned a dangerous corner in the demographic history of our country.

PHYSIOLOGICAL ZOOLOGY
Aricles appearing iz fordhoming issus: REACTIVITIES Of COLPODA DUODENARIA TO ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS. II. FACTORS
INFLUENCING THE FORMATION OF RESTING CYSTS. By C. V. TAYLOR and A. G. R. STRICKLAND, Stanford University. RETARDATION OF EARLY CLEAVAGE OF URECHIS BY ULTRA-VIOLET LIGHT. By ART}IUR C. Guisn, Stanford University. ON THE KILLING ACTION OF OPTICALLY ISOMERIC NICOTINES IN RELATION TO PROBLEMS OF EVOLUTION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM IN ANIMALS. By G. F. GAUsz and N. P. SmARAGDOVA, Institute of Zoology, University of Moscow. THE PRODUCTION OF DUPLICITAS CRUCIATA AND MULTIPLE HEADS BY REGENERATION IN EUPLANARIA TIGRINA. By ROBERT H. SILBER and VKTOR HAMBURGER, Washington University.
Edited by W. C. ALLEE, Professor of Zoology, The University of Chicago. Published
Quarterly by the University of Chicago Press. Subscription: 35s. 2d. per year.
E#glish dgents: CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS

SOCIETY OF COMPARATIVE LEGISLATION

"For the promotion of knowledge of the eoure of lIlation different eonies, more aielarly in the
sver part of His Majesty's Dominions, and in the United States"

Preident : The Rt. Hon. S. M. BRUCE, C.H., M.C.

Chaiman of the Executive Committee: The Rt. Hon. Lord MACILAN, G.C.V.O.

Honorary Seeretaries: C. E. A. BEDWEIJ, Esq. Profesor H. C. GITrEREDGE, KLC.

Aumal Su Msription

One Gninea

Address: 28 Esex Street, London, W.C.2

