THE BIOLOGY OF SUPERIORITY

Being a reply to an article with that title by Professor Raymond Pearl in the American Mercury, November, I927
By W. T. J. GUN, F.R.Hist.S., F.S.G.

IN his article Professor Pearl endeavours maternal sides; nephews and nieces,

to show, that, speaking generally, great children of both brothers and sisters; and

men have sprung from families who first cousins. All these groups are biologic-

may be considered as otherwise undistin- ally as closely akin to A as are his father

guished. He has, it appears, looked and his own children. Moreover, some

through all those whose biographies occupy account should certainly be taken of the

more than a page of the Encyclopcedia somewhat more remote groups who share

Britannica, and from these he specially one-quarter of A's descent.

selects for further consideration sixty-three The writer is at present engaged on

philosophers and eighty-five poets. He has an examination of the relatives of two

examined the general positions of the hundred eminent men of British origin.

fathers and the children in these cases, and These eminent men have been selected on

stamps them as on the whole mediocre. much the same principle as that adopted by

Seeing that Professor Pearl does not give Professor Pearl; but the conclusions, which

the names of these selected philosophers and it is hoped will be set out later in full detail,

poets, it is not possible to criticise his are very different from those arrived at by

results in detail. We can do no more here him. Here it need only be mentioned that

than put forward certain general considera- in many cases where neither the father nor

tions which seem to have escaped the the children have achieved any special note,

Professor's notice.

one or more eminent uncles, nephews or first

In the first place, it is not very wise to cousins may be found, and these, it must be

base any conclusions as to the biological repeated again, are biologically as near akin

inheritance of an eminent man from a con- as are the father and the children.

sideration of his father and children alone. Secondly, the question arises whether

If only one group is to be taken into these fathers and children, whom Professor

consideration, this should clearly be that of Pearl has noted, were really so mediocre as

the brothers and sisters, as these alone he seems to think ? He appears to hold the

completely share descent with the great opinion, that if a man fails to reach the

man, A. A's father and children share only eminence of a separate memoir in the Ency-

half his descent, and several other groups clopPedia, that he must therefore be quite

equally share half the descent, viz., A's common-place. The truth, of course, is

uncles and aunts, both on the paternal and

(Continued overleaf.)

NOTES OF THE QUARTER (Continued.)

(here reviewed under " Popular Biology ")

fore our going to press. Other important is worth the attention of medical men. Him-

works not noticed for the same reason are Professor Pearl's The Rate of Living (University of London Press), the Proceedings of

self one of them, as well as a biologist, he deals specially with those problems of human heredity that face the practising

the World Population Conference (Arnold), and William Bateson, F.R.S.: His Essays and Addresses (Cambridge University Press). All will be fully reviewed in our
July issue.

doctor. Also here reviewed is Mr. Ludo-
vici's gay, slashing attack upon birthcontrol. Whether or not one agrees with it all, The Night-Hoers is coherent, non-religious, and written chiefly from the eugenic

Dr. Crew's Organic Inheritance in Man aspect.

4 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

that there are many grades between In effect, out of the two hundred examples

supreme eminence and mediocrity.

at present being examined by the writer,

Professor Pearl lumps together mer- more than half the number actually have

chants, clergymen, college professors, etc., relatives in D.N.B. within the groups de-

in one undistinguished heap. In effect, they lineated. In other words, their cases are

must differ widely, and some would un- therefore stronger than those of Blake and

questionably be men of ability, who met Harvey.

with considerable success in their respective Even from the rather fragmentary infor-

callings. This applies more particularly to mation that we have of the Professor's re-

the business men. All through history very searches, we find scarcely any mention of

able men have applied their talents to actual degeneracy on the part of the fathers

commercial pursuits, a course which leads and children. Mediocrity is the worst that

more to present profit than to future fame. can be urged against them. This being so,

One instance may be noted which, not his statement that eugenists would have

being that of a philosopher or a poet, would segregated or sterilized the parents of some

not occur in either of Professor Pearl's of the great men of history, is positively

special lists. James Watt, the inventor of amazing. For these cases we should like,

the steam engine, was the son of a success- we should like very much, to have absolute

ful merchant, who rose to be Provost of chapter and verse. The writer has certainly

Glasgow, and-the nephew, on his mother's not come across a single such instance.

side, of George Muirhead, who has a In conclusion reference should be made

separate memoir in D.N.B.* Professor Pearl to the Professor's further surprising state-

would ignore the uncle altogether and would ment, ascrib,ed to eugenists, that " only

classify the father, clearly a man of ability superior people should be allowed to breed

in his own line, merely as a merchant. freely. " What eugenist has ever made

Watt, according to the Professor, would such a statement? Restrictions have never have sprung from quite undistinguished been proposed, except in the case of the

stock. hopelessly inferior. The mediocre are

Again, Robert Blake and William Harvey had no relatives with separate memoirs in D.N.B. But both the great admiral and the great physician had several
brothers, who, in each case without exception, achieved success in their respective callings; and, as has been said, brothers stand the nearest of all in biological relationship.

obviously as necessary for the world's work as the superior. A too great increase in the supply of the latter might indeed result in a lack of employment worthy of their capacity; but, on the other hand, any absolute decrease in their number would be a real calamity. The supply can only be obtained from thoroughly sound stocks; and it is from such stocks, and such stocks only, that real greatness, as opposed to a flashy

* D.N.B. = Dictionary of National Biography. imitation thereof, will be found to arise.

