FAMILY PLANNING: THE PAST AND THE FUTURE*

By H. A. DAVIDSON, M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P.

Male Subfertiity

Post-Coital Test

T HE male subfertility centre of the The post-coital test consists of an examina-

Family" Planning Association was tion of the woman's cervical secretions a

established in I945 by the decision of number of hours after coitus (usually 7 to I2).

a medical committee under the chairmanship It is painles§, it can be done in less than

of Mr. Aleck Bourne. Its purpose was: I, to five minutes, and it needs no unusual

provide reliable investigation of male fer- equipment or exceptional ability. This test is

tility by semen examination, post-coital concerned with the no-man's-land of fertility

tests, and clinical examination; 2, to help which is neither strictly the seminologist's

in establishing standards for this work, and, nor the gynaecologist's business, so that one

3, to collect research material.

tends to blame the other for its neglect if,

The annual number of tests increased from indeed, it is thought of at all ! Nevertheless,

289 in its first year to I,OI9 in the second, its practical importance is obvious: for of

and since then an average of about 2,000 what avail is the most favourable report on

tests a year has been maintained. Patients a man's semen if we do not know whether

are referred to the centre by private con- his spermatozoa reach the cervical canal and

sultants and general practitioners, by a find the conditions they need there? And

number of hospitals, and by F.P.A. clinics, how can we be certain that coital mechanics

and records have already been filed of over are adequate, and that a woman's cervical

IO,OOO semen analyses, over 2,600 post- secretions are as they should be until we

coital tests, and 200 testicular biopsies. have found a dense and active sperm popula-

The advent of the National Health Service tion in them ?

brought a reduction of the centre's income In our experience the commonest cause

rather than of its work, and this presumably of failure of fertility investigations is an

means that such a service is not sufficiently irritational attitude to this test. Its frequent

provided for by the general medical services. omission and the sacrifice of its diagnostic

What have we learned from the data possibilities have given rise to several

collected ?

popular (and not only popular) superstitions,

Firstly, that disturbances of male fertility such as that of " incompatibility," or a

are very common indeed. A review of our mysterious " X-factor." And we see with

material shows that less than one-third of distressing regularity couples who are said

the men we see are normally fertile. More to be normally fertile in every respect yet

than 8 per cent are completely and hopelessly remain childless for years and get no further

sterile, and the remainder distinctly sub- help than the instructions to " go on trying."

fertile. Admittedly this is a selected group The history of two such cases seen within the

of men-the husbands of wives who had last six months may be of interest: one

failed to conceive-yet the significance of couple complained of io the other of I4

these findings is unmistakable.

years' sterility. Both had had exhaustive

Secondly, we have learned to appreciate investigations-one woman had been through

the value of the post-coital examination. the hands of three specialists. Both wives

This seems so important that at the risk of had had one major and several minor

going into tedious technicalities I should like operations and both husbands were tested

to discuss it in some detail.

repeatedly and found normal. Treatment

* A paper read at a Members' Meeting of the Eugenics Society on October 2ISt, I952.

had been lavish but ineffectual, and postcoital examinations were the only investiga-

202

* FAMILY PLANNING

203

tions omitted. In both cases the post-coital and often the examination of a specimen

test showed a poor result owing to unsatis- brought in is left to any technician who

factory cervical secretions, and both wives happens to be at a loose end. It is not

conceived within two months of treating this surprising, therefore, that week by week we

condition. In both cases the test took only a see the most tragic mistakes in diagnosis;

very few minutes, and the cost of treatment men who have been told that they are

was about ninepence!

perfectly normal, and whose wives have

A review of our post-coital reports shows consequently undergone any likely and

only about one good result in five. This unlikely form of treatment, turn out to be

means that in approximately 8o per cent subfertile, or even sterile, and, conversely,

of our cases this test gave an immediate men who have been given the most gloomy

pointer to the diagnosis of a couple's diffi- opinions turn out to be perfectly normal.

culty. For a poor post-coital result must To quote only one example of many: a

mean either poor semen, poor cervical young man came to us with the story that

secretions, or a mechanical fault of coitus. three semen tests at his local hospital had

A subsequent semen test immediately decides shown him to be sterile. Allegedly his

between these alternatives and opens the spermatozoa were all immotile, and he was

way to rational therapy.

given a hopeless prognosis. Our semen test

Another aspect to these considerations showed him to be highly fertile, and we

deserves attention: of most subfertile found out that his previous tests had all been

couples it is the wife who usually seeks advice done on condom specimens. It has been

first, and in fact most of the women for known for over twenty years that condoms

whom we do post-coital tests have already immobilize spermatozoa quite rapidly, yet

had routine gynacological investigations. this type of test continues in many places

And, even if they have escaped the still to this day.

widespread custom of doing a D. & C. first It is certain that, until clinical laboratories

and asking questions afterwards, many of faced with this work are prepared to employ

them have had salpingograms, or tubal specially trained staff to deal with it, and to

insufflations and endometrial biopsies. Now allow them facilities and time to do so, the

if the post-coital test were to give a clear male factor in the infertile marriage will be

diagnostic indication in only half the cases one of the mysterious " X-factors" and we

examined, the amount of medical manpower shall continue to guess.

and time wasted and the cost of unnecessary

expenditure of X-ray material must be The Position To-day

enormous every year. This might be worthy The subject of this talk is " The Past and

of serious consideration in view of the recent the Future," and so far I have talked of the

appeals for economy in the medical services. past only. But before looking ahead to the

Nor should we forget the waste of the future, I think it will be well to try to

patient's time and the unnecessary distress summarize our present position.

caused by these procedures.

We set out to help to establish standards

The third lesson we have learned through for this work, and I think we have made good

this work is that the standard of generally headway towards our aim. To-day we are

available male fertility tests is still deplorably able to tell a man whether he is fertile or

low. A semen examination is highly skilled sterile, or whether he needs further attention.

and time-consuming work. Also, the con- This may seem little enough from a research

ditions under which seminal specimens have worker's point of view, but it means very

to be collected and delivered to the laboratory much to the patient, for a definite verdict

are highly critical and need a good deal of of complete adequacy or hopeless sterility

organization. Most clinical laboratories have saves an endless amount of wasted time and

neither the trained technical or secretarial useless treatment and enables a couple to

staff nor the time to attend to these matters, make practical arrangements accordingly.

204 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Secondly, the results of our tests are com- would criticize a general practitioner for parable from one time to the next, since our dealing himself with, say, a straightforward

methods eliminate the observer as much as case of pneumonia, or a broken wrist, rather possible. In the past and with other methods than sending the first to a chest hospital and in use nowadays, a semen test often repre- the second to an orthopaedic hospital.

sented an estimate rather than a calculation. Undoubtedly there are highly specialized This made it difficult to assess the results of fertility investigations needing special equip-

treatment. With a standardized method and ment and these are obviously a matter for the comparable results we have been able to gynacologist, the seminologist, the endoeliminate several forms of time-honoured but crinologist and the G.U. surgeon. But it is

irrational therapy, and to prove the value of not in this field that most of the trouble

others.

arises. Where so many couples come to an

Thirdly, our work on post-coital tests has impasse is precisely in what I may call the

revealed the inestimable importance of general practice of subfertility, where the

co-operation between male and female clinics, specialists' reports have their place but a and, incidentally, has yielded some useful balanced and common-sense view of the

methods of practical treatment. Our present situation, then, is that we
have accumulated a certain amount of knowledge, and that experience has shown
this to be of practical use. But the application of what we have learned is still limited
to a comparatively small number of workers,
and our task for the future is to make these facts known, and to make them part of the daily routine in subfertility work.

whole situation is of first importance.
Therefore we shall continue to make every effort to keep in contact, by publications, by post-graduate lectures and by direct teaching, with the general medical public as well as with the experts.
Needless to say, we shall also continue with our established routine and with the pursuit of our present lines of research.

We have already begun to do so, for half a dozen technicians trained in our methods
of seminology are working at several hos-
pitals, and more than twice that number of doctors have come for training in post-coital examinations. In March this year the F.P.A. organized a meeting for its clinic doctors who were interested in this field, and over sixty attended. The meeting was concerned

Summary
The F.P.A. male subfertility centre was established in 1945 to provide reliable investigation of male fertility by semen analyses, post - coital tests and clinical examination, and to advise on treatment.
The annual number of tests rose from 289 in its first year to about 2,000 in the third

with practical problems and methods of and has continued at this level, thus showing

investigation, and similar conferences will be held in future. These will probably be open to doctors outside the F.P.A. We hope that this will serve to make more generally available the services hitherto confined to a very few centres.
The Future It has been argued that subfertility investi-
gations are a highly specialized field and therefore should be confined to hospital departments rather than left to clinics or doctors not of consultant status. But then, every field of medicine is highly specialized if one chooses to make it so. And no one

need for such a service. Records have already accumulated of over io,ooo semen analyses, over 2,600 post-coital tests, and over 200 testicular biopsies. Review of this
material has shown: (i) that about twothirds of patients referred are subfertile
(8 per cent completely sterile) and only onethird normally fertile; (2) that in 8o per cent of childless couples the post-coital test gives an immediate pointer to the difficulty, saving
many other investigations, and (3) that standards of generally available male fertility investigation are still deplorably low. Research into etiology, diagnosis and treatment of male subfertility continues.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLIV, No. 4

