THE ROYAL COMMISSION ON POPULATION AND PEP
By RICHARD RUMBOLD

RP E P (Political and Economic Plan- giving them advice on minor sexual prob-

ning) has recently issued a valuable lems, advice which should include an eugenic

paper (Population and the Press: assessment of the parties; abortion would

The Royal Commission Reports)* setting out its views on the Report of the Royal

be legalized on certain eugenic grounds; and voluntary sterilization would be permiss-

Commission on Population published in June, I949. The pamphlet, as is to be expected,

ible for people suffering from hereditary disease. But support for these admirable

consists mainly of a comparison between the Royal Commission's report and P E P's

proposals is lamentably absent from the Royal Commission's report. "We have

own report on the same subject which was
published in I948 under the title of Population Policy in Great Britain.t "The two
reports," says P E P, " have very much in
common. They discuss the same things, in much the same way, and by and large come to the same conclusions." But (it adds) for that very reason the Royal Commission's
report is rather disappointing, since a body with such resources might have been expected to achieve more than P E P with its far more limited resources although the formidable battery of statistics accumulated by the Royal Commission will prove invaluable in any further discussions of population questions; and it is very reassuring that, despite the highly controversial nature of the subject, these two very different bodies, working independently, have seen the essentials of the problem in
very much the same light.
Eugenists, however, will note with disappointment that the Royal Commission, although implicitly aware of the qualitative aspects of population problems, is much more cautious than P E P in making any positive recommendations in this matter. P E P wants a Family Welfare Service linked to the National Health Service within which would be a group of para-medical services. This Welfare Service would be at the disposal of couples contemplating marriage,

received evidence (it states) of a small but
growing demand for advice on suitability from an eugenic point of view for parent-
hood. The evidence does not justify us in recommending any comprehensive provision
at this stage, but we should like to see
experiments made where circumstances are suitable. A clinic which embraced facilities for advice on infecundity and on birth control could develop naturally as the needs emerged to include pre-marital examinations and other services of direct relevance to family welfare." This all eugenists will rightly regard as " fiddling while Rome
bumss"; and in addition no proposals are made in regard to sterilization.
Let us turn now to the wider issues of population policy. Both reports are in agreement (though they reach it by different considerations) as to what the goal should be: a falling population, they declare, would have considerable disadvantages, but, on the other hand, there are no valid reasons to justify substantial increases, and the goal of policy should be, therefore, to increase the birth rate to the point at which the present
population replaces itself. P E P believes that with good planning a rising standard of life can be secured for a stationary population, and the Royal Commission states that
" the uncertainty of the future regarding world supplies of food and the opportunities of British export trades gives us good reason

* Planning. NO. 301.

to be thankful that no further large increases

t EUGENICS REVIEW, July, 1948. 40. 2. PP. 55-6o. in our population are probable."

I27

128 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

The methods of securing the desired in- a standard of accommodation appropriate

crease in the birth-rate should be primarily to a family, the family would receive a grant

by creating a society sufficiently attractive representing the difference between the rent

for people to want to bring children into it. which it could afford and the reasonable rent

There must be no attempt to coerce women of this appropriate accommodation. The

into childbearing by lowering their status, Royal Commission also accepts the need for

depriving them of careers or by restricting some such scheme, but recommends that an

the use of contraceptives. No one could expert committee should be appointed to

quarrel with this humane thesis, but it may examine the possibility of a general scheme

be questioned whether PEP is justified of rent subsidies or rent rebates related to

in contending that " individuals may be the size of the family.

morally certain that children are a blessing Another question over which the two

and that anyone who thinks otherwise has bodies are in substantial agreement is emi-

a false and distorted sense of values." gration. Both recognize the disadvantages

Parenthood, surely, is a vocation, calling for of large-scale emigration from this country,

qualities of high selflessness and devotion, particularly, of course, of young able-bodied

and not everybody is inclined or fitted to workers, which is bound to exaggerate the

accept its trials and responsibilities; and present bad age-distribution. On the other

nothing can quicker lead to disaster than hand, emigration to Commonwealth coun-

to badger people into bringing children into tries, particularly if it included a share of

the world against their will by telling them dependants, has obvious strategic advan-

that their reluctance to become parents tages in lowering the density of population;

spells a distorted sense of values.

and both reports believe that the matter

Both reports recommend an increase in should be discussed farther on the highest

family allowances and an increase in the level between the Governments concerned.

present insurance maternity grant for the Regarding immigration, however, there is

first baby; and PE P recommends low- considerable difference of view. P E P is

interest marriage loans. But both declare inclined to welcome selective European

that the major obstacle to parenthood and family life is shortage of houses. The need to build houses more quickly is imperative, and the Royal Commission asks for more variety in size of houses to enable families
to move as they expand and then contract with the years; and both agree on the
importance of giving large families the financial means to pay the rents of the large

immigration to compensate for deficiencies in fertility, shortages of certain types of manpower and losses due to emigration. But the Royal Commission is pessimistic about the " capacity of a fully established society like ours to absorb immigrants of alien race and religion."
These, however, are relatively minor differ-

dwellings that are available. P E P, how- ences, and the wide measure of agreement

ever, puts forward a positive proposal to reached by the two bodies should greatly

extend rent assistance to all families, who- increase the value and importance of each

ever are their landlords. After definition of other's work.

E ics Review, Vol. XI, No. 3

