THE EUGENICS SOCIETY

T HE Annual General Meeting was held be modified during the current year by the

at 69 Eccleston Square, S.W.i, on suspension of the annual election of mem-

Tuesday, May 28th, I940, at 5 p.m., bers of Council and that those members of

with the President, Lord Horder, in the Chair. Council who have consented shall remain in office without further election for that

period with the powers vested in them."

MINUTES. The minutes of the Annual General Meeting held on Tuesday, May i6th, I939, which were contained in the
Annual Report, included in the April issue of the EUGENICS REVIEW, and had therefore been circulated to all Fellows and Members of the Society, were taken as read and signed
as correct. ANNUAL REPORT. The Chairman pre-
sented the Annual Report, the adoption of which was proposed by Mr. Bramwell, seconded by Mr. Binney and carried unani-

It was therefore agreed that the Honorary Officers and Council should remain as appointed at the Annual General Meeting held on May i6th, I939, with two excep-
tions: i. Owing to the resignation of Professor Ryle there would be now only
five Vice-Presidents instead of the usual six. 2. The resignation of Sir Mark Grant Sturgis from the Council; this was received: and accepted last September, to take effect in May.

mously.

The Emergency Committee for the ensuing

STATEMENT OF ACCOUNTS AND BALANCE year will consist of the following, with power

SHEET. The Honorary Treasurer presented to co-opt: The Lord Horder, Sir Charles the Statement of Accounts and Balance Arden-Close, Mr. Binney, Mr. Bramwell,

Sheet for the year ended December 3Ist, Mr. Chance, The Hon. Mrs. Grant Duff,

I939. These were unanimously adopted.
APPOINTMENT OF HONORARY OFFICERS

Mr. Gun, Mrs. Hubback, Dr. Lewis, Mr. Martin, Mr. Titmuss.

AND COUNCIL FOR THE YEAR I940-I. The ELECTION OF AUDITORS FOR THE YEAR

following Resolution, passed by the mem- I940-I. It was proposed by Mr. Binney,

bers of the Emergency Committee at their seconded by Mr. Gun, and carried unani-

meeting held on April 2nd, I940, was read mously, that the auditors of the Society,

by the President:

Messrs. West & Drake, be re-elected.

" Since it appears to this meeting that A hearty vote of thanks, proposed by Mr. it is undesirable in present circumstances Binney, to Lord Horder for his work on
to have elections of members of Council, behalf of the Society for the past year was it is hereby resolved that the procedure carried unanimously.

ANNUAL REPORT 194041

In this Report, the accounts relate to the period December 3Ist, I939, to December 3Ist, I940. The rest of the Report covers the period from March 3ISt, I940, to March
31st, I94I. The war and the continued absence on
active service of Dr. Blacker have made the work of the Society difficult during the past

year; but in spite of adverse conditions the Emergency Committee Meetings were regular and well attended. At the October Meeting, however, it was agreed that, in view of the situation arising out of the war, the work of the Society should be placed on a care and maintenance basis, and with great regret it was decided to dispense with the services of

27

