THE VALUE OF MEDICAL EXAMINATION BEFORE MARRIAGE*

By COL. MALCOLM STODDART-SCOTT, M.P.

In the following article, Colonel Stoddart-Scott that it will ever be discussed on the floor

writes about the widely discussed Private Member's Bill, which he seeks to introduce in the House of

of the House of Commons.

Commons, dealing with the controversial subject

of compulsory exchange of certificates of medical Twofold Objective

examination between engaged couples.

What does my little Bill hope to do ?

E VERY year in November there is a Its objective is twofold. (i) To make for

ballot amongst Members of Parliament happier marriages. (2) To provide for

for the privilege of introducing into Par- healthier generations to come. The title is

liament a Private Member's Bill. There are " to make it compulsory for the exchanges

over 6oo starters in the Parliamentary sweep- of certificates of medical examination before

stake, but only twenty ever get placed. A marriage." You will see from the title the

Member is always considered very fortunate purpose is to do one thing only-that persons

if his name appears amongst this lucky about to be married should exchange

twenty. Many Members pass through their certificates stating that they have been

Parliamentary life without ever having this medically examined within a given period

privilege and opportunity.

prior to the marriage. It does not propose

The chance of getting a Private Member's Bill passed through both Houses of Parlia-

that details of examination or medical histories should be included on the certificate.

ment and becoming the law of the-land is indeed remote. If the Bill is non-con-

The value of this action would be to give greater mutual assurance to-those about to

troversial, if it has the support of the undertake the important and changed

Government and if one's name is drawn responsibilities of the marriage partnership.

amongst the first six, then there is a chance, It would give an opportunity of discussing

a possibility, that it may get through. A with the family doctor the intimate problems

good Bill, non-controversial, with Govern- which may and do perplex those about to ment backing, can be lost if too much time be married. In those instances-and they

is taken up by the Private Member's Bills would be a very small minority only-

which precede it as a very limited amount where disease was detected or the medical

of Parliamentary time is available.

history made it' prudent, treatment or

advice could be given.

The chance of my little Bill ever getting on the Statute Book is almost non-existing. I have drawn nineteenth place. From the
reaction of some of the national Press, I can hardly consider my Bill non-controversial, and I do not expect the Government to adopt it and to gain the additional time and facilities to get my Bill through. I have, therefore, to go through all the actions of preparing the Bill, get it printed and
published, without knowing for certain

In no case would the exchange of such certificates prevent anyone from getting married. A doctor might advise that a
course of treatment might remove an infection or procure a cure, and therefore it might be prudent to postpone marriage for' a brief period. A medical examination will in some cases give cause for reflection. If such advice were given and followed, it would perhaps prevent unhappiness after marriage, and may possibly prevent the

*Reprinted from Wharfedale and Airedale Observer, Friday, November 27th, 1953.

breakdown of marriages. It could help further to reduce infant mortality.

40

THE VALUE OF MEDICAL EXAMINATION BEFORE MARRIAGE 4I

The infant mortality rate is held by many Tuberculosis-the White Man's Scourge-

to be the most delicate index of the Social has now become a curable disease. One'

Services of a nation. In this country the factor which has helped to bring this about

infantile mortality rate (that is the number is early diagnosis. There may be only one

of infants who do not survive the first year case in a thousand of undiscovered tuber-

of birth) has been falling steadily over the culosis who would present themselves for

past thirty years and last year it was the medical examination before marriage, but

lowest on record. If we can add to this isn't it worth while to discover and treat

great advances in social progress by medical such a case with the quick prospect of

examination before marriage, is it not worth recovery that early diagnosis implies ?

doing? Medical examination before marriage I do not believe in compulsion any more

is not a? new idea. It has been talked about than most people, but we already willingly

for many years. In some countries it has and properly accept certain social Qbliga-

already operated for some time including tions. The number of men and women who

Norway, Sweden, Denmark and Turkey. voluntarily present themselves for a pre-

In many of the States in the U.S.A. a blood marriage medical examination is a growing

test has to be made three days prior to one. But these are almost always the

marriage.

healthy people, who prize physical fitness.

Medical examination in itself is not strange to most of us. We have become increasingly used to such examinations for a variety of purposes. At school we have compulsory medical examinations, prior to doing two years National Service we have to undergo compulsory medical examination. Why not then before we undertake marriage and become the parents of the next generation ?

If my Bill was to become law many more would have the satisfaction of knowing they too were amongst the fit, and many doubts and unfounded fears would be removed.
My Bill is so far down the list that it may never be heard of again, but a public interest in it has been aroused which in my view, and in the view of so many who have
written to me, is a good thing. If the result is to encourage and increase the number of

people who voluntarily undertake medical

Medical Co-operation

examination before marriage, then we can add our little to the health and happiness

The co-operation of the medical profession of the people of this country.

would be needed, of course, and would I This Bill places emphasis in the right

believe be readily forthcoming. In some direction-the " preventative medicine "

instances, and again I stress the minority, which is always the most valuable aspect

the doctor might refer individuals to the of medicine-for it removes diseases and

Marriage Guidance clinics. In certain prevents sickness.

diseases with heredity traits such as Haemo- In this age of the atom, of the increasing

philia and mental conditions, a doctor's world population, of intensive world com-

advice would be invaluable. Any instance petition, the prize of survival will probably

of V.D. (which is fortunately rapidly becom- go to the healthiest people. It is therefore

ing a receding disease) could be referred for the duty of every thinking man and woman

treatment.

to plan for healthy Britons of the future.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLVI, No. 1

