THE GENETICS OF AMENTIA*
By FREDERICK GRUNDY, M.D., D.P.H., Barrister-at-Law
(Deputy Medical Officer of Health to the Borough of Luton)

INTRODUCTORY

grades and clinical types, I knew only as text-

I WAS asked to address this Society
because a thesis I wrote some little time ago on the basis of a territorial survey of amentia in East Anglia caught the eye of our very vigilant secretary. The primary justification for my presence, therefore, is to give you a brief account of one aspect of this in-
vestigation; but it would be unfair to you and to me alike were I to confine myself rigidly to the subject-matter of the original
thesis, for you will understand when I
describe the circumstances of its inception that my outlook has matured considerably since then. Furthermore, the thesis was in-
tended to be a scientific document, and I
am pursuaded that a leavening of its cautious premises with a little more venturesome, if more precarious, opinion is likely to add to the interest of a discussion of this sort.
Consequently I propose to divide my address into two parts. (i) A description of the investigation and the conclusions I drew at the time. (2) A critical estimate of the methodology of genetic surveys, and a statement of certain personal views, which I shall submit for your comment and criticism. So that you may reach a valuation of the
work I must tell you something of the circumstances that led up to it, and of the
extent of my own knowledge at that time. In I93I I took up a post involving a good
deal of school medical work and mental deficiency in East Suffolk, and there I made my first acquaintance with rural England, a
very beautiful, peaceful countryside. My knowledge of mental deficiency was restricted
to its clinical and t.dministrative aspects.
The social aspect of feeble-mindedness, the relative influences of heredity and environ-
ment in the determination of the various

book subjects, but after a short intimate medical contact with the family life and
the educational machinery of the county
the real nature of the problems was forced
upon me, their difficulty and their magnitude alike. I drew up a provisional scheme
and began.
With the exception of the Wood Report I avoided references to other workers' findings until I had completed the collection of my data, and I believe that the investigation was on that account as free as possible from
preconceptions. Latterly I have given
thought to the problem of the causation of amentia, and to the control of its incidence. The outcome of these deliberations I shall
submit when my major task of describing the family survey is fulied.
The area in which the investigation was
carried out had a population of 45,435 and a school population of 6,645. It may conveniently be described as the north-east quadrant of East Suffolk, constituted of three rural districts and the townships of Beccles, Bungay, Halesworth, and Southwold. The whole area is essentially agricultural and there is longshore fishing along the coast. Many of the villages are still comparatively isolated, for cross-county com-
munications are relatively poor. There was no great difficulty in obtaining family histories in most instances, for the inhabitants knew a good deal about neighbouring fami-, lies; social cohesiveness was, in fact, high throughout the area. I employed the same standards as those fully described by Dr. E. 0. Lewis in the Wood Report, I929, using Stanford tests and Burt's graded tests in the estimation of mental age and educational age respectively. In all 750 children (II *2 per cent. of the entire school population) were

* A lecture delivered before the Eugenics Society on
March 29th, 1935.

examined by individual methods, and the investigation of suspected defectives followed

2I7

2I8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

closely that usually undertaken for certification under the Education Act. It was neither practicable nor desirable to subject adults to systematic testing, and their examination was undertaken with the social concept in mind. There is every reason to believe that the ascertainment of defectives of school age was complete for all practical purposes. It is clearly impossible to submit details of individual cases, but I want to say that the diagnosis of deficiency in school children was invariably based on precise personal assessment, and that relating to adults on strongly presumptive evidence in all cases, and on personal observations whenever possible.
Mention must be made of certain terms which may not be familiar to all of you:
i. Mental age (M.A.) means equivalent age in'terms of intelligence tests.
2. Educational age (E.A.) means equivalent age in terms of educational tests.
3. Intelligence Quotient (I. Q.)
- Mental Age x IOO
Actual Age
4. Educational Ratio (E.R.)
Educational Age x IOO
Actual Age
5. Retardation for the purposes of the investigation was given an arbitrary meaning which corresponded roughly to an all-round backwardness of two years. The term retardation, therefore, refers to educational attainments and to nothing else.
THE RETARDED CHILD
Any detailed consideration of retardation such as the original thesis contained would be irrelevant to this discussion; but I cannot avoid referring to certain broad conclusions, a recognition of which is essential to the proper understanding of the subject-matter of this address. So as to occupy a minimum of time in this connection I propose to make bare statements without attempting to familiarize you with the evidence on which they are based.
I. Incidence of Retardation. According to the tests employed 7 * 3 per cent. of the school

population of eight years and over were found to be three and a half or more years retarded. Assuming a normal frequency distribution of Educational Ratios, 30 per cent. of the children of eight years and over are
two or more years retarded.
2. Distribution of Retardation and Mental Deficiency in the Area. I marked on a map those parishes which had 4 per cent. or more of defectives in their schools, and as might
be expected the incidence of deficiency and dullness were shown to run hand in hand, for most deficiency is of the sub-cultural variety. Although not apparent from the map itself without an intimate knowledge of local
circumstances, the incidence of deficiency and retardation was highest in the areas of
greatest geographical and social isolation. This factor of social isolation seemed to operate indirectly, raising the incidence of poor stocks by providing a strong incentive to the better stocks to migrate to areas of greater social amenity, that is to urban areas. There was no doubt in my mind that although inbreeding was relatively common in the more isolated places, the role it played was insignificant as compared with the factor I have mentioned.
3. The Causes of Retardation. The following table which summarizes the causes of retardation in children in the eight years plus age groups is almost self-explanatory. I wish only to direct your attention to three points:
I. The small part played by medical
conditions. 2. The mythical character of " aprosexia." 3. The inclusion of instances of bad teach-
ing in the group " other causes," which accounts for its size.

Table showing Causes of Retardation in children of eight years and over

Low general intelligence 307 Change of school ... I5 Sensory defects ... ... 6 Absence without illness 5
Physical illness ... ... 2I Aprosexia ... ... 2 Other causes ... ... 47

8 & 7c. 3 & 3c.
4 & IC. II & IOC.
I & IC.

Total

403... ...

GENETICS OF AMENTIA

2I9

The figure followed by c. indicates the number of cases in which dullness was a contributory cause in conjunction with the other named condition.
Summary. Seventy-seven per cent. of retardation is associated with dullness exclu-
sively, and 82 per cent. with low general intelligence. Twelve per cent. may be attributed to deprivation of education opportunity and 3 per cent. to medical conditions.
4. Disordered Conduct in School Children. Very briefly the following facts emerged:

given an environment as uniform as that provided in the case of the average child in this country the E.A. is almost as reliable a measure of intelligence as the I.Q.
If intelligence is defined as " the aggregate of characteristics which intelligence tests
measure," which I submit is a rational definition, this is merely another way of
saying that the M.A. and the E.A. are highly correlated. Lest the proposed definition seem insensate I will outline the argument that leads up to it.

i. Only twenty-nine, or one in 229, of the (a) The word intelligence is commonly

school population exhibit disorders of

used to mean certain characteristics

behaviour.

possessed by one person in the judg-

2. Of these twenty-nine, fourteen were

ment of another. In this sense it is a

actual defectives, and eleven had I.Q.s

private judgment and not a scientific

between 70 and 8o per cent; that is only

datum. Psychological definitions other

four had mental ratios over 8o per cent.

than the one suggested above give no

3. It is equally noteworthy that of I35

greater precision to the word.

feeble-minded children only ten showed (b) Tests have been devised which are

any outstanding disorder of conduct.

ethically neutral, and which embody

That is to say, twelve out of thirteen

everything public in the various judg-

feeble-minded children are so designated

ments.

purely and simply because of a low I. Q. (c) When intelligence is defined in terms

and its associated low educability.

of these tests it becomes the business

This fact is of extreme importance in so far
as it limits the conclusions which may cor-
rectly be drawn from geniological data relating to adults and children; for in the case of adults the criterion of mental
deficiency is an incapacity to effect independent social adaptation, a standard which

of the psychologist to ascertain to
what extent test scores are correlated
with the characteristics of intelligence
in the ordinary sense of the word, and the business of the biologist to investigate the relative influences of nature and nurture in their determination.

refers exclusively to social behaviour. 5. The Relationship between the M.A. and

FAMILY HISTORIES

the E.A. I reached the general conclusion I do not propose to describe the method I

that these variables are so highly correlated adopted in obtaining family histories, locat-

that the I.Q. can be estimated with fair ing defectives, and checking information, for

accuracy from the E.A. in the absence of I am sure your imagination will carry you

unusual factors, such as defective sensory over all that.

apparatus or deprivation of educational A total of I65 ascertained defectives of

opportunity.

school age was made up of I35 feeble-minded,

It must be concluded that the E.A. is twenty-three imbeciles, and seven idiots, a

closely dependent on the I.Q., or that in proportion almost identical with that found

general both are measures of the same attri- by Dr. Lewis in rural areas. The close

butes. That is to say, intelligence tests are correspondence is a matter of importance,

but educational tests in disguise. It is because it raises a presumption that no great

generally admitted that the I.Q. is deter- disparity existed between the standards

mined to a considerable extent by environ- employed in the investigations.

mental agencies, and I suggest now that Of ii6 family histories, twenty-eight were

220 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

not full enough to permit confident conclu- although not actually defective. It seemed

sions. No fewer than I49 of the ascertained that a factor, sometimes suggested by the

defectives of school age appeared in the history, additional to the neuropathic in-

family histories, leaving only sixteen, all of heritance had operated to produce an actual

feeble-minded grade, in whose case a family defective among a group of poor quality

history was unobtainable. Set out below are siblings.

summary classifications based on the his- Without elaborate statistical methods, the

tories.

value of which I shall consider later, conclu-

PATHOLOGICAL TYPES

sive proof of hereditary influence cannot be

Imbeciles and Idiots

Feeble-minded

Mongolians ... ... 9 Infantile encephalitis

Meningitic ... ... I Traumatic (birth in-

2

offered, but it is noteworthy that other workers who have-used the method of family

Hydrocephalic ... I jury) ... ... I surveys have reached substantially the same

Epileptic ... Simple primary

... i Simple primary ... I8

... I32 conclusions as those presented here. A glance at the family pedigrees gives a very

Total ... ... 30 Total ... ... I35 fair notion of the standard employed, but a

CAUSATION

personal acquaintance with the families in

Imbeciles and Idiots

Feeble-minded

(a) Environmental

(a) Environmental

factors ... ... 6 factors ... ...

4

their usual environmental setting is by far the most convincing evidence.

(b) Without apparent

(b) Without apparent

The symbols used in the charts are those

cause

...

I7...

(c) Prima facie evid-

ence of a heredi-

tary factor ... 7

cause

...

...

(c) Neuropathic in-

heritance

...

(d) Combination of

neuropathic in-

heritance and en-

vironmental factor

10
71
I5

adopted by the Eugenics Society. There is one unusual feature to which I would draw
your attention. According to my own estimate, which does not conflict with generally accepted views, roughly half the children

23 per cent. attributable to 71 per cent. attributable

inheritance.

exclusively to neuropathic

certified under the Education Act will not be defective in a social sense in adult life in a

inheritance.

rural area. Likewise there is no doubt that

I need say nothing about Group (a), and it many parents who were classed as poor type

will be sufficient to say of Group (b) that cases would have been classed as defective during

under this heading could not be referred to a school life. That is to say, there exists a wide

cause, although reasonably complete infor- disparity between the standards used in the

mation was available. It is likely that a educational and social classifications of

fuller knowledge would have led to their feeble-mindedness, and it is beyond doubt

classification with those due to environmental that the use of the single term " feeble-

causes.

minded" in two distinct senses, both of

I must now indicate the nature of the which are legal and not scientific, is highly

evidence which was taken into account in the confusing in an inquiry of this sort. An

selection of cases attributed to neuropathic attempt was made to overcome the difficul-

inheritance, either alone or in combination ties implicit in this duality of meaning by

with an environmental factor. Very briefly introducing the letters E. and S. into the

inheritance was regarded as a factor in causa- charts with the following connotation:

tion in the presence of (a) several defective

(a) Applied to adults: was probably

siblings, (b) defectives or other marked neuro-

defective educationally during

paths in antecedent generations, especially E.

school life.

defective or borderline parents.

(b) Applied to children: defective in

Feeble-mindedness was judged to be due

an educational sense.

to the combined influence of hereditary and

(c) Applied to adults: defective in a

environmental factors where, in the presence

social sense.

of a neuropathic family history, only one of S. (d) Applied to children: will probably

many siblings was actually defective, whereas

be defective in a social sense in

several others were of poor mental quality,

adult life.

GENETICS OF AMENTIA
SywnbOlh6~ im 6he FanWulj Ped-igrees

221

0 Fau *@* Defecet Rl&au or" Female
* SUabtrch~ or mu5cage
E!l e I~fDele or borda-land child
or pool' tafje aAdu
PeFrson dAi4a

fR

reqnte a or
cotlral a .
A Sex tLn~w.
A-- b lwarwg p~
S ndE IId"A Ien egdwscaRbed rXthe t,

E~~~

b=;E~Ss s

VoqrE

ThPc1 of "No Apparcnt Ca seP Cgxup. PrilmFa~cie £vidauxoFNeuroizkii rvdic

CP ? ?

Iljpo_ of casses onwhidLdLdtThwtjo O?
BlastOphaCr8 has beL b&Asd

Chronic Diabetes

< on Z~~~~~~~~~1

TWO
E

E3

S

222 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

whole of children whose amentia was attriSuicAdt buted to neuropathic inheritance.

AE

t

.T bk

Number of defective sibs (a)

in family

... ... I 2 3 4 5 6 6+

Number of families ... 19 4 7 5 I -

S S S P E E E ? Inants Total (b) size of sibship ... I 2 3 4 5 6 6+

Number of families

.. 5 8 8 9 4 - 2

E. SEr S

Number of unsatisfactory (c) siblings 98 Total number (b) of siblings I24
Number of defective or borderline (d) parents 40... ... ... ... Total number (b) of parents = 6

79 percent. o per cent.

(a) " Sibs " means siblings in family of an ascertained

defective of school age. (b) Total number does not

include those who were not assessed either because they

were inaccessible, or in the case of children too young.

E

(c) " Unsatisfactory" means defectives, borderline cases (I.Q. less than 8o per cent.), dead during infancy,

and stillborn. (d) " Borderline" means illiterate

(;

7~~~~(~e~~dullards who were almost certainly defective in an educational sense during childhood. You have noticed that in 86 per cent. of the

feeble-minded there is evidence of hereditary

influence alone or in combination, in contrast

with aprima facie 23 per cent. of lower grade

aments, which supports the generally accep-

ted conclusion that lower grade deficiency is

not a family problem to the same extent as

the higher grade. If all grades of defectives

are considered together, 75 per cent. appear

to be associated with a neuropathic inherit-

ance. As the incomplete histories, which afl

refer to feeble-minded persons, are not taken

It might be objected that (d) is a perilous into account in this estimate, it follows that

prophecy, and (a) no more than a retrospec- the proportion of cases in which heredity

tive guess, yet they are all. that can be plays a part is somewhat underestimated, for

attained by any investigation that is not an undue proportion of lower grade defec-

spread over at least two decades. I can give tives is admitted.

you no better example than this of the non- It cannot be too strongly emphasized that

sense implicit in family charts relating to the majority of feeble-minded children are

defectives, quite apart from any fallacies merely profound dullards, distinguished from

that may creep into the'ir interpretation. those usually classed as " dull and back-

The representative charts I have selected ward" by a purely arbitrary borderline.

to give a fair notion of the family histories Such deficiency has no pathology in the

are almost self-explanatory, and I shall not ordinary sense of the word, and the)subjects

go into them in detail.

thereof are represented by the extreme left of

The following numerical summaries supply a frequency distribution curve of intelligence

information about the family histories as a quotients. They are quite properly regarded

GENETICS OF AMENTIA

223

as the analogues of short individuals of say amentia-the group that to my mind consti-

5 feet, in a community of average height tutes the only problem of any real import-

5 feet 6 inches, in which a few members ance from a genetic point of view.

attain heights of 6 feet. It is among this We are at once confronted with the general

group and not among the definite patho- problem of the measurement of the degree to

logical types that hereditary influence is so which social conduct is genetically deter-

prominent.

mined, and this in turn involves two issues.

This, the major portion of my address, I shall wind up by asking you to glance at the summary of conclusions as they appeared in the original thesis. I advance them tentatively on the basis of the family histories I
collected, and their limitations will be

I. The measurement of the ability to effect social adaptation.
'2. The estimation of the influence of heredity and environment in determining the measured ability.

apparent from what I shall say in the course With regard to the first, let us admit quite

of the next few minutes.

frankly that we have no method of estimat-

ing this ability. The I. Q. is a measure of one

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

aspect only. It is true that the expert can

i. Roughly 75 per cent. of defectives of all grades come of stocks which exhibit distinct mental abnormalities, of which deficiency and gross dullness are the
commonest.
2. Of the remaining 25 per cent., a few are attributable to environmental causes,
but most are without apparent cause.
3. Feeble-mindedness and dullness are familiar to a much greater extent than
lower-grade deficiency. 4. The mating of two mentally defective
individuals yields offspring who are all
defective. 5. The mating of two individuals of " poor
type " yields offspring of " poor type," who are often defectives in an educa-
tional and sometimes in a social sense. 6. " Dull parents, dull children," is a
usual association. 7. When a neuropathic stock exists the
chance presence of an adverse environment, using the term in its broadest sense, may produce actual deficiency in cases which might not have been defective without the intervention of such a factor.

form a very sound judgment about the capacity of an individual by the use of current performance tests, but like a personal judgment of intelligence it is not a scientific datum. We must look to the psychologist to invent tests which involve affective mental content to a greater degree than those in current use, and which cor-
relate more highly with observed social capacity. This is the first step.
The second problem, so far as I can see, is by its nature incapable of solution. I cannot
go into my reasons for saying this without introducing rather tedious mathematics, but the crux of the matter is that a neutral
environment cannot be constructed in which gene differences are real isolates.
Now suppose these two problems solved, still a further trial awaits us-that of determining the mode of transmission of differences due to genetic constitution. Forget for a moment that subcultural amentia is a
sociological rather than a clinical category, that the frequencies of such aments occupy a segment of the distribution curve of I.Q.s, from which it follows that the notion of any
specific germinal determinant, Mendelian or otherwise, must be excluded. I say forget

TRANSMISSION OF SUBCULTURAL AMENTIA

these difficulties, and ask how the mode of transmission of differences due to genetic
constitution may be investigated. Experi-

Before considering the question of the mental genetics is clearly out of the question,

control of deficiency let us take stock of our and we must fall back on statistical methods

knowledge of the genetics of subcultural of which two are available.

224 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

i. The principle of inbreeding, which is useless because the incidence of the condition under consideration is too great.
2. The principle of random mating, which is likewise inapplicable for the following reasons: (a) Assortative mating is the rule among feeble-minded and borderline cases; (b) The number of substitutions is unknown; (c) 70 per cent. I. Q. does not delineate a category.
I hope that I have made it abundantly clear that there is little hope of establishing the mode of transmission of " simple primary amentia " in terms of Mendelian genetics. It may be that you find it difficult to subscribe to all these opinions, but I have at all events convinced myself that there is no more room for argument than in the case of a wellestablished proposition in mathematics. If, therefore, you are seeking a strictly scientific solution you are chasing a will-o'-the-wisp.
Happily the scientific solution is not essential for reasoned action, for there can be no doubt in the minds of most people that aments are undesirable parents either because of their genetic constitution, or because of their incapacity to provide a suitable environment for the proper development of their offspring of whatever genetic constitution, normal or otherwise; or for both these reasons. It follows that unless the State contemplates the provision of a suitable environment for the offspring of aments, presumably by removing them from the care of their parents and supporting them at the expense of the community, whatever their mental status, the computation of the relative influences of nature and nurture in the production of " simple primary amentia" is more important in theory than in practice.
Although I shall suggest almost in the next breath that I see no urgent need to institute a radical control of the incidence of deficiency, certain provisional measures might be instituted at once with good effect, but some of you may think my provisional measures rresponsibly radical.

CONTROL OF DEFICIENCY
I suggest, in respect of all feeble-minded
persons in a social sense, the prevention of their parenthood, and in respect of imbeciles and idiots, their painless extermination as they arise. There is little hope of preventing the occurrence of more than a small proportion of lower grade defectives. For practical
purposes they do not propagate, for nature has conditioned their sterility, and I contend
in favour of their extermination not because they constitute a serious economic burden or
a potential danger to society, but on humani-
tarian grounds.
I venture to argue that it is unfair to the defective himself to permit him to survive, that it inflicts unnecessary pain and suffering on his parents, who, being almost always
of normal mentality and sensitivity, have been dealt the hardest of all blows in the birth to them of an idiot child. Against this euthanasia, which would remove a class of writhing, paralytic, vegetating masses which outrage the self-respect of man, there is nothing but irrational sentimentalism.
It would be presumptuous of me to discuss eugenic policy here, for I could at most repeat what has had its origin in this very Society. I shall, however, ask your indulgence for a short time to enunciate a question which demands an answer in precise terms if
negative eugenic policy is to be placed on a
generally acceptable footing. It must be asked if the problem of defi-
ciency is in any way so urgent that immediate radical action is indicated. An answer to such a question must always be a matter of persoinal judgment based on such evidence as the incidence of defectives of the several grades, their relative fertilities, the economic capacity and needs of the community, the probable future development of the community, the ideals of the community, and if these clash, the extent of willingness to sacrifice one for the realization of another.
There can never be scientific opinion about some of these matters for they involve values, but the more clearly such questions are enunciated, the more complete the data relative thereto, the more likely is substantial agreement to be reached.

GENETICS OF AMENTIA

225

I have already indicated that in my personal view there is no great urgency, and to suppose that there is, is to lose one's
sense of proportion. In my submission any urgency that exists is for investigation and the concomitant enlightenment of the public. In this connection I suggest the institution of territorial surveys extending over at least two generations, and I believe that to provide the necessary body of evidence such mea-
sures must have the support and guidance of the central government and embody a system
of state genetic records. Not for a moment do I believe that such
measures would lead to the solution of the theoretical difficulties I have mentioned, but they would unquestionably provide a very
valuable body of knowledge. Eugenic measures, like other measures of preventive medicine, can only be successful in so far as they are in step with public opinion, but it is

my view that the general body of opinion
in these matters does not lag greatly in a temporal sense behind the most enlightened opinion of the day.
The mere fact that such bodies of advanced
thinkers as this and kindred societies have crystallized out of the general social milieu is sufficient to presage a broader
understanding amongst the general population, and with repetition and the use of penetrative methods even statesmen may be stimulated to understanding and action. I am not astonished that active measures of
positive and negative eugenics are at present outside the scope of practical politics, but I am appalled that the central government has made no move to collect systematic genetic records, which might, perhaps, assist future generations to face problems that we, in our lack of knowledge, bequeath to them in a confusion of confficting sentiments.

JOURNAL OF COMPARATIVE LEGISLATION AND INTERNATIONAL LAW

THIRD SERIES.

VOL. XVII. PART I.

FEBRUARY 1935

1. ARTICLES-

CONTENTS:

The Administration of Justice in East Africa. By Sir Alison Russell. The Constitutional Capacity of Canada to give effect to International Labour Conventions. II. By
C. Wilfred Jenks. Broadcasting and Comparative Law. By B. A. Wortley, LL.M. Bynkershoek's Observationes Tumultuariae. By Professor R. W. Lee, D.C.L. The Law relating to Devaluation of Currency. By Dr. jur. Rudolf Gottschalk. Measure of Damages in the French Law on Contract. By Professor Ren6 David. New Regulations in the German Code of Civil Procedure. By Dr. Ernst J. Cohn. Mens Rea in German and English Criminal Law. I. By Professor Hermann Mannheim. Salvage and Collisions of Aircraft-Draft Conventions. Notes on Imperial Constitutional Law. By Professor A. Berriedale Keith, D.C.L.

2. NOTES.

3. NOTICES OF BOOKS.

Annual Subscription, One Guinea.

SOCIETY OF COMPARATIVE LEGISLATION, 1 Elm Court, Temple, E.C.4.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVII, No. 8.

