HENRY TWITCHIN

IV/,

same mental make-up would probably have limited their families fifty years ago.
Nevertheless if Dr. Fisher is on the whole
correct, civilization can only be saved by a
very radical change of opinion and practice. And in particular much of the propaganda
of eugenists will prove to have been misdirected. To quote his own words: " The reformer must expect to encounter deepseated opposition in the classes on which he would naturally rely for an intelligent anxiety for the future of their country."
One conclusion is fairly clear. Before the eugenic movement commits itself on the one hand to the further encouragement of the social promotion of infertility, or on the

other to subsidizing the breeding of undesirable groups, a really thorough investigation should be made of the causes of differential fertility. rhere can be no doubt of its existence or of its undesirability, but
several opinions are possible as to the most hopeful method of combating it.
Dr. Fisher's book, then, must be read. But it is not easy reading. It is greatly to be hoped that within the next ten years the sections dealing with evolution and eugenics will both be rewritten in a form which demands less intellectual effort in its readers. Till then it is likely to remain the best discussion of its subjects so far
written.

HENRY TWITCHIN

Some Notes on his Family History By 'W. T. J. Gun, F.R.Hist.S., F.S.G.

I HAVE been asked to make some addi- With regard, however, to the male line

tions to the account of our benefactor descent some interesting facts have been

by Major Darwin in the REVIEW for brought to light by Mr. Fulton. The direct

July I930, and Mr. Leonard Jessop Fulton ancestry cannot, it is true, be definitely

has very kindly supplied me with informa- traced back further than Henry's grand-

tion that he collected some few years ago father, Andrew Twitchin. The name

in connection with Mr. Twitchin's pedigree. Andrew is however significant, as it is fre-

Nothing further has been ascertained with quently found to occur in conjunction with

regard to the maternal family, the Love- that of Twitchin in various individuals of

locks, nor with regard to the descent of the the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries,

Northways, to whom the paternal grand- yeomen farmers for the most part or men of

mother belonged. It is to be noted, how- similar status, residing in Berkshire or its

ever, that on this side Henry Twitchin pos- immediate neighbourhood.

sessed a relative, Edward Northway Butt Having regard to this rather uncommon

by name, who was in business as a chemist Christian name, and very uncommon sur-

and acquired a considerable fortune. It is name, there can be little doubt that Henry's

probably from the Northway strain that grandfather was descended from a certain

Henry Twitchin's business ability was Andrew Twitchin, of Inkpen in Berks,

mainly derived.

whose will was proved November 22nd,

II8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

i657. The immediate ancestry of this Alexander had a son, Andrew, who

Andrew Twitchin is to be found in a matriculated at Hart Hall, Oxford, but

recently published History of Andover did not enter any of the learned professions.

Grammar School, by Arthur Bennett and He became a millowner at Andover, and,

Edmund Parsons.

like his father, served as Bailiff of the town.

About the year 1547 Alexander Twitchin, He was father of the Andrew Twitchin of

whose parentage is unknown, was born at Inkpen, to whom reference has already been

Tingewick in Bucks, about three miles from made. This Andrew was apparently a yeo-

the town of Buckingham. WVinchester Col- man farmer, and the family were evidently

lege owned estates at Tingewick, and in not keeping up in the world. In this there

consequence those of its inhabitants who was nothing remarkable; there was certainly

could qualify possessed a claim to scholar- a tendency at that, and indeed at other

ships -at the College. Alexander was so times, for the descendants of scholars to

qualified and entered the foundation at decline in social status. We have every rea-

Winchester in I558; his name under that son, however, to suppose that the stock

date is to be found in Kirby's Winchester remained sound.

Scholars. We learn from the New College On the balance of probabilities Henry

Register that in I566 he was admitted to a Twitchin was descended from Alexander the

probationer Fellowship at that College, and schoolmaster, and it is curious to reflect

in 1568 to a full Fellowship. On February how a certain note was attained in the six-

6tht, I58i, Alexander was appointed first teenth century, and again in the twentieth

headmaster of the newly established Free while the intervening generations ' bloomed

School at Andover, and held that position unseen.' There must be many similar

till his death in i6iI. He was in every cases: in fact, it is probable that most of

respect an important citizen, Councillor in the successful men of the present day, how-

I599, Bailiff (Mayor) in I604, and from that ever obscure may be their immediate origin,

date till his death Chamberlain, the term are descended in some line or another from

then (and occasionally still) used for the successful men of two or three hundred

Borough Treasurer. One of his sons-in-law years ago. In most instances, however, par-

was Vicar of Andover, and subsequently ticularly when the surnames are more com-

headmaster of the school, while another suc- mon than that of Twitchin, accurate research

ceeded to the living thus vacated.

is difficult, if not altogether impossible.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIII, No. 2.

