MALTHUS IN PERSPECTIVE

By JOHN BLACKER

T HOMAS ROBERT MALTHUS (I766- Dr. Beales' introductory chapter on " The

I834) published the first edition of his Historical Context of the 'Essay' on

famous " Essay on the Principle of Population" describes its impact on

Population" in I798, at the age of thirty- contemporary society and the storm of

two. Ever since, his theory has been the controversy which it aroused. He then goes

subject of a controversy of fluctuating on to discuss the influence of Malthus on the

intensity. Many of the arguments that have Poor Law Amendment Act, of I834, and

been used against it have been valid, but on the stream of transatlantic migration,

more often they have been based on recalling the evidence Malthus gave before

misconceptions and misrepresentations of the Committee on Emigration of I826-28.

what he had in fact written. This is true, not Now while the effect which his ideas may

only of the time at which Malthus wrote, but have had on the volume of migration to the

also of today, and now that the increasing New World is clearly very small, the question

gravity of the world's population problems of Malthus's influence on the re-shaping of

has once again brought the subject to the the Poor Laws is a complex one, and it

fore, two recently published books are cannot but be felt that Dr. Beales's treatment

all the more welcome in so far as they put the of it is somewhat inadequate. " If Chadwick

subject into perspective and discuss it and Senior were its architects," he writes,

dispassionately.

" the spirit behind the Poor Law Amend-

" To know what Malthus actually wrote is ment Act (I834) was that of Malthus." This

clearly the minimum to be urged," writes view though only partially true, is -so

Professor Glass in his preface, and the generally held that there has come to be

Introduction to Malthus * which he edits heaped on Malthus the obloquy for all the

contains two reprints of Malthus's writings, horrors of the workhouse system as it

together with introductory essays by H. L. developed after I834. The Hammonds'

Beales, D. V. Glass and A. T. Peacock, and a have described how these horrors were

bibliography of British population literature finally brought to light in I845 through

from I793 to i88o, compiled by J. A. Banks the scandal of the Andover Workhouse,

and Professor Glass. The reprints of Malthus where the half-starved inmates fought for

'consist of " A Summary View of the Principle the gristle and marrow of some putrid bones

of Population " published in I830, and " A which they had been given to crush.

Letter to Samuel Whitbread, Esq., M.P." "Poverty," says Dr. Beales, "was a

written in i8oi. In many ways these may be crime." But Malthus did not regard poverty

regarded as the most valuable part of the as a crime, even if many of his self-styled

book. The " Summary View" published followers did. What he regarded as criminal

four years before Malthus's death contains was that pauper boys and girls should marry

the pith of his argument, as presented in his and beget large numbers of children whom

great work. The letter to Samuel Whitbread, they had no prospect whatever of being able

however, deals with the more limited subject to support and who could only become an

of the latter's proposals for the amendment added burden on the ratepayer. He insisted,

of the poor law. On the whole Malthus wrote reasonably enough, that the proportion of

simply and readably, and these works may the population dependent on poor relief

well stimulate the reader to look at the should be reduced to the minimum, and he

elaborations of this theory in the larger work. therefore believed that the poor law should

* D. V. Glass (Editor). Introduction to Malthus. be administered in such a way as best to

London, 1953. Watts. Pp. x X 205. Price ios. 6d.

discourage such improvident marriages.

169

170 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Eventually, he thought, the gradual and arguments. Dr. Beales says that Nassau

total abolition of the poor laws would be Senior (the Professor of Political Economy

best suited to this end. In particular he was at Oxford and the leading economist of

strongly opposed to such measures as that the day) " repudiated the Malthusian

put forward by Whitbread in I807 for the orthodoxy," but on this issue at any rate

provision of cottages for paupers out of the Malthus had his support, for in I829 Senior

poor rates, which, he thought, could only be wrote to him saying: " We have the poor

a stimulus to marriage.

laws to increase our numbers. . .."

How far, it may be asked, was Malthus's There is no doubt that had Malthus's

diagnosis of the social problems of this time, scheme for the total abolition of the poor

and the treatment which he recommended laws been put into effect, it would have

for them, correct ? This question, however, brought starvation to innumerable tempor-

Dr. Beales scarcely answers. He emphasises arily unemployed workers in the towns.

that the workhouse system proposed by the But it is arguable that in his opposition to

I834 Act was inapplicable to the problems the provision of cottages out of the poor

of the industrial towns in the North. But rates, he may have been right. Mr. Kenneth

the abuses of the Speenhamland system, Connell, in his book on the population of

and the total inadequacy of the old method Ireland before the famine,3 puts forward the

of poor relief clearly made a revision of the view that it was the possibility of obtaining

poor laws imperative. According to Halevy2 a holding-facilitated by the spread of the

the average annual expenditure on poor potato, and by the changeover from pasture

relief had increased from some [2 million to arable farming by the Irish landowners-

before the French War to some [8 million in which occasioned the violent expansion of

i8i8. Dr. Beales attributes this rise to " the the Irish population after I770, through the

steep climb of prices to unprecedented medium of early marriage.

heights, the sharp embarrassment of a Professor Glass's chapter on " Malthus-

series of bad harvests, the strains and and the Limitation of Population Growth"

stresses of war finance, the very amateurish- is perhaps the most interesting of the three.

ness of the justices of the peace." He does Malthus maintained that the postponement

not mention the growth of the population of marriage was the only legitimate and

which was fundamental to all the social moral method of controlling fertility, and

problems which faced the ministries of Professor Glass shows that the demographic

Liverpool and his successors. Furthermore evolution of Ireland after the great famine

it is well known that the Justices of the in I845 came closest to this ideal. If the

Peace, who at that time were responsible for original expansion of the Irish population

the disposal of the poor rates, had the had been due to earlier marriage through

example of the French Revolution the fragmentation of holdings, the decline in

immediately before their eyes, and were fertility after I845 was due to a return to the

terrified lest a similar jacquerie should arise old custom of passing on estates intact from

in this country. Thus in their efforts to one generation to another and thus to the

appease the working classes they started postponement of marriage. The compara-

to disburse increasingly large sums of money tively small amount of extra-marital sexual

in poor relief. The requisite statistics are not relations, reflected in the low illegitimacy

available, but it is conceivable that these rate, and the small decline in fertility after

disbursements resulted, not so much in a marriage has taken place, likewise shows that

permanent amelioration in the conditions of Ireland approached more nearly to Malthus's

the mass of the working classes, but rather requirements than other Western European

in their rapid increase in numbers and a countries.

further rise in the price of food. Thus the Professor Glass also discusses the influence

Malthusian protagonists of Poor Law reform of Malthus on the legislation against early

may have had at least a basis of truth to their marriage in certain German states where the

MALTHUS IN PERSPECTIVE

17I

population problem had again become acute third, by the decline in fertility due to the

through the fragmentation of holdings. His spread of contraception. How far are these

chapter ends with a brief discussion of the three methods applicable to those countries

spread of birth control in western society. today where the Malthusian pressure of

"The development of the birth control population against the means of subsistence

movement in nineteenth-century England," is assuming ever more serious proportions ?

he writes, " represented an explicit accept- From the remedy of emigration there is

ance of the Malthusian theory and a complete clearly little to be hoped and Mr. Peacock

abandonment of Malthus's rules of conduct." dismisses it briefly. " Relatively speaking,"

" Whatever the value of the Malthusian he writes, " migration is not an important

theory," he ends, " Malthus's precepts of factor in determining the level of population,

conduct have lost their relevance as a means and it is unlikely, given the present world

of preventing a conflict between population political situation, that emigration of Asiatic

and resources." As regards Malthus's peoples to other areas would be at all

condemnation of birth control, this may practicable, quite apart from any economic

certainly be true, though people are inclined incentives which might promote population

to forget that for a clergyman of the Church movement."

of England living at that time, it would have The question of the development of

been unthinkable for him to have adopted industry and agriculture he discusses in

any other attitude. His advocacy of the rather more detail, and examines the

postponement of marriage, on the other relevance of the law of diminishing returns

hand, still has a very real bearing on the to under-developed countries: " It does not

world's population problems, particularly appear likely," he writes, " that much can be

in India, where the prevalence of early done to raise the level of per capita income

marriage is a major cause of the high quick enough to offset increases in

fertility among the Hindus. Thus the population." The problems of the utilization

possibilities of the postponement of marriage of foreign aid are discussed and, somewhat

was one of the subjects under discussion at reluctantly, it would seem, he comes to

the Bombay Conference on Planned admit the truth of the Neo-Malthusian

Parenthood last November.

argument, if only for a temporary crucial

Dr. Beales is an economic historian, phase. "I go further," he writes, " and

Professor Glass a sociologist, and Mr. A. T. contend that this crucial phase is now about

Peacock an economist. Possibly for this to be experienced in Asian countries, and

reason alone the latter's brief chapter on the may well be a formidable barrier to improve-

vast subject of " Malthus in the Twentieth ments in living conditions, even if foreign

Century" is somewhat disappointing, for aid to these countries is forthcoming, for the

so many of the problems which may be gap between the birth-rate and the mortality

raised under this heading are really those of rate is likely to be considerable for some time

the anthropologist rather than the economist. to come."

" The reader who has any knowledge of the The vast and all-important question of the

economic problems of under-developed spread of birth control, however, he hardly

countries," he writes in a note, " will realize touches upon, regarding it as being outside

how summarily I have dealt with them." his sphere as an economist. " Here we must

Malthus was preoccupied with the pressure assume that the spread of knowledge of

of the population against the means of birth control, already apparent in India,

subsistence which he saw about him in will be a major factor in years to come,

almost every European country. Since his and that the practices implied will not be

time this pressure has' been relieved, first, opposed by the sanction of moral and

by large-scale emigration to the New World; religious codes. But this is an assumption

second, by the enormous increase in produc- and it does not behove the economist to

tion of both industry and agriculture; decide whether it is a reasonable one or not."

7THE EUGENICS REVIEW

,The bibliography of British population time in the light of his theory, and a vivid

literature from I793 to i88o, compiled by picture is drawn of its application to areas

J. A. Banks and D. V. Glass, contains a such as India, and other countries of high

wealth of valuable material for those who fertility. He ends the chapter by summar-

wish to follow up the subject, and one's only izing the fundamental points of the

regret is that it could not have been brought Malthusian theory fully and succinctly:

closer to the present day.

" Malthus held that since it is easier for man

Dr. G. F. McCleary's book The Malthusian to produce children than to produce subsist-

Population Theory* is both comprehensive ence, population constantly tends to out-

and readably written, and, like the majority run subsistence but is restrained by a

of Faber's publications, beautifully produced. variety of checks, all of which may be

It is.at the same time a biography of Malthus divided into (i) positive, which tend to raise

and a critical exposition of his theory. There the death-rate, and (2) preventive, which

are eleven chapters, the first six of which tend to reduce the birth-rate. He also held

describe in detail the different sections of the that the positive checks became less

essay and how they came to be written. prevalent with the advance of Western

There then follow two chapters entitled civilization; that an unchecked population

" Malthus and Contraception " and would double itself every twenty-five years;

" Mistakes about Malthus," in which the that it is necessary that population increase

common misconceptions of the Malthusian should be restrained; and that -the positive

theory are analyzed and disproved. So far checks should as far as possible be eliminated,

the theory has been fully and lucidly and the ' requisite population of any country'

explained, but without any attempt at be reared ' from the smallest number of

critical assessment. This then follows in two births.' On these basic propositions there

chapters entitled " Was Malthus right about seems to be agreement among the most

Population ? " The first of these analyses instructed critics that he was right."

the main points of the theory-the geo- The final chapter of the book entitled

metrical ratio of population growth, and the "Malthus as Professor," describes the later

arithmetical ratio of increase of the means of events of Malthus's life, and indicates the

subsistence. Of the first he writes: " It features of his other works on " political

seems we may safely conclude that when economy."

Malthus said an unchecked population would On the .whole the two chief impressions

double itself every twenty-five years, thus received from Dr. McCleary's book are, first,

increasing in a geometrical ratio, he was the picture of Malthus himself, who appears

right." On the other hand, on the subject of as a man who was kindly, likeable, and wise,

the arithmetical ratio he says: " The and second, the great breadth and

arithmetical ratio is the most vulnerable comprehensiveness of his theory on

point in the Malthusian theory of population, population.

the point most easy to attack, and most There is but one addition which might be

difficult to defend." This chapter also made to the book, which should come under

contains the famous correspondence between the chapter on " Mistakes about Malthus."

Malthus and Nassau Senior, and is followed It is one which Dr. McCleary indicates, but

by an evaluation of the differences between does not explicitly state. It is commonly

them, intimating that in the light of the maintained that the Malthusian theory holds,

decline in fertility of the West, Senior may that any attempts to increase the means of

haye shown more insight than Malthus.

subsistence or to better the conditions of the

The second of the two chapters entitled lower classes are useless and futile, as these

"Was Malthus right about Population ?" ameliorations will merely be offset by their

discusses the developments since Malthus's increase in numbers. Even Mr. Peacock is

* G. F. McCleary. The Malthusian Population Theory. London, I953. Faber. Pp. IgI. Price 15S.

guilty of this misrepresentation; " The first proposition of the theory," he writes, " is

MALTHUS IN PERSPECTIVE *

I73

that the level of population in a given An increase of population is in itself a very

society tends to gravitate to that which just decided advantage, if it be not accompanied

permits subsistence standard of living for the by an increased proportion of vice and

great majority of its inhabitants. If for any misery. And the period during which, the

reasons the standard of living rises above the pressure of population is lightened, though

subsistence level, then better living -it may not be of long duration, is a period of

conditions will promote earlier marriages and comparative ease-and ought by. no means

a fall in mortality rates, so that the growth in to be thrown out of our considerations. It is

population cancels out any increase in the further to be observed that the experience

means of subsistence." Against this it is of such a period may sometimes operate in

argued that it is only after an initial improve- giving to the labouring classes a taste for

ment in their modes of living that people such a mode of living as will tend to increase

can be induced to limit their fertility. their prudential habits. But it is obvious,

Malthus, however, fully acknowledged this. that without this latter effect, the pressure of "It does not by any means follow from these poverty cannot be permanently lessened."

principles," he wrote to Senior in I829,

REFERENCES

"that we should not use our utmost

i. Hammond, J. L. and Barbara. Penguin Books. p. 105.

The Bleak Age.

endeavours to make two ears of wheat grow 2. Halevy, Elie. England in i8i5. Benn. (2nd Ed.).

where one grew before, or to improve our commercial code by freeing it from restraints.

p. 38I.
3. Connell, K. H. The Population of Ireland 1750-i845. O.U.P.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLV, No. 8

