THE HUMAN BLOOD-GROUPS

A Survey of their Nature and Inheritance

By C. I. B. VOGE, Ph.D., B.Sc., and ELDON MOORE
(From the Animal Breeding Research Department, Edinburgh)

C RIME has its uses: it was responsible but, though this is an obvious necessity, the

for interesting the general public in factor of the groups is equally important.)

those remarkable biological pheno- Perhaps this was almost inevitable, for the

mena, human finger-prints, and it is now blood-groups do not belong to that type of

causing a growing interest in the human biological phenomena, like the lives and

blood-groups.

habits of animals, which can be explained in

Scientific knowledge of these blood-groups ordinary language. They lie in the realm

has by now been employed to a great extent of the bio-chemist, who, investigating the

in various countries to determine whether or roots of life in chemistry and even physics,

not a given blood-stain-the mere word sug- has developed a vocabulary that would

gests Mr. Edgar Wallace-could have come stultify a Solon.

from a given individual, and the verdict of So, since the subject is one of increasing

the diagnosis has been accepted as legal importance in human biology, we, the

evidence. Several times the mode of their present writers, are attempting a collabora-

inheritance has been raised in courts of law tion. One of us (C. I. B. V.) is responsible

in efforts to determine the paternity of chil- for the facts in this article: the other

dren, but in most of these cases the scientific (E. M.) has only contributed a little to the

evidence, being of a negative order-as will genetics of the subject, and has been chiefly

later be explained-has been legally value- concerned in translating-so far as that is

less. But a few months ago, in Hamburg, possible-those facts into English. Towards

the court decided, on the evidence of the the end, where C. I. B. V. advances a new

blood-groups, that the plaintiff could not hypothesis, based upon some of his own

possibly be the father of the child alleged to immunological observations correlated with

be his. This, we think, was the first occasion the results and interpretations of others,

when the fact of human biological inheri- E. M.'s contribution ceases for a space.

tance was admitted as legal evidence. But, as is hereafter shown, there appears to be a THE NATURE OF THE GROUPS

possibility of such evidence not being The blood-groups are groups which differ

entirely free from error.

from one another primarily in respect of

Yet, with this growing interest in a their power to affect each other when mixed,

subject which may some day rank with the each member of the four possessing peculiar

finger-print system in importance, and properties; and blood, for the purpose of

which is most favourable for the study of this article, can be divided into two compo-

human heredity, very few of even the edu- nents: (a) the serum, a clear, straw-coloured

cated public have any but the remotest idea fluid drained off from the rest, and (b) the

what the blood-groups are, nor even realize, rest, especially including the erythrocytes,

we think, that it is their existence which which are more commonly known as red

renders necessary the utmost care in choos- blood corpuscles. The first indications of

ing ' donors ' of blood in blood-transfusion blood-grouping occurred when Landsteiner,'

cases. (The popular belief attributes this to in a series of experiments to discover

the necessity for choosing ' healthy ' blood, whether and in what way the blood of one

197

zQ8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

individual differed from that of another, bours, would cause agglutination and serious

noticed that sometimes the addition of X's disturbance, if not death. On the other

serum to the blood of Y caused the latter's hand, his own motto is, " All contributions

erythrocytes to agglutinate-to gum up to- thankfully received," since foreign sera do

gether in little clumps. This seemed sur- not affect his erythrocytes.

prising, since one would naturally expect Next come A and B, who will murder

the blood of two individuals of the same both each other and AB, though AB cannot

species to be mutually compatible, though hurt them, nor they 0.

there would be nothing extraordinary, for Lastly comes the defenceless, generous

instance, in the blood of one of the carni- AB, who is the ' universal donor ' to all the

vores causing such a chemical disturbance in others and is liable to be murdered by any

that of an ox (heterologous hemagglutina- of them.

tion). Further research, by the systematic In no case does agglutination occur on the

testing of the serum of one man on the addition of the serum of one person to the

erythrocytes of others, and vice versa, re- erythrocytes of another belonging to the

sulted in the classification of all human same group.

beings into four groups. (We should say It is clear that the chemical factors in-

here that we are disregarding two early and volved are double-the agglutinogens, the

mutually contradictory methods of symbol- erythrocytal substances which are gummed

izing these groups, those of Jansky and up by foreign sera, and the corresponding

Moss, and are adopting a later and simpler serum agglutinins which cause the gum-

symbolism, suggested by Landsteiner and ming up in foreign erythrocytes. Since 0

now generally used.)

does not possess either A or B agglutino-

Table i (adapted from Landsteiner') gives gens, foreign sera cannot cause gumming

the scheme of the groups and their effects on up in his erythrocytes. Logically, one would

one another, a + sign indicating that the also expect his serum to lack the corre-

serum (horizontal lines) causes agglutination sponding agglutinins and consequently to be

of the erythrocytes (vertical columns), and a innocuous to foreign erythrocytes. But he

sign indicating that no agglutination is the " universal murderer," so it is evi-

occurs.

dent that the corresponding factor to no-

agglutinogen is not no-agglutinin. The

TABLE I.

point requires research.

AB, on the other hand, is liable to attack

Cells of Groups

from all quarters, since he possesses both

Sera of Group 0

A

types of liable-to-be-gummed-up substances,
B AB while apparently the duplex qualities of his

agglutinin cancel each other and render his

O ...

_ + + + serum harmless to foreign erythrocytes.

A ...

- ++

It is unnecessary to stress the practical

importance of the discovery and classifica-

B ...

.. -.

+_

+ tion of these groups to-day, when hospitals

AB ... .

are daily calling upon healthy ' donors ' to give pints of blood to invigorate patients

weakened by illness or haemorrhage. The In short, the blood-groups arrange them- grouping of both ' donor ' and patient must selves in a delightfully simple and orderly be known, and the general rule now is only manner, which may be concretely sum- to transfuse when both are of the same

marized by a resort to anthropomorphism. group. AB's, 'universal donors,' can be

At the top of the scale stands 0, the uni- used, but their blood has been known, on versal murderer, because his blood, if trans- occasions, to cause mild disturbance in that

fused into the bodies of any of his neigh- of other groups.

THE HUMAN BLOOD-GROUPS

IN CASES OF MATERNITY

and the agglutinogens in the erythrocytes of

Grouping is sometimes also of impor- the blood are of a very deep-seated and con-

tance in the relations of mother to unborn stitutional nature, for ' blood-grouping ' can

child. Normally, of course, the placental also be demonstrated in sperm cells, seminal

barrier keeps completely separate the blood fluid, saliva, milk, and organ tissues.

systems of mother and fcetus, which may be This fact leads to two intriguing hypo-

of different groups-a fact which indicates theses. The sperm of a heterozygous man

the molecular magnitude of the agglutinins may (a) be of a different group from that of

of the blood. But McQuarrie," investigating the seminal fluid which carries it; or (b)

the toxxemias of pregnancy, has found in carry genes for a character incompatible

over 70 per cent. the blood of the mother with itself. The suggestions open up a fruit-

inter-agglutinated with that of the foetus, ful field of research, for herein may lie

while Gruhzit" states that in eclampsia the causes of sterility or lethal factors.

maternal blood does actually agglutinate her child's. Ottenberg,J though, calls attention THE RACIAL SIGNIFICANCE

to the work of Dienst,4 who finds that Geneticists and anthropologists next took

'laking '-the rupture of the membrane of an interest in the blood-groups, the first to

the erythrocyte-may occur instead of discover whether, and if so in what way,

agglutination, but that in any case it is co- they were inherited; the latter to determine

existent with the presence of an abnormal their distribution among the races of man-

connection between the maternal and faetal kind and to investigate its significance.

circulations.

Table 2, from Landsteiner, summarizes the

If the placental membrane, in normal racial distribution.

cases, was no barrier to the blood, one would It will be noticed that the groups have a

naturally expect the child to be born with geographical relation: the peoples of the

thie same grouping as its mother. In fact, North and West have more A than B indi-

as Unger" noted, the agglutinins, the serum viduals, those of the South and East more

substances which cause the ' gumming up,' B than A, while the so-called 'primitive'

while found in the blood of 97 per cent. of races-American Indians, Filipinos, Eski-

adults, only appear to be present in about mos, and Australian aborigines-have a

I3 per cent. of children under one month very high percentage, compared with other

old: at that age most possess merely the peoples, of Group 0.

agglutinogens, the erythrocytal substances This last fact led Hirschfeld, Bernstein,

which are 'gummed up.' Thus a child at and others to advance the theory that 0 was

first is only negatively grouped, and does the mark of the first human stock, from

not usually join the positive category, by which A and B had arisen by progressive

developing its corresponding agglutinin, mutation-with the attractive corollary that

until one to three years old.

the civilizations of East and West were per-

How a mother can bear a child of different haps the products, respectively, of B blood

grouping to herself (as, indeed, any hetero- and A blood. Unfortunately for this hypo-

zygote or recessive can give birth to a differ- thesis, similar marked percentage differ-

ent type from herself) had best be discussed ences have been noted as distinguishing

later, when we deal with the genetics of the different sections of the same races, while

subject. But it is interesting-and perhaps Landsteiner and Miller found that chim-

important-to note it here, with the corol- panzees possessed agglutinogen A, and

lary that transfusion, without previous tests, orang-utans both A and B-a rather subtle

from mother to child might be fatal to the and suggestive fact that the reader can

latter, even though it is the creature newly present to the next ' Fundamentalist ' he

delivered of her womb!

meets. Blood-groups characterize at least

Whatever be their chemical composition, one other mammal, the sheep, in which

it is evident that the agglutinins in the sera Kaczowski" has found three; and possibly

200 THE EUGENICS REVIEW
TABLE 2. PERCENTAGE OF BLOOD-GROUPS Di VARIOUS PEOPLES.

Race

Observer

0 A B AB

English ... ... ...

Germans ...

...

German Jews ... ...

French ... ... ...

North Americans

Turks

.. ...

...
...

Hungarians ...

Japanese

... ...

Chinese (Shantung) ...

Chinese (Peking)

...

Chinese (Nganhai) ... Hindus ... ... ...

Gypsies ... ... ...

Negroes (Senegal)

American Negroes

....

Australian Aboriginals

North American Indians Eskimos ... ... ...

...
...
...
...
... ...
...
...
...
...
... ...
...
... ...
...

... Hirszfeld and Hirszfeld ... ... Hirszfeld and Hirszfeld ...
... Schiff and Ziegler... ...
... Hirszfeld and Hirszfeld ...

Snyder...

...

...

...

... Hirszfeld and Hirszfeld ...

... Verzar and Weszeczky ...

Fukumachi

...

... Liang ... ... ...

... Liu and Wang ...

...

... Liang

... ...

... Hirszfeld and Hirszfeld ...

... Verzar and Weszeczky ...

... Hirszfeld and Hirszfeld ...

... Snyder

...

...

... Cleland ... ...

... Snyder ... ...

... Heinbecker and Pauli

...
... ...
...

... 46.4
... 40.0
... 42 1 ... 43*2 ... 45*0
... 36*8
... 310 ... 26*8 ... 211
... 30.7 ... 47*9 ... 3I.3 ... 34.2
... 43*2
... 47*0
... 45 *54 ... *i3
... 8o - 65

43*4 7.2 3 .0

43*0 I220 5.0

41-1 II9 4-9

42 *6 II*2 3.0

42 . 10*0 3.0

380o i8*6 6 6

380I8oi8282
40.9 I84 I3.9
3I16 36-8 I0o5

25.I 34*2 10

21-7 2I-7

8.7

I9*0 431*2 8.5

2I11 38.9 5*8

22*6 29*2 5.0

28*O

20*0

5.0

54 46- -

7*7 1I0

12 *90 2.42 4.03

further research among the primates would reveal the existence of groups AB and 0.
THE INHERITANCE OF GROUPING
The inheritance of the blood-groups has been fairly extensively investigated by several workers, though the exact genetics have not yet been finally elucidated. But the following, quoted from Ottenberg and Beres,' may be taken as established:
" (i) A or B never occurs in the red cells of a child if not present in one of the

parents. (2) When one of these substances is present in both parents it occurs in most
of the children. (3) When only one parent
has one of these particular substances some
of the children inherit it. (4) When a par-
ticular substance is absent from both parents
no child has it." Also, as they write, " It
is clear that not the groups as such are inherited, but the presence or absence of the agglutinogens A and B."
Table 3 (from the same) summarizes the matings observed.

TABLE 3. SUMMARY OF DATA ON INHERITANCE OF BLOOD-GROUPS.

Parents

Number of
Families

Groups of Children.

Number

of 0 A B AB

Children

_

Number Per Cent. Number Per Cent. Number Per Cent.| Number Per Cent.

OxX *. 323

839

OxA ... 587

1,556

OxB ... 222

591

AxA ... 253

700

BxB ... 48

140

AxB ... 227

588

OxAB ... 112

342

AxAB ...

89

293

BxAB ...

41

122

AB xAB ...

6 L6

83I 99*0 620 39.8
26I 44 2 129 I8.4 i8 I2*9
97 i6*5
21 6*i
2 0.7
5 41I

8 | I0 |-

921 59'2

8

2 03 326

57I 8i*6 -

- I22

I74 29 6 15I

I49 43 .6 149

125 42 .6

70

21 I7*2

57

3 12.5

5

-
0-5 55 2
87.I
25 7 43 6 23 -9 46-7
37_5

7 0.5 2 0.3
I66 28*2 23 6.7
96 32*8 39 32.0
8 50.0

Totals I,go8

5,187 I,984

1- ,974

-

888 -

34I -

THE HUMAN BLOOD-GROUPS

201

The i per cent. of not-O children from

TABLE 5.

O parents can fairly be explained by illegiti-

macy or errors in technique; and from this Parents table, as from the pedigrees of Epstein and

Children Possible

Children not Possible

Ottenberg,' it can be taken as certain that

0, the ' universal recipient,' is also the universal recessive, and for the same reason -he lacks both agglutinogens, and hence his blood cannot be agglutinated by foreign sera, while his hereditary qualities, as always occurs in inheritance of the presence-

OxO ... ...

OxA ... ...

OxB ... ...

AxA ...

...

AxB ...

...

AxAB ... ...

BxB ...

...

BxAB ...

...

0
O,A ,B 0, A 0, A, B AB 0, A, B, AB 0, B 0, A, B, AB

A, B, AB B, AB A, AB
B, AB
A, AB
-

and-absence type, are dominated in breeding by the groups possessing agglutinogens.

ABxAB OxAB ...

... 0, A, B, AB ... 0, A, B, AB

-

Advancing from this position, one might

consider A and B as two separate qualities Bernstein,' Furahata,' 10 and others have

both dominant to 0, and AB as a heterozy- recently challenged this two-factor scheme-

gote of the two. Von Dungern and Hirsch- hitherto generally accepted-and offered,

feld' have developed this on a two-factor instead, variations on a triple allelomorph

hypothesis, outlined in Table 4, where, as hypothesis, making A and B separate

usual, a capital letter represents the domi- single-gene mutations from 0, to which they

nant or ' present ' factor, and a small letter are dominant, and AB a simple heterozygous

the recessive allelomorph or 'absent' compound of them both. Until further facts

factor.

are known, one must reserve judgment; but

TABLE 4.

the new hypotheses, if proved, would not

GENETIC FORMULE OF THE: FOUR GROUPS

make much difference to the practical legal issues. The main alteration would be the

Group impossibility of an 0 x AB mating produc-

ing either 0 or AB children! It is true that

0 A B AB there are nineteen such cases on record, but Furahata questions the accuracy of the

aabb

AAbb

aaBB

AABB

diagnosis. It is not possible here to go into this any further, but it is worth recording

Aabb aaBb AaBB Hirschfeld's observation. All of those

AABb

nineteen cases were of AB mothers by 0 fathers: no AB children have been known

AaBb from the reverse mating, 0 mothers by AB

fathers. His suggestion is that the child

Table 5 gives in condensed form the prac- dies during pregnancy owing to the strong

tical results of this theory; and it will be incompatibility of its cells with the serum

seen that they fit the facts of Table 3, if of its mother. If this is a fact, it will, like

allowance is made for a small percentage of other lethal factors, complicate the mathe-

illegitimacy and errors of technique in the matical ratio on which any genetical hypo-

latter. It also explains how the legal value thesis rests.

of the present blood-tests can only be negative, and even then in but a few cases. Test-

CHANGING THE GROUPING

ing for grouping can determine not whether But, apart from these genetical difficulties,

a man is the father of a child, but only too much value should not be attached, in

whether he could be. If, for instance, wife law, to the determination of relationship by

and husband are 0, and the child belongs blood-tests, owing to the possibility of the

to any of the other groups, its paternity blood-groups being altered by certain dis-

must clearly be sought elsewhere.

eases and chemical agencies. In at least two

202 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

recent cases before the courts there have present normally in minute quantities in the

been doubts, and in one it was stated that blood serum, combined in such a manner

anti-syphilitic treatment might have caused with the serum proteins that two different

a change.* Popenoe'1 thinks that such a forms of agglutinating effect can be pro-

change may well occur in disease, since, he duced, according to the method of combi-

says, it is apparently possible for a blood- nation.

group to change under the influence of The presence of such basic proteins, or

bacterial action. Eden,12 too, deals with their degradation products, in the body

changes that may be caused by such com- fluids is by no means an idle hypothesis,

pounds as quinine-e.g., in anti-malarial since the latter take part in the synthesis

treatment-calcium lactate, antipyrine, of the nucleic acids and the former are

liquor potassium arsenicosum, or by chloro- present in large amount in spermatozoa.

form, ether anasthesia, and X-ray treat- The composition of these protamines varies,

ment. These changes, however, do not appear to be permanent; and after a time,

but generally speaking they contain 80-go
per cent. of arginine, and, as has been

which varies, there is a reversion to the already pointed out, their power of altering

original grouping.

the agglutinating capacity of sols is remark-

Up to this point this article has dealt only able, and they possess such effects in virtue

with well-proven facts, except where we of the fact that arginine is dibasic

have made it quite clear that doubt exists. and possesses a high isoelectric point.

E. M. now drops out, so that C. I. B. V. can In a later communication Voge and

develop some bio-chemical hypotheses, pur- Gilroy" have discussed the value of Sakaposefully controversial, which seem to him guchi's test for this substance, and the sug-

to follow from the facts.

gestion is advanced that sera belonging to

THE MECHANISM INVOLVED

the various groups might be examined by this reaction in order to ascertain whether a

Landsteiner and Jagic,1' and Hirschfeld" difference in arginine content existed, and

have demonstrated that various inorganic whether this could be correlated with the

colloids may cause agglutination of thin sus- blood groups.

pensions of blood corpuscles, while Kraus and Ludwig"5 have shown that bacterial sub-

It is well known that sera have to undergo a preliminary heating of thirty minutes

stances may also cause hkmagglutination. Of recent years it has been amply stressed

before being examined by the Wassermann reaction, and for ninety minutes before

that erythrocytes as well as blood serum conform to the laws of colloid chemistry; thus perhaps it does not appear strange that the addition of substances such as silicic

being submitted to the Sigma test. The purpose of this preliminary inactivation is to prevent a false diagnosis being obtained, and Voge" has shown, in connection with

acid, ricin, and the protamines should cause agglutination or lysis, since an alteration in the surface forces would occur. The effects shown by the two former substances may be of academic interest, but attention must be turned to some substance whose presence in the body is not abnormal, and yet which is capable of combining in different ways in

the gum benzoin reaction, that a similar heating must perforce be resorted to if false positives are to be avoided. In a later communication the mechanism of such precipitation is discussed, and it is shown that the reactions associated with syphilitic sera can be simulated both in the Wassermann and gum-benzoin reactions by the addition of

such a manner that its agglutinating effect may be altered according to the method of combination. Such a suggestion postulates a substance, protamine-like in nature,

minute amounts of a protamine to normal serum."8 The significance and connection between these phenomena and those associated with blood-grouping may not be clear,

* In Berlin-briefly reported in the Scotsman,
Dec. 6th, I928.

but it must be borne in mind that it has
been stated that in syphilis it is possible for

THE HUMAN BLOOD-GROUPS

203

the blood-grouping to change. The cause upon the particles be lowered in any way so

was tentatively asserted to be due to the that it falls below a certain critical value the

anti-syphilitic treatment, but this point is particles are no longer capable of repelling

thought to be debatable. Again referring to each other and so remaining in suspension,

the paper of Eden,12 it will be seen that and they fall out of suspension. Such a

several at least of the substances dealt with change may be brought about by the addi-

are capable of altering the colloidal equili- tion of positively charged particles to nega-

brium of the serum proteins; the effects of tively charged ones. The addition of basic

ether and chloroform upon lipoids is well proteins or basic dyes to the normal nega-

known, and these substances play a large tively charged serum proteins would un-

part in the stability of colloids. Locke and doubtedly so alter the charge that instability

Hirsch"7 show that alteration in the lipoid- would occur. Schroeder" has contributed

serum combination results in a shifting of work which also appears to bear out this line

the isoelectric point of the stroma in such a of thought. This author shows that iso-

manner that a marked change in the colloid haemagglutination is always accompanied by

stability of the serum would result. Under a reduction in charge upon the erythrocytes,

such conditions it might well be expected and shows that the lowest charge is recorded

that abnormal agglutination results might with agglutination by group 0, while serum

occur. Quinine hydrochloride is capable of group AB with cells belonging to group 0

altering the stability of serum proteins in showed the highest charge. This worker

such a manner that precipitation may occur has also demonstrated that the isoagglutinin

if a sol be added, such as Bordet's antigen is associated with the euglobulin fraction,

or gum benzoin, and this effect is similar to vide supra.

that associated with the addition of a prota- Landsteiner and Van. der Scheer," dis-

mine to normal serum.

cussing the chemical nature of the isoagglu-

From these few examples it will at least tinogens, state that these antigens probably

be seen that the changes that are reported consist of proteins combined with other sub-

to have occurred in the blood-groups appear stances which determine, at least in part,

to be associated with substances which are the specificity of the whole complex. A

capable of profoundly affecting the stability protein-free material which reacts specific-

of the blood serum. The examples given are ally in vitro, but has no antigenic activity

drawn from the study of precipitation and unless injected along with a protein has also

agglutination phenomena, and it appears been obtained by some workers, and this

feasible that knowledge gained in this direc- is confirmed by Landsteiner and Levine.2"

tion might be applied to the study of the

phenomenon of blood-grouping. Kroeger THE POSSIBILITIES AHEAD

and Hektoen,' Rosenholz,20 and Voge,21 i In conclusion we may glance at some pos-

investigating various immunological tests, sibilities, for to both the authors it seems

have indicated that the changes concerned that the future of the blood-groups will be

are associated with the euglobulin serum greater than their past-indeed, that the

fraction, and the latter author has demon- future of biology will more and more become

strated that the action of the protamines a matter of bio-chemistry and bio-physics.

upon blood serum affects this fraction almost For some time after the first discovery of

entirely. Gutmann2" has shown that washed the blood-groups they seem to have been

human erythrocytes are agglutinated by all regarded in much the same way as finger-

basic dyes except fuchsin, and that acid dyes prints-as a phenomenon of considerable, if

have no power of agglutination. The mech- not great, scientific importance, but of little

anism of such agglutination is as follows. practical significance except in cases of blood

Particles are kept in suspension in virtue of transfusion. But of late years it has become

the charge they possess; this charge may be more and more apparent that a person who

either positive or negative. If the charge is characterized by blood of this or that

204 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

chemical composition is for that reason ate blood-groups exist, and by Landsteiner

likely to differ from his fellows in other and Levine2" of some entirely different

matters of importance. The apparent free- agglutinable factors in human blood-appar-

dom from cancer of the North-West American Indians,26 an almost pure 0 race, is a fact of the greatest significance, if it can be
substantiated. But there appears to be a considerable diversity of opinion upon this point,28 which demands a systematic investi-

ently inherited as simple dominant and recessive allelomorphs-open up a series of new vistas; and we can dimly foresee the
time when a man will be as easily identified from an analysis of the various factors in

gation of the blood-groups of the cancer one drop of his blood, as if he had signed his

patients in European countries. Again, name and recorded his finger-prints at

according to Ottenberg and Beres,' there is Scotland Yard. Further, as the knowledge

evidence indicating that one or more of the of genetics grows, that one spot of blood may

groups are immune to diphtheria, while the reveal not only the man himself, but the

mere fact that exposure to certain diseases past of his ancestors, the future of his

or treatments can change the grouping, is children. suggestive of fruitful possibilities.

The discoveries by Owen"0 that intermedi- But these are disturbing thoughts.

LITERATURE CITED
I. Landsteiner. Centralbiat. f. Bakteriol. I900. 27. 357.
2. Landsteiner-Jordan and Falk. Newer Know-
ledge of Bacteriology and Immunology, p. 892. University of Chicago Press, I928.
3. Ottenberg. lourn. Amer. Med. Assoc. I923.
lxxxi. 295. 4. Dienst. Zent. f. Gynik. 1905. xxix. 353. 5. Ottenberg and Beres-Jordan and Falk,
ibid. p. 9II. 6. Epstein and Ottenberg. Tr. New York Path.
Soc. I908. viii. II7.
7. Von Dungern and Hirschfeld-Jordan and Falk, ibid. p. 9I2.
8. Bernstein. Zeit f. induk. Abst. u. Vererbungs. 1925. xxXVii. 237.
9. Furahata and Kishi. lap. Med. World. I927. vii. I.
io. Furahata and Kishi. Zeit f. induk. Abst. u. Vererbungs. I928. (Supp. I).
ii. Popenoe. Journal of Heredity. I928. xix. (IO).
I2. Eden. Deut. Med. Woch. 1922. xlviii. 85-7. I3. Landsteiner and Jagic. Wien. Klin. Woch. 1904 (3); Munich Med. Woch. I924 (27). 14. Hirschfeld. Arch. f. Hyg. 1907. lXiii. 237.
I5. Kraus and Ludwig. Wien. Klin. Woch.
1902. lix.
i6. Voge and Gilroy-for publication.

17. Voge. 1928. Thesis, Edinburgh University.
i8. Voge. Biochemical Journal. I929. (In the
press.) 19. Kroeger and Hektoen. Proc. Soc. Exp.
Biol. Med. I927. XXiV. 352. 20. Rosenholz. J. Exp. Biol. Med. 1928. x. io0. 2I. Voge. Biochemical Journal. I929. XXiii. (2).
I85-7. 22. Gutmann. Cent. Bakt. Parasitenk. I928. CVi.
68-73. 23. Schroeder. Arch. Ger. Physiol (Pfluger's).
1926. CCxV. 32-42.
24. Landsteiner and Van der Scheer. J. Immunol. 1924. iX. 2I3.
25. Landsteiner and Levine. Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med. 1927. xxiv. 6oo, 94I.
26 Einaudi. Minerva Med. I927. vii. 8o-86; Cancer Review. 1928. p. 2I6.
27. Locke and Hirsch. J. Infect. Diseases. I925. xXXVii. 449-464.
28. Buchanan and Highly. Brit. Journ. Exp. Path. I92I. II, 247.
29. Kaczowski. Proc. Roy. Soc. Edin. 1928. x lviii SI . I0o.
30. Owen. Edin. Med. Journ. I928. xxxv. ii. 3I. McQuarrie. John Hopkins Hosp. Bull. 1923.
xxxiv. 5I.
32. Gruhzit, Am. J. Obst. and Gyn. I923.
lXXXi. 295.
33. Unger. J. Amer. Med. Assoc. I92I. IXXvi. 9.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXI, No. 3.

