CORRESPONDENCE.

PRIMOGENITURE AND ABNORMALITY: A POSSIBLE FALLACY.

Probably the earliest observation that consumption seemed to pick

out the eldest born for its victims was made in I9o6 by the present writer

at the Crossley Sanatorium. For the purpose of mathematical confirma-

tion, the data were offered to Professor Pearson, who kindly examined

them. The result was A First Study o/ the Statistics of Pulmonary Tuberculosis, in which especial incidence of consumption upon first and second

born children was described; the only related observation quoted being

from an article in Biometrika (on the inheritance of duration of life) that

" the elder adult sister and adult brother live on an average four years

longer than the younger adult sister or brother."

Following this brochure on consumptives there came, also from the

biometric side, two others in which I had no part: on lunatics and on

criminals. In both classes (the figures for the latter may be found in

Pearson's Boyle Lecture) very much the same sort of incidence was de-

scribed, while later a third, albinism, was added.

Meanwhile, looking round for a larger material of consumptives upon which to test further the hypothesis, I had found it in five German works1

and in some further pedigrees of my own. In an article (Tke Lancet, Oct.

7th, I91 i) I showed that all save one of these sources yielded on analysis

special incidence of consumption upon first and second born children. A

bibliography of the subject was appended, going as far back as I866,

giving authors who, I now found, had asserted eldest born incidence

amongst idiots, amongst criminals, and in men of genius. The last

observation came from that distinguished pioneer in other fields, Dr.

Havelock Ellis, who was the first to posit a multiple abnormal tendency

on the part of the eldest child.

Of the chief of the foregoing investigations the exact figures are

now given. To show them as succinctly as possible one contrasts two per-

centages-first, the percentage of eldest born children in the whole

material of each inquiry; secondly, the percentage of eldest born

children in the particular class examined. Thus Sir A. Mitchell2 says:

"Of all the children born in Edinburgh and Glasgow in I855, 22'8 per cent. were first pregnancies, while of the 85 idiots 33 per cent. were first

pregnancies."

So we can put it

Mitchell-

wlfole material ... ... ... ... 22'8 per cent.

special class (idiots)... ... ...

... 33 per cent.

Somewhat similarly, but preferably, as giving a closer comparison,

may be expressed Langdon Down'ss data. Of 2,000 idiots he found 24 per

cent. first born. Now the average size of the families these idiots came

from was 6'9I, the total number of children being therefore I3,820

(6'9I X 2,000). Among these 13,820 there were, of course, 2,000 oldest born, one to each family, making a percentage of I4'4.

Hence:

Down-

whole material ... ... .. ... I4-4 per cent.

special class (idiots)... ... ... ...

24 per cent.

1 Brehmer: Die Aetiologie der chronischen Lungenschwindsucht (1885). Die

Therapie der chronischen Lungenschwindsucht (I889). Riffel: Erblichkeit und

Infektiositat der Schwindsucht (I892). Weitere Pathogenetische Studien (I9OI)

Schwindsucht und Krebs (1905).

2 Edinburgh Medical Journal. Jan., I866.

Mental Affections in Childhood. I887.

CORRESPONDENCE.

59

Again, the 38! Crossley Sanatorium consumptives of whom I got

particulars came from as many families, the members of which numbered

in all 2,I64. Now in 2,I64 people the number of eldest born was 38I, or

I7'6 per cent. Amongst the 38! consumptives it was 13, or nearly 30

per cent.

And so

Pearson and Rivers-

whole material ... ...

... I7-6 per cent.

special class (consumptives) ... ... 29-6 per cent.

The method of comparison is now clear, and succeeding figures will

be given without comment.

Heronl-

whole material ... ... ... ... i6-5 per cent.

special class (lunatics) ... ... ... 23 per cent.

In Brehmer's cases-

whole material ... ... ... ... I4'8 per cent.

special class (consumptives) ... ... i82 per cent.

In Riffel's records-

whole material, "S. & K.," 16-3 per cent.; "W. P. S.,"

I6-3 per cent.; " E. & I.," 20-I per cent.

special class (deaths from phthisis), " S. & K.," 20 per

cent.; " W.P.S.," i8 per cent.; " E.

& I.," I7 per cent.

Own Pedigrees-

whole material ... ... ... . . I58 per cent.

special class (consumptives) ... ... 20-I per cent.

Among other findings which can be similarly stated is one kindly sent

by Dr. Crzellitzer2

Crzellitzer-

whole material ... ... ... ... i8-9 per cent.

special class (high myopics) ... ... 28-6 per cent.

S. Hansen's results, published in the EUGENICS REVIEW last October,

come out:-

whole material... ... ... ... ... I7 per cent.

special class (consumptives)... ... ... 28 per cent.

It becomes clear, then, that calculations such as the above have con-

vinced many different people that the fate of the eldest born is to recruit

the ranks of certain abnormal classes more often, proportionally, than do

succeeding members of a family.

Now, as regards consumptives, from the outset I had suspected a

mathematical fallacy. That was why, to begin with, high mathematical

opinion was invited. In my examination of Riffel's data, too, I had taken

the percentages of deaths from pneumonia, typhus, trauma and cancer,

and compared them according to order of birth. Except cancer, they had

not shown eldest born incidence. Crzellitzer, in a later paper,3 had done

similarly with ocular defect other than hereditary high myopia; he had

not found eldest born incidence here either. But the numbers of his

" control " were very small; and my figures from Riffel, although larger,

were not comparable with those derived from a material of living con-

sumptives. Therefore having begun for another purpose a "control "

consisting of normal persons of the working classes, mostly urban

dwellers, and of an age distribution similar to that of sanatorium patients,

I made order of birth one of the particulars on the schedule. After this

1 A First Study of the Statistics of Insanity. 1907. 2 Wie vererben sich Augenleiden? Gesellschaft fur Soziale Medizin, Hygiene
und Medizinalstatistik. Feb. 10, I9I0.
Die Vererbung von Augenleiden. Berliner klin. Wochenschrift, 1912, No. 44.

60 EUGENICS REVIEW.

was begun, Mr. Macauiay sent his pamphlet,' in which, considering only

the biometric publications, he put down the described elder born incidence

to a statistical fallacy connected with the ages of the subjects examined.

tAenntdions.eemTihneglyyretlhaete ftiond2i5n9gssuibnjecmtys,

control cases both men and

support his main
women,2 coming

confrom

as many families, the members of which numbered 1,754. The percentages

of eldest born are:
whole material ... ... ... ... I4-7 per cent.

special class (the actual examinees) ... 22 per cent.

Other methods of calculation give a like result, as is shown in the

following table

Expected Actual

Crossley Sanatorium Consumptives- Number.

bornst ... ... ...

67....

Number.
113

2nd born... ... ... ...

... 644 ...

79

Normals-

Ist born ... ...

38 2...

...

...

...

57

2nd born......
The normals go on

to

...
show a

la.r.g. e

...
third

373

...

born excess,

41
which the

con-

sumptives do not; but both agree in a practical equality of actual and

expected numbers in the case of the fourth born, and after that a counter-

balancing deficiency for all born later than fourth; precisely the phe-

nomenon invoked to prove not only a special incidence, according to order

of birth, of consumption, but also of lunacy and of criminality; indeed a

general pathological tendency connected with primogeniture.

These results in normal subjects require confirmation; but it must be

remembered that statistical work, as that high authority Professor Pearson

aanpdrioortiherlsikealriehoaoldwatyhsat

stating, is the eldest

notoriously full of pitfalls. There born would turn out consumptives

was and

lunatics. We know from obstetricians that the eldest born child is

shorter and lighter than succeeding children. Primiparae must be of

immature age oftener than multiparae, and K6r6si and Marro have

described an unhappy fate for the scions of immature stock. My own

experience in
are decidedly

pig-breeding confirms that unsatisfactory compared

of others, with later

namely ones.

that The

first litters child of a

pFrriuhmiinpsahroalzi3s

more subject to head
found that i6 out of

injury during labour. 30 premature children

Wallich and brought to a

Bicetre clinic for nervous affections and other defects were eldest born.

The well known tuberculous tendency of the insane would be well ex-

plained if being elder born were a part of the diatheses of both phthisis and lunacy. Similarly, too, the hardly less certain" variational diathesis"

of men of genius; while all four classes, mentally unsound, men of

genius, criminals, and consumptives, are just the ones which had been
tentatively associated aforetime. Nevertheless, all such apriori arguments

must, of course, yield to direct evidence, if that stand examination.

In conclusion, assuming that this excess of elder born in interrogated

persons is, as we say, an artefact, to what can it be due ? The question

must be one for statisticians and mathematicians. Mr. Macaulay appears

to think that the elder born will naturally be more often of the age at

which phthisis appears than will the younger born. However, the average

age of the normal examinees mentioned above hardly varies at all with

Voerlddeern,4of

birth. Another explanation is that who took the tuberculous families in

first two

advanced by Von den of Riffel's publications,

1 The Supposed Inferiority of First and Second Born Members of Families.

Montreal.

2 In the Lancet article I have shown, what Crzellitzer for his part confirms,

that elder born incidence has nothing much to do with sex.
Annales de Gynicologie et d'Obstltrique. November,I9II.

Archivfur Rassen-und Gesellschafts-Biologie. Juli-AugustI,908.

CORRESPONDENCE.

6I

and made out that while in them there were certainly more deaths from consumption amongst the three earlier born than in the remainder, yet this was due to smaller infantile mortality amongst these earlier born. In other words, proportionally more first, second, and third born infants would survive to grow up to adolescent and adult ages, the time at which phthisis shows itself; and so both the general adult population and the consumptive population are made up to a disproportionate degree of first, second, and third born. The criticism I have to make upon this does not now, after examining normals, differ much from what was said in the Lancet article before. These normals do indeed show (what, by the way, the whole of Riffel's data did not) a lessened infantile mortality amongst first, second, and third born children, just those which are present in apparent excess. But that lessened mortality seems too small to account wholly for that excess; and may itself be apparent only.
What would be instructive would be the histories of completed families, all of whose members had died; it may be because Riffel's records consisted partly of completed family histories, that they showed smaller eldest born incidence than other sources.
However, these are matters for statisticians rather than for clinicians. All that is here urged is that the evidence upon which an association of abnormality with primogeniture has been based, is open to cavil.
W. C. RIVERS, M.R.C.S., D.P.H.
NOTE.-Since writing the above, Mr. Cobb's article in the EUGENICS REVIEW for January, 1914, has come to my notice. In this he suggests a leash of fallacies to account for elder born incidence in consumptives, etc. Two of these, being of purely mathematical bearing, I am incompetent to discuss; but the third is inaccuracy of the data, particularly from a younger "sibling" forgetting a deceased elder one, and therefore wrongly reckoning himself or herself eldest born; and concerning this it might be said that it would not apply to many of the cases in the material mentioned above as " Own Pedigrees," since in them the parents of the subject were often questioned. Neither could it apply to the special class of idiots, for here by the nature of the case the subjects themselves could not have been the informants (see Mitchell's data, Down's data, and a more recent and unmentioned paper by Dr. Hunter). Good judges inform me that Mr. Cobb's mathematical attack upon elder born incidence seems so far the best directed one. That matter statisticians will no doubt soon decide. But if it be confirmed that the phenomenon obtains also in the case of normals, then the matter loses interest for clinicians and eugenists-except as a warning against " uncompleted " families.

