A STUDY IN DEGENERACY
By ARABELLA KENEALY, L.R.C.P.
THERE is an infant of my acquaintance who, I think, must make the angels weep. Moreover, he is a serious stumblingblock in the path of the eugenist.
His limbs are large and firm, his fists are hard and mottled. His skin is of a clear and glowing pink, his blue eyes are round and shining. He has never for a day of his nine months of existence suffered from an ailment or distress. Finally, as might have been expected, he has won a prize at a Baby Show. Looking as he does a picture of happy and incomparable health, he is the admiration and the envy of mothers of infants apparently less well physically equipped.
And his incomparable health it is which is a stumblingblock in the path of Eugenics.
For both of his parents are sickly, ill-grown and perpetually ailing.
" How now about heredity ? " scoffs the unbeliever. " Here, surely, is a living contradiction of its tenets. Here, surely, is proof positive that Nature is perfectly capable of looking out for the next generation, no matter what its parentage. For is not the child of this unhealthy couple as healthy a child as we know ? "
The phenomenon is worthy of attention, although to the biologist the explanation should not be far to seek. This PrizeBaby of the incomparable health is a Degenerate. The popular conception of a degenerate is, of course, a hunchback, a cripple, an imbecile, a criminal, one blind, deaf, or otherwise defective, or afflicted with some or another disease with a name to it. And yet an absolute and typical degenerate may be, like this baby, none of these things, but may, on the contrary, be possessed of every limb, organ, faculty and sense normal to humanity. But -and here lies the key to the position-all his faculties and

38 A. Kenealy :
structures are of a grade so low, so inferior to the average as to constitute a lapse from the normal type.
Degeneracy expresses itself in an infinite variety of forms. The lack of that constitutional power essential to the due human equipment in every department of capacity, physical and mental, which characterises a normal human being, may show in complete absence of one or more organs or faculties, or spreading itself, as it were, evenly over the whole organisation, it may show in a general inferiority of structure, of function, and of mental calibre. The individual then lacks no limb, organ, or sense, but all the limbs, organs, and senses he possesses are, biologically, of a grade below the normal. He may be perfectly healthy, well balanced, and efficient upon this lower grade of being, precisely as a negro or a Kaffir may be healthy, well balanced and efficient upon the plane which is his normal in the evolutionary scale. But a grade of tissue and of mental or moral calibre which is perfectly normal to a negro or a Kaffir is abnormal and constitutes degeneracy in a member of a higher race.
A degenerate, in short, may be defective and patently abnormal, or he may be a mere reversion to a former and inferior type.
In the latter case, the resources of the organism being stinted (owing to parental constitutional impoverishment), the stint, in the place of expressing itself in some specific defect or disease, entails a dropping of the whole organisation to a lower gear. The individual thus reverts to a former and inferior type, one which was perhaps normal to an antecedent evolutionary epoch in the stock from which he has sprung, but is abnormal, or degenerate, in that stock to-day.
So with this infant of my acquaintance. To one in the secret of it, a glance at his bald, base head, at his pink and smiling animal face, reveals at the same time the fact of his degeneracy and the source of his lusty vitalism.
His skull from poll to brow presents an easy and discreditable descent. Little of moral or of intellectual capacity has he, while the strictly physiological regions of his brain, those presiding over the functions of mere organic life, are largely developed. One conjectures that during his ante-natal growth,

A STUDY IN DEGENERACY

39

owing to a stint of maternal nutritive supply, the nascent
organism found no wherewithal to equip itself duly in the higher departments, and accordingly reverted in mass to a type
lower in human calibre than the stock upon which it was grafted,
or that the "graft," owing to parental impoverishment, was
inherently degenerate.
For whereas both parents are mentally and morally up to
the normal standard, but below it in physical vitality, their child is of a type which is obviously below the normal mental and
moral standard, but is above it in lusty vitality. Possibly it is less in the degree of constitutional power
possessed by an individual than in the fashion in which this power is distributed among the faculties, that true degeneracy lies.
" My (financial) expenditure is Me," says Emerson. The man of crude tastes may possess means equal to those of the man of culture, the difference between them is shown in the essential values of the objects upon which each expends his means.: So, too, with evolutionary development. The man of higher organisation is he whose vital resources are duly invested in his nobler qualities. But the children of a noble family, should their parents fall into financial straits, must
necessarily come down in the world, exchanging their fine ancestral home for a middle-class villa, so, also, the children of fine evolutionary stock, should their parents fall into constitutional bankruptcy, must perforce, in the place of inheriting the parental habitation, go lower in the scale of life.
It would seem that the main difference between Disease and Degeneracy-and there is all the difference in the
world, so far as the Race is concerned-is that in Disease we
have an organism endowed still with healthy aspirations, struggling against its own inherent disabilities or against the
disabilities of its environment, doing its best in the teeth of adverse factors to sustain its evolutionary level, to recuperate ailing and devitalised tracts of cells, or when these have lapsed beyond the power of redemption, as in cancer, tuberculosis, suppuration and so forth, to evict them from its economy; while in Degeneracy healthy aspirations no longer exist, the
strugg,le for the survival of the higher in the organism against the

40 A. Kenealy :
lower in the organism having ceased, and the cells having conformed in mass to a lower grade of being.
This, then, is what has happened to the degenerate infant I am describing. He is not diseased, he is not defective, nor is he sickly. On the contrary, he is a complete human infant with every limb, organ, and faculty duly and harmoniously developed and properly functioning, and he is, moreover, charged with abundant nervous forces wherewith to energise his capabilities.
In this latter particular he serves for a striking contrast to his circle of baby contemporaries. For these, like the majority of modern, artificially-fed, anaemic, neurotic infants, with whom digestion spells dyspepsia, growth implies ache and weariness, and devolopment entails disability, are perpetually suffering from some or another distress. And yet these suffering infants are, from an evolutionary standpoint, superior to him in absolute human health notwithstanding that they are afflicted with physiological ills. For their suffering is the expression of the evolutionary aspirations of cells which are striving to maintain a high level of living, while his physiological contentment is the inertia of cells which have conformed to a lower type.
Pain is the prayer of nerves for healthy blood. Pain and distress are the voices of aspirations after vital elements indispensable to high health. When we suppress (as much of present-day medical treatment aims at doing) the voices of such aspirations toward higher health, we merely so blunt the conscience of cells to their essential higher needs that they cease to demand the fulfilment of these, and in consequence deteriorate. Anodynes stop the cry of pain, as opium will still the cry of hunger, but anodynes can no more supply the elements for which the tissues are crying than opium can nourish the body.
The whole secret of Health and of Evolutionary Development, lies in the healthy aspirations of the tissue-cells.
Once in the remote ages of the pre-historic Past there was a single cell we know now as the amoeba, in which lay hid the latent aspiration to become a man. That aspiration is now accomplished fact. And the single-celled amoeba, " the proto-
plasmic father of man'" by virtue of the aspiration in it.i(derived

A STUDY IN DEGENERACY

4I

we know not whence) so triumphed over all the antagonistic forces and conditions of its environment, adding ever and ever to its potential capacities, realising ever more and more of its potential ideals, that it has now become the complex manycelled being, modern man.
So to-day man sustains or continues his evolutionary development by virtue of the aspirations of his many cells, every one of which contains in latency the incalculable forms still intervening between us and the perfect human type.
The moment, however, that the cells, in mass or in part, in the place of aspiring to yet higher ideals or of sustaining those already achieved, conform, without protest of pain or of disability, to a lower grade of being, Devolution has begun. In that moment, man, having evolved from, has taken the first step in reverting to, the single-celled amoeba.
My " healthy " infant, his cells ceasing to aspire, and conforming without protest to the lower grade to which they have relapsed, has turned back his face to the darkness whence his kind have come. And he has ceased to suffer because he has ceased to aspire. His suffering circle of contemporaries suffer, however, because they are still striving. Their disabilities and pains are the expression of a biological divine discontent amid their myriad cells ;struggling for higher existence, struggling against all the disabilities of impoverished constitutional resources, of the ignorance of nurses, of the neglect of mothers, who proffer them the stone of artificial feeding in the place of the living bread of mother-milk, struggling, suffering, and yet fighting bravely to sustain the evolutionary level of their poor little nobly-fashioned heads, of the soul-light in their eyes, of the human beauty in their faces, of their finely modelled limbs-in a word, of the higher humanity in so far as this has been realised in them. And it is their very struggle for the survival of the higher in them which taxes their powers and entails disabilities.
To employ that whioh might seem to be a contradiction in terms, their health is the source of their disease. They are like well-born persons hard put to it to keep up a fine ancestral dwelling. To maintain its structure in good condition expends

42 A. Kenealy:
the greater portion of their available resources. They would be far less straitened were they to cease from striving to keep the whole building in good repair, and, lapsing from their standards, were to abandon the higher chambers of their dwelling and to content themselves with occupying only lower floors-as has happened to my degenerate infant.
A duty lies, I venture to think, with the eugenist-to draw finer distinctions regarding health than have hitherto been drawn, to recognise that the first function of health is so to maintain the standard of the tissues that they shall not lapse from the type achieved by the particular stock from which they have sprung, even though this standard is maintained at the cost of some debility and suffering. Such debility and suffering are to be regretted, and Eugenics must seek to secure for everybody parentage which will not only entail organisation true to standards, but will also transmit enough of vitality to maintain these standards without tax of suffering.
I have been frequently impressed by seeing that among children brought to hospital, the noblest and highest types die off almost without a struggle, while the ill-formed and degenerate clutch on greedily to the very last shreds of life, and battle through. I have asked myself-Is health not health ? Is Nature mocking us, that these unfit survive while the fit succumb? For the very unfittest and the very fittest alike die; the very unfittest because they seem to have nothing more than a frail and casual holding, as it were, within the poorest tenement-physiques; the very fittest because the tax upon their resources made by maintaining their more worthy dwelling-places, leaves them no powers wherewith to meet the strain of illness.
And between these two are the great mass of the Average, of which in the main the best types are handicapped by disability or die (for the reason given), while the inferior, struggling less bravely to maintain standards or letting these lapse altogether, win through with least effort. Before I had found what I think may be light upon the subject, it was a source of perpetual pain and perplexity to me to see the most beautiful, the sweetest-natured, and the most finely-fashioned children suffer or die, while the ugly, the misshapen and the ill-conditioned suffer

A STUDY IN DEGENERACY

43

far less, and when ill fight with an uncanny eagerness-and success-for life. Until I realised that ill weeds grow apace because choicer growths demand fostering conditions for their survival and development, it had seemed to me almost that Nature was possessed by an unholy craze to eradicate the fairer flowers from her human garden.
The higher the organism the more sensitive it is to adverse factors of its environment, and the more complex and insistent its needs. For this reason the very finest types of children, as the very worst-and particularly of the children of the poorsuccumb or live handicapped by some or another disability, the higher organisation being, in our day of impoverished vitality,
over-taxed by the struggle to sustain the standards of its type
against adverse circumstances,-while the worst are endowed with so little vitality as readily to be extinguished.
The general view is that parents whose children are what is known as " healthy "-which in our superficial way of regarding things, means merely that their physiological processes are normally performed and that they show no symptoms of disease -have acquitted themselves satisfactorily so far as the Race is concerned. In point of fact, however, such parents may have done the worst possible injury to the Race by having allowed the
Dype to deteriorate in their offspring. If the evolutionary develop-
ment of the Race is to be sustained and is to continue, children must not only be born " healthy," but they must be born also of
good type. The degenerate infant who is serving me for text, upon
whom his parents pride themselves and whom his circle inordinately admires, is, poor babe! base and crude of type. In him the racial stock has suffered such a deterioration that many generations of mating with higher stock will be necessary to raise it to the level of average humanity.
There is no graver menace to a race than is furnished by such sturdy degenerates. For not only do they in their own persons and in that of their offspring debase the type, but, exhibiting no symptoms of disease, they are not commonly recognised as degenerates, and accordingly prove stumbling-blocks in the way of the Eugenic propaganda. The eugenist, realising that in

44 A. Kenealy :
order to continue evolutionary development every generation must be an infinitesimal advance upon the last, should not allow himself to accept the definitions of "health" nor the glowing descriptions of " fine infants," which satisfy the short-sighted observer and confound our creed.
The " healthy baby " born of diseased or indifferent stock, so frequently flaunted before us as a living refutation of our faiths, should be recognised as a mere reversion to an anterior and lower type-a degenerate, in short.
Here lies the explanation of that which seems to be an anomaly when the refined and highly-organised but neurotic and over-taxed mothers of our cultured classes produce, as they do frequently, offspring of the crude, rough-hewn, and unintelligent peasant type. Such women, deficient in motherpower, are able to supply only impoverished resources wherewith their offspring build their developing bodies. The embryo, thus stinted, relapses in all, or in tracts merely, of his tissues to a cruder phase of the stock from which he is springing, lapses from the higher organisation evolved by generations of fostering conditions and environment, and reverts to the boor, so letting slip perhaps ten generations of achieved development-development which is thus lost to the Race.
A valuable object-lesson is supplied, indeed, by a type of woman common to-day, all nerves and restless activity, her spare frame a figure of famine modishly draped, highly civilised, because possessing so little of nature, highly educated and fastidious, while her children are, on the contrary, crude, clownish, and uncomely.
Seeing her with them one derives an impression that she is taking her gardener's family for a holiday. They are her very own, however, and she will frequently, quite innocent of biological implications, boast of their rough-hewn frames and their robust "health," and congratulate herself upon the fact that they have inherited none of their mother's neurotic or other constitutional disabilities. She and her friends are surprised at the apparent anomaly. For here is a fragile neurotic, a tangle of jangled nerves, whose threadbare constitution is perpetually breaking into holes, nevertheless mothering sturdy, phlegmatic offspring,

A STUDY IN DEGENERACY

45

whose natural avocation in life would seem to be-the plough.
The biologist sees no anomaly however. The thing is an
expression merely of a recognised natural law. The parental resources being-in the mother at all events-in a state of bankruptcy, the developing embryo could find no wherewithal to equip itself according to the evolutionary traditions of its stock, and in consequence reverted to the type of some ancestral wielder of the spade.
Mothers, bankrupt of constitution, when they produce, on the contrary children delicate and ailing but of higher type, pervert the maternal function far less gravely than is done when their offspring are crude and strong. For such delicate and ailing children may by care and attention be so recruited as to become fairly efficient members of the Race, while at the same time preserving the valuable traits of more highly-developed humanity; whereas the sturdy degenerate stock will require perhaps ten generations of eugenic development to reclaim it from its evolutionary lapse.

