E. SUNDERLAND
Science Laboratories, The University, Durham
The Tasting of Phenyithiocarbaride in Selected Populations in the
United Kingdom

Introduction

genealogically derived. The limits of the various

During the last few years the author, together with various helpers in the University of Durham, has carried out a number of projects involving the examination of some genetically controlled variables, including dermatoglyphics, colour blindness and PTC tasting in selected British populations. This paper is intended to present the results of this work in so far as PTC tasting is concerned, but with special reference to north-east England where the largest numbers in the surveys were tested.

postal districts in north-east England were established and the participators allocated to the districts according to their parents' birthplaces. More than sixty postal districts were delineated in Northumberland, County Durham and contiguous parts of the North Riding of Yorkshire. Of the total sample tested, and using parental birthplaces as the criteria, only some 682 individuals could be allocated to the various districts, resulting in very small numbers in some districts, too small in fact for statistical comparisons among them to be meaningful. For

The Data
Well over one thousand individuals in north-east England were tested to determine whether or not they possessed the inherited ability to taste phenylthiocarbamide. A modification of the Harris-Kalmus5 sorting technique

this reason, the postal districts were grouped to form nine areas, each composed of contiguous districts and each containing forty-seven or more individuals. Historical associations and information were not consciously used in delimiting
the areas.

was used, with the number of solutions reduced

to eight:

Results

PTC

CONCENTRATION

SOLUTION NUMBER

mgm/litre

The results for the nine areas, shown on Map 1, are summarized in Table 1. In each area, the

1 1,300-00 3 325-00 4 162-50 5 81 25
6 40-63

total number represents individuals whose parents were born in any one or any number of the constituent postal districts.
There is no statistically significant variability

7 9 11

20-31 5-08 1.27

among the nine areas. The calculated x2 value is 6 29 which, for 8 degrees of freedom gives p

values of 05O0-090.

Much of the work was done in schools widely Yet, it would appear that certain areas have

distributed in the counties of Northumberland much lower percentages of non-tasters than

and Durham (Map 1).

have others. Areas A, D and E have particularly

The birthplaces of both parents of each "Low" values, whilst C, F, G, H and I have

participator were noted, with a view to establish- "High" values. Area B (postal districts 10-16)

ing the "locality" from which each subject was divides the "Low" area into two parts, the

143 THE EUGENICS REVE:W, September 1966, 58, 3.

/' .t.11
..

f/\
OTTERBURIN

ROTHBURY B

BELLINGHAM

./

(...*~~~~~~~~CORBRIDGEi' r-e

MAP I

% NON TASTERS IN 9 AREAS N N. E. ENGLAND

SE HOUSES

EZ HIGH % AREAS
EZ=1 LOW % AREAS
SCHOOLS WHERE * CHILDREN WERE
TESTED 22 2, 28 6 = % NON TASTERS
HADRIANS WALL EDGE OF COALFIELD --- COUNTY BOUNDARIES + + + SUB-REGION OF B

OMORPETH

_ POPULATION
/l\ MORPE I H;

POULATION

R rYNE

0 i0 20 30

/(7J 00 v
j, ',/)

FRASER ROBERTS -BLOOD GROUP
DIVIDING LINE
_ __--KOPEC'S BLOOD
GROUP DIVIDING LINE

30

fN-

50 E3==Mmr-=

5 10 15 20 25 MILES
II

THE TASTING OF PHENYLTHIOCARBAMIDE

Morpeth postal district itself extending from the town to the Scottish border. For this area it was noted that the majority of the participators were from the town of Morpeth and immediately

TABLE 1

Tasters and Non-Tasters in 9 areas of North-East England

No. of Total

%

Area Non-Tasters No. Non-Tasters

A 17-5* 79 22-2

B

33.5** 100

33 5

C 14-5 47 30-9

D 12-5

51 24-5

E 29-0 122 23-8

F 25 5 75 34-0

G 30 0

95 31-6

H 29-0

99 29-3

I 33 0 109 30-3

TOTAL 224 5 777 28-9

* In most European groups a large proportion of the participators are either complete non-tasters or else can taste either solution 1 or 3. Another large proportion can taste one of the weaker solutions, numbered 5, 6, 7, 9, and 11. The former group is termed "non-taster", the latter "taster". However, a very small number taste at solution 4; that is, they are able to distinguish between water and a PTC solution of 162-5 mgm/litre. Thus, in the bimodal distribution, the antimodal value is at solution 4 and the individuals tasting at this solution are equally allocated to the "non-taster" and to the "taster" categories.
* * See text below.

adjacent areas in the east; the minority from Rothbury and other districts in the west of the
area. In the south-eastern group there are 24 5 non-tasters out of a total of sixty-nine individuals
(35 5 per cent non-tasters), and in the west, six non-tasters, of a total of twenty-one individuals (28.6 per cent non-tasters). It seemed at least geographically reasonable to place the western parts of area B with the other "Low" areas; the south-eastern parts with the "High" areas. Table 2 summarizes the data.

TABLE 2

Tasters and Non-Tasters in North and West N.-E. England
and in South and East N.-E. England

North South and West and East Totals

No. of Non-Tasters No. of Tasters Totals % Non-Tasters

650 156 5 221-5 208-0 337.5 545.5 273-0 494 0 767-0 23-8 31-7 28-9

x2=5 30. For I degree of freedom, p=0-02-0-05.

It would therefore appear that there is a statistically significant difference between the
two areas.

Additional individuals could then be placed in the two areas, again according to the parents' birthplaces in the north and west "Low" or rural area, or the south and east "High" or industrial-coalfield area. Of the eighty-one additions to the north and west data, twenty-one or 25 9 per cent were non-tasters; of the 241 additions to the south and east data, 77 5 or 32-2 per cent were non-tasters. All the data are summarized in Table 3.

TABLE 3

Tasters and Non-Tasters in North and West and in South
and East N.-E. England

N. and W. S. and E. "Low" "High" Area Area Totals

No. of Non-Tasters No. of Tasters Totals % Non-Tasters

86-0 234-0 320-0 268-0 501 0 769-0 354 0 735 0 1,089 0 24-3 31-8 29-4

x2=6.62. For 1 degree of freedom, p=O0-01O-02.

This clearly indicates a statistically significant difference between the two groups.

Discussion
Dr. Fraser Roberts4 demonstrated that a clear distinction could be drawn between two homogenous populations found respectively north and south of a certain line in northern England, in terms of the ABO blood group genes. This line bisects Newcastle and runs westward south of Consett, so that most of Northumberland together with small areas of northern County Durham lie north of the line whilst most of County Durham, much of Newcastle, together with an outlier at Morpeth belong south of the line. Statistically, the north-south division is highly significant.
Again, Dr. Ada Kopec7 indicated certain regional differences in north-east England in terms of the ABO genes. As with Dr. Fraser Roberts's data, the numbers of individuals in the samples used were very considerable. In her analysis it is shown that there appears to be a distinct population in north and west Northumberland, which continues northwards far into Scotland, compared with the population south and east of that area in Northern England. As might perhaps be expected, the areal extent

145

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of the two populations delineated by each author does not coincide exactly but the areas are sufficiently similar to confirm that there is a very real distinction to be drawn between the north and west Northumberland population and that immediately to the south-east of it, mainly in County Durham, in terms of the ABO genes. The A and 0 frequencies in the two populations
are given by Dr. Kopec7:

North

South

0A Dr. Fraser Roberts 51-97 36 75 Dr. Ada Koped 50 85 35 52

0A
48-11 39-66 48-88 39 70

Viewed in the context of these data it is most
interesting that a distinction may also be drawn
between the two groups in terms of the PTC
tasting polymorphism. Satisfactory reasons to account for this
pattern in terms of prehistoric, historic and recent population movements cannot readily
be provided. Some salient features may however be noted. In Neolithic times, there is but little evidence for settlement in north-east England. From 1700 BC onwards there was a considerable
ingress of Beaker people, especially north of the Aln and in the Tyne valley, with few settlers in County Durham, perhaps because of the diffi-
culty seafaring invaders experienced in finding good landing places on the cliffed coastline.
The Brigantes, with their Iron Age culture occupied areas south of the Tyne; the Votadini, areas in Northumberland and southern Scotland.
It has also been asserted that the Romans "pushed" the British population northwards to the areas beyond the Tyne and the Wall which they built just north of that river. Certainly the
post-Anglian Romano-British remains are most concentrated around the Cheviots. Again, in the area north of their Wall and east of the North Tyne, the Romans may have settled people from Rhaetia whilst removing Votadini to the Rhaetian frontier.
The Anglian settlement in north-east England is mainly post 547 AD and the Anglians constitute the last major group to enter the area before the recent period. Most of the early Anglian settlements were in Northumberland and along the Tyne valley, with far fewer located in the

areas immediately to the south. The Tyne-Tees
area was described in the sixth century AD by
Symeon of Durham as a "deserted waste". The
Anglians probably mixed with and did not replace the previous population with the result
that there was probably a persistence of the
Romano-British population in areas north of
the Tyne. Post-Anglian invasions were most important
south of the Tees. Thus the Danish settlements
extended as far north as southern County Durham whilst Bernicia remained under Anglian
control. Again in the harrying of the north after
the 1069 rebellion there, only Teesdale and the
lower Tees valley suffered; more northerly areas
escaped unscathed. These southern areas were
later resettled by Norse speakers from the Vale
of Eden who might well have been a group of
mixed British, Norse and Anglian origin. It
would seem that the distributions of Anglians
and Scandinavians in this area were very different. Anglians, Norse and British appear to have contributed to the pre-industrial population of north-east England but their relative importance varied locally.
In the mediaeval period Northumberland in particular was a frontier zone and as such difficult to settle and to occupy permanently. Many of the people were periodically evacuated during Border disturbances. The plains of south-east Northumberland and areas south of the Tyne were far less affected by these disturbances. All the mineral working areas of the north-east are, with the exception of some coal mining districts, located south of the Roman Wall. The so called lead dales of County Durham saw pastoral and mining colonization in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, by people from more southerly dales as well as from areas as far afield as Germany. Since the Middle Ages there have been many villages "lost" in Northumberland, with presumed loss of population in the area, but this phenomenon is not found to anything like the same extent in County Durham.
The period from 1825-50 witnessed an enormous inflow of migrants to the north-east coalfield, especially from the lead mining dales to the west, the North Riding of Yorkshire and Darlington. After 1850, there was much

146

THE TASTING OF PHENYLTHIOCARBAMIDE

immigration to the coalfield in particular from the possibility of a rise in the percentage of

rural northern England, rural Wales, Ireland, non-tasters northwards as Fisher and Taylor3

Scotland, East Anglia and Cornwall.

originally showed for the ABO genes. Much of

Thus it would appear that in certain pre- the available data is summarized in Table 4.

historic, historic and also in recent times, the With the exception of the Orkney figure, the

north-east coalfield area, including most of percentage value in each instance approximates

County Durham and the south-east plain of to 30. It is however noteworthy that Scotland

Northumberland, had a different population and County Durham provide the high frequen-

history compared with the areas to the immediate cies, though they are not statistically significantly

north-west. These population movements may higher than the values found further south.

early have resulted in a basic population dichotomy still to some extent discernible in

TABLE 4

terms of segregating genetical features. More-

Non-Tasters in various British Groups

over, the tendency to a disaffection with local

0/0

social conditions, and the wish to move away as a result, is to a considerable extent familial. Migrants do not appear to be randomly selected in a population; social factors differentially affect individuals and families in this respect. This has been demonstrated in the contemporary context by studies conducted in coal mining

Total NonNo. Tasters

S. E. England (Harris & Kalmus5) 441

Pembrokeshire (Pullin & SunderlandlO) 1,005

Lancashire (Cartwright2)

430

County Durham (Sunderland)

735

Scotland (Sunderland)

206

Orkney (Sunderland)

420

Liverpool (Kitchin et al.6)

265

31-5 27-6 27 9
31-8
32-0 37-7 29-4

villages in County Durham. Long continued

selective migration, very largely familial and In this context, the low percentage in

socially determined, may be of great importance Northumberland (86 non-tasters of a total

in accounting for the genetic differentials noted sample of 354: 243 per cent non-tasters) is

here. very remarkable and difficult to explain. The

Since many immigrant groups in north-east Scottish sample is too small to be sub-divided

England arrived from areas across the North and allocated to different regions of that country

Sea, it is of interest to note the non-taster so that it is unknown whether or not the low

frequencies in some Scandinavian populations: percentage of non-tasters in the Northumberland

Denmark. (Mohr9) 31 8 per cent

area is also found in the southern counties of

Southern Sweden. (Akessonl) 32 0 per cent Norway. (Merton8) 305 per cent

Scotland. Of the total Scottish sample, only twelve individuals have parental birthplaces in the Southern Uplands. Of these only one

These figures do not differ significantly from the (8-3 per cent) is a non-taster. Thus, if these

Durham and other English values cited below. twelve were added to the Northumberland series

In south-east England, the percentage of the low frequency of non-tasting would be even

non-tasters is reported by Harris and Kalmus5 further established.

to be 31-5. For PembrokeshirelO, the percentage Again, it is unknown whether or not the very

is 27-6. Cartwright2 has unpublished data for high percentage of non-tasters in Orkney is

Lancashire with 27-9 per cent non-tasters and duplicated on the nearby parts of the Scottish

Kitchin et al.6 found 29 4 per cent for Liverpool. mainland or whether it is in fact a feature better

The 31 8 per cent non-tasters in County Durham explained in terms of genetic drift or founder

is not significantly different from these other effect in the archipelago. The Orkney sample is

figures quoted. Again, hitherto unpublished too small to allow ofallocation by parental birth-

data collected by Sunderland show 32 per cent places to the various islands in order to establish

non-tasters for Scotland as a whole and 37-7 per whether or not significant inter-island variation

cent for Orkney. These figures suggest that there exists. However, the islands were divided into

may well be a single homogeneous population three groups; firstly the islands lying north of the

in most of the United Kingdom together with Mainland of Orkney (Stronsay, Sanday and

147

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Westray for example); secondly the Orkney Mainland, and thirdly the islands located south of the Mainland (Hoy, South Ronaldsay and Burray for example). The frequencies in each of the three areas are summarized in Table 5 and no significant difference exists among them.

TABLE 5 Non-Tasters in Orkney

No. of Non-Tasters Total

N. Orkney Islands Orkney Mainland S. Orkney Islands

17 0
83 5 45

41 226
12

% Non-Tasters
41-5 37-0 37-5

Summary
PTC tasting data for north-east England was presented and a marked difference was demonstrated to exist between the population of the north and west parts of the area and that of the south and east parts. A similar type of dichotomy in north-east England had previously been shown to exist for the ABO blood group genes by other workers. PTC data for other populations in the British Isles were also presented. It would appear either that there is a single homogeneous population in this respect in much of the United Kingdom or else that there might be a gradual increase northwards in the non-taster frequency, culminating in the very high figure for Orkney. Alternatively, however, the Orkney frequency may be the result of genetic drift or founder effect. Whichever overall interpretation is adopted, the very low percentage of non-tasters in

Northumberland seems quite anomalous and no altogether satisfactory explanation presents itself.
Acknowledgements
Thanks are due to Mr. R. Cartwright for allowing quotation of his hitherto unpublished Lancashire figures and to Mr. R. C. Taylor, Miss J. E. Travers and various undergraduates in the University of Durham for assistance in collecting the data. Moreover, one is grateful for the co-operation of the County Education Authorities in Orkney, Northumberland and Durham, the staff of the Department of Psychology in the University of Aberdeen and the Head Teachers of the many schools visited.
REFERENCES
1. Akesson, H. 0. 1959. Taste deficiency for phenylthiourea in Southern Sweden. A. Ge. Me. Ge. 8, 43.
2. Cartwright, R. 1965. Unpublished typescript. P. II. 3. Fisher, R. A., and Taylor, G. L. 1940. Scandinavian
influence in Scottish ethnology. Nature, 145, 590. 4. Fraser Roberts, J. A. 1953. An analysis of the ABO
blood group records of the North of England. Heredity, 7, 361. 5. Harris, H., and Kalmus, H. 1949. The measurement of taste sensitivity to phenylthiourea (PTC). Ann. Eugen. Lond. 15, 24. 6. Kitchin, F. D., Evans, W. Howel, Clarke, C. A., McConnell, R. B., and Sheppard, P. M. 1959. PTC taste response and thyroid disease. Brit. med. J. i, 1069. 7. Koped, A. 1964. Blood group distributions in the United Kingdom. Unpublished typescript. British Association Meeting. Southampton. P. 18. 8. Merton, B. B. 1958. Taste sensitivity to PTC in 60 Norwegian families with 176 children. Acta Genet. Stat. Med. 8, 114. 9. Mohr, J. 1951. Taste sensitivitv to phenylthiourea in Denmark. Ann. Eugen. Lond. 16, 282. 10. Pullin, E. W., and Sunderland, E. 1963. A survey of phenyithiocarbamide (PTC) tasting and colour blindness in Pembrokeshire (Wales). Man. 63. 52.

148

