EUGENICS AS I SEE IT*
By THE LORD HORDER, K.C.V.O., M.D., F.R.C.P.

I-THE SOCIETY AND ITS WORK

IT is customary, on this occasion, that Society's influence and also a generous

the President should refer to the work of the Society during the past year, that he should say something about its policy, and that he should indicate in what directions the Council thinks it is desirable that its
activities should advance in the near future. In all these matters I am guided by close
association with the General Secretary and

subsidy from its exchequer. Here is a definite, concrete objective which the Society is anxious to see attained. It has therefore done all in its power to increase that body of public opinion in favour of the Bill shortly to be put before Parliament without which
it is not likely that politicians will give it
their support.

with the more active members of the Council. One event of importance, which it is Activities of the Society
fitting that I should mention, is the re- Propaganda, by lectures, exhibitions, films
constitution of the Society in regard to the and the work of the Eugenics Alliance, has
Council and the Standing Committees. This proceeded healthily. The Eugenics Alliance,

reconstitution was entered upon with a view to securing greater business efficiency, to a sharpening of the tool, as it were, for the better performance of the work for which the Society exists. The number of members of Council has been considerably reduced, as also has the frequency of its meetings. The Executive Committee has been strengthened and greater power has been given to it. The officers of the Society are hopeful that the results of the reconstitution will justify the time and thought that this reform has necessitated.
I am constrained at this point to refer to the great loss to the Society by the death of Sir Basil Blackett, a powerful element in the conduct of its affairs, whose gift for administration was offered so generously and whose absence from our councils we greatly deplore.
Dr. Julian Huxley's Galton lecture was as stimulating, and was as full of incisive yet constructive criticism, as might have been anticipated. I refer to some parts of this lecture elsewhere.
The Joint Committee on Voluntary Sterilization has received the whole weight of the
The Presidential Address on the occasion of the Annual General Meeting of the Eugenics Society, on May zoth, I936.

a new departure, exists to bring our principles and practice into contact with those citizens who do not become Fellows or Members of the Society. The Alliance, so far, has only seventy members, and this is, of
course, only a beginning. If the Alliance is to succeed in its purpose its membership should be in the thousands. We want to tell people what eugenics is not and what it isthat it is not pure mathematics or abstruse biology, or a mere question for highbrows, but something in which the man in the street can, and should, interest himself. Our principles may be sound, and our efforts
to carry them out may be sound also, but if we do not link up with the men and
women who are the material upon which our
principles are to work we are like a motor car that has no cardan shaft and leaves the back-axle motionless. Our propaganda and our Alfiance are therefore fundamental to our success. Six out of ten people still think of eugenics as something crankish or idealistic, or concerned in the main with adding prohibitions to life. Or they have a dim notion that it isn't quite nice, and has a faint flavour of the stud about it. Only
education can alter all this. The Society has produced a pre-marital
health schedule which has been well received

265

266 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

-not, be it observed, a document designed reasons for believing that in France, in

to discourage marriage, but to tell people Italy and in Germany official opinion on this

who are intelligent and responsible enough matter concerns itself merely with numbers

to want to know what sort of children they in the family, and not with quality, although

are likely to produce if they produce any. in Germany certain compulsory eugenic

A research studentship of £250, tenable considerations are borne in mind, such as

for two years, has been founded in honour compulsory sterilization of the unfit.

of Major Leonard Darwin, who was President But we must remember that all three of

of the Society for seventeen years. The first the countries mentioned are influenced

holder of the studentship is Dr. R. B. Cattell, almost entirely at present by a feverish

Director of the School Psychological Clinic desire to increase their population for the

at the City of Leicester. Dr. Cattell proposes pure pursuit of nationalism, if not actually

to investigate a typical rural population and for war. Such a spirit, we must hope, will

a typical urban population of schoolchildren only be of temporary duration, and will soon

from the point of view of the average size of be checked by economic considerations, if

the family at each level of intelligence, not by the annihilating action of modern

together with cognate enquiries.*

warfare, which will inevitably make a holo-

The Population Investigation Committee

caust of the civilian population, as well as of the fighting units, to a degree never

Population problems have been much witnessed before. Surely our severest critic

under consideration of late, and the Society does not suggest that the Eugenics Society

has appointed a committee to investigate should frame its policy along such lines as

the factors influencing the fall in the birth- these ?

rate. Members have been co-opted from

various other bodies concerned in this Differential Fertility

question. The expenses of the enquiry will But when we deal with matters of a

be met by the Society. The personnel of this differential or qualitative kind we are on

committee consists of representatives of safe, and permanent, ground. As the result

the Eugenics Society, the British College of the differential birth-rate, enormous

of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, the Medical numbers must rise each year into the richer

Research Council, the Royal Economic half of society. The case of a workman being

Society, the Society of Medical Officers of made a foreman or being put to some better-

Health,and the British Population Society, paid job is typical of what is going on very

with Professor Carr-Saunders as chairman. widely. The qualities which count in such

Now it is, in my judgment, well within the selections are honesty, tact, good workman-

province of the eugenics idea that population ship, perseverance, physical strength and

questions should be fully considered. All ability. They are all useful qualities, and

the same, the very essence of Galton's in so far as they are hereditary, this process

teaching was the promotion of favourable tends to correlate them permanently with differential fertility, so that the aim of those class distinctions. Certain bad qualities

who, alarmed by the falling birth-rate, are help; but the good undoubtedly outweigh

concerned about a mere increase in numbers, the bad very greatly. Recent statistical

really runs counter to Galton's objective. results point to the conclusion that intelli-

There can, of course, be no eugenic opposition gence is correlated with wealth, and these

to quantitative increase in the birth-rate, considerations make it probable that if

provided this differential factor is borne in these other good qualities could be measured,

mind, but to the eugenist in the Galtonian they also would be found to be thus cor-

sense qualitative considerations must never related. A conclusion of this sort is naturally

give way to quantitative ones. There are unpopular with many social reformers. Is

* The results of this investigation were published in the EUGENICS REVIEW of October 1936, p. i8i.

it possible that some of the recent movements in favour of a positive population are

EUGENICS AS I SEE IT

267

based upon a revolt against an unpopular in order to make it possible to frame a

fact ? But if eugenics is to be rendered practical eugenic policy." In what circum-

scientific, or even if it is only to be rendered stances is race mixture known to be bad,

useful, it must disregard bias, and take for and what knowledge of its biological effects

further guidance and further activity the do we specially need? The Society has no

truth which research discovers. " The con- answer to these questions. We might very

test between truth and unpopularity is very profitably appoint a Darwin Research stu-

old and much of the history of scientific dent to go thoroughly into this matter.* He

progress has been bound up with it."

would be asked to summarize the evidence

in favour of the view that, in certain circum-

A Programme for the Future

stances, race mixture is either good or bad.

What of our programme apart from this When placed in full possession of such

question of population ? There are several evidence, the Society might find itself in a

important matters touched upon in the position to indicate along what lines further

Society's Aims and Objects* concerning knowledge is required to enable us to frame

which we badly need to formulate our a practical eugenic policy. It might even

policy. In outlining the views which we have be able tentatively to outline such a policy.

in mind with regard to them, I draw liberally Immigration is also a subject into which

upon the carefully considered, if tentative, the Society might well promote an inquiry.

statements drawn up for our consideration It would be very interesting to have a

by Dr. Blacker.

summary of the eugenic bearings (if any) of

There is the question of what we call the immigration laws of different countries.

"human evaluation and registration." A careful consideration of these, together

Everyone agrees that there are unquestion- with an examination of the effects of recent

ably superior people whose fertility we should immigration into this country, might enable

like to increase. Conversely, there are inferior us to formulate a reasonable policy, which

individuals whose parenthood we should would serve a useful eugenic purpose.

like to discourage. At the present moment In regard to taxation the Society might

we have no satisfactory criteria as to these formulate a definite policy upon the question

two groups beyond the vague one of economic of rebates for children. The Statement of

and occupational success in various social our Aims and Objects says that " The present

grades.

system of income-tax allowance should be

If an attempt were made to formulate a amended, extended and rendered more

scheme whereby, amongst the limitless variety effective." Definite proposals are required

of physical, mental and moral qualities under each of these three headings. Here is

which together constitute good and bad another useful piece of research which the

citizenship, it were made possible to recog- Society proposes to promote.

e, when we see one, a eugenically average In the matter of education the Society

type, we should achieve a great deal. It is favours for children of superior ability the

therefore suggested that the Council should extensive provision of scholarships sufficient

appoint a committee to investigate this to ease financial burdens, and thereby pro-

matter thoroughly and to decide what mote the further reproduction of the parents.

physical and mental tests would be appro- How much more extensive? Some precise

priate to enable us to grade people on a recommendations might be formulated by a

eugenic scale.

committee containing persons familiar with

In regard to race mixture our statement educational and budget problems.

says that " in certain circumstances race Here are questions of considerable

mixture is known to be bad. Further moment, most of them concerned with posi-

knowledge of its biological effects is needed tive eugenics, at which it is proposed to work.

* EUGENICS REVIEW, I934, XXVI, I33.

* Effect has been given to this recommendation, see p. 293.

268 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

II-GENERAL PRINCIPLES

In regard to our general outlook, how shall essence of the eugenic outlook. Galton

we best pursue the definition of Francis never thought in terms of quick results, or

Galton, which is our motif and our purpose: of popular reforms. How could he, when the

" Eugenics is the study of agencies, under essence of his idea of eugenics lay in the field

social control, that may improve or impair of heredity ?

the racial qualities of future generations, It is important to think clearly about all

either physically or mentally " ? If we desire this. As Leonard Darwin says: "It is

to fulfil our mission, it is necessary to keep pleasant to hope that good health and good

this definition clearly before us. The tempta- conduct, the results of improved surround-

tions to wander away from it are frequent ings, will automatically reappear in future

and numerous, and the range of possible generations." But there is not the slightest

means by which it is supposed that we can reason to think that they will. And even if

carry out Galton's purpose is almost limit- environmental conditions do indirectly, and

less. In regard to all this, there are two ultimately, favour the production of superior

propositions which, I think, we should put individuals or races, to improve these is not

to ourselves. The first is that every proposal the task allotted to the Eugenics Society.

for human betterment that comes before us It is " to-morrow's children," not to-day's,

should be criticised severely before it is with whom we are concerned, and we believe

admitted as being in the truest sense that time and thought and money spent

eugenic according to the Galtonian definition. upon any and every means that are known

The second is that whenever, as must needs now, or can be known in the future, to

happen, proposals arise concerning which increase the chance of a heritage of better

there is no clear indication whether or not qualities, physical, mental and moral, are

their study, or their application, brings them more profitably spent if the long view be

within the Galtonian definition, whilst they taken.

should not be rejected, they should yield Let me be clear upon this. The eugenist

first place to research and action concerning has no quarrel with the environmentalist.

matters about which there is less or no doubt. He is sympathetic with all the activities of

No society which exists for a purpose like the latter, keeps in touch with them, assists

ours can do everything. To be effective at them to the best of his power. But this is

all it must limit its scope when it comes to an not primarily his contribution to human

actual, and practical, programme. Societies, betterment. The environmentalist desires to

like individuals, would do well, as it seems to make fit homes for heroes to live in; the

me, to say to themselves now and again: eugenist desires to make the heroes. To the

" This one thing I do," or " These things I question frequently heard, whether nature

do," as the case may be, rather than yield or nurture be the more important, we can

to the clamour to enlarge their field of action answer: Neither, both are so important that

until their original purpose is obscured and it is mere pedantry to sit and discuss it.

their potency dissipated.

May I try to make a difficult point here?

From time to time quite worthy people have The quality of a change in inheritance,

striven to attach to the eugenic programme whether that change be for better or for

a number of subjects of immediate, and worse, goes deeper, has greater strength,

therefore attractive, interest. These have than has any change in environment. It is

included such things as venereal disease, the therefore all the more worth striving for.

teaching of sex hygiene, divorce, temper- It is frequently assumed all too readily

ance, abortion, racial poisons, housing policy that environmental improvement must

and so forth. To concern ourselves with these necessarily carry with it a permanent value

things is to take the short, and not the long, for the succeeding individuals or groups of

view. And it is the long view which is the individuals. There is a possible fallacy here,

EUGENICS AS I SEE IT

269

clearly. We are entirely ignorant of the ultimate effects of environmental changes, or even of the length of time that the changes themselves will last. But there is much more reason for believing that a successful eugenic reform will continue to exercise its benefit through successive generations.
Influence of Environment
The social effects of environment, that is, the effects produced on individuals by changes in their own surroundings, may be mental or they may be physical. It is necessary to remember that different considerations apply to these two effects. The attitude of the eugenist is necessarily different in face of them. Let me again quote my distinguished predecessor in this chair, Major Leonard Darwin:
" Every eugenist admits, or acts as if he admitted, the immense importance of mental and traditional environment; for when considering the effects produced by these factors, problems connected with heredity are often consciously or unconsciously pushed into the background. For example, if we completely ignored everything but heredity, we should now be advocating child murder instead of utterly repudiating it, as we most certainly do. The agony of the mother of a murdered child is rightly held to be the predominant consideration in studying the ethics of infanticide, and this agony is wholly due to a change in her environment. Moreover, no fears or apprehensions would be aroused in the minds of the cats of the next generation by the drowning of any number of kittens to-day; and, if all the environmental conditions were the same in the case of man as in the case of the lower animals, I see no reason why babies and kittens should be treated differently. The higher mental powers of man and the fact that knowledge may be transmitted from generation to generation for an indefinite period, however, make any analogy with domestic animals a dangerous guide in human affairs and justify the more or less complete neglect of heredity in considering
LB

certain social questions. But with regard to physical environment the eugenist is unquestionably right in demanding that the hereditary factor shall always be given a prominent place in discussing the problems involved, a demand which might have been made even before all our recent statistical knowledge had been acquired, knowledge which I myself hold to be of the greatest value."
Dr. Julian Huxley has quite recently, in his Galton lecture, faced us anew with this same question of the relative degrees of influence exercised upon successive generations by genetic and environmental or social conditions. Referring to differences in the average of stature, physique and intelligence known to exist between schoolboys of different classes, he quotes Professor CarrSaunders's conclusions that
" so far as persons in this country are concerned, the mental differences which we observe, after stripping off the obvious ac.qiirements in the form of knowledge of facts, habits, customs, manners, are due only in very small part to differences in the physical environment, and in a varying though never to a large degree to differences in the social environment, and for the greater part to inherited differences."
And Professor Carr-Saunders draws the same conclusions with regard to the physical differences.
Dr. Julian Huxley questions these conclusions, pointing out that they may easily be vitiated by our recent knowledge with regard to vitamins, and that moderate insufficiency of these accessory food factors may result in retardation of growth, stunting, lack of physical and mental energy and reduced resistance to infection.
" In the face of such facts," says Dr. Huxley, " it is no longer legitimate to attribute the observed differences in physique and intelligence between social classes mainly to genetic factors. Genetic differences may, of course, exist; but the strong probability is that most of the differences are dependent on differences in

270 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

nutrition. Further, the defective nutrition that the Eugenics Society has been in danger

of the poorer classes is in part due to of going to sleep for want of criticism:

ignorance, but in a large measure to mere criticism from without and criticism from

"poverty. . Until we equalize nutrition, or within. We may have had our nightmares,

at least nutritional opportunity, we have but we have never lapsed into coma.

no scientific or other right to assert the Dr. Huxley is much too wise, and, more-

constitutional inferiority of any groups or over, much too humanistic, to dissuade us

classes because they are inferior in visible from pursuing certain limited activities of a

characters." *

concrete sort just because the corpus of

And the lecturer concludes that it is practically impossible to compare results obtained on
material from different environments and to
draw genetic conclusions on their face value. Very good. No one who thinks clearly and
forbearingly denies the difficulties inherent in the argument. And we may accept the
dictum of Hogben, and admire the clarity and the succinctness of his phrases, when he says, of these matters, that " the ambiguity of the concept of causation . . . has com-
pletely obscured the basic relativity of nature and nurture." But let us not confuse
the issue. Granted, as Dr. Huxley says, that it is practically impossible at present to
evaluate the environmental and the genetic factors if we mix the social classes, what does this mean except that here is work for the Eugenics Society, namely, to study the
different social classes as distinct groups, and compare the results ? But this is already included in the aims and objects of the
Society.

knowledge which we so far have to guide us
is small. He knows too well how small is this corpus of knowledge in any of the social sciences even, and no one would seriously speak of eugenics as being a social science, still less one of the natural sciences. The nearer eugenics gets to becoming a social science the better, but that it is still a long way off should not be allowed to stifle our efforts. We do not desist from helping a man to get well of rabies because the virus causing his disease has never yet been isolated.
Indeed, the analogy between eugenics and medicine is very close. I have said more than once that eugenics is the most profitable form of preventive medicine, and I believe it. It is this creed which accounts for my being in this chair to-day.
Before Jenner and Lister and the other pioneers of prophylaxis in medicine there were still things for the doctor to do, pending the slow increase in the knowledge and the approximation of public health to established scientific principles. Those critics who say

Some Critics and Criticisms
Dr. Huxley warns us that our methods need overhauling, and this warning-the urgent need of " methodizing " our programme, as he puts it-is very timely. Julian Huxley has always been a great bulwark of the Eugenics Movement. We look to him and to others like him, whose scientific training and outlook are invaluable in any field where science is a basic necessity for successful advance, for guidance. Yes, and for criticism. It were perhaps invidious, in close proximity to this obvious compliment, to suggest that effort may be paralysed by excess of criticism. But we must bear such a contingency in mind. It can never be said

that our knowledge of genetics is so slender that we dare not act upon it yet, lest we make mistakes, would, if they applied their criticism to medicine, make first aid in many circumstances and conditions pure folly. And, in this connection, what is the cure for ignorance unless it be observation and research? And it is largely to encourage both of these in relation to genetics that the Eugenics Society exists.
Then there are critics who say: You are too idealistic, anyway. This thing cannot be attained, it is too high. An attitude which, again, might have been taken up quite as reasonably in regard to diseases which have come under control as the result of painstaking research.

* EUGENICS REVIEW, I935, XXVIII, i6.

Dr. F. C. Schiller has some pungent

EUGENICS AS I SEE IT

271

comments to offer upon the attitude of " obstructive conservatism " with which the eugenist is frequently faced. " The practical
eugenist," he says, " is not really found to
wait for a quixotic agreement and an illusory finality about the knowledge he needs. He only needs knowledge enough to warrant his first tentative experiments

mankind from the elimination of feeble-
bodied men of genius. We are once more asked to remember how much we owe to St. Paul, Newton, Kant, and other weaklings. But no attempt is made to show that
our indebtedness would not have been incomparably greater if these great men had enjoyed a robuster physique, or that their

to cope with crying and admitted evils, and physical infirmities promoted, rather than

can trust his very experiments to yield him impeded, their spiritual activities. It is the instruction needed to carry him on to the conveniently forgotten that with just a little

next step. He can well reply, therefore, to more physical debility these geniuses would

those who counsel caution to the pitch of inaction: 'True, I know little enough, but I know enough to start on; moreover, it is only by experimenting and taking certain risks that I can ever hope to learn what as
yet I do not know.' " To traverse this contention it would

not have been able to achieve anything at all, and that for lack of a little more adequate physical equipment much ability has always been lost to the world. Nor again is any tear bestowed upon the geniuses whose physique was so defective that they never
lived to manifest their superiority even to

have to be shown that we have not, as a their friends. Least of all is it shown to be

matter of fact, enough knowledge to venture impossible that as much genius (or more)
on any experiment. But will any of the might not be engendered by a eugenical

critics of eugenics contend that the whole of society from its sane and healthy stocks as

our present knowledge of genetics and anti-eugenical societies now produce from

biology is practically irrelevant, and leaves their tainted and uncertain sources. It is so

us just as helpless as the most ignorant little genius that we get at present and we

savages? It may be that we have not make such miserable use of it that the very knowledge enough to try a particular conjectural loss which eugenics might

experiment; but in each case specific reasons should be given for thinking so. Merely general insistence on the defective-
ness of human knowledge should no more suffice as a deterrent than general enthusiasm
for eugenics should (suffice to exculpate the
authors of some foolish experiment that

occasion need scarcely enter into a statesman's calculations. At any rate the chances
of obtaining genius might be enormously
improved by diminishing the great waste and elimination of ability which is now promoted by our social order in the very
families which seem most fitted and likely

claims to be eugenical."

to engender genius."

Even if we had to start from scratch; And so, despite the critics, I am disposed

and had no biological facts to go upon at all- to regard the Galtonian effort as worth

which is, even by the critics, allowed not to while, and I grudge neither the time nor the

be the case-I would still be a eugenist. In thought that I give towards helping to push

the words of our pamphlet dealing with the the eugenics plough in co-operation with the

aims and objects of the Society: " Modern sturdy colleagues who have borne much

civilized man revolts against submission to more of the heat and burden of this particu-

the crude process by which the less capable are eliminated by early death. Eugenics seeks to find the means by which conscious human direction may be applied to the preservation and increase of racial improvement through heredity."
One more type of criticism still crops up, "the old bugbear about the possible losses to

lar day than I have. The soil is a stiff one, and the pains which are needed to keep the
furrow straight are considerable. But we are not going to turn back because we are
convinced that the tilth is good and that we can rely upon Nature, who is ready with the seed, to give a better harvest as the result of our labours than she would give without them.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XVm, No. 4.

