OUR CROWDED ISLAND
By Sir CHARLES ARDEN-CLOSE, K.B.E., C.B., C.M.G., F.R.S.

Present-Day Difficulties

substantially the same in spite of the second

M ANY of us, uncomfortably aware of world war. During the twentieth century our

the irritations of food queues, over-
full buses, shortages of supplies, and restrictions in every direction, are inclined, perhaps, to attribute the troubles and inconveniences of life in Britain, at the present time, to the after-effects of the second world
war. And to a large extent this is, of course, a correct explanation. But it is possible to maintain the theory that in a rightly planned society, with a properly balanced population, the more serious of our troubles would have been avoided. And, in particular, our food troubles would have been less insistent than they are now if there had been fewer to feed and if we had more food available at home. To be sure, the question of food is only one of those which press upon us now with no satisfactory answer available; but food is the most urgent and elementary of our requirements, for we can, at a pinch, make

numbers in England and Wales have in-
creased from 32-527 millions in April I9OI to 43-026 millions in mid i947, an increase of
ioi millions.
The area of England and Wales is 58,324 square miles, or 37,327,479 acres. This gives the extraordinary density of 737 persons per square mile, a good deal less than an acre per person. Actually, if the land were divided up, each person could have a square of about 65 yards a side; and if we make allowance for towns, moorland, and the other categories of country unsuited for food production, we shall find that we are of
much the same opinion as Sir John Russell, who, a short time ago, stated that " we have in this country little more than half an acre of cultivated land a head of population." Each person would have a plot about 49
yards square.

shift with less clothing, with fewer houses, or So far, nothing has been said about the

with less warmth in our houses, and, in fact, population of Scotland. That country keeps we have all of us learnt to limit our calls its numbers down, by emigration, to about

upon such requirements, and no great harm 5 millions, with slight variations. It is results. But food is the first need of man, curious to note that a considerable proporand limitation of this primitive necessity is tion of emigrants from Southern Ireland

not good for his body or his mind and ad- settled in Scotland up to the outbreak of the versely affects his energies and capacities. second world war, so that Scotland was ex-

porting Scotchmen and importing Irishmen.

Population Density of Britain

Taking 5 millions as the existing number of

Let us first of all discuss the question of the inhabitants of Scotland, and adding this

our numbers, bringing the facts up to date. to the 43 millions in England and Wales, we

There has been no census of population in have the total population of Great Britain,

Great Britain since I93I. In that year, on in mid I947, as about 48 millions. The area

April 26th, the population of England and of Scotland is 29,796 square miles, that is,

Wales was 39 *947 millions, and we may put almost exactly half the area of England and

it at about 39*980 millions in the mid-year. Wales. The area of Great Britain is 88,I20

In mid-year I947 it has been calculated that square miles, and the density of its popula-

the population of England and Wales was tion is now 545 to the square mile.

43-026 millions; in fact, in spite of the war, It is sometimes said that though Britain is

our numbers increased in sixteen years by densely crowded with people it is not so

somewhat more than 3 millions. The previ- crowded as Belgium, and it is desirable to put

ous intercensal increase (I92I-3I) was 2*o6i this comparison fairly. Belgium has an area

millions, so that the rate of increase was of XI,755 square miles and an authoritative

23

24 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

estimate of the density of its population,
per square mile, in 1939, was 7I3. The density of population of England and Wales was about 737 in 1947, and of Great Britain 545. Although we have not available an upto-date figure for Belgium we may say that it is probably not far off the figure for
England and Wales. It must be observed that Britain has some eight times the area of Belgium; and England and Wales five times, almost exactly. One might, perhaps, expect that a relatively small country could cope with a great pressure of people more comfortably than could a large one. In any case, so much depends upon the foodproducing capacity of the countries con-
cerned that a mere comparison of densities only affords a rough, preliminary measure of
the well-being of their populations.
Another country which is sometimes men-
tioned, in connection with this question of density, is Java. According to Carr-
Saunders, writing in I936, the density of population per square mile, in Java, was 8I7. The area, including Madura, is under 5I,000
square miles, practically the same as that of
England without Wales. The above-quoted authority remarked that " the position cannot be regarded as otherwise than menacing; and this is now the view of the Dutch authorities."* He goes on to indicate that it would in future be difficult to provide food for an increased population. We may say that, in any case, there is no parallel to be drawn between a mainly industrial people in the temperate zone and a densely packed agricultural Asiatic population in the tropics.
There is more to be said for a comparison of the population density of this country with that of Italy. The area of Italy, including Sicily and Sardinia, is I20,956 square miles, or, excluding those islands, IOI,575
square miles. Italy was described by CarrSaunders in I936 as an over-populated country, and its numbers were then increasing. According to Landry the population in I936 was 42 millions and the annual excess of births over deaths was 375,000. According to official statistics the population,
* World Population. Clarendon Press, 1936, p. 280.

at the end of I946, was 45,645,000. With this
figure and the above-mentioned area for the whole of Italy, including the islands, the density works out at 377 to the square
mile (see Table I).

TABLE i

DENSITY OF POPULATION PER SQUARE MILE

Great Britain

...

England and Wales ...

545 737

England ... ... .. 783

Belgium (1939) ... ...

7I3*

Italy 377... ... ... ...

We shall not go far wrong if we say that the
population density of England and Waleg is
rather greater than that of Belgium and
nearly double that of Italy. Of course, the numerical density of popula-
tion is only a rough and ready indication of a
condition of pressure. But it is, nevertheless, an indication which deserves to be taken
account of, because, in some cases, it sets a
limit to population growth. In an entirely self-sufficient country it would determine the
number of people who could be fed from the soil. And even in the cases of Western peoples who have expanded their numbers
mainly by industrial development and the
import of food in exchange for goods produced in the country, even in these cases the amount of food which can be produced at
home is a vital constituent of the problem of trade and exchange. And this matter of the possible amount of home-produced food is decided ultimately by the area of land which is available for the purpose. There is, therefore, no need to shirk discussion of area and
density, though any such discussion must not ignore the factors of trade and finance. We have at the present time ample evidence of the extremely artificial condition of our national economy. We are rightly told by our public men of all parties that our pre-war existence was made possible by our exports and by our invdstments abroad. Now that the latter have largely disappeared we have to rely chiefly upon our exports as a means of purchasing the balance of food beyond that which we can produce at home, and the

* In Europe's Population in the Interwar Years,
League of Nations Publication, 1946, the density of
Belgium is given as 275.3 per square kilometre, in
1939, i.e. 713 per square mile.

OUR CROWDED ISLAND

25

prospect is not entirely encouraging. We are The report specially stresses the matter of

thrown back to a very inconvenient extent the inherent fertility of the land. Dr. Stamp

on the problem of producing as much food as remarks that investigations tend to show

we can in our island. And that must be the that there is a considerable stability of land

next subject of our inquiry.

use on the best land and on the poorest land,

and that the greatest fluctuations are to be

Home-Grown Food

found on land of intermediate quality. He

We may begin by considering how much adds the interesting historical note that,

agricultural land is required for the produc- " The problem of increasing the home food

tion of food sufficient to support one human supply is nothing new. It was a paramount

being on a Western European standard. This problem at the time of the Napoleonic wars,

problem is necessarily vague, but is not when much unsuitable land was ploughed, to

entirely indeterminate; and as evidence be abandoned soon after." It may be noted

that it is worth consideration we have the that the population of England and Wales, in

pronouncements of several eminent authori- I82I, was about I2 millions.

ties on agricultural methods and policy. As subsequently revised, Dr. Stamp divides

Estimates by three experts, now, alas I no the land into ten major types, beginning with

longer with us, Sir Henry Rew, Sir Daniel first-class land capable of intensive cultiva-

Hall and Sir Thomas Middleton, all con- tion, and going on through good general

nected with the Ministry of Agriculture and purpose farm land, medium quality general

Fisheries, were not entirely in agreement. purpose land, first-quality grassland, good

The first-named stated that to maintain a but heavy land, medium quality light land,

unit of our population, on a pre-war standard to the poorest land, rough marsh pasture, and

of food, would require 24 acres of food- ending with areas occupied by towns, etc.

producing land. Hall's estimate was 2 to He remarks that, of the first-class arable

42 acres. And Middleton said that pasture land, huge tracts have been taken for aero-

could supply food, for one year, at the rate dromes and by public bodies, and that such

of 2 to 50 acres per person, whereas arable land needs protection from the inroads of

land could feed i to i*i persons per acre. housing and industry, and, he might have

These estimates are clearly rough and ready; added, from the demands of the Services.

probably Middleton's is the most valuable. In consultation with the Ministries of

But, of course, the actual food-producing Agriculture and Town and Country Plan-

capacity of the total area will depend upon ning, Dr. Stamp has revised his earlier

the extent of the various categories of land estimates, and now gives the following

and the fertility of each category. And as to acreages:

these various areas we have some excellent

England &

information. In I94i Dr. Dudley Stamp, the Director of the Land Utilisation Survey of Britain, published an important report,

Wales Total good agricultural land 17,825,900 Total medium agricultural
land ... ... ... 1X1,933,800

Scotland 3,963,300
2,877,400

entitled Fertility, Productivity and Classifica- Moorland, heaths, etc. ... 6,35I,000 12,II3,800

tion of Land in Britain. In his introduction Chief towns, etc.

... I,142,700 114,200

Dr. Stamp remarks, " the importance of a

37,273,400 I9,068,700

classification of land according to inherent

fertility and productivity was suddenly It will be noticed that whereas in England

emphasised by the outbreak of war.... It and Wales about 8o per cent of the whole area

took the war to bring home to the leaders and of the country can be classed as good or

people of Britain the tragedy of the long- medium agricultural land, in Scotland the

continued loss to industry and housing of percentage is only about 36. Or we may put

much of the best agricultural land of the the comparison like this, England and Wales

country, thereby lowering enormously both have 4 35 times as much good and medium

the actual and potential production of food." agricultural land as Scotland, and, if the

26 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

size of a population depended entirely upon the productivity of the soil, England and Wales would have 4*35 times the population of Scotland.
Dr. Stamp has information in greater detail than is given in the above table, and from this information the agricultural expert could arrive at a plausible figure for the size of the population which the land of Britain could feed. Using Middleton's factors and the above table, however, it is possible to get an idea of a maximum home-fed population. But actual records are more valuable, though they only imperfectly serve as a guide to the future.
A consideration of the area of land which can be made use of for the supply of homeproduced food has its importance as providing an estimate of the limiting amount of food which can be so produced, and thus gives us a limit to the number of people who can be fed from home sources. But we can, perhaps more profitably, discuss what was actually done, during the war years, and since that time, in the way of feeding the teeming population of Britain with food produced in our island.
Food in War-Time
The study of this part of the food problem is rendered easy by the information provided by an admirable pamphlet, published by the Ministry of Food in I946 and entitled, How Britain Was Fed in War-Time. It is therein mentioned that " The chief reason why the war-time shortage of food was so acute was the dependence of the United Kingdom on imports for more than half its food supplies; up to I939 over half the meat, nearly all the fats, four-fifths of the sugar, and some ninetenths of the cereals and flour were imported." To make up for a large part of these imports it was necessary, as we all know, to stimulate the home production, with the result that " by I944 there was, by comparison with the pre-war production, a go per cent increase in
the production of wheat, an 87 per cent in-
crease in potatoes, and a 45 per cent increase in vegetables. The production of sugar-beet increased by I9 per cent. ..." Before the last war we imported, each year, some 22

million tons of food; " every day ten or fifteen food ships reached our ports," and " imported food provided more than twothirds of the calories and more than half of the total protein supply." Our dependence upon imported foodwascolossal, and farmore than that of any other country in the world, Britain was obliged to buy the bulk of her
food from abroad. In studying the figures
given in the pamphlet it is rather curious to note that the United States did not send us any very noteworthy quantity of food, as compared, that is, with Canada and Argentina.
There is much of interest in the pamphlet
not very directly affecting our particular
enquiry, but a perusal of the whole of it is
well worth while and will show the reader
how efficient a public department can be when provided with a far-seeing and capable direction and a skilled technical staff. Before we leave this instructive pamphlet it may be noted that it is therein stated that whereas the annual average weight of imported food and animal feeding stuffs, during the years I934-8, was 22 million tons, these imports were reduced to an average annual weight of about ii million tons during the war years I942-4. Of course, weight is not in itself a satisfactory measure of food value, but it
gives an indication of the amount of shipping
that was required-and saved.

Present-Day Food in Britain

And now we come to a matter which is of
direct importance for the study of our present dependence upon outside sources of
food supply. The Ministry of Agriculture
and Fisheries has very civilly sent the present writer the following information in a letter

dated November igth, I947:

" The most recent calculations made by

the Ministry of Food, of the proportion of food consumed in the United Kingdom

which is home-produced, refer to the year July I946-June I947. The figures are as follows:

Percentage of calories home-produced ... ..
Percentage of all protein home-produced ... Percentage of animal protein home-produced ...
Percentage of vegetable protein home-produced Percentage of fat home-produced ... ...

39
5 59 43 3I

OUR CROWDED ISLAND

27

These figures are exactly comparable with one kilogram of water by i degree Centi-

those quoted for other years in the pamphlet grade." The calorie values of the various

How Britain was Fed in War-time."

foods are determined by actually burning

And if we refer to the pamphlet in question these foods in oxygen and measuring the

we shall find that in the years I934-8 the resulting amount of heat. Thus the article on

home-produced calories averaged 30 per cent " Diet " in the Encyclopadia Britannica, in

of the total consumption, and for the years which it is stated, later on, that, during the

I943 and I944 the figures were 4I and 40 per years I909-I3, the daily ration of the

cent respectively. It therefore appears that I average man " in the United Kingdom was

we increased our home-grown production 3,4I0 calories.

from 30 to about 40 per cent, an increase of It is clear that we are entitled to use, as a

one-third, no mean result, but still leaving single figure to indicate our dependence upon

6o per cent to be imported. We will now deal imported food, the estimate that 39 per cent

with the use of calories as a measure of food of our total consumption is home-produced.

production.

That means that 6i per cent of our food is

imported. The population of Great Britain

Food Units

is now (I947) 48 millions, and it follows that

Dr. K. G. Fenelon, Director of the Statis- the equivalent of some 29 millions of our

tics Division of the Ministry of Food, has people are fed on imported food, and i9 mil-

kindly furnished a copy of some notes, lions on home-grown food.

dated December i9th, I947, on the problems But even this is not the whole story. The

involved in the calculation of the proportion average amount of food now consumed in

which home-produced food forms of the total this country is below the pre-war average.

supply in Great Britain. In these notes it is The Minister of Food stated in November

pointed out that there are three possible I947 that there is an " average daily calorie

units for use in the measurement of food, intake of just below 2,700 per head for the

namely, weight, value and nutritional sig- whole population." This should be com-

nificance. As to weight, it is clear that the pared with the average daily quantity con-

use of this as a unit would give very un- sumed, during the years I909-I3, of over

reliable results, though, of course, the discus- 3,400. So that not only do we import 6i per

sion of weights is necessary in a consideration cent of the food that we eat, but, even with

of transport and storage problems. As to this large addition to our resources, an

value, there is a long discussion on this point, addition paid for with the utmost difficulty,

including the consideration of such items as even with this huge purchase of food from

the cost of imports at the port of arrival, the other countries, we are under-fed to the

number of non-food items included in the extent of 20 per cent.

food items, and other details which need not The matter may be put in this way: the

concern us here, except to note that cost 39 per cent that we produce in this country

cannot generally be accepted as a means of is 39 per cent of a standard which is twenty-

comparison. Finally, it is decided that:

seven/thirty-fourths of the pre-war standard,

If food as a source of energy and a means of life is the criterion, the calorie method, in spite

so that in terms of the latter we only produce at home 3I per cent, that is, 3I per cent

of its defects, is superior to the cost method, and of the total amount of food required to feed

snce protein, fat and carbohydrates are the
calorie providers (in the proportion of 4*9 and 4)
they are in effect subsumed in the calorie figures. The use of protein only would under-emphasize

Britain on a pre-war scale. The facts cannot be disputed, and the
reasons for them are not far to seek. This is a

foods of low protein content. Where, however, very densely populated country, and we lived,

the criterion is economic or financial the calorie until the outbreak of the second world war,

method is not suitable.

somewhat precariously by means of our

'The calorie is the quantity of heat world-wide trade and on our oversea invest-

energy required to raise the temperature of ments. Our condition was tolerable, if

28 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

artificial. But it was admitted on all hands that, whereas the home country was crowded with people, the Dominions were, and are, under-populated. It only required the calamity of a second world war to undermine our home stability. Our present condition is largely due to the continued increase of our
numbers; the population is now ioi millions
larger than in the beginning of the century; it has grown from 37'5 millions in I9OI to 48 millions in 1947. At our present rate of food production at home, and on our present standards, we could feed half the I90I population.
Important Opinions
In his valuable article, entitled " Stages in Population Growth," which appeared in the EUGENICS REVIEW for October I947, Dr. Blacker remarks, " The United Kingdom is far from being self-sufficient in foodstuffs. We depend, and are likely to continue depending for some time to come, on imports." This may, perhaps, read a little too optimistically. Can anyone foresee a time, within the next generation, when we shall not have to depend mainly on imports of food? Here are some additional opinions:
Mr. Ernest Brown, then Minister of Health in the House of Commons, in July I943: It was an entire misreading of the situation to regard the reproduction rates of the nineteenth century as normal. In Great Britain the population was more than trebled during the hundred years, and had still substantially increased to its present size ... with an area density which was among the highest on contemporary record.... A check was inevitable sooner or later.
Mr. Ernest Benn*: We are 684 to the square mile as compared with twenty-three Russians or forty-three Americans; and we have lost those claims upon the rest of the world, secured to us by the work of previous generations, and on which our high standard of living was built.
Lord Moran, in September I945: This dreadfully over-populated island....
Professor C. E. M. Joadt: And so it (the population) will begin to decline. For goodness' sake, don't let us be frightened of that. I think
an England with far fewer people in it will be a
happier and more comfortable England.
Lord Trentt: I would appeal, in particular,
* Sunday Times, September 3rd, 1944.
t Sunday Dispatch, October 7th, 1945.
$ The Times, March x2th, 1947.

to industrialists to recognize that the food problem is their problem and not only. the
farmers'. Food is as vital to the human worker as fuel is to the mahine. The more we produce from our own soil, the less we need to scramble for abroad ... from every point of view industrialists should support and reinforce the demand for positive action to reduce our precarious dependence on external food supplies.
And Dr. Arthur Bryant*: We are a creditor country no longer.... But we still have to feed a far bigger population than we can grow food for. That necessity places us at the mercy, in the open markets of the world, of those who raise the food we so urgently require ... within the next two years, possibly the next year, a food crisis of the most grievous kind may face us.... None of the dangers confronting us, domestic or foreign, compares in urgency with this.
In a discourse at the Royal Institution on October 3ISt, I947, Lord De La Warrt put the case like this:
The word " crisis" is misleading, and its use has prevented us from realizing that the start we gained in the industrial revolution has run out and that cheap food and raw materials, with the consequent high standard of living to which we had become accustomed, can no longer be taken
for granted.... During the last five years
before the war . . . we had already begun to live beyond our means....
If the land of Britain is to yield of its best, it will demand a greater share of every section of our national wealth, its energies, capital, income, raw material, and, above all, its brains. It will take time to solve the problem of feeding the millions who inhabit Britain. Neither agriculture nor any other single industry can provide a panacea; though agriculture could furnish a greater contribution to the future well-being of our country than any other industry.
And Dr. Inge':
My own opinion is that since we cannot hope to recover our foreign trade, we shall gradually return to pre-industrial England with a much smaller population living mainly on the land. We may be happier when that change has been brought about. But the reduction of the population by birth-control would be a very slow process, and those who wish to emigrate may be those whom we do not wish to lose.
Other Difficulties
Difficulties caused by the crowded state of our island do not entirely end with the shortage of food. There are, for instance, the
* Illustrated London News, March 22nd, 1947. t Nature, December 27th, I947.
The Hibbert Journal, January 1948.

OUR CROWDED ISLAND

mconveniences of present-day travel, the had actually been born and a life-table

deterioration of the countryside, the exhaus- would show how many would be likely to

tion of our mineral resources, and the survive to a given year. The diagram

destruction of our forests, resulting in our showed a rise up to about I935 and then a

having to import nearly all the timber that decrease to I963, after which date the

we need. The shortage of houses and clothing numbers would be speculative.

should fairly be put down chiefly to the Or we may quote Sir Ernest Rock Carling,

second world war. But the war also should who spoke at a conference in June I947:

be credited with having caused an improve-

In 1946 there were 6,587,000 people of 6o and

ment in the supply of food from home over in Great Britain, compared with only

sources. This is the crucial matter. We can, 2,408,426 in I9OI. It is estimated that in 1971 in time, repair our houses, rebuild those there will be between 9 and io millions.

destroyed by enemy bombs, and build new and better dwellings in place of our slums, and all this we can do mainly from our own
resources. But there is a severe limitation to
the amount of food that can be grown in Britain, and the shortage of food imposes burdensome reactions on our economic situation.

And Sir Godfrey Ince:
In 1939 we had 417,000 young men reaching
the age of I8; in 1950 295,000 would do so.
We may, in fact, take it as true that the population of Britain is an ageing one. At the same time we must realize that our numbers have not yet begun to diminish. In spite of the second world war there has been

The Future

a steady increase, and we have reached the

How does this picture of a densely crowded Britain square with the demand, which we
sometimes hear, for an increase in the birth-
rate ? Well, those who make this demand are
moved, not by our present difficulties, but by the fear of a possible future of a continuously dwindling population. This fear is chiefly due to the publication of various
forecasts of the size of our population, based

present massive total of over 48 millions. We do not know when the population will be at its maximum, and we cannot say what that maximum will be, though we might hazard a guess, and put it at somewhere in the neighbourhood of 50 millions. It is legitimate
to put the question: If we find the utmost difficulty in feeding 48 millions, how shall we be able to feed a still larger number?

on certain assumptions as to future fertility.

So far, the forecasts have not been justified, Emigration

and we should do well to take the advice of It will be generally agreed that, if our

the late Dr. R. R. Kuczynski who, in the numbers are not for ever to go on increasing,

words of an obituary notice in The Times, we must face the difficulties resulting from

studiously refrained from predicting the an ageing population. And, as a conse-

total future population of any country, " a quence, oldish people must learn to take a

nsk which no serious statistician should be larger share in the nation's work. If a certain

wiling to shoulder." But, whilst it is correct number of the young and fit emigrate to the

to say that forecasts of future figures of total Dominions, the average age at home must

population should be looked upon with sus- still further increase, and we must face this

picion, this remark does not apply to fore- difficulty also. For on general grounds it is

casts, based on a life-table, of certain highly desirable that the other units of the

elements of future population. Thus, Pro- British Commonwealth should increase their

fessor A. V. Hill, in The Times of September relatively sparse populations by immigration

23rd, I943, gave a diagram, based upon the from this country. Take the case of Australia,

calculations of Mr. D. V. Glass, which showed for instance, with a population, on June 30th,

for successive years up to I963 the number of I947, of 7,580,800. The British newspaper

women in England and Wales who would be proprietors' delegation, which visited Aus-

alive between the ages of 20 and 40. These tralia in I943, returned with the knowledge

30 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

that, in that country, the population problem lions in i946, and this prediction happens to

was of prime interest to everybody. Sir be not far from the truth.

Walter Layton* said that " economists In January I948 the total white population

would like to see Australia with at least of the British Commonwealth overseas could

20 million people. Where was she to get be put at 25 millions (see Table 2). In January

them? Everywhere the members of the I927 the total white population of the above

delegation went they were questioned about countries was just over I9 millions, so that,

immigration." In May I944 Mr. Forde, the in 2I years, there has been an increase of

acting Prime Minister, said that if Australia some 6 millions.

did not build up her population, the country

TABLE 2

"might not be given another chance."

WHITE POPULATION OF THE BRITISH COMMONWEALTH

There can be no doubt that Australia is

Canada (June 1947) Australia (June 1947)

... ...

... ...

... 12,582,000 ... 7,580,800

anxious for a steady stream of immigrants New Zealand (Jan. 1946) ... ... ... 1,746,319

from this country. Mr. Arthur Calwell, Australian Minister of Immigration, stated,

Union of South Africa (1946) Newfoundland, about ... S. Rhodesia, etc. ... ...

... ... ...

... 2,372,690 300,000
... 150,000

in August I947, that Australia House had

received inquiries from 400,000 people in

24,731,809

Britain about settlement in Australia. He re-stated the view that 70,000 immigrants could be absorbed each year without interfering with the country's economic standards. He did not agree with those who advised people in Britain to stay at home, where they were " only helping to starve and suffo-
cate each other."t
As to Canada, the population was esti-

Taking the whole British Commonwealth,
Britain and Northern Ireland have some 49 4 million people, and Canada, Australia, New Zealand, South Africa, Newfoundland, Southern Rhodesia, etc., have approximately 25 million white people, that is, rather more than half the number at home.
A redistribution, during the course of the next generation or so, would seem to be

mated by the Dominion Bureau of Statistics eminently desirable. In November I947, to be I2,582,000 in June I947. This repre- Lord Addison, speaking for the Government,

sents an increase of more than 9 per cent. said: "The Government did not take a

since the census of I94I.

short-sighted view of the needs [of the

The white population of New Zealand was Dominions] and considered it right that

reported, in January I946, to be I,746,3I9, Britain should afford the loss of the propor-

and the Maori population to be I72,509, tion of the population which migrated to the

almost exactly one-tenth of the whites. The Empire. Britain's loss would add not only to

white population had increased ii per cent. the strength of this country, but to that of

in about ten years. IThe total, in January the Commonwealth in a practical way."

I946, was I*9I8 millions, and now it may be Speaking to the Oxford University Labour

I * 96 millions, in a country which has an area Club on February 27th, I948, Mr. Hugh

of more than ioo,ooo square miles. But it Dalton expressed the view that in the long

should be remembered that at the beginning run this country would not be able to carry

of the century there were only 773,000. It such a large population as at present. There

was calculated, more than twenty years ago, ought to be a substantial movement of

that the numbers would reach about 2 mil- population from this island to other places,

* The Times, January 25th, 1944.

especially to Australia.*

t The Times, August 29th, 1947.

* The Times, February 28th, I948.

Eugenics Riew, VoL [ Nok I

