THE
EUGENICS REVIEW
EUGENICS AND THE WAR.
THE relation of war to eugenics has been the subject of much controversy in the past. There have been those who argued that war, and the preparation of a nation for war, were beneficial eugenic influences. The militarists have urged that preparation for war necessitated the setting of a high standard of physical and mental fitness, and that in countries where conscription was in force this had a real selective value, in that those rejected by the State as unfit for military service were often rejected by the woman as unfit for matrimony. They also maintained that the ideal of military efficiency, coupled with universal training with a view to the general attainment of that ideal, was bound to raise the average standard of the race. Extreme exponents of the war creed argued that even war itself was beneficial to nations, in that the weaker race was crushed out, the stronger surviving and taking its place. While appreciating the effect that many great wars have had in the lowering of the standards in both conquered and victorious alike for many generations, others nevertheless viewed the preparation for war as an eugenic agency, for trusting that with the spread of education
the danger of actual war would be greatly diminished, they held that the advantages to be derived from the preparation for war outbalanced the increased risk of war due to that preparation. In other words, they believed that the risk of war was worth running because the preparation for war was good for mankind, and they thought that this beneficial training

I96 EUGENICS REVIEW.
could not be secured on any other grounds than that of preparing to make war.
The subject as a whole is replete with controversy, and the truth is to be found only by a careful analysis of a large number of eugenic and dysgenic influences, and the striking of a final balance.
On broad lines, it may be conceived that war, in the earlier stages of the development of the race may have beneficial effects which may cease in more highly developed stages of civilization. On these lines Spencer showed that war was one form of the struggle for existence which promoted the survival of the fittest and thus had created a tendency to racial improvement. But what may have tended to racial advancement in the past ages, when small communities depended for their very subsistence upon strength of arm, physical courage and subtlety, has ceased to promote advancement in the more highly civilised condition of to-day. Whatever argument may be adduced in favour of the preparations for war as of eugenic value in our own times, it must be generally conceded that war itself, uhder modern conditions of mechanics and mobility, is almost entirely dysgenic. It is not necessarily the best that survive in the warfare of the present day. The youngest and the bravest of the race are certainly diminished in numbers. Prowess in battle has no " survival value " in the biological sense, as regards the individual, and little as regards the nation; for even the victorious nation, though surviving and dominating, multiplies from an inferior stock after the war. Two unequal races join in battle, and the one which survives is thus proved the fittest in the struggle. But the survivor may be so damaged as to be thrown back many stages in the course of development, and the world as a whole is the poorer.
The struggle for existence which in the earlier days of the human race implied constant sanguinary conflicts between tribes had its beneficial effect in its own time; but the struggle for existence commensurate with the development of the race to-day is on a higher plane. To quote Dr. Sarolea, "The decisive struggle for life in modern humanity is not the external
and superficial struggle of the battlefield, but the permanent

EUGENICS AND THE WAR.

197

and deeper internal struggle of the city, of the laboratory, of the workshop, of the home, of the soul, the struggle for political rights or legal rights, the struggle for religious freedom, the economic struggle for a living or for a higher standard of living, the struggle for truth." The war philosophy of the Prussian school is a reversion to savagery, a reactionary policy doomed to failure through its utter want of accord with
modern conditions. But at the present moment the discussion of this question
on philosophical and academic grounds is possibly as foolish and as futile as Nero's musical efforts while Rome burnt. The horror of a great war-the greatest the world has ever knownis upon us, and the eugenic and dysgenic effects of war are about to be put to the supreme test of actual experience. All we can now do is to put forward every endeavour to mitigate the racial injury to the utmost of our power.
The British Empire, by reason of maintaining her army on a voluntary basis, must inevitably suffer racially more than other nations. The battle death-rate must strike her unevenly and reduce the number of her males amongst the class from which it is most desirable that she should produce the stock of the future. In the countries with universal compulsory service the reduction in effective males will be spread over the entire population; good and bad will alike be reduced. In this country
the types which are physically and mentally superior will volunteer for active service. Those of the strongest character, possessing most love of adventure, the greatest initiative, the keenest and the fittest will lay themselves out to be reduced in numbers. The sample of those killed will not be the average of the race, but the best type of the race. The cream of the race will be taken and the skimmed milk will be left. Although the system may give victory and national prestige, the racial effect must be injurious. It may even be disastrous.
Certain definite action may, however, be taken to minimise the evils.
i. By increasing the birth-rate of the depleted class, and by taking every precaution that the greatest possible percentage of births in this class reach maturity.

.i98 EUGENICS REVIEW.
2. With these objects in view, all who wish to marry before leaving the country should be encouraged to do so, the fullest security being given that every wife shall be well cared for and properly looked after in the husband's absence.
3. The wives and children of those who have gone to the front should be well cared for and encouraged to maintain the advantage already gained in the struggle for existence.
4. Every possible means should be taken to prevent the economic disturbance caused by the war proving disastrous to those who, by reason of age or other cause, have been unable to go on active service.
Efforts upon these lines have already been made to deal with the industrial section of the population. The question of unemployment of the industrial classes, the care of families of soldiers and sailors at the front; these have, to a large extent, been met by various funds. But there is one direction in which little, if anything, has been done to ward off the disastrous effects of the war. The professional and middle classes are in a somewhat peculiar position. In normal times this great section of the population is well able to look after itself. A large number of persons belonging to the professional and educated classes will, in the event of the war being prolonged, be thrown out of employment. The younger unmarried men will, in most cases, obey the call to arms. Many married men of acceptable age will also join the fighting forces. But there will necessarily be a large number of men who for reason of age or infirmity, or for family reasons, will be unable to join the army or co-operate definitely for home defence. It must also be remembered that many professional men are enlisting in the ranks, and this group will require special treatment.
During the next few months many will inevitably have to give up the struggle to keep their business establishments going, and numbers of clerks, typists, and other employees, will be thrown out of work.
In normal times of peace and prosperity a very large number of the population are engaged in connection with businesses and industries built up on the basis of a high state

EUGENICS AND THE WAR.

I99,

of civilization. In time of war there is a rapid reversion to a
more primitive civilization. The field for the provision of luxuries and amusements is
one of the first to suffer. Later, many of the professions suffer from the cessation of business due to the restriction of credit.
Contracts are cancelled, new works are not started, and the kindred professions of architecture, engineering, surveying, accountancy and law must suffer. Many of those engaged irn work connected with art, journalism, the stage, amusements, etc., have already felt the pinch of poverty. The distress may extend rapidly through ever-widening circles as we draw near
to the winter.
It is now useless to criticise the fact that in this country
there has been a vast amount of employmiient in the nonproductive fields of work. The higher the pitch of civilization
the larger is the percentage of the population which can, in normal times, be legitimately employed in the non-productive works. Amusements and luxuries are naturally and rightly given up at a time of national crisis. The money spent upon these things is reserved for other objects. Economies have to be effected. Inevitable and right as this curtailment is, the immediate effect is to deprive vast numbers of the source of income upon which they and their families have been subsisting.
A complete reorganisation of employment amongst the educated and professional classes cannot be carried out without immense temporary local hardship.
Industrial distress is in many ways more easily dealt with, and may very possibly not be as severe as many anticipated. The State can do, and is doing, much towards the organisation of relief amongst the industrial classes. With the middle classes the problem is more difficult.
In normal times, it is realised that there is great difficulty in rendering assistance on sound lines to persons of middle class who are reduced in circumstances. In times, such as those we are approaching, the difficulties will be far greater.
Not only will the question arise of dealing with those who have been ruined by the economic conditions brought about by

200 EUGENICS REVIEW.
the war: it will also be necessary to consider the families of men of the professional classes who have enlisted in the ranks.
The pay is almost nominal.
In addition, there is an allowance of 12S. 6d. a week for the wife, or 17s. 6d. for a wife with two children. Assume the case of a man whose profession has been that of journalist, architect, author, artist, solicitor-a man who has had a public school education and who has brought up his family to a certain reasonable standard of comfort and requirements-how can this standard be maintained? Is it desirable that the standard which has been attained with much struggle and hard work through successive generations should be abandoned? If nothing is done to assist these families over the difficulties of the war period, the standard of culture and civilisation obtained by generations of struggle will inevitably be lost and in the loss the nation must suffer.
The critical period for most individuals may last only a few months, or at most a year. Much of the suffering will be due to the suddenness with which the blow will fall. In many cases time will give opportunity for adaptation to the new circumstances. This will be especially the case with those who have been unable to enlist. In the cases where the breadwinner has enlisted, and may be absent for a long period through imprisonment or illness, the help may be required for a longer period; but much suffering in the future
may be saved if just that help is given to maintain the family in its normal place in the social machine.
Realising the difficulties likely to arise, and the urgent racial necessity of conserving the good stock that remains, a group of eugenists arranged for a small conference, to which were invited the representatives of the principal professional institutions and the representatives of various bodies organising relief. At this conference it was made clear that the more highly organised professional institutions possess benevolent funds, and are fully capable of dealing with distress amongst their members in normal times. It also became apparent that, in very many cases, the larger professional firms and business houses were making the most adequate provision to meet those

EUGENICS AND THE WAR.

201

cases where their employees had volunteered for the front, often making arangements to continue to pay to the family of the volunteers the difference between the salaries they had been receiving and their war pay, at the same time guaranteeing to keep their billets open for them on their return. At the same time, it was admitted that, especially in the constructive and artistic professions the strain of the war was already apparent, and that, at no long distant date, abnomal conditions would be likely to arise in consequence of the war which might throw considerable strain on the benevolent funds of even the most wealthy professions. It was also realised that, while the functions of the benevolent funds themselves were, as a rule, limited to rendering financial assistance, it was clear that in the conditions of widespread economic disturbance which have arisen, certain forms of assistance other than merely monetary, would be imperatively needed, and that these special forms of assistance might more easily be provided by the co-operation of the professional institutions and the various societies organising
relief. It was therefore decided to form a body called the Profes-
sional Classes War Relief Council, to be composed of the representatives and secretaries of the principal professional institutions and of representatives of the various societies organising relief. The functions of this body will be mainly advisory and consultative. By inclusion in the Council of representatives of the bodies organising relief and representatives of the various professional institutions, there will be available a body eminently suited to co-ordinate efforts to relieve any distress which may arise within the middle classes.
The Council is not formed with the idea of interfering in any way with the benevolent funds of the professional institutions, or with the methods which may be adopted by the societies organising relief; but by co-operation the Council will probably provide certain centralised forms of assistance in the direction of temporary employment, hospitality, education, maternity aid and the like.
It is realised that, in the circumstances of the case, it will be absolutely essential to consider the family as a unit, and to deal

202 EUGENICS REVIEW.
with individual cases of distress on family lines. Assistance will be given to men to find new openings, as far as possible, in connection with their own professions, and the Council will be in a position to watch events and to approach the government, local authorities, or other bodies in the interests of members of the professional classes. They will urge that, as far as possible, employment shall be evenly distributed, and overtime should be avoided by bringing into employment as many persons as possible. To render the individual more mobile and to free him
from anxiety during the period of unemployment thie Council
may, in certain cases, by co-operation with the societies organising relief, give assistance to the women and children of the family, thus leaving the man free, if necessary, to seek unskilled temporary employment at a distance. The running expenses of the household can be reduced during the winter, hospitality being offered to the wife and younger children, the older children being sent to special schools, for it is hoped that arrangements may be made by which existing schools which might otherwise have to close through lack of pupils may be kept open by special arrangements.
Preparations are being made to carry these plans into effect. The Eugenics Education Society have, under the scheme, undertaken the organising of one important branch of this work, namely, the Maternity Assistance, and members of the Society, and readers of the REVIEW, are invited to co-operate in this work, which may be looked upon as being essentially eugenic.
It is proposed that the first maternity home should be arranged in London, and the Society are negotiating for a suitable hospital for the purpose. Doctor Scharleib, Doctor Florence Willey, Doctor H. Simson, and Doctor H. Barnes and several others have promised their services on the voluntary staff, thereby assuring the best possible treatment to the patients. A number of fully trained and qualified midwives and maternity nurses have also offered their services, and it is only necessary to provide sufficient funds for the cleaning and refitting of the hospital and to guarantee the wages of the soldiers' and sailors' wives and widows whom it is intended
should be employed as wardmaids.

EUGENICS AND THE WAR.

203

In addition to the special hospital, a number of maternity nurses have volunteered to give their assistance in private houses. It is also proposed to secure a certain number of country houses which may be fitted up as convalescent homes for those leaving the hospital. Several houses have already been offered, and it is only a question of time to take advantage of these offers, to organise the system of relief and thus to open out one definite line in which material assistance may be given to a class who deserve to receive every consideration from the community.

