THE NEED FOR WIDESPREAD EUGENIC
REFORM DURING RECONSTRUCTION.
By MAJOR LEONARD DARWIN.
ABOUT a year and a half ago in our REVIEW I placed before the Soiety certain arguments in favour of the belief thalt eugenists sh)ould look to quality rather than to quantity in their efforts to promote racial progress. Refiorms of m-any kinds, mioral, social, educational and financial, might now be introduced which would tend slowly to improve the in-born qualities of the nation as the generations succeeded each other; and of the practical measures mentioned on that occasion, perhaps the mtst important was the organisation of a strenuous endeavour to persuade the poior to limit the size of their families wvilth reg.ard to their p,robable powers of being able unaided to bring up their chilldren in comfort, whilst instituting an equally strenuous propagacnda in favour of lessening that limitastion oif faminlies which is now so} frequently practised by those who could afford to have more children iif they would take the well-lbeing rather than the social status olf th-e family into consideration. The eugenic
ar:guments in favour of such a p1roppaganda are based on the fact tihat a tendency must always exist in a society like ours foT the unfit to fall iatob the lowest economic strata, and for the more capable to ri!se into the
ranks of the well-to-do. It is true, no doubt, that if we only look to inherited wealth, it may be disputabl-e whether any coirrelation exists between ability of any kind and the possessibkn of riches acquired by previous generations; because such riches tend to keep the unfit in the rainks of the wealthy; a consideration which may, however, be more than counterbalanced as regards average results by the greater choice in selection in mairriage afforded by the possession of wealth whlilst young. Thiis question may, however, here be left undecided; for it is sufficient for my purpose if it be admitted that the class which has to rely in a measure on the Sitate, or in other words on their neighbours, for assisance in ordecr to meet the cost of rearing their families contains a somewhat higher proportion of the biolog;ically unfit than does the self-.supporting section of the oommunity; in whidh case any change in the relative rate
of multiplication of these two groups must in some degree affect the raicial qualities of future generations for good oir for evil. The necessity
for taking action in order to insure that those who are living independent lives shall on the wrhole multiply relatively more rapidly than the dependent and pairasitic types now seems to me to be even more uirgent than when I then spoke; partly, pethaps, because I have more cleaarly perceived certain immediate social advantages which would result from the sire of families being more closely related to, the wage-earning capacities of the parents. Though no dne could fail to recognise the advantages of lessening the distress amongst the poorest strata of society

146 EUGENICS REVIEW.
by redducing th,e numbers of their progeny, yet it was not to me equally
apparent that an increase in the size of the famrilies of the fit would be
ac-companied by immediate social and economic advantages. Any
increase in the fertility of the well-to-do, if insufficient to cause actual
poverty, would both incTease the proportion of the well educated in the ranks olf the nation, and also decrease the proportion of those acquiring large foatunes by inheritance; and the more equal distribution of both knowledge and wealth thus produced woulid be highly advantageous. If we could make the size of f-amilies bear a closer relationship to the probable future incomes of the parents, we should, in fact, produce gTeat
social and great racial benefits.
The main reason for the increase in our desire to see the question of ralcial progress adequately considered when peace comes is, however, the cotiriuance of the slaughter of our best types in this terrible war. The poit in coinnection with this subject which I wish to suggest for yor consideration to-day is thait, though in one sen-se quantity is of far less importance than quality, yet that the racial harm resulting from thihs immense destruction of the more fit cannot possibly be entirely obviated
by measures which would merely result in the preventio.n of paTenthood amongst that small fraction of the community who may fairly be described as the gxossly unfit, even if accompanied by measures tendcing to produce
an increase in fertility of another small group at the other end of the eugenic scale. Such eugenic measures would be highly desiraible in themselves; but unless we can intToduce reforms covering as wide a
racial field as that affected by the engines of wuar of our enemies, we must lloxk forward to racial deterioration, great or small, as being the inevitable result of this wair. We must not rest satisfied with, as it were, cutting off a thin slice of decay at the bottom, whilst put!ting on a no thicker layer of good material at the top, but we ought at the same time also to strive to initroduce measures having a more widesspreaid
action. There are, moreover, certain theoretical considerations which
point to the conclusion tha.t general measures of reform affecting large
sections of the community, even if they should seem. to be but feeble and patial in their action, might nevertheless under present conditions
produce gxeajter racial effects in certain directions than could be produced by the more obvious methods of dealling directly with individually selected groups of the grossly unfit or of the exceptionally fit. My retmarks on these theoretical points should be rega.rded, no doubt, as being merely suggestive and made with the purpose of eliciting discussion. If the theoretical consider,atibns which I shall put before you should not, hounever, be eventuaally destroyed by the criticism whdh I desire to evoke, i.t may be that they ought to have no inconsiderable itfluence in determining the eugenic policy which shou-ld be adopted in
certain directions.
Before passing on to discuss this somewhat tech-nical point, I wish, however, to safeguard myself against attack by erecting defensive works in certain quarters. It widl no doubt be urged that there i's no reason for supposing that those who ate capable of earning a sufficient incomne

THE NEED FOR WIDESPREAD EUGENIC REFORM.

I47

to secure their independence are likely to be possessed with innate
qualities above the average, and that we have, therefore, no ground for assuming that ain increase in their progeny would make for racial progress. It should perhaps be noted that eugenists certainly do not as.sert thait individuals who have acquired great wealth are likely to be charaicterised in an exceptional manner by the goodness of their quali-
ties; for wealth is not infrequently won in a most objectionable manner.
Wealth is, however, in my opinion, more often than not quite honestly acquiTed, and to bring the dishonest millionaixe into this discussion is in truth merely to cloud the issue. No doubt the scoundrel who swindles his neighbours or grinds down his employees, besides doing great immediate harm, is probably possessed with some bad innate qualities which he may transmit to posterity; but in view of the fact that men of this type form but a small proportion of the very wealthy class as a
whole, wdhilst the very weallthy foTm but a mi.nute proportion of the whole population, it seems that any increase or decrease in the fertility
of these high-class malefactors would have extremely little effect on the racial future of the nation. If we are to endeavour to introduce eugenic
refrms having the greatest possible effect, we shoulid, it is suggested, now dievote ouT miain attention to the contrast between the great mass of self-supporting citizens and that large body of individuals who standing alone would be incapable of supporting themselves. That thiis shiould be our attitude will become more apparent if I succeed in pTdving my case in regard to the great theoretital importance in racal matters of measures affecting the bulk of the population as compared with reforms only affecting extreme types.
Lookiang at the mas,s of the nation, wuhat are the qualities which
differentiate those who succeed in winning an independent livelihood fxom those who fail to do so? If economic pTospects are to be taken into
consideration in any degree in regard to parenthood, this is a question which has to be faced. No doubt many persons fail either as the result
of accidents of various kinds forr which they are in no sense responsible, or on accounit of what can only be described a.s exceptionally bad luck; but in a well ordered conmunity these individuals would be recogniseid and would be adequately dealt with without trenching oln their rights or
duties as potential parents. Certainly in regard to all those indicviduals whose inability to win their way in the world is due to causes other than unavoildable physical or mental defects, this is a class whose fertility the eugenist at all events does not wish to lessen. But in addition to either
bad luck or bad suroundings, may not cetain good inbown qualitiles mrilittate against success in life, and if so, will it not be the unsuccessful
who will possess these good qualities, it will be asked. Generosity uincontxolled by common-sense probably does often produce harmful effects amongs;t the very poor; but this can halrdly be described as a good oombimnation o,f qualities. And moreover, iit would be very hard to prove tit generosity, if wisely exercisedj is a quality wvhich on the average and in the long run does material hann to those who possess it. O.n the other hand, it will be urged that some baid innate qualities db mtake
for success in life. But granted thalt the wicked do prosper in small

I48 EUGENICS REVIEW.
numbers, there seems to me to be no reason to- believe that the poseessn
of any bad quadity does pay if we look to average resuiltks. What we
really ought to d-o is to concentrate our aetntion on the great bulk af society, and to endeavour to realise whatf are the qu'alities which aost often m;ake fo,r failure to win an inoome adequate to maintain a smiall family in comfort.
Regarding th,e question from this broad point of view, first to be noted amongst the causes of failure are miany foms of physical dcs-
aibility, inborn and not caused by surroundings, including iJl-heiaith of
many kindis. Then as to mental qualities, the chief opponents to success besides iniferior mental powers are dishonesty, l.aziness, bald temnper, incapacity to work with others, want df forethought, and a tendency to drink. Many will hold that neaatly all th.ese defects ari.se entirely from the results of bad surroundings, and although we believe this to be a thoroughly distorted view of the facts, yet we are xmore than willing to join foroes with these social reformers i:n fighting against the evils of bad environment. Bu-t we ask them in return td adoiit that the wobrld would be enormously benefited if the qualities whikhnmost dften drrag a man down to the lowest ecomonc strata of society were to have a less firm grip on mankind, and to consider whether this would not be the result of a xelative lowering of the fertility of thoise now found to be incapable of self-support.
No doubt there are many who will refuse to admit that the qualfties, and mOre especially the mental qualities, which are associated wiith god
or ill success aire passed on by natural inheritance from gen-eration to
generation in accordance with laws sufficiently well understood to enable us to base practical proposals thereon. Except in the case of glaring pbysical defects, science gives us no war,rant for interfering with the lives of human beings in rega,rd tb pairenthbxd, so it is ofteen asserted. But all knowledge, however i,t may be acquired, comes within the domain of science. Conclusions so widely accepted as not to need the services of the scientific expert for their proof or elucidation generally form the very basai's oin whicth the wiole scientific superstrucature ultimately rests, anid such conclusions are as scientific as those established by means of the most modern appliances. For example, it is doubtless difficult "to impress on the mind o.f those who have not attended to the subject the ful,l conviction of the fo:rce of inheritance whicsh is slowly acquired by rearing animals, by studying the many treatises which have been published o,n the various doTnestic animals, and by conversation with breeders "1; yet, when this full conviction has been acquired, it is none the less scientific because it has not been directly drawn from the transaction,s of learned societies. The breeder's arguments may take the form of asking " what would be the chance of winning a prize if two infeior animals were paired together '1; but his knowledge must nolt be neglected becau-s-e he does not express himself in technical scientific phLrases. Further scientific investigation will undoubtedly greatly improve the breeder's art; but that art, which is founded on beliefs, proved to be true
I Vari-ation under Domestication. Darwin I, pp.446-448.

THE NEED FOR WIDESPREAD EUGENIC REFORM.

I49

by centuri;es of criticism, cannot possibly be neglected on the ground th-at it is not scientific. With .regard to all animals but man, it is only the
utterly ignorant who would wish to leave the force of natural inheritance
out of account; and science at all events teaches us that man is closely allied to the rest of the animal creaton.
The first steps in eugenic tbwought were doubtless founded on ideas acquired in consequence of the domestication of animrals, as may be
proved by reference *to certain early classical writings; for breeders have known for many centuries that, in Galton's words, " the physical structure of future generations is as plastic as clay under " their control, no doubt within certain limits.' The animal breeder's precepts might indeed have formed the main basis for the eugenic pxropaganda but for two solid objections to this method of advocacy. In the first place all references to arguments based on our kinship with other animals are apt to arouse opposition, for somewhat the same reasons, perhaps, that many weak-minded persons are annoyed at references to their less prosperous relations; and even if the allusions often made to the methods of the stockyard in reply to our arguments are silly and unconvincing, yet it is best if possible to avoid pl.acing a weapon in the enemy's hands. Then again-and thi.s is a far more important point-it is obvious that differences between men and the lower animals do exist which make the dbmestication of animails a dangerous guide as regards eugenic reform. No doubt nearly all well-educated persons now believe in the fact of organic evolution; and, once this is admitted, the lessons learnt by a study of animal life cannot be passed by as being wholly irrelevant to humain affairs. But however freely this conclusion -may be accepted, it makes it none the less certain that the moral obligations thrown on men create an. undeniable distinction between them and all other animals, and that these obligations absoluttely preclude the adoption of many of the! methods of the stockyard in human affairs. No eugenist reconmends either compulsory marriage or the murder of the unfit, and it is this fact which creates ithat wide gap which we all know must separate the methods of the breeder of animals from the methods of eugenic reform.
Although the presence of a barrier may be obvious to us all, yet it often happens that until the impediment is examined in all its details, we caninot judge to what extent it ought to be permitted to stand in the way of our progress. Even at the risk of arousing certain susceptibilities, a few more words concerning the lessons which may or may not be lea,rnt from animal life seem necessary. A prize bull during the course of hais life may have as many as two hundred offspring; and if e.ach one of his progeny wvere to owe, say, £s of its value to its parentage, then we see that on this account the bull would be worth Xi,ooo, less the cost of his maintenance. We value a bull in fact mainly on account of that probable excess in the value of his progeny which is due to his exceptional physical merits. On the other hand, in considering the value to
the world of a man of exceptional qualities, we as a rule look only at tihe beneficial effects which he may produce on the moral, mental and
I Memories of My Life. Galton, p. 312.

15o. EUGENICS REVIEW.
physical environment of his neighbours and of posterity. Even if a ma
should excel most of his contemporaries by bu.t little in character or ability, yet that small excess might be of great value to mankind, because of the enormous numbers of persons who, might in consequence be beneficially affected. The prize bull and the prize man both owe their value to their superiority over their contemporaries; but as in the one case attention is often only focussed on the direct physical influence on the progeny, and in the other case generally only on the indirect mental influence on others, it follows that men and animals may be, in fact, valued by very different standards.
Whilst fully admitting that distinctions between human and animal values do exist, and whilst fully recognising the reasons why men of exceptionally valuable qualities will be needed in the coming generations, yet eugenists feel that these facts merely strengt-hen their desire to take such 'steps as will tend to secure to posterity the benefits to be derived from the influences of great tnen. Our descendants will be, like ourselves, the product of the then existing environment when acting on the inborn natures of the human raw material exposed to its influences; and as we can do but very little to affect the environment of the human. race in the distant future, our main effort must now {be to transmit to posterity such a stream of human raw material as will be most likely in good surroundings to give rise to the greatest number of great men and to the least nuinber of bad men. And the question is, What steps can
we now take so as best to insure this result ?
Here it is necessary to enter on the more theoretical and speculative parts of my argument. In doing so, let us in the first plaice imagine any group of individuals to be divided into classes in accordance with the measurements of their inborn qualities; that is, in accordance with the measurements of the qualities which they would have dissplayed had they all been brought up in exactly similar surroundings. To use an educational simile, let it be assumed that the individual at the top of the list is given seven miarks to the good, whilst the individual at ;the bottom is awarded seven ba.d marks, zero represen,ting the mean or average individual, these marks being awarded in accordance with their physical measurements. Bot-h theoretical considerations and practical investiga.tions indicate that if, in these circumstances, we were to compare the top class, including all those receiving between five an.d seven marks to the good (and therefore averaging approximately six marks) with a lower class including those with between one and three marks to the good (and therefore approximately averaging two marks), it would be found that this lower class was goo times as numerous as the top class.1 If we were considering the qualities which lead to success in life, the top class woul!d include all men who could, according to Galton, be fai,rly described as " eminent," w-hilst those in the lower class might peThaps be fairly grouped under the title of " useful citizens." We see, therefore, that the
1 Galton's Hereditary Genius, p. 30. I have for simplicity neglected his very small top and bottom classes X and x. Marks at examinations are probably given more in accordance with the rarity of the type than with the measurements, and the use of the word " marks" is, therefore, not here altogether happy.

THE NEED FOR WIDESPREAD EUGENIC REFORM.

I51

eminent man is goo times as rare a being as is the useful citizen, whilst his good qualities, if they could be physically nieasured, would be seen
to be on.ly three times as great; and what we want to know in regard to
eu-genic questions is whether we ought in such a case to look to the figure
of goo, representing the relative rarity of the two types of individuals, or to the figure of 3, representing the relative measurements of their
qualities, or, if not, by what other methods of comparison ought we to be guided? In any thorough investigation of the various problems con-
nected with parenthood thus presented for consideration, much debatable
ground would (have to be covered. Differences of opinion have no doubt
arisen between the adherents of the sta.tistic-al and Mendelian methods of enquiry; but as my confident belief is that when the whole truth. is known, neither party will have to comipletely abandon any of their fundamental tenets, it will be on the assumption that this is the case that these difficult questions will here be briefly discussed.
In the present state of our knowledge it may be safely assumed tha.t certain qualities will characterise every individual springing from a germ oontaining a certain heritable ingredient; or, in Mendelian phraseology, we know that certain characters are dependent on a single dominant factor and a-re inherited accoTdingly. Since no other individuals besides those endowed with this ingredient or dominant factor can display the quality in question, it follows that if all the individuals thus characterised were to be exterminated, then there would be no reason. to suppose that any persons possessing the quality in question would ever appear on earth again'; whereas if the fertility of the individuals proved by their qualities to be the carriers of this dominant factor were to be increased, the number of persons thus characterised would consequently be increased in future generations. In fact in cases like brachydactyly and other peculiarities, mostly of a pathological character, which are known to be due to the presence of a single dominant factor, there can be no doubts as to, the theoretical aspects of the eugenic problems concerning parenthood. We need not consider whether the ailment is rare or frequent; for all that ha.s to be decided, in the case of bad qualities for example, is whether the defect in question is sufficiently injurious to justify either the actual prevention of parenthood or the demand for that self-sacrifice whlich is necessary in the- case of the voluntary renunciation of parenthood. The desi.red end can certainly be attained, and it is only a question whether it is worth the cost of attaining it. Then as to a character which is only displayed when an individual fai.ls to receive a certain ingredient from both parents, that is in the case of a quality dependent on a single recessive Mendelian factor, the same considerations are generally applicable. Here, however, the benefici.al results obtainable from interfering with parenthood would be far slower in making their appearance; because the recessive facto; may be present in an individual without its being possible to detect its presence by his qualities. A harmful recessive factor can be slowly reduced in numbers by selective breeding, and all that can be done is to persevere in that process. In the case of qualities dependent on a single factor, or on a very small number of

152 EUGENICS REVIEW.
fac.tors, the line of demarcation between those who certainly possess the quality in question and those who do not or may not do so, is generally
well marked, and all theoretical problems concerning selective breeding
are in these cases as simple as possible.
If we turn oux attention to the complex qualities which lead to success
in life, however that success may be measured, this simplicity entirely
vanishes. Every shade of mental capacity exists between that possessed
by a born leader of men on the one hand, and that possessed by a man who fails in all he attempts or who attempts nothing, on the other; the genius rarely gives rise to a genius amongst his immediate descendants; and great achievements always seem to require a combination of several qualities, including reasoning power, concentration of mind, energy, faculty of observation, etc., each of which may be found without the others being present. From all this we judge that success in life can never be due to the presence either of any one or of but few Mendelian factors. Another reason for supposing that we are here dealing with a more or less fortuitolus com-
hination, of a considerable number of independent factors is that it can be proved that where such conditions exist, the individuals composing a population, ef arranged in accordance with the measurements of the character or quality in question, would be distributed about a mean according to the well-known law of error; a distribution which generally coincides fairly closely with that actually existing amongst human beings whatever may be the test of capacity by which they are arranged. Where a large number of factors are involved, as in the case of economic success, the Mendelian method of investigation fails, and we are d!riven in such cases to rely wholly on the statistical method of enquiry. Now statistical enquiries have established the fact that when, for example, the relative excess above the mean in any quality of two individuals is as 3 to i, then this same ratio will continue to exist between the average qualities of their descendants, other things being equal; the reason being that the same proportional regression to the mean will take place in both cases. In other words, if as has been seen, the eminent man has qualities measuring three times as much
as those possessed by the useful citizen, the dose of good qualities, so to speak, which the eminent man will pass on to posterity will 'be three times as big by measurement as that passed on by the useful citizen.
We must not, however, remain satisfied with merely estimating the relative magnitudes of the natural legacies which will be left to posterity in the shape of their progeny by persons of different grades of qualities, but we must also consider how these legacies will be distributed amongst the populations of the future. In the case of domestic animals the progeny of selected individuals may be kept aapart, and if no interbreeding with inferior types is then permitted, the selected good stock will be kep.t as far as possible in all its purity. But with man selective bree-dint of this kind does not take place, and there is, therefore, a constant tendency for marriages uncontrolled by such selective influences to produce a uniform distribution of these transmitted qualities throughout a nation. From various causes differences in average abilities doubtless do arise within a nation between different groups; but it will be a, first approximation to the truth to assume that the good qualities left as a

THE NEED FOR WIDESPREAD EUGENIC REFORM.

153

legacy to the nation by men of eminence will in a few generations be spread nearly uniformly over the whole surface of the nation.
Now, if it be true that the value' to the nation of the future of e-ach descendant of an eminent man is on an average three times as great as that of the descendant of the useful citizen, we must also remember that
it is equally true that these good citizens are goo times a.s numerous as
are the men of eminence. The good inheritance of all the men of
eminence added together would make but an imperceptibly thin layer if
sp,read uniformly over the whole suirface of the nation of the future; whilst the collective effect of the inheritance of the good citizenis of to-
day, if it could be separately estimated, would be seen to have a marked
effect on posterity. If any eugenic tendency were to be brought into operation which would have the effect of increasing the fertility of only one out of every three hundred selected at random of the useful citizen class, yet in o,rder to produce a like bene.ficial influence on posterity by affecting persons of the eminent class, such a tendenqy would have to affect every single individual in that class. We thus see that a widespread campaign directed towards increasing the rate of multiplication of the great mass of those who are above the average in qualities hel,d to be desirable, or of diminishing the fertility of the possessors of qualities hel,d to be undesirable, might have a considerably greater beneficial
effect in regard to the average qualities of the nation of the futuLre than could result from any attempt to focus attention in re-gard to parenthood
on the rare and exceptional individuals at either end of the scale of mexit. In rega-rd to immediate social results, it is doubtless widely recog-
nised that the bulk of our efforts should be directed towards reforms intended to affect the great mass of society; and the foregoing considerations raise the question whether the same rule should not also guide us in regard to -reforms aiming at racial improvements. Those who attach, great importance to the value to! the world of men of genius will not, however, readily perceive that their wish for the appearance of more great lights in future generations might also be best met by general measures affecting the fertility of the. gTeat mass of the nation rather than by efforts to- deal with selected individuals, a point which. may perhaps be roughly illustrated in the folloiwing manner. Imagine a dozen boxes
each filled with an equal numbeT of black and white balls, and imagine one ball being selected from each box by chance. Now it is easy to see that the probability of thus selecting a dozen white balls and no single black ball would be exceedingly small. But this is aibout the same probajbility as that of an infant selected by chance out of a whole nation growing up to become a person of eminence; and, moreover, if or in so far as it is true that the appearance of a man of eminence is due to the chance collection in one individual out of a homogeneous group of parents of all the necessary Mendelian factors, the Teason why so few persons of eminence are born is also thus in a manner illustrated. It is true tha.t such a selection of a group of balls from boxes illustrates in a most inadequate manner the grouping together of Mendelian factors in
1 As to the legitimacy of here introducing the idea of value, see note at the end of the paper.

154 EUGENICS REVIEW.
a single germ; for the presence of recessive factors, which might have been indicated by black balls in some way rendered invisible by their association with white balls, has been in no way represented. But if the proportion of the white balls in each of the boxes were to be increased, we do see that it is obvious that the chance of drawing nothing but white
balls in a chance selection from all the boxes would thus also be increased; and in spite of the inaccuracy of the analogy it may thus be made more apparent why a rise in the future in the average qualities of mankind would result in an increase in the number of men of the type which would now be classed as eminent then making their appearance. Assuming no selective influences to be at work, the formation of a new generation may be likened to the selected balls being thrown back pellmell into the boxes and another chance selection of balls being then made from them. We have seen that in exceedingly few cases would nothing
but white balls be drawn, and consequently, even though those selected were all white, their return to the boxes would change the proportion of white and black therein but very littl.e; just as it seems likely that if -the
racial effect on future generations of the progeny of eminent men coulq
be separately estimated, it would be seen that these effects.were very minute, and also that ultimately the production of men of genius would thus be rendered only very slightly more probable. The drawing from the boxes of groups consisting for example of say seven. white and five black balls would be a frequent event, and if the frequency of this event were by some magical pTocess to be proportionately increased, the return of these groups would make a material effect on the proportion of black and white balls in the boxes, and consequently of the chance of nothing but white balls being obtained at a subsequent drawing; and in this way it may be seen why it is likely that even a moderate increase in the fertility of the great mass of useful citizens would not only be the best means of raising the level of mankind in the future, but that it would also increase the proportion of men o.f genius in. the ranks of posterity.
A tacit assumption has been made in the foregoing argument which may be open to criticism, namely, that each one of the Mendelian factors which are necessaiy in combi.nation for the production of a man of eminence, would, if appearing alone, give rise to a desirable quality; for if this law did not geneTally hold good, that is, if any one of these factors necessary as the ingredients of genius were by itself to give rise to an undesirable quality, then it would follow that such a necessary factor would' be in a measure eliminated by any general raising of the human standard, and that men of genius might in consequence appear less often, not more often in future generations. All the qualities which can be separately distinguished as being constantly possessed by great men, such as energy, perseverance, concentration, memory, width of outlook, etc., would, -however, unquestionably be useful standing alone; and it seems therefore a highly probable assxnption that each of the ingredients of genius, would, if appearing as a'separate quality, as a rule be held to be desiraible. The fact, if it be a fact, that men of great ability ofte-n have weak constitutions has no doubt frequently been brought forward as if it presented a serious obstacle in the path of eugenic

THE NEED FOR WIDESPREAD EUGENIC REFORM.

I55

reform. The greatest leaders in war and in commerce, however, have generally been exceptionally healthy; whilst as regards the ill-health of
the literary or scientific genius, it may be partly or wholly explicable
without ireference to any correlation between innate mental and physical qualities. Poor constitutions often make young people devote themselves
to intellectual pursuits in. preference to outdoor exercises; and the chances o,f a man of exceptional innate intellectual capacity making his maTk in the world are consequently somewhat increased if he is blessed with a certain degree of physical ill-health. There is, I believe, a period in the life of many individuals when their ambitions might be satisfied in many different ways; and good health will often lead to that satisfaction
being obtained on paths leading to no enduring fame. When the youth of a nation are all keenly aroused in a certain direction, then there will appear one of those apparently inexplicable outbursts of genius in that direction; whilst at other times many mute inglorious Miltons will be found not only behind the plough, but also in society and in the hunting field. That a certain connection should exist between genius and illhealth need cause but little surprise, neither should it lead us to doubt that widespread racial progress will generally be accompanied by a
greater output of great men.
It nevertheless may be a fact that great sensitiveness to mental
impressions is apt to be to a certain extent associated with oJer-sensitive-
ness to physical influences, in which case other considerations have to be
held in view. It is certain that the men of the most supreme genius have left but very few, descendants behind them; and this want of fertility on their part may have been due to correlated iniherent physical defects. But if any such relationship does exist between inherent good mental qualities and inherent physical inferiority, we here find little reason for
holding that the best way of now increasing the number of men of albility destined to appear ih future generations would be to concentrate our attention on increasing the fertility of the men of ability of to-day. Those who believe that genius and ill-health are correlated and who attach enormous importance to the effect of men of genius on the world, should consider whether the logical conclusion of their premises would not be a, demand for an endeavour to lower the average hea-lth of the nation. The value to the community of good health is, however, so enormous that very few would hesitate in order to secure it to face a highly disputable probability of a diminution in the number of men of genius to appear in the future. And in support of this view, may I have the temerity to suggest that the influence of these rare beings has often been exaggerated? We have all noticed the ease with which the place of some wholly "indispensable " person is usually filled on his retirement; and this is but one illustration of the general law that we look too much to the relative rarity of the different grades of human beings and too little to their relative measurements. When fo.rced to select from a lower and wider grade of human beings, we accept the necessary lowering of standard very reluctantly, partly because we do not perceive how slight may be the lowering necessary to open out this wider

156 EUGENICS REVIEW.
field. It is no doubt questionable to what extent the average marks, as I have somewhat inappropriately called them, awarded to the different grade.s really represent relative capacities or values, even though they are correct as indications of relative physical measurements. But it may be worth noting that the divergence between relative marks or measurements and relative rarity increases rapidly as we approach the extremes of fitness or unfitness. When comparing a class of human beings receiving on the average two marks to the good with a top class receiving on the average six marks to the good, we have seen that though the marks given to the top class are three tim-es as many as those given to the lower class, ye.t that the relative rarity of these abler individuals as compared with their more mediocre companions is as goo to I. But if we were to compare this same lower cdlass with a smaller top class, containing persons winning on an average not 6 but 6j marks to the good, we should find that the relative rarity had risen to about 30,000 to i; and i-t is this relative rarity which mainly impresses itself on our minds and influences us. The next best men to the men -of genius, though decidedly inferior, may not be nearly as far behind him as we are inclined to ibelieve. In any case a possible correlation between ill-health and ability, if it exists, seems to afford no justification whatever for concentrating our attention on cases of exceptional albility in matters of eugenic reform.
In this discussion only the extreme types at one end of the scale, n.atnely, the extremely fit, have thus far been considered; though. it is possible that the principles suggested for consideration might be just as important in their application to the extremely unfit. The following purely hypothetical illustration may perhaps be permissible merely for
the sake of making this possibility more apparent. According to the information available, insanity has been increasing in recent years in England and still more in Ireland; whilst it is well known that a generation or two ago there was a great amount of emigration from both islands, though mo.re from Ireland. This increase of insanity may be in truth but a statistical increase; or, in other words, it may be of such a nature as to give no real indication of either a deterioration in environment or a decline in inherent qualities. But it is, on the other hand, possible that it may be partly due to the better types having left these islands in considerable numbers, to a consequent general lowering of the average, and to the resulting increase in the frequency with which certain Mendelian factors necessary to give- rise to the insane diathesis have been brough-t together. Should this be even a partially correct illustration of the methods of inheritance frequently found in operation, then not only insanity but many other gross defects would be made to appear less frequently by reforms producing a general rise in human standards.
In the foregoing contrast between the effects of eugenic reforms intended to cover wide fields and those only affecting extreme types, I have endeavoured to represent this topic as being a subject for discussion rather than as one about which there can be no doubts; and this for two reasons. In the first place, before a final decision could be reached the questions involved would need a more searching analysis, and one

THE NEED FOR WIDESPREAD EUGENIC REFORM.

'57

probably comprising more mathematical reasoning than has here been
attempted. Then, again, I regret to find myself somewhat at variance with the views advocated by Sir Francis Galton, if I understand them
aright; for in his Huxley lecture especially he strongly insisted on the
advantages to be gained by endeavouring to increase the fertility of the highest types. In regard to measures dealing with small numbers, it no doubt seems indisputable that these few should be selected with the
greatest care from those at the top; and Gal-ton proved that this is even more true than general considerations would lead one to believe, especially if the end to be gained is the production of great men in the next generation. If it were right and practicable to keep selected human stock as pure as animal stock and thus to create a race of super-men, then Galton's argument would be unanswerable; though even on that supposition he did not, as it seems to me, weigh with sufficient care the ultimate adva!ntages of, as it were, adding to the population at the top as compared with a general raising of the level of the whole population. If by means of reforms a.pplicable to great numbers, all mankind could be
raised one class in the sc.ale of merit, or if all the figures in Galton's tables could be pushed one column to the right,l not o-nly would the numbers in the existing higher classes be greatly increased, but the beneficia.l change would be equally apparent in every grade. Had Galton not assumed the existence oif perfect assortive mating for the purpose of making his argument more clear, had he at all events made the more accurate assumption that marriages are in no way selective, and had more been then known concerning Mendelism, he might have been led to attach less importance to looking mainly to a selected few. Then, again, he did not consider whether the methods which would produce the greatest number of great men in the next generation werealso those likely to produce the same result in the generations of the more distant future. Even if we are looking only to t-he output of men
of geniu*, we ought to consider how to produce the race most likely as
,the result of its inborn qualities to be productive in this respect; and, if there is to be no enforced selective mating, do-es it not appear proibable that wide measures of eugenic reform, including large numbers within their nets, would in the end do more for mankind than any attempt to deal! with individually selected groups? ' This is the question here submitted for your consideration.
The conclusions reached during or suggested by this enquiry may be sumnmed up as follows: Except in regard to the cases (feeble-mindedness probably included) where human qualities are dependent on single or but few Mendelian factors, general measures affecting large numbers seem to be, at present more likely to be effective in promoting racial progress than are any endeavours to promote or restrict the fertility of
extreme types. If a wide field of eugenic action is to be covered, we must seek for some easily recognised line of demarcation between the
types of individuals whose rates of multiplication ought to be increased and those amongst whom p.arenthood should be diminished or prohibited.

1 Essays in Eugenics. Galton, p. 14.

158 EUGENICS REVIEW.
The boundary here suggested for consideration is that between those who have succeeded in winning an independent existence and those who have
failed to do so. It is true that this boundary will remain'ill-defined until a definite meaning has been attached to the word "independent," and that no such definition has been here attempted. No hesitation will, however, be felt, in the case of large numbers of individuals, in deciding
to which of these two classes they should be assigned, and here will be the best field for all our eugenic efforts for some time to come; for it will be in regard to these unquestionable types that there will be most need for taking action. The adoption of any such rule would no doubt
result in action being sometimes taken which would be held to be unjust
could all the facts be known; but a regard for our own safety makes us
approve the rule that the captain who6 has lost his ship in doubtful circumstances shall be deprived of his command, and in like manner our regard for the welfare of posterity justifies in douibtful cases the applica-
tion of genetal rules which may inflict some unmerited suffering on a limited number of individuals. To what extent failure to win an inde-
pendent livelihood is correlated with inferior inborn q'ualities, and to
what extent with inferior environment, will probably ever remain an insoluble problem; but as success in life is certainly promoted by both good surroundings and good inborn qualities, it follows that heredity m.ust count for something in selecting out the failures from the successes; and even if natural inheritance should count for but little, which we deny, but which certain social reformers believe, this would merely mean that eugenic reform would be slow in its action, and not that it would be without any racial results. The main argument in favour of establishing this line of demarcation between the fields of positive and negative eugenics, that is in favour of endeavouring to reduce the size of families where poverty forbids an economically independent existence, and of increasing the fertility of -the well-to-do is that, as regards immediate results, a more uniformin distribution of wealth and culture would thus be produced, and that, as regards ultimate results, those inborn qualities which facilitate success in life would thus be made to appear in greater measure in future generations and in this way our descendants would be made on the whole more prosperous than ourselves. The sterilisation of the grossly unfit, as advocated in America, and the encouragement of the fertility otf the exceptionally fit by the endowment of a specially selected few, are measures, in so far as condemned, only to be condemned on ethical or practical grounds, and if we should find our range of commendable action thus limited in regard to these extreme types, consolation may be found in the view here suggested for consideration, namely, that eugenic measures affecting the bulk of the population may well have greater beneficial racial effects both as regards the raising of the average standards of mankind and as to the production of men of genius or great ability in the future. In fact what I have wished to point out is that though we should certainly follow the lead of the best breeders in invariably striving to keep the whole of their stock up to a high general level, yet since selective mating and breeding

THE NEED FOR WIDESPREAD EUGENIC REFORM.

159

only from highly selected male animals cannot be imitated in human
affairs, animal analogies must not prevent us from looking mainly to the great bulk of the nation in regard to all questions connected with parent-
hood. These theo.retical considerations in fact confirm us in our deter-
mination to push on with wide-reaching eugenic measures affecting large
numbers; and these measures should include the inculcation of the ideal of parental responsibility, in which aim the obligation to obtain health certificates before marriage and the better enfoercement of allowances to mothers from illegitimate fathers would be likely to be of great use; the transfer of wealth from non-parents to parents within each economic group by
changes in the assessment of income tax and death duties; the lessening
of the apprehensions of parents as to the welfare of their children by further aids to secondary education; the rigid enforcement of laws against overcrowding and insanitary dwellings if combined with some method available in suitable cases for preventing parenthood amongst young couples proved to be permanently incapable of living a decent life unaided; the prohibition of the immigration of undesirable aliens; the availability of adequate housing accommodation at economic rents; and the lessening of the fertility of certain classes, such a.s
criminals, habitual drunkards and unemployables. Reforms such as these would not only make the whole rank and file of the future more
prosperous, but as the result of such wide-acting measures, more leaders of all grades would be made to appear in the future to lead the nation onwards in the path of progress.

NoTE.-The following table, based on that given in Galton's " Hereditary Genius," may be of interest in connection with these theoretical speculations

CLASSIFICATION ACCORDING TO NATURAL GiFTs. No AsSORTIVE MATING.

I. 2. 3. 4. 5-

Grades "marks"or

average measure-
ments of parents above or below

Number in each million of popu-
lation.

mean.

Products ofCols. Relativevalues
I & 2, indicating of offspring of relative values to all in each posterity of total grade andofall progeny of grade above or below.

Ratio of total of Col. 3 to
figures in Cot. 4.

or class.

II
2i 3i 4i
51 6o over 7

256,791 I61,279 63,56315,696
2,423 233 14 1

128,395 24I,9I8 158,907
54,936
I0,903
I28i 9' 8

596,439 468,044 226,126 67,219 I2,283
1,380 99 8

One in I.O
,, 1.3 ,,9 2.6
99 9.0
,, 49.0 i, 432.0 ,, 6025.0
(?)

TToottaall S5o0o0,,o0o0o0

559966,,443399

i6o EUGENICS REVIEW.

T'he contrast here mainly to be held in view is that between methods of

promoting racial progress dependent upon general legislation affecting the

fertility of whole classes indiscriminately, and efforts to affect the fertility of a

number of individuals, selected because of their individual merits or demerits;

the qualities desired being assumed to be distributed according to the normal

law of error.

It has been assumed that all qualities are measured by physical measure-

ments, just as height is measured by feet and inches. If no assortive mating

takes place, all inherited qualities dependent on a considerable number

of uncorrelated factors are constantly being gradually distributed

throughout the whole community as the generations succeed each other; and the

distribution of qualities is constantly being brought back to the normal distribu-

tion in spite of any selection that may be taking place. The ultimate effeot of

selection
therefore,physical

is in these circumstances merely measurements of the community.

toThreaisfeigourresloiwnercotlheumnav,erage

of

the

give a correct indication of the relative effects, which would be produced by

selection in the different grades, on the average physical measurements of

posterity.

Such physical measurements do not, however, necessarily represent the

relative value to mankind of the individuals measured; just as the relative value

of a race-horse who wins by a neck and that of the losers in the race is not

measured by their relative speeds. This latter is, however, hardly a happy

illustration; for it is value in utility and not value in exchange that should be

here heldc in view. The discordance between the numerical grading as shown in

column i and therelative average values of the individuals classified is especially

noticeable in regard to mental qualities; the underlying reason being that the physical giant does not by his presence affect the physical growth of his neigh-

bours, whilst the mental giant may add greatly to the mental equipment of

millions of other human beings.

We have seen that, in the absence of assortive mating, selection may increase

tahffeecatvinegratg%ee

of the physical measurements numerical distribution of the

of the grades.

community But if so

without ultimately the average value

of the individuals composing the community will certainly increase with some

relationship to, though not necessarily proportionately with, the increase in

these physical measurements. Thus in these circumstances the column 3 do give a correct indication of the relative benefit or injury

figures in
to the race

in the distant future of now increasing or decreasing the progeny in the different

grades.

Where there is assortive mating this conclusion may no longer hold good;

because selection may then bring about a change between the proportion of the numbers in the different grades. Intermarriage may no longer keep re-establish-

ing a normal distribution. If those near the top of the scale in mental attributes

are vastly more valuable than is indicated by their numerical grading, then an

increase in the numbers in these top classes would be beneficial even if the

average of the numbers in column 3 were to remain unaltered, the average

measurements of those in the lower classes being diminished. But as we know

that normal distribution is as a fact, approximately maintained, we may avoid

this difficulty and yet obtain a first approximation to the truth by assuming that

no assortive mating takes place.

It may be worth noting that it is probably only in regard to those very near

the top of the scale that the grading gives a very inoorrect idea of relative
values; for it is only such as these who have a widespread influence on others.

This discordance is, moreover, far less in the case of those near the bottom of

the scale; for the giants of iniquity and ignorance destroy human knowledge in a manner in the least

do not degree

as a rule actually
comparable to the

way in which men of genius add to it. It was for this reason presumably that

tGalton held that it was more important to increase the fertility of the very fit than to decrease the fertility of the very unfit. Lastly it may be noted that since the redistribution of qualities by intermarriage is only slowly affected, the immediate results of increasing the fertility of the higher grades would be somewhat greater than that indicated by the above table, even in the absence of

assortive mating.

The following are the conclusions arrived at, assuming assortive mating to be non-existent :-If any measure were to be adopted which would only affect

THE NEED FOR WIDESPREAD EUGENIC REFORM.

I6I

the fertility of a definite number of individuals, these persons, as has already been remarked, certainly should be chosen from amongst those as near as possible to the top or bottom of the scale, as the case may be, in order to produce the greatest racial results. This is even more necessary if assortive mating does exist.
If any measure were to be adopted which would only affect all those above
a given standard of merit (or a definite proportion thereof selected at random) then in order to produce the greatest results, the line of demarcation between the affected and the unaffected should be the mean; or, in other words, general measures tending to increase the fertility of all alike should be applied to all
above the average and to none below it.
If mankind could be sorted out into classes as set forth in the above table, and if a measure were to be introduced which would tend to affect the fertility of all the individuals of only one such class, then it will be seen that the greatest result to posterity would be produced if the one class affected was that averaging xi marks.
If a choice had to be made between a measure affecting all individuals above or below a certain standard, and a measure affeoting a certain definite proportion selected at random of all the individuals either above or below the mean, the problem becomes very complex. Let the standard selected be, for example, all those in and above grade 5j, in which case, as we see, this specially selected group would number 248 per million, or about 12,000 in 50,ooo,ooo. The last column indicates that, none below the mean being affected, the value of the
progeny of this selected group would be Ih of the total value of the progeny of
all above the mean; and it follows that if one in 432 of all above the mean (1,200 per million, or 6o,ooo per 5o,ooo,ooo) were affected as reaards fertility to the same extent as the selected group, then the racial results on posterity would
be identical. Which is the more probable, that the best I2,000 could be specially
selected and all influenced in regard to fertility, or that 6o,ooo out of the 25,000,000 above the mean could thus be affected by general legislation?
Many considerations have to be held in view in considering this point. In the first place the relative practicability of the two schemes must not be overlooked. To tax the whole population in order to endow a comparatively small number with a view to encouraging parenthood would arouse keen opposition; because the mass taxed would be in no way immediately and directly benefited. On the other hand, certain general legislation, such as taxing the unmarried for the benefit of parents, would be less resented. The segregation of small numbers of the selected unfit can, no doubt, be advocated and defended on the grounds of the direct benefits thus at once conferred on society. Assuming the
prejudices against selection to be overoome, any attempt to select out all the indivi-
duals belonging to these top classes would nevertheless certainly fail for several reasons. The methods of selection would inevitably be faulty; for many good and bad qualities would be wholly ignored, and, even if there were no actual jobbery or favouritism-a highly improbable supposition-decisions would frequently be erroneous. Prizes would be, as it were, given for success in many different subjects; but this would not necessarily affect the ultimate racial results. The
qualities deciding the choice would in many cases depend largely on questions of environment, and many would be accepted belonging to lower natural classes, and many in the top classes would be overlooked. Moreover, even if rightly selected, the fertility of only a small proportion of those chosen would actually
be influenced. For example, taking the case of the award of a monetary grant to selected individuals on marriage, then some would marry and be sterile, whilst others would produce no more progeny (or even possibly fewer progeny) than if no such stimulus to marriage had been forthooming. Even if the whole award were made to be dependent on the number of children appearing, this would be no guarantee that it was only given on account of children appearing because of the award. If an actual increase of progeny were only to be produced in one case out of five awards, or if the efficiency of the process were thus decreased fivefold, then 6o,ooo would have to be selected in order to affect the
fertility of 12,000 persons; and what we have to consider in the foregoing
example, when considering ultimate effects, is which would be the more difficult,
selecting these 6o,ooo out of the total population of so,ooo,ooo, or introducing
general legislation which would have the effect of actually inCreasing the fertility of 6o,ooo individuals out of the 25,000,000 above the mean, or more

I62 EUGENICS REVIEW.
accurately affecting one in 432 of those above mediocrity. The choice is cer-
tainly doubtful; but the smaller the number of those individually selected, the
more surely would general legislation become the more effective method of producing enduring racial improvement.
Possibly the following are the most importltnt conclusions to be adduced from this method of regarding these questions. If reliance were to be placed on the selection of individuals for exceptional treatment, attention should not only be paid to the individual merits of both the parties, but great weight should be attached to the merits of near relatives; for in that way the probable value of each additional offspring would be greatly increased, although it is true that the numbers selected might thus be greatly decreased. Then as to general legislation intended to affect all above the mean, the maximum effect (if it did not occur at either end of the scale) would be produced in or somewhere above (but not necessarily Tnuch above) the xi marks class; or, in other words, great attention should be paid to increasing the fertility of the large class of decidedly superior citizens, whilst any decrease in the fertility of the equally large class of decidedly inferior citizens would be equally beneficial to posterity as regards racial effects. To decrease the fertility of this large somewhat inferior class would be difficult; but we do thus see what great racial damage m-ay be done by the indiscriminate promotion of parenthood. Lastly, it is to be noted that these two methods of seeking racial progress can be simultaneously adopted.

