EUGENICS: CAN IT SOLVE THE
PROBLEM OF DECAY OF
CIVILIZATIONS ?*
BY R. A. FISHER, Sc.D.,
(Fellow of Goonville and Caius College, Cambridge. HoIn. Sec.. E. F. S.)
The decav anid fall of ancienit civilizations, equally of those wllich extend beyond the limits of writtein history, as of, withlinl historic times, the Graeco-Roman aind the Islamic, offers to the sociologist a quite special problem; one, the importance of which to maankind of the present time and of the fiuture is porportionial to the magniitude of the events wlhichl it embraces.
One must understand the term civilizationi, not merely as applicable to societies of whiclh we see reasoni to approve and admire the institutions, but as designatinig the aggregate of all the social adaptatioIns appropriate to the permaineint evistence of a dense population.
In general form these adaptationis have a univ-ersal character. In all societies which we cani call civilized, the personal understandings, wlhich a man can form with a small circle of immediate acquaintances are supplemented by a vastly more numerous system of conventional uniderstandiings, which establishes his customary relations, his rights anld his obligationis, with regard to the entire societv of which he is a
member. He is thus free to devote himself to productive labour even
of a highlv specialized character, witlh confidenice that the productioil of necessities for his primary iieeds, the protectioni of his possessions from robbery, and even the satisfaction of his moral and intellectual requirements, will be undertakeni bv the labours of others, who make of suchi tasks their special occupations. The specialization of occupatioIns, involving the customary acceptance of a conventional monetary imedium, the mainiteniance of public order, and theinationalorganizatioII of military preparations, are thus the universal characteristics of the civilized in contradistinction to the uncivilized societies of mankind, and it is a matter of experience, which Ino one thinks of denying, that such an organization does in fact enable a given areato support a much larger population, and that at a higlher level of material anid intellectual well-being, than the uncivilized peoples who could alterinativelv find there their subsistence.
Such a civilized societv, onice organized and establislhed, how is it possible to imagine that it should fail in competition with its uncivilized nieighbours ? The latter occupy their territory more sparsely, they lack moreover the organized central government wlichl could
* Thiis paper was presented in French at the Conference of the International
Federation of Euigenic Organisations in Paris on Saturday, Julyl 3rd, 1926, in the Rooms of the Leaguie of Red Cross Societies, Aventue Velasquez.

PROBLEM OF DECAY OF CIVILIZATIONS.

129

mobilize to advantage their scanty numbers. On the contrary, our experience of uncivilized populations shows them to be divided by
hereditary enmities and petty jealousies, which should make their union, even upon a question of the simplest national interest, almost
an impossibility. Industrial organization gives to civilized peoples, in antiquity as well as in our own times, the advantage of superior
weapons; while the habits of co-operative labour enable them to adopt
a more regular, coordinated, and effective system of military tactics. Above all, the superior knowledge which a civilized people can, and
does indeed, continually accumulate, should enable them to act generally with superior information, with a surer knowledge of the consequences of their collective action, and with the capacity to profit by experience, and to improve their methods if their first attempts should
prove to be unfortunate. Bearing in mind the unquestionable advan-
tages of superior knowledge, of coordinated efforts and of industrial
skill, should we not confidently anticipate, if we were ignorant of the actual history of our planet, that the history of civilization would consist of an unbroken series of triumphs, and that once the germ of an organized society had made its appearance in Babylonia, perhaps, or in Egypt, it would be only a question of time for every country in the world to be in turn absorbed and organized by the Babylonian, or Egyptian, civilization.
The indications which we possess of the earlier civilizations, as well as the plain narrative of the historic period, differs strangely from the naif yet rational anticipations outlined above. We see, indeed, a certain tenuous continuity of traditional civilization, but this con-
tinuity will not conceal, either from the ignorant or from the savant,
the brusque changes in the lands, the languages, and the religion
associated with the highest civilization at different epochs; nor the fact that each such great change, as well as many others of less obvious effect, has been accompanied by the violent irruption of some new people of uncivilized origin. The experiment of becoming civilized has, in fact, been performed repeatedly, by peoples of different racial origins, perhaps always. indeed, with some aid from the traditional ideas of peoples previously civilized, but developing their national and industrial organizations by their own progressive powers; and in all cases without exception, if we set aside the incomplete experiment of our own civilization, after a period of glory and domination accompanied by notable contributions to the sciences and the arts, they have failed, not only to maintain their national superiority, but even to establish a permanent mediocrity among the nations of the globe, and in many cases have left no other record of their existence than that which we
owe to the curiosity of archacologists. To what ought we to ascribe this failure, again and again experi-
enced by the highly civilized nations ? And of what sort should be an explanation which we should regard as adequate? It is easy to find among the peoples of antiquitv institutions disagreeable enough to our modern feelings, it is easy to criticise their educational ideas,
or the forms of government which they have successively adopted; above all it is easv to find fault with their ignorance of economic law

130 EUGENICS REVIEW.
anid to ascribe to their mistakes in this domain the samiie civil and political muisfortunes, which we anticipate equally from the parallel errors of our politieal opponents. Such arguments are not only inconelusive
from our ignorance of the laws of causation upoIn wlich they rely, they are also demonstrablv insufficienit to meet the requirements of our special problem. For, in the first place, our knowledge of the earlier
stages of the history of great peoples shows us customs no less repulsive, manners no less licentious, a neglect of education at least equally pronounced and ignorance of economic law as absolute as anyv which can be ascribed to their civilized sucecssors. In the second place, moreover, in a period of natioinal dccay it would be unireasonable to
expect that any aspect of national life, political, religious, intellec-
tual, or economic, should remain in a healthy and flourishing conidition, or that the misfortunes of the times will eseape the comnplaints of observant contemporaries. That the conditioni of agrieulture, for exaiiple, was unsatisfactory in the later Roman empire, though a legitimate inference -from the state of that society, fails to constitute in any true sense ani explanationi of its progressive decay. Peoples in the prime of their powers appear to find Ino difficulty in making good use of very inferior natural resources, and adapt their niational organization with complete success to mnuch more violent clhanges thani those which can be adduced to explain the misfortunies of the later stages of their civilization.
A physiciani observing a number of patients to sicken andldie inl similar though not identical conditions, and with similar though not identical symptoms, would surely make an initial error if he did not seek for a single common cause of the disorder. The complexity of the symptoms, and of the disturbances of the various organs of the body, should not lead him to assume that the originial cause, or the appropriate remedial measures, must be equally complex. Is this not because the physician assumes that the workinigs of the body, though immensely complex, are self-regulatory and capable of a normal corrective response to all ordinary disturban-ces; while onlv a small number of disturbances of an exceptional kind meet with no effective response and cause severe illness ? Have we not equally a right to assume a self-regulatory power in humani societies? If not, we should be led to think that such societies should break down under the influence of any of the innumerable accidents to which they are exposed. Human societies of various kinds have adapted themselves to every climate, from the Arctic to the forests and deserts of the Tropics. They share the territories of the most savage or the most poisonous animals, and often long withstand without disruption the assaults of most implacable human enemies. Social progress has not been arrested by the introduction of new weapons, of alcohol, or of opium, or even of infanticide; yet these introductions might each of them seem to threaten the existence of the race. That civilized men. possessed of more effective appliances, with access to more knowledge. and organised for the most detailed co-operation, should prove themselves incapable of effective response to any disturbance of their social organizations, surely demands some very special explanation.

PROBLEM OF DECAY OF CIVILIZATIONS.

131

If we turn to our owin civilizationi in the hope of isolating a sinigle
cause whiclh is capable, continually and persistently of injuring the
racial qualities of future generations, we are at onice confronted with
the phleiiomenion of the differential birthrate. The earlier investigatioiis oIn this subject gave no adequate idea of either the widespread
clharacter or of the intenisity of this phenomenon. The method of correlationis had revealed that among the boroughs of Londoni a high fertilitv was positivelv correlated with all the indications of a lower social status. This was true of the census of 1851 to an extent which
might possibly be explained by the higlher age at marriage of the
superior classes. In the figures for 1901 the association had become greatly strengtlhened, indicating a rapid increase in the differeni-
tiation between the different classes in respect of fertility. For England and Scotland generally, the most complete informationi
upon which we have to rely is that provided by the census of 1911, since
unfortuniately the necessary questions were not repeated in 1921. For Scotland, Dr. Dunlop has published the average number of children
in marriages of at least 15 years duration at the time of the census, and
for whiclh the age of the bride hadl beeii from 25 to 29. In spite of this partial stanidardisation of the age at marriage, which will doubtless have tenided to decrease somewhat the differences observed, the professionial occupations, officers of the army and navy, doctors, lawvers, ministers of religion and clerks all show a fertility among the lowest, while the most fertile groups are supplied by the poorest ,classes of labourers. It should be noted firstly that with marriage of
at least 15 years duration in 1911, we are here concerned with births largely of the last decade of the ninteenth century, and secondly that
the differences show themselves clearly between different grades of the same occupation. Thus plasterer's labourers have more children than plasterers, bricklayer's lalbourers more children thani bricklayers, .and the farm labourers more childrenl than the farm foremen.
For England at the same census the results published by Dr. .Stevenson show a steep and regular gradation of fertilitv from the professional occupations to the lowest grades of labourers, although it should be noted that in this classification three large and approxinmately homogeneous groups, the textile workers, the coal-miners and the agricultural labourers, were set aside from the rest of the populationi for separate consideration.
It is niow sufficiently recognised that the inverse relationslhip betweeni fertility and social status, though strongly marked in the Uniited Kingdom, is by no means confined to that country, but is, on
the contrary, a pheionmenoii nmore or less definitely established in every
civilized country; and there are interesting indications, not yet, I believe, established by any widespread investigations, that even in the villages of India the peasants with the smallest holdings provide the largest quota of children.
In this peculiar tendency of civilized societies to concentrate in the lowest classes the task of producing the citizens of future generatioIns, our modern civilization appears to be merely following the course traversed by the Graeco-Roman civilization. We know, it is

132 EUGENICS REVIEW.
true, practically notlhing of the rate of reproduction of the lower orders of society under the Roman Empire, but there cail be no doubt that the failure of reproduction among the aristocratic, and among the self-respecting families was extremely pronounced. In my opinion the same conclusioin should be drawn as to the wealthier classes of the Islamic nations, at least during the centuries which contain the high-
est developmenit of their civilization; and, as we shall see, there is reason to suppose that a cause exists capable, unless counter-acted, of producing such a phenomenion in any society in which social position is largely determined by wealth; and this condition brings within the
scope of the principle the most ancient civilizations of which we have
any informationi. The first indicationi of a rational explanationi of the differenees in
fertility that show themselves between different classes was found by Galton in studving the extinction of English peerages. Galton observed that in manv cases the extinction of the peerage followed upon the marriage of the peer, or his heir, to an heiress, and was led to consider wlhether the failure of male heirs, which is necessary to the
productioni of an heiress, was not due in part to congenital causes, wlhicl
showcd themselvces subsequently in the extinction of the peerage to whiclh she was united. He collected therefore, fronm the records of the English peerage, a large number of cases of marriages with heiresses, and compared thenm with an equal number of marriages with woleni wlho were not lheiresses. His table showed a considerable difference betweein the fertilities of the two groups, thus confirming the hypothesis which lie had formed. Subsequent examinations of marriages in the Englislh peerage have shown that the average number of children borni to the peeresses increases steadily with an increase in the size of the families of whicli thev were members. Galton
attached mluclh importance to his discovery, and pointed to a further confirmation of the priIiciple in the fact that the extinctionis are more frequent in the Ihiglher ranks of the peerage than in the lower ranks.
In commenting on this work of Galton, de Candolle made the important observations that the same causes were at work, and that
the same principle must be applied in explanatioin of the lowered fertility of the well-to-do classes generally. I am not altogether
sure whether de Candolle had seized absolutely the subtlety of Galton' s argument; for it is not merely that heiresses find it easier to marry, and therefore marry on the average more frequenitly thain do other girls, but that they tend to make on the average marriages more advantageous socially, and therefore to ally themselves to men, whio by their abilities have established their social position. In any case, there can be nio question of the value of de Candolle's observation, for, as is now well understood, the phenomenon of infertility among the upper classes is by no means confined to titled families.
In a brief but important note to the "Eugenics Review, " J. A. Cobb has pointed out (1913) that the same principle must act from the top to the bottom of the social system, and that the action of social selection in all classes must be to unite with infertility all such forms of ability as tend to promote social elevationi. Cobb did not consider

PROBLEM OF DECAY OF CIVILIZATIONS.

133

the applicationi of this principle to the menital and moral qualities
which favour the voluntarv limitation of children, and was therefore led to attach the less importance to the action of this principle as an
explaniation of the differential birthrate ill our own times. Nevertlieless he argued that siince its actioni was continuous and universal tlhroughout the great mass of the population, it might, in its ultimate
Iiistorical consequences, be of more importance than the voluntary actioni of parents. Hie made also the interesting suggestion that the
social selection of persons whose reproductive apparatus or instincts
were im-iperfectly developed, might lead to suclh outbreaks of perverse Vices as are occasionally observed to occur in the hiigler ranks of societies.
In the liglht of moderni knowledge as to the inheritance of the
mental and moral qualities in man, there cani be no reason to exclude
from consideration those qualities of temperament which favour, or are opposed to, the voluntary limitationi of births, any more than those
equally temperamiental characters whichl favour the postponement, or the precipitation, of marriage; and, it is an importanit argumelnt
in favour of the view that we have to do here with a selection acting directly upon the fertility itself; that the elements into whichi fertility muav be analyzed, the marriage-rate, the age of marriage and the
fertility of married personis of a given age; all appear to have a social graduiation ili the salme senlse.
If wc adnmit, and it is difficult to find grounds for denying ariy
stel) of the argument, that a social selection of this kind characterized also the civilizationis of the ancient world, we mnust suppose that at the beginninig of anl indigenious civilization, whether this event occurred onlce only or several times in anicient history, the population stratified itself into various occupationis of differenit importaniec roughly in accordance witlh the innate abilities of the different families; that,
wiith the development of aggregates larger than the individual family
the primitive military advantage of beloniging to a nunmerous kindred becamie outweiglhed by the econiomic burden of supporting an increasing
fainillyvupon a limited domaini. At first, we must supp)ose that the
families of superior classes were not less fertile, or possibly were more so, than the families of inferior rank; but as soon as social positioIn camc to be influenced to an important extent by the possession of
wealtlh, nmemlbers of small families began to enjoy a social advantage as conmpared to more prolific strains. There would thus grow up a tendenicy, affecting all such innate qualities as could, in the social surroundings, exert an influenice upon fertility, for the lower classes to be innately nmore fertile thani their social superiors. For a long time,
perlhaps, this difference of innate fertility would be more than counter-
balanced by the economic advantages belonging to social position, for it is characteristic of man as of other animals to reproduce himself more
rapidly, the more favourable is the environmenlt; and, especially, the delegationl of such} parental cares as the work of the household, and even the niursing of children, would strongly favour a higher fertility in the
upper classes. Nevertheless, the social selection which we have described, acting persistently ancd upon the great masses of the popula-

134 EUGENICS REVIEW.
tioli, imlust soonier or later, reverse the differenitial birthrate, anid cause the lower classes to become effectivelv the more fertile. From this
point the inniate qualities of the race, in all classes of society, cannot but
,deteriorate; for in nio state of society, however unijust its institutions, call we imiiagiine that it will niot be the more able, the mlore inidustrious,
andl the more beautiful, wlo finid their- way inlto the upper classes. Finiallv, we may anticipate that progress in the arts, in the sciences, anid
in social orga,nisation will conitiniue subsequenitly to the epoch wlhenl
racial (leteriorationi has set in; that these improvements of social
organiisationi will iinclude the more anid m}ore thoroughl utilizatioll of
suclh inniiate ability as is available, witlh a correspond ing increasingly
rapid exhaustioin of the inniate qualities of the classes from wlhichl it is drawn.
Ani important stage in the evolutioni of social rganiizationi, wlhicl is observable in several, if iiot in all, of the civilizationis of whielh we have knowledge, appears to be intimately relatedl to the process of social selection, whichl we have described. Societies of a primitive character are composed of relatively permanenet classes, in which the social status of the individual is determiiied primiarily by birth, and only to a minor degree by the wealth whici lie may possess, or whicll lie can accumulate At a certain stage of development political movemiients are found to arise, aimiied at the atteniuationi of the privileges of birth, afnd tendiiig to a reorgaiiization- of the social strata oni a basis, principally or entirely, of wealtlh. The movement called Liberalisim in our owni civilizationl is evidently of this kinid, and in the reorganizatioin of our owii societies has already attainied, in this respect,
practically its full effect. IIn the Islamic civilizationi the revolution by
whlichl the Abbasside dynasty in 750 A. D. supplanited the Omeyyads, lhas maiiv similar features. It asserted the claims of the subject
)eoples, and of the uiiorthodox sects of Islamism, anid, in its success, it
established a constitutional monarchv, of which the first Vizir was a
self-made banker with no pretenisions to familv. Movements of this
kind may, conceivably, represent a normal reaction of the humain ind under civilized conditionis; whether this be so or iiot, it is easy to see
that suclh movemenits will be powerfully reinforced by any inequalitv of the birthrate whichl promotes an influx of persons of humble origin
iiito influential positions. Indeed it may be argued, on historical grounds, that aristocracies do not yield up their aristocratic privileges unitil they are permeated by the sentiments of families, wlho, by reason of wealth and intermarriage, have miiigled inextricably in their race. The dissolution of class barriers enables a societv to draw upon ability whencesoever it mnay arise; it becomes a necessity for societies in which abilitv is becoming more and more rare. Nevertheless in a plutocratic society it completes the vicious circle, by mnaintaining that stream of
infertile promotions by whichi the fertility of the upper classes is coIn-
tinuallv forced down. In a full sociological eniquiry into the effects of social selection
upoIn the innate qualities whiclh favour fertility, it would be necessary to consider, in a detail which is here impossible, its action in barbarous societies, on the oiie hand, and in decadenit civilizations on the other. If, however, we conceintrate our atten-tioni upon the problem of main-

PROBLEM OF DECAY OF CIVILIZATIONS.

135;

taiiniig in full vigouIr a eivilization, wlhiclh is still in a flouLrishlinig condition, it is onilv necessary to observe that the menace to that eivilization, whieli is here discussed, arises solelv from the social advca-ntage whiclh our economic system gives to families of low fertility.
We owe it to the geniius of the Frenelhi people to lhave shiowni, withx
quite other objects in view, how the social disadvantage of the fertile fanmilies mav be diminished, abolisledc, or even reversed, witliii the limits of our economie and industrial svstem. The discussioin of the eugenic effects of svstems of familv allowanices lhas hiitherto been mainly coneernied with the direct effects to be anticipated in promoting the fertility of those classes who are actuially in receipt of suchi allowances. If I am right in supposing that the effective fertility of a social
class, in a particular moral and economiiic environiment, depenids
largely oni those inniate qualities wlhiel govern our temperamental responses, then this (lirect effect mav be of miuclh less importance tlhani
onie lhas beeni inclinied to imagine. Suclh direct effects will onlv be of eugeinic v-alue when the allowances are )aid to classes havinig natuiral abilities above the average of the ination to whichl tlhev belong; but, if I
anm right in believing that the fertility of the upper classes is only mainitain-ed at its low level by the selective promotioni of tlhe least fertile members of lower classes, then the paymeiit of familv allowancees to any one class will have an indirect effect, wlhich, acting slowly, but cuimulatively, will tend, gradually, to raise the fertility of all classes superior to it. 'Moreover, turniing to thle lower classes of societv, if their higlh fertilitv is, to any extent, maintainied bv the accessionl of members of the most fertile famnilies of suiperior classes, tlheni family allowances given to anv class will, to this extenit, tenid to lower the fertilitv
of all classes iniferior to it. It is to this indirect effect of family allow-
ances that the attention of Eugenists should, in imy opinlioni, be princi-
pally directed. In order to nullify, or better to reverse, the action of social selec-
tion upon the innate causes of fertility, it would be necessarv that the allowanices should cover the full net cost of the children in every class, or, to put the matter nmore exactly, that a member of a large family should finid hiimself in a position of similar social and economic advantage, to ani onily child of )arents in the same station This presupposes that the allowances shall increase, at least proportionately to the earn-ings of the father; and this presents Ino economic difficulty throughout the salaried occupations. The economic difficulties of applying the method to capitalists and to professional men working for profit appear more formidable, though they admit of, at least, a theoretical solu-
tioln, through some form of mutual insurance.
A serious objection, which deserves a most careful consideration, to the total abolition of the economic advantage of small families-a total abolition which it would be desirable, on eugenic grounds, to maintain permanently with a view to reversing the differential birthrate-is that in such a state of society there would be no economic check to the growth of population. Overpopulation caiiiot, indeed, be regarded as an immediate danger, in view of the actual frequency of births in
England or in France, and it would doubtless be long before symptoms,

-136 EUGENICS REVIEW.
alarming in this respect, could be induced to showv themselves. Nevertheless, we should recognise that we are preparing here a problem, which it will fall to our successors to solve, and there is little doubt that a eugenically desirable solution would entail the prohibition of more than a rigid maximum of births in classes in which the real wages showed a tendency to fall below a fixed mimimum.
Such a restriction will only be repulsive to our ideas of liberty so long as we continue to foster the outworn fiction that the ecoinomic burden of an excessive population is in fact born only by those who are responsible for its increase. Experience of the actioti of an economically stable system of family allowances in throwing uponi a whole industry the burden of an undesirable increase in numbers, should do much to impress upoIn all classes the justice of such restrictions, against the time when the necessity for them should arise. In the meanwhile, there can be no doubt that individual restriction, based upon eugenic diagnosis, might in many cases be applied with economic benefits.
It may be that the scientific theory which I have put forward will prove, in the light of late investigations, to be incomplete, or indeed incorrect; in any case in view of the importance of the subject it is to be hoped that such investigations will be undertaken, and the theorv examined rigorously in every point. For the present I see no reason to doubt that the fate of entire civilizations may be sealed by so small a thing as the economic advantage of the less fertile stock, and that by resolutely attacking the economic problem which confronted her at the moment of her devastation, and of her victory, France has made a contribution to human thought, which, in its ultimate consequences, will dwarf the great events which gave it birth; a discovery upon whicl may be founded, after the failure and ruin of many glorious achievements of the nations of antiquity, the human ideal of a truly imperishable civilization.

