VOLUNTARY STERILIZATION BILL

(This Bill, embodying exactly and in detail the recommendations of the Departmental Committee on Sterilization (the " Brock Committee ") which was appointed in June I932, was drawn up by the Joint Committee on Voluntary Sterilisation in collaboration with the County Councils Association, the Association of Municipal Corporations, and the Mental Hospitals Association, and presented by a deputation of these organizations to the Minister of Health on May 23rd, 1935. Before being introduced into Parliament it would be submitted to an expert Parliamentary draughtsman for any necessary modification of form. The substance however would remain unchanged.]

ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
Clause
i. Classes of persons who may be sterilized. 2. Conditions to be satisfied before sterilization is performed. 3. Duties and powers of the Minister of Health. 4. Appointment of the Advisory Committee. 5. Persons by whom and places where sterilization is not to be performed. 6. Notice of performance of sterilization. 7. Confidential nature of documents. 8. Provision as to expenses. 9. Protection of medical practitioners. io. Penalties for offences. ii. Definitions. I2. Short title and extent.

SCHEDULE.

An Act to enable sexual sterilization to be performed upon certain persons at their request, or, in certain cases, at the request of their parents or guardians or the authorities responsible for their maintenance.
Classes of persons 1. Subject to the provisions of this Act, sterilization may be performed
steimayzed upon the following classes of persons:
(a) Persons in whose case there exists mental defectiveness. (b) Persons who have suffered from mental disorder. (c) Persons who suffer from a grave physical disability deemed to be
inheritable. (d) Persons who are deemed to be likely to transmit mental defectiveness
or mental disorder or a grave physical disability to a subsequent generation.

Conditions to be satisfied before steriation is per-

2. Except performance

where in the of sterilization

opinion of a registered medical practitioner the is necessary in the interests of the person's health,

formed. the following conditions shall be satisfied before any sterilization is performed,

for the purpose of preventing procreation or child-bearing, upon any of the

persons defined in Section i of this Act.

(i) Such persons shall transmit, or cause to be transmitted, to the Minister of Health the following documents:

(a) An application in the form prescribed by Part I of the Schedule to this Act, signed by the applicant, stating:

(i) His age.
(ii) That he desires to be sterilized, and the grounds upon which the application is made.

136

VOLUNTARY STERILIZATION BILL
(iii) That he understands the nature and consequences of sterilization.
(iv) That if married, he has informed his spouse of the application where it is possible to do so, and produces evidence to this effect.
(b) Two separate medical certificates in the form prescribed by Part III of the Schedule to this Act, each of which shall state:
(i) That the medical certifier has personally seen the applicant and inquired into the reason for his application.
(ii) The class of persons, as defined in Section i of this Act, to which the applicant belongs.
(iii) The facts, ascertained by himself and/or communicated to him by others, upon which the medical certifier has founded this opinion.
(iv) That the applicant has attained sexual maturity. (v) That where the applicant is suffering from mental defectiveness he is, in the opinion of the medical certifier, a fit and proper person to live in the general community under suitable conditions after sterilization. (vi) That in the opinion of the medical certifier the applicant understands the nature and consequences of sterilization.
One of these two medical certificates shall, if possible, be furnished by the person's usual medical attendant. The second shall be furnished by a medical practitioner approved for the purpose by the Minister of Health.
(c) Where application is made on the ground that the person is a mental defective or has suffered from mental disorder, one of the certificates shall be signed by a registered medical practitioner experienced in psychological medicine and approved for this purpose by the (Minister of Health) (Board of Control), stating that the certifier has examined the person and inquired into his history and is of the opinion that no injurious results to the person's mental condition are likely to follow sterilization.
(2) Permission for the performance of sterilization shall not be granted in the case of any person who has not attained sexual maturity.
(3) Permission for the performance of sterilization shall not be granted in the
case of any person who is under the age of twenty-one years without the written consent, to be given in the form prescribed by Part II (a) of the Schedule to this Act, of the parent or guardian of such person.
(4) Where the person is, by reason of mental defectiveness, deemed to be incapable of giving a reasonable consent to be sterilized, the parent or guardian of such person shall be empowered to make application on his behalf, and such application shall be made in the form prescribed by Part II of the Schedule to this Act.
(5) When such parent or guardian cannot be found, or is outside Great Britain, or is being dealt with as a person of unsound mind, or as a mental defective, under the Lunacy, Mental Treatment or Mental Deficiency Acts, the Minister of Health shall have power to act upon the application of the person or local authority who is in fact responsible for the applicant's maintenance.

137

:138 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

(6) Permission for the sterilization of a person suffering from mental defectiveness shall not be granted unless the Minister of Health is satisfied by medical certificates or such other evidence as he considers satisfactory that an inquiry has been made into the personal characteristics and circumstances of the defective, and that after sterilization he would be a fit and proper person to live
in the general community under suitable conditions.

Duties and powers 3. The Minister of Health shall have the following duties and powers in

of the Minister Health.

of

regard

to

applications

for

sterilization

transmitted

to

him

in

accordance

with

the provisions of this Act:

(a) If satisfied that the applicant is a fit and proper person to be sterilized in accordance with the provisions of this Act, the Minister of Health shall issue to him in the form prescribed by Part IV of the Schedule to this Act an authorization for sterilization, and such authorization shall
permit a registered medical practitioner to sterilize the person at any
time within six months after the date of the authorization. If sterilization has not been performed within a period of six months, the sanction shall lapse, but may be renewed by the Minister of Health on receipt of a satisfactory explanation of the delay.
(b) If not satisfied that the applicant is a fit and proper person to be sterilized, the Minister of Health shall refuse his consent unless and until he has been satisfied by the production of further evidence.
(c) For the purpose of obtaining further evidence the Minister of Health may:
(i) Require additional particulars from the applicant or from one or both of the medical certifiers, or from the appropriate local authority.
(ii) Direct that a special examination of the applicant and/or inquiry into the circumstances of the application be made.
(iii) Refer the application with the documents pertaining thereto to the advisory committee referred to in Section 4 of this Act, for its consideration and report.

(d) Provided that where the applicant for sterilization is suffering from mental defectiveness or is a person who has suffered from mental disorder, the Minister of Health, before coming to a decision, shall consult with the Board of Control.

Appointment of 4. Upon the coming into operation of this Act, the Minister of Health shall

the Advisory Coinmittee.

appoint a special advisory committee, to be known as the Advisory Committee

on Sterilization, which shall consist of specialists in psychological medicine,

medical practitioners and geneticists. Such Committee shall have the duty of

advising the Minister upon, and may initiate the investigation of, such psycho-

logical, medical and genetic questions as may arise in connection with any

application or with the operation of this Act.

Persons by whom and places where sterilization is not to be performed.

5. (a) Sterilization under this Act shall not be performed except by a registered medical practitioner.
(b) Sterilization under this Act shall not be performed in any institution or place in which persons suffering from mental defectiveness or mental

VOLUNTARY STERILIZATION BILL

I39

disorder are detained under the provisions of the Lunacy, Mental Treatment or Mental Deficiency Acts. Provided that this prohibition shall not apply to the case of mental defectives under guardianship or in private houses.

6. (a)

Where sterilization has been performed in a hospital it shall be the duty of the superintendent or secretary of the hospital to forward to the

Notice of performance of sterilization.

Minister of Health within seven days a notice in the form prescribed by

Part V of the schedule to this Act, stating that sterilization has been

performed.

(b) Where sterilization has been performed elsewhere than in a hospital, it

shall be the duty of the medical practitioner performing it to forward

such notice.

7.

All

applications,

certificates

and

documents

furnished

in

accordance

with

Confidential nature of documents.

the provisions of this Act shall be confidential and their contents shall not be

divulged to or by any person except those acting in an official capacity for the

purposes of this Act.

8. (a) The local authority on being satisfied that having regard to his financial Provision as to circumstances an applicant for sterilization cannot reasonably afford expenses. the expenses of and incidental to sterilization and the application therefor, shall have power to pay either the whole or part of such expenses, provided that it shall be the duty of the local authority to recover from the applicant, or from any person legally liable to maintain him, such part, if any, of the said expenses as the authority consider the applicant or such person is, having regard to his financial circumstances, reasonably able to pay.
(b) Any expenses recoverable under this section shall, without prejudice to
any other remedy, be recoverable summarily as a civil debt.

9. (a) A medical practitioner who signs a certificate or does anything under Protection of medithe provisions of this Act shall have protection against civil or criminal cal practitioner proceedings similar to that accorded by the Mental Treatment Act, I930, Section i6.
(b) Nothing in this Act shall render unlawful any surgical operation or medical treatment which before the passing of this Act could lawfully
be performed or applied.
10. (a) Any person who makes a wilful misstatement of any material fact in Pezaties for any application, statement or certificate under this Act or who divulges offe
the contents of any document except as laid down by this Act shall be guilty of a misdemeanour.
(b) Any person who makes default in sending to the Minister of Health the notice of the performance of sterilization as required by this Act shall for each day or part of a day during which the default continues be liable to a penalty not exceeding ten pounds.

* It will probably be necessary to add clauses dealing with the procedure for prosecution and the
recovery of fines for offences.

I40
D~iOfls.
Short title and
extent.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW
11. In this Act, if not inconsistent with the context:
(a) The expression " sterilization " shall mean:
(i) The operations of vasectomy, salpingectomy, or any other surgical operation whereby the patient is rendered incapable of procreation or child-bearing without any other impairment of the capacity to exercise sexual functions.
(ii) Any medical treatment which attains the same results as a surgical operation with the same limitation in its effects as regards the sexual functions.
(b) The expression " mental defectiveness" shall have the same meaning as in the Mental Deficiency Act, I927, Section I, subsection (2).
(c) The expression " mental disorder " shall mean any chronic or recurrent disorder of the mind in consequence of which the person has received medical treatment.
(d) The expression " local authority" for the purposes of this Act shall mean:
(i) In reference to a person of unsound mind, the local authority for the purposes of the Lunacy and Mental Treatment Acts, I890 to
I930;
(ii) In reference to a person who is mentally defective, the council of a county or county borough;
(iii) In all other cases the council of a county, county borough or non-county borough as the case may be.
Providing that, without prejudice to their powers under the Local Government Act, I933:
(i) A local authority for the purposes of the Lunacy and Mental Treatment Acts, I890 to I930, may delegate or refer with or without restrictions or conditions their functions under this Act in reference to persons of unsound mind to a visiting committee or to a subcommittee thereof;
(ii) The council of a county or county borough may delegate or refer with or without restrictions or conditions their functions under this Act in reference to persons who are mentally defective to their committee for the care of the mentally defective or to any subcommittee thereof.

12. (a) This Act may be cited as The Voluntary Sterilization Act, I93

.()m

yvJLLI~yA

t9

(b) This Act shall not apply to Scotland or Northern Ireland.

(c) This Act shall come into force . . .

VOLUNTARY STERILIZATION BILL SCHEDULE

141

PART I

FORM OF APPLICATION FOR PERMISSION TO BE STERILIZED

I, [1

[IJ Ful Chrsta
name and suname.

of [l]

['] Full postal addresm

[']

[]DescrIption (prfesson or

hereby make application for permission to be sterilized in accordance with the occupato).

provisions of the Voluntary Sterilization Act, I93

I hereby declare as follows:

i. (a) I suffer from mental defectiveness.

(b) I have suffered from mental disorder, namely:

[1] [41 State nature of mental disorder

(c)

I suffer from a grave physical disability which I believe to be inherit-

and places and dates of treatment

able, namely:

of same.

[5]

[5] State nature of disability.

(d) I believe myself to be likely to transmit to a subsequent generation

(mental defectiveness) (mental disorder) (the grave physical disability

of ), on the following grounds:

[5]

t'] Give grounds for this belief.

2. My age is

years,

months.

3. I understand that sterilization will render me incapable of producing children.

4. I am married to [7] of

['1 Give name and
addres of spouse.

(I have informed my spouse of my intention to make this application and attach documents in evidence thereof) (I have been unable to inform my spouse of my intention to make this application, for the following reason:

5. I am not married.

6. The name and address of my usual medical attendant is as follows:

7. I enclose with this application two medical certificates from the following:

(a) [8]
(b)

Give names and postal addresses of
the medical certi-
fie.

8. The reason why one of the medical certificates in support of this applica-

tion is not signed by my usual medical attendant is as follows:

Signed: [9]

(5] Applicant's
signture.

Dated : This

(day) of

(month)

(year).

I42 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

['1 Give nae, I, [10]
adde and description of witn ot to the applicat'sOI

hereby declare that the above signature was made in my presence, this

(day) of

(month)

(year).

[11] signature of Signed: [11]
witness.
To the Minister of Health N.B.-Marginal notes must be strictly followed, and inappropriate words or clauses struck out. Two medical certificates on Form III are required in support of an application. One of these certificates should, whenever possible, be signed by the usual medical attendant of the applicant. The second certificate must be signed by a medical practitioner approved for the purpose by the Minister of Health. Where the applicant is a mental defective or has suffered from mental disorder, the second certificate must be signed by a practitioner experienced in psychological medicine approved by the Minister of Health.

PART II
FORM OF APPLICATION FOR STERILIZATION, MADE ON BEHALF OF A PERSON WHO BY REASON OF MENTAL DEFECTIVENESS IS INCAPABLE OF GIVING A REASONABLE CONSENT, BY HIS PARENT OR GUARDIAN OR THE AUTHORITY
RESPONSIBLE FOR HIS MAINTENANCE

P] Give name of In the matter of [1]
Cer &:X

2Give fullposa of [3]
a sofsame

(] Give name of I [3]
pemawnuaing Xs L J
rquest

(] Give full postal addr of same

of

[']

r] Gived ipti (profession occu-

[5]

pation, or oce) of
same. hereby request that permission be granted for the above-named [1]

to be sterilized in accordance with the provisions of the

Voluntary Sterilization Act, I93

r Stat reas wyerly zation ['] Give reasons.

I declare as follows:
(a) I am the (father) (mother) (guardian) (official representative of the authority responsible for the maintenance) of the above-named [1]
(b) I make this request for the following reasons:
i. That the sterilization of the said [1]
is advisable on the following grounds: [] 2. That the said [1]
is incapable of giving a reasonable consent in consequence of suffering from mental defectiveness. 3. That the parent or guardian of the said [1 is unable to make the request for the following reasons: [7]

VOLUNTARY STERILIZATION BILL

I43

(c) The said [1]

is

aged (years) (months).

(d) The said [1]

is

[unmarried] [marred to [8]

(] Give name of

Spouse.

of [9] , and (his/her spouse has r] Give addrea of

been informed of this application, in evidence of which I attach docu- spouss.

ments) (it has been impracticable to inform the spouse for the following

reasons: [10]

('* Give reons.

(e) The name and address of the usual medical attendant of the said

(f)

[1] is as follows: [11]
The reason why one of the medical certificates in support of the application is not signed by the usual medical attendant of the said

1] Give name and postal address
of usual medical attendat.

[1] is as follows: [12] (g) After sterilization the said [1]
be living under the following conditions: [13]

[1(] Give reason.
will
[1] Describeavail-
able conditions.

I enclose with this request two medical certificates from the followi[ng:

(b)r(a) } [14]

(14] Give mes
ad e ostal
certifiers.

Signed: [1]
Dated: This

(day) of

(month)

.(yI ear).

5] Sinature and
descrption of per-
q g the

I, [16]

of

hereby declare that the above signature was made in my presence, this

(day) of

(month)

(year).

[15] Give name, full
postal address and description of witnes to the above signature

Signed: [17]

'] Signature of witness to the above gnaturem

To the Minister of Health

N.B.-Marginal notes must be strictly followed, and inappropriate words or clauses struck out. Two medical certificates on Form III are required in support of an application. One of these certificates should, whenever possible, be signed by the usual medical attendant of the applicant. The second certificate must be signed by a medical practitioner approved for the purpose by the Minister of Health. Where the applicant is a mental defective or has suffered from mental disorder, the second certificate must be signed by a practitioner experienced in psychological medicine approved by the Minister of Health.

PART IIA

FORM OF DECLARATION TO BE SIGNED BY THE PARENT OR GUARDIAN OR AUTHORITY RESPONSIBLE FOR THE MAINTENANCE OF AN APPLICANT FOR STERILIZATION WHO IS UNDER THE AGE OF TWENTY-ONE YEARS
(To be appended to Part I or Part II)

I, [1]
of [']
[I]
hereby declare:

n(1a] meFualndaCuhrrinsatmiaen
r1]Full postal
addre. (5] Profession or oocupation.

(a) That I am the (father) (mother) (guardian) (official representative of
the authority responsible for the maintenance) of the above-named [

]dGirve

name and
of appliC

'44 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Giivet name of
a
[') Give reason.

(b) That I have read (his/her application) (the application onhis/her behalf)
and that to the best of my knowledge and belief the statements therein are true. (c) That I consent to the said []
being sterilized.
(d) That the reason why this declaration is not signed by the parent or guardian of the above-named [5
is as follows: [6]

t'] Signature and
description of person makin the request.

Signed: [7] Dated: This

(day) of

(month)

([] Give name,
address and des-

II

ral
LJ

cr.ption of witness
ntaotutrhee. above sig-

f
hereby

de
declare

that

the

above

signature

was

made

in

my

presence,

this

(day) of

(month)

(year).

[r] Signature of Signed: [9]
witness.

(year).

To the Minister of Health N.B.-Marginal notes must be strictly followed, and inappropriate words or clauses struck out.

PART III

FORM OF CERTIFICATE OF MEDICAL PRACTITIONER IN SUPPORT OF AN APPLICATION FOR STERILIZATION

[1] Give name of person psed to

In the matter of [1]

be sterfii.

[] Give full postal of [2] address of same.

('] Give description [a] (profession or occupation) of same.
an applicant (on his/her own behalf) (through his/her parent or guardian) (through the authority responsible for his/her maintenance) for permission to
be sterilized.

('] Give name of medical certifier.

L r'i

F«1Give full postal oo f
address of medical
certifier.
hereby declare as follows:

I. I am a person registered under the Medical Acts (and the usual medical attendant (if any) to the above-named [1] )
(and approved by the Minister of Health as a practitioner experienced in psychological medicine) for the purpose of giving medical certificates under the Voluntary Sterilization Act, I93

VOLUNTARY STERILIZATION BILL

I45

2. On the [6]

of r] Give date of

at [7] of

in the county

(borough)

Give place of examination.

, I personally examined the said

[1] and am of opinion

that he/she is a fit and proper person to be sterilized on the ground that

he/she [8]

[3 Strike out the

(a)

Is a mentally defective person within the meaning of Section i

of the

paragraphs which
do not apply.

Mental Deficiency Act, I927, being [9]

r] State here whether an idiot imbecile, feebleminded person or
moral defective as defined in Section T of the Mental Deficiency Act, I927.

(b) has suffered from mental disorder, namely: [10]

[10] State nature of mental disorder.

(c) is suffering from a grave physical disability which I consider to be

(d)

inheritable, namely: [1L]
is likely to transmit to a subsequent generation (mental defectiveness)

[11] Give name of disability.

(mental disorder) (the grave physical disability of [11]

3. I base my opinion on the following grounds:

(a) Facts observed by myself, at the time of the examination:

[1] [] Give detalls.

(b) Facts communicated to me by others:

[1]

[1'] Give full par-

ticulars of the do-

fect, disorder or

4. I have ascertained that the said [1]

disability, with names and ad-

has attained sexual maturity.

dresses of informants.

5. [14] I have inquired into the personal characteristics and circumstances of [1'] Only to be

the said [1]

and am of the opinion

flled in where the applicant is suf-

that he/she

is

a

fit

and

proper

person

to

live

in

the

general

community under

fering from mental defectiveness.

suitable conditions after sterilization, and that to the best of my knowledge and

belief such conditions are available.

6. [15] I have inquired into the nature and circumstances of the mental [1'] To be filed in

(defect) (disorder) from which the said [1]

by a practition
experiene In psy-

(suffers)

(has suffered), and as a result I am of the opinion that the performance

cloocl medi-
cine, the case of

of sterilization upon the said [1]

whoan applicant is a mental defec-

is not likely to be followed by any injurious results to his/her mental condition.

tive or has suffered from mental dis-

7. I further declare that I have questioned (the said [1]

order.

(the parent or guardian of the said [1]

) and am

satisfied that he/she understands that the effect of sterilization will be to

prevent the said [1]

from producing

offspring.

Signed: [6]
Dated: This

(day) of

(month)

(year).

[10] Signature and

qualifications

of

media

practi-

To the Minister of Health
N.B.-Marginal notes must be strictly followed, and inappropriate words or clauses struck out. Two medical certificates on Form III are required in support of an application. One of these certificates should, whenever possible, be signed by the usual medical attendant of the applicant. The second certificate must be signed by a medical practitioner approved for the purpose by the Minister of Health. Where the applicant is a mental defective or has suffered from mental disorder, the second certificate must be signed by a practitioner experienced in psychological medicine approved by the Minister of Health.

I46 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

PART IV

FORM OF AUTHORIZATION BY THE MINISTER OF HEALTH FOR A PERSON TO BE STERILIZED

I, Minister of Health, in virtue of the powers conferred upon me by the

Voluntary Sterilization Act, I93 , having received (on his/her own behalf)

(through his/her parent or guardian) (through the authority responsible for

his/her maintenance) an application that

(name

of applicant for sterilization), of

(address

of applicant) should undergo sterilization, and being satisfied that the said

(applicant) is a fit and proper person to

be sterilized, DO HEREBY GRANT THIS AUTHORIZATION for the said

(applicant) to be sterilized by a registered medical practitioner at any time

within six months of this date.

Signed:

Dated:

N.B.-This authorization is only valid within the time stated. If sterilization is not performed within such time, it may be returned to the Minister, with a statement of the reason for the delay, and a request
for its renewal.

PART V

FORM OF NOTICE OF THE PERFORMANCE OF STERILIZATION

I hereby give notice that in accordance with the authorization of the Minister

of Health, dated

, sterilization was

[] Give name of performed upon [1]
person sterilized.

('] Give address of of [5]

same.

($I Give place. at [3]

(Al Give date. on [4]

pq[(o5asftGaiilcvmeaatdnidaorms.e, afnUdd Signed [] Dated: This

(day of)

(month)

year).

To the Minister of Health N.B.-This notice shall be forwarded within seven days of the performance of sterlization to the Minister of Health, failing which the person responsible is liable to a penalty of ten pounds for each day or portion of a day during which the default continues.
Where sterilization is performed in a hospital, it shall be signed and forwarded by the secretary or superintendent: if elsewhere, it shall be signed and forwarded by the medical practitioner performing
sterilization.

