24 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

HAVELOCK ELLIS
Ellis, Havelock. My Life. London,
I940. William Heinemann (Medical
Books) Ltd. Pp. xvii+542. Price I5S.
THIS book has been awaited with impatience by all admirers of Havelock Ellis. Where expectations ran so high, the first impression may be one of disappointment, but the second and lasting impression will undoubtedly be one of deep interest and appreciation.
Havelock Ellis and his wife-for the book is quite as much about her as about himwere both remarkable people, with wisdom and altruistic endeavour much above average comprehension, combined with capacity for achieving work of enduring scientific quality in the face of discouragement and even obloquy. They were both abnormal in many ways, so overflowing with intellectual and emotional vitality that one should perhaps not be surprised that they frequently made life Hell for each other. Havelock Ellis repeatedly states, however, that they both preferred this Hell to other people's banal Heaven-and so one can but accept the strange childishness of the outward expression of their life together.
Both were profoundly interested in eugenics and Mrs. Ellis lectured on the subject under such titles as " Eugenics and Spiritual Parenthood." " The first time she gave one of these lectures was to the Eugenics Education Society, but they never invited her to lecture again. She delivered the lectures, however, on various occasions both in England and America."
Havelock Ellis explains that he could not begin to write his life before the age of

40, because he " wished to give due weight to the influences of heredity" and found
that the investigation of his remote ancestry
helped him to understand the sources of his
own tendencies. In the first chapter he
seeks to explain much of his life and work and some of its apparent contradictions by the diversity, pugnacity, religious feeling and vigour of his forebears. Like many other great men, he says that he had always felt that he " derived the active side mainly from his mother." His own feeling of
achievement is summed up in such vivid
sentences as: " I have been an adventurer in morals and a pioneer over spiritual seas";
and " it is useless for Opportunity to present
even the most attractive forelock to one-who was not born to seize it." He rejoices that
when he surveys his ancestral stocks as a
whole from the eugenic standpoint, he " can find little that seems in the slightest degree
unbalanced or unsound." In the last chapter, when summing up his life at the age of 8o and assuring us that he " had never been so happy as to-day," he again stresses the point of view that it is only " by accepting
the facts of constitution and temperament as they come from Nature and making of them an act by which failure could be woven into success" that life can be made whole. He sees himself as " one who was, instinctively and unconsciously, an artist in living, one who used, honestly and courageously, the material of such mixed quality that was put into his hands at the outset and slowly wrought the work that Nature and his own nature-they seemed to him one-had set him to do, together with his own life, into one large and harmonious whole, so that all he lived he wrote and all that he wrote he lived."
URSULA GRANT DUFF.

