CONGENITAL MALFORMATIONS

By C. 0. CARTER, B.M., M.R.C.P.

U NDER the title congenital mal-
formations I propose to include all
the physical deformities which children may have when born, or may develop without obvious external cause soon after birth. The study of the interaction of genetic and environmental factors resulting in the development of these deformities and of the methods by which they can be presented is obviously a part of the science of Eugenics. Very little is yet known about these malformations; it is not easy to find out what is happening to a foetus concealed in its mother's womb, but perhaps enough is already known to indicate the ways in which future generations may prevent these deformities occurring.
The Epidemiological Importance ofCongenital Malformations
Fraser Roberts (1950) in a recent lecture drew attention to the ever-increasing relative importance of congenital malformations as a cause of infant deaths. As the more accessible environmental causes of stillbirth and infant deaths are prevented by the everimproving care given by doctor and midwife so the proportion of these deaths due to congenital malformations steadily increases.
Record and McKeown (I949) have quoted
the Registrar General's figures for Scotland showing that in recent years about one fifth of all still births and one tenth of all infant deaths are attributed to congenital malformations. In the same way congenital malformations are contributing an ever-increasing proportion of the deformities and illnesses which cause ill-health or even death in childhood and adolescence.
The Psychological Importance of Congenital Malformations
I think, too, that with the coming of planned parenthood these malformations have assumed greater psychological importance. Victorian mothers who not uncommonly underwent twelve pregnancies

and were proud to have reared eight of the resultant children were not greatly upset by
a stillbirth and accepted a deformed child as an act of Providence; but where each
pregnancy is a deliberate act planned at
carefully spaced intervals, parents, and mothers particularly, have a feeling of
personal responsibility for a malformed child, which may cause them distress and deter
them from having further children. In some
cases where the chances of subsequent children being affected is considerable this attitude is reasonable, it is perhaps best that
they should have no more children, but in other instances there is little chance of further children being affected and the parents are needlessly denying themselves children.

The Frequency of the More Common Malformations

The nature and frequency of the more common congenital malformations are shown in Table I. These are those which one might
expect to find in a sample of Io,ooo maternities.
TABLE I

CONGENITAL MALFORMATIONS IN 10,000 MATERNITIS

Anencephaly

... ...

Spina bifida aperta ... ...

Hydrocephaly

... ...

Mongolism ...

... ...

Pyloric stenosis ... ...

Harelip (± cleft palate) ...

Cleft palate alone ... ...

Club feet ... ... ...

Polydactyly

... ...

Congenital dislocation of the hip

Congenital heart disease ...

Hypospadias

... ...

Miscellaneous

... ...

...
...
...
...
... ...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

25... ... ... ... 25
... ... 15
IS... ...
... ... 23
... ... IO ... *-... .. 5 S... ..
... ...5 ... ... IO IO... ... ... ... 40

Adding all the malformations up it will
be seen that about one child in fifty is born with some type of congenital malformation.
In Anencephaly the right and left halves of the brain and skull have failed to develop properly and to join. Anencephalics are mostly stillborn and the remainder will die in the first few hours of life. There is no hope

83

84 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of surgical cure after birth. In Spina Bifida bone marrow and perhaps the liver in late

Aperta there is a gap in the lower part of the pregnancy or soon after birth together in a

spinal column through which the membranes proportion of cases with damage to parts of

of the spinal cord and part of the spinal cord the brain. In the more severe cases the child

itself may protrude; most of the affected is stillborn. There would be about 50

children will die in the first few weeks of life children with rhesus incompatibility in 4

and only a small proportion survive beyond series of io,ooo maternities. Of these about

ten years of age, though there is hope that 5 would be stillborn, another 5 die in infancy,

better methods of surgical treatment may be 2 or 3 survive with some damage to the brain

found. In Hydrocephaly the brain and skull and the remainder recover completely.

are distended, due to a block in the circulation of cerebro-spinal fluid. Many of the The Causation of Congenital Malformations

hydrocephalics will die during the process of As with any other disease processes, there

birth and only about half of them will is not likely to be much progress in the

survive the first year of life. There are very prevention of these deformities until more

few survivors at the age of ten. Here, too, is known about the way they are caused. In

improvements in surgery may come to make this society we are accustomed to thinking

the outlook much better in time. In Mon- of the development of human beings in terms

golism there is mental defect in association of the interaction of genetic factors and

with a number of physical peculiarities which environmental factors. For example, eye and

are characteristic. Many Mongols will die hair colour are largely determined genetically,

in the first few months of life and only about infection with German Measles largely

a quarter of them will survive to the tenth environmentally, the height and weight of

year. In Pyloric Stenosis there is an obstruc- school-children appreciably by both genetic

tion at the lower end of the stomach. About and environmental factors. I propose to

9 out of IO children are cured surgically in consider what we know about causation of

this country and in the best centres 99 out of congenital malformations in these terms.

IOO are cured. With modern surgery even the more severe forms of Harelip and Cleft Purely Genetic Determination

Palate usually survive.

There are quite a number of individual

The common deformities of the skeleton, malformations which are, for all practical

club feet, supernumerary fingers and toes and purposes, entirely determined genetically.

congenital dislocation of the hip are not, of For example, Achondroplasia, a type of

course, a danger to life and with good dwarfism characterised by very short arms

treatment few of these children are left with and legs, a depressed bridge of the nose with

any disability; with club feet and congenital somewhat bulging forehead and normal

dislocation of the hip, however, treatment intelligence. Those of you who have not seen

must be skilled and prolonged. Many of the such individuals in your professional capacity

children with congenital malformations of may well have seen them about in the streets

the heart die young, but great strides are or during your visits to circuses. There are a

being made in the surgery of these conditions. pair in the current circus at Olympia. This

Hypospadias, a malformation of the penis, condition has been shown with near certainty

can usually be cured completely by plastic by M0rch (I94I) to be due to a single

surgery.

dominant genetic factor. Again, many of the

Cases of rhesus incompatibility are not minor deformities of the skeleton such as the

included in the table since these are not condition in which the fingers are short, only

actually cases of malformation and no true two phalanges instead of three, or that in

physical deformities are known to be caused which there are only two digits on the hand,

in this way; the main features of the danger giving the so-called lobster hand, are due to

to the foetus from rhesus incompatibility are single dominant genes.

destruction of the red blood cells and the To refresh your memories I have illustrated

CONGENITAL MALFORMATIONS

85

the essentials of dominant inhentance in a diagram (Figure i).
Inheritance of a dominant gene.

Il\lParents, M x 00

Germ cefs. Aora

a

Children. Aa or aa
FIG. I
The essentials of dominant inheritance are shown in Figure i. Big " A " represents the gene for Achondroplasia, little " a " the alternative gene for normality which may occupy that particular place on that particular chromosome. An individual possesses two of each type of chromosome and so two of the alternative genes that a chromosome may carry. A normal individual has " a " on both of the particular chromosomes concerned; an Achondroplasiac has " A" on one and " a " on the other. It is not known what an individual with two " A " genes would be like but it would be an exceedingly rare event. Of the children of an Achondroplasiac on the average half will be normal and half Achondroplasiacs, according to whether the Achondroplasiac parent transmits " A " or "t a "' ; the normal parent can only transmit" a." An artificially typical pedigree of a malformation due to a dominant gene is shown in the next diagram (Figure 2).
Typical pedigree of a deformity due to a
dominant gene.

tion," perhaps a chemical change in part of the chromosome which has probably occurred in the formation of the germ cell. Sooner or
later this new gene, if it is a harmful one, is eliminated. The rate of elimination depends on the extent to which the gene diminishes its possessor's likelihood of having children. Obviously a gene which invariably causes death in infancy will be eliminated straight away and there will only be one affected individual in the family tree; the disease
will not appear to be hereditary at all. On the other hand, a gene which does not affect
fitness at all may persist for many generations and one may get very long pedigrees showing the deformity in each generation; some are known going back hundreds of years. In
Achondroplasia, most cases are new mutations, but where Achondroplasiacs do have children, on the average half of these children are Achondroplasiacs too. Achon-
droplasiac women can usually only have children by Cmsarean section.
Another type of dwarfism due essentially to a deformity of the bones of the spine,
Morquio's disease, is due in most, cases to a recessive gene. I have illustrated the essentials of recessive inheritance in the next
diagram (Figure 3).
Intgriance % a recessive gene.

Parents. Mm x Mm

Germ cell*. or m

orm

Children. MmM 2m mm(

Initial mutation----- b
* = affected individual. joaffected individual without issue.
FIG. 2
You will note that at some time the condition starts in only one of the children of
normal parents. This is the initial " muta-

FIG. 3
Here, little "im" represents the gene responsible for Morquio's disease and big " M " the alternative gene, for normality. A child will only have Morquio's disease if he has " m " on both the particular pair of chromosomes concerned. This will come about when two apparently normal parents, each carrying " m " but also " M," so that they appear normal, marry. Each of these parents can transmit " M " or " m " and these children will be normal, carriers and affected with Morquio's disease in the

c

86 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

proportion of i: 2: I; that is on the average I/4 of the children will have Morquio's disease.
The next illustration shows an artificially typical pedigree of a malformation due to a recessive gene (Figure 4).
Typical pedigree of a deformity due to a
recessive gene.
LI6
0= affected individual.
FIG. 4
The parents of the affected child are shown as first cousins. A child with an affection determined by a recessive gene has received the gene from both his parents. With a gene that is rare the chance that a married couple share a gene is much greater when they are nearly related. The chance that an individual shares a particular gene that he possesses with his first cousin is one in eight. The chance that he shares this particular gene with an unrelated woman is only the frequency of the gene in the general population, perhaps something like one in five hundred for Morquio's disease. So with rare conditions determined by recessives it is not uncommon to find that the parents are affected.
The two examples quoted are too rare to give on the list of common malformations. There is good reason for this. Where the gene is dominant and severely limits fitness nearly all the affected persons will be due to new mutations and the frequency of the condition will approximate to twice the mutation rate (twice because there are a pair of chromosomes on which the genes may mutate). Mutations are rare events, so such conditions will be rare. With a recessively determined deformity which is severe enough to make it impossible for the affected person to have children it can be shown that the proportion of affected persons will tend to

equal the mutation rate of the gene concerned. So once again one would expect them to be pretty rare.
It is perhaps fair to say that not many more diseases due to single genes are likely to be discovered unless they are very rare or unless a not uncommon disease is newly recognized and distinguished from other diseases causing similar signs and symptoms. An example of a newly recognized disease is a condition known as Cystic Fibrosis of the Pancreas. It was realised some fifteen years ago that a number of apparently different types of illness-one type of obstruction of the bowels in the newborn, one type of recurrent lung infection in children and one type of failure to absorb fat in children-were all due to a congenital anomaly affecting the lungs, the pancreas and some other organs. Recently, good evidence has come from America (Lowe, May and Reed, i949) and independently from The Hospital for Sick Children, London, that the basic disturbance in this disease is due to a recessive genetic factor.
It is possible that some instances of the more common malformations which will be considered later will in time be separately distinguished and found to be due to single genetic factors.
Purely Environmental Determination
From theoretical considerations there are a number of groups of environmental factors which might be expected to interfere with the development of the embryo-inadequate nutrition either because the mother herself is ill-nourished or because there is an inadequate transfer of nutrients to the embryo through the wall of the uterus, or the passage of poisonous substances or infectious agents across the wall of the uterus, or the exposure of the embryo to harmful physical agents such as the radiations from radium.
In animals all these agents have been shown to be capable of producing congenital malformations. It has become apparent that much the same malformation can be produced by a variety of different noxious agents and even that malformations which

CONGENITAL MALFORMATIONS

87

are known to be due usually to a genetic Vitamin A from the mother to the foetus,
factor can be closely simulated by mal- but to some disturbance in the utilization of formations due to environmental factors. Vitamin A in the faetus. For example, in rodents Spina Bifida Until recently there was no evidence that Aperta due to a recessive gene is known, but infections caused true congenital malforma-
this malformation can also be produced by tions, although it was quite common for
injecting a blue dye into the mother before smallpox and syphilis to be transmitted from the start of or early in pregnancy. It has mother to foetus. Quite suddenly, however, been suggested that at certain stages in io years ago an entirely new light was
development different parts of the embryo thrown on the causation of congenital mal-
that happen to be growing vigorously are formations by the Australian eye specialist
affected if any of the varied requirements of Gregg. Following the epidemic of German growth are withheld. But it is just because Measles in Australia in I940, he noticed that a malformation can be produced in numerous a number of mothers of children with con-
different ways that one must be cautious in genital cataract had had German Measles in
assuming that a method shown to operate in the earlier months of the pregnancy of the
an experimental animal is also the way that affected child. A number of other Australian that particular malformation is produced in workers investigated this further and it was humans. Thus Warkany in America has found that when the German Measles had
shown that one can produce a great variety been experienced in the first four months of of malformations by depriving the mother of the pregnancy the subsequent child was
Vitamin A or of Riboflavin (part of Vitamin liable to suffer from one or more of a number
B) for some little time before and during of congenital malformations, congenital cata-
pregnancy. This is most important funda- ract, deafness, heart disease and occasionally
mental work, but women in this country are mental deficiency. German Measles late in not subjected to a diet grossly deficient in pregnancy had no ill-effect. The Australian Vitamin A and there is no good evidence that impression was that a high proportion of the inadequate nutrition of the mother plays any mothers affected in the early months of the part in causing congenital malformations. If pregnancy had such deformities, but no
inadequate nutrition did play a part one adequate prospective survey which followed might expect malformations to be more the mothers from the time of their infection common in social class 5 where, at any rate to an examination of the subsequent children before the war, many mothers had a diet well was made so that one would know precisely below the optimum. In fact there appear to the proportion of children who were likely to be no class differences in the incidence of be affected. Experience here, in America and malformations and for the more limited in Scandinavia is small, but does not give group of central nervous system malforma- quite such a gloomy picture. Attempts are tions Record and McKeown (1950) in now being made in this country to have Birmingham found that the incidence was instances of mothers affected with German essentially the same in the poor districts of Measles notified at the time so that the
Birmingham as in the wealthy districts. In children can later be examined and an Rotterdam during the winter of I944-5 there accurate estimate of the risks to the children was severe malnutrition but this had no made. It is important to have such an effect on the incidence of malformations estimate as naturally enough the question of (Smith, I947). More recently in Palestine a desirability of abortion when the mother has group of i20 mothers who had riboflavin German-Measles early in pregnancy has been deficiency did not have a single malformed raised. In this country there would not child (Brzezinski, I947). The lesson to be appear to be adequate evidence to justify this. learned from these experiments of Warkany's This discovery of Gregg's was of great is perhaps that some malformations in man theoretical interest, but German Measles by may be due not to an inadequate supply of itself -contributes little to the total sum of

88 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

malformations in this country since only a birth of the child. The biggest series avail-

very small proportion of women in pregnancy able is for Poliomyelitis (Aycock and

have German Measles, even if one makes Ingalls, I946). Ninety-eight mothers affected

allowance for mild, unrecognized attacks. in pregnancy with this illness had two mal-

Only a very small proportion of the mothers formed children. These malformed children

of malformed children give a history of occurred to two of the twenty-four mothers

German Measles in pregnancy. For example, who experienced the infection in the first four

of over a hundred mothers of malformed months of the pregnancy, but even so this is

children whom I have questioned carefully well within the figure one might expect by

a few days after the birth of their child not a chance. Attempts are now being made in

single one had had German Measles during this country to get reliable figures for the

pregnancy. Even if one considers a specific number of specific vinrs diseases, though it

malformation such as congenital heart will be some years before these are available.

disease, which may be caused by rubella, it Influenza, unfortunately, has not been in-

was found that only six out of over six cluded, but it is to be hoped that some

hundred cases of congenital heart disease medical officer of health in an area heavily

seen at the Congenital Heart Clinic at the hit by the recent epidemic will take the

Hospital for Sick Children had had rubella in opportunity to record those mothers who were

the pregnancy of the malformed child. It is, affected in the early months of pregnancy

however, important to recognize examples of and have the subsequent children examined.

deformity due to German Measles since the However, even if one takes all the common

mother can be assured that there is only the specific virus diseases together they would

ordinary chance of about I in 50 of any later account for only a small proportion of all

child being malformed.

congenital malformations; they are rare

Another maternal illness which can cer- events in pregnancy. The only infection

tainly cause congenital malformations is which occurs sufficiently often to make any

Toxoplasmosis, a disease due not to a virus appreciable contribution to the total sum of

like German Measles but to a small proto- malformations are the non-specific group of

zoon. It may cause Microcephaly (that is a common colds. These ape seasonal diseases

type of mental defect associated with a very and if they do cause many congenital mal-

small. brain and skull), Hydrocephaly and formations it should be possible to show a

some eye defects. The disease is not un- seasonal variation in the number of con-

common in certain parts of the United States genital malformations. An analysis I made

of America and a few cases have been recently (Carter, I950) of I90 malformations

described in this country. It is not possible by month of birth over a period of six years

yet to estimate its importance accurately, in a big London maternity hospital showed

but it would be surprising if it accounts for no significant variation from month to

more than a very small fraction indeed of all month or season to season that could be

congenital malformations. Again, only one explained by the prevalence of colds from

child in the family is likely to be affected, so October to March.

that the prognosis for further children is good. Some years ago in Philadelphia, Murphy

There is no good evidence that any other (I947) analysed a large number of malforma-

types of maternal infection can cause con- tions by month of birth and he, too, found no

TABLE II
NUxaaa OF MALFORMZD CSLDREN BORN IN EACH MONTH 2943-1948 AT A LONDON
MATERNITY HOSPITAL Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May June July Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec. Total Malformed i8 z8 i6 14 20 15 II 7 19 17 23 12 I90
Per cent. 1*5 I-6 14 1l2 1-7 13 I-O o-6 17 I25 1-9 1-0 1.4
genital malformations, but no investigator significant variation. More recently in has yet been able to follow up any large Boston a group of doctors found in a large series from the maternal infection to the series of births from one hospital that though

CONGENITAL MALFORMATIONS

89

the incidence of all malformations did not Pinheads. In some families this malforma-

vary from month to month, there was an tion is distributed as if it were due to a

excess of multiple malformations, that is, recessive factor. But it is also known that

children with several deformities at once in both German Measles and irradiation of the

the autumn, which might reasonably be mother in pregnancy can cause Microcephaly.

attributed to winter epidemics eight months The time will come when it will be possible

or so previously. This is a sensible idea easily to separate the different forms of

since German Measles does usually cause examination and relate each to its mode of

multiple malformations; in my own series I causation; then one will no longer talk about

was not able to confirm this, but it needs Microcephaly as if it were one condition, but

checking further. I also found that there was have specific names for the types of known

no individual three-monthly period during causation and use the word Microcephaly

the six years in which there was a significant only for a residual group where causation is

increase in the number of malformations, still unknown.

suggesting that none of the various epidemics The best examples of combined hereditary

that occurred in this period had any con- and environmental factors is the condition

siderable effect on the rate of malformations. hamolytic disease of the newborn due to

Apart from infections there is no good incompatibility of mother and child for the

evidence that any other maternal conditions rhesus blood group. Hemolytic disease is

such as chronic heart disease, chronic lung outside my definition of congenital malforma-

disease, abnormal position of the uterus, or tions, but it is worth describing in somewhat

disease of the ovary caused any increased oversimplified form as an illustration that

incidence of malformations, and further one the relations between genetic and environ-

may say that at any rate for the more mental factors may be complex and un-

common of these conditions it is unlikely that expected. To get haemolytic disease the

they do cause any such increase (Carter, I950). child must be rhesus positive and

have a rhesus negative mother; this is Genetic and Environmental Deteiaion purely genetically determined, the rhesus

This may take two forms. A malformation positive gene being dominant so that a rhesus

may be due sometimes to genetic factors and negative woman married to a rhesus positive

in other instances to environmental factors. man may have a rhesus positive child.

Or both genetic and environmental factors Another factor, however, is also required;

may be needed to cause the development of the mother must have been previously

the malformation in a single individual. All sensitized to rhesus positive blood cells

the more common congenital malformations, either by a previous pregnancy of a rhesus

except for congenital heart disease probably, positive child, or by a transfusion of rhesus

fall into one or other of these two groups positive blood cells. A transfusion will

-Anencephaly and Spina Bifida Aperta, sensitize the majority of women, but only a

Hydrocephaly, Mongolism, club feet, con- small proportion of rhesus negative mothers

genital dislocation of the hip, Pyloric who carry a rhesus positive child are sensi-

Stenosis, Hypospadias.

tized. It is not yet known whythis shouldbe so.

Unfortunately not enough family studies Among the true congenital deformities,

have yet been made with most of these to club foot and congenital dislocation of the

know whether either type of factor may cause hip probably afford illustrations of the inter-

the malformation or a combination of both is action of genetic and environmental factors

required.

although we do not yet know the details of

Warkany has cited Microcephaly as an this interaction. There is a definite concen-

example of a malformation apparently tration of club foot within certain families.

caused alternatively by genetic or environ- The general incidence in the population is

mental factors. Microcephalics are graphic- about I in 6oo as indicated earlier, but the

ally described by some American authors as probability of a brother or sister being

go THE EUGENICS REVIEW

affected is not i in 6oo but about I in 30; factor in club foot is pressure of the wall of

similarly we find the parents and children of the uterus inverting the foot, and he is able

individuals with club foot affected are more to demonstrate convincingly the way that he

often than one wpuld expect by chance. thinks the foetal limbs are positioned in the

This might be due to non-genetic similarity uterus so as to produce the deformity. One

of environment within these families, but this may suppose that the genetic constitution of

view is made unlikely by a study of the twin the foetus causes its leg to grow out in such

brothers and sisters of children with club foot. a way that there is a tendency for the foot to

It was Sir Francis Galton who first drew reach the wall of the uterus at an angle and

attention to the value of twin studies. In be inverted, but that something else decides,

brief, monozygous twins, often called iden- perhaps the size and shape of the uterus,

tical though they are never quite identical, perhaps the lie of the foetus in the uterus,

have the same genetic endowment, both whether the foot does, in fact, get inverted.

being derived from an early division of a With congenital dislocation of the hip it

single embryo derived from a single sperm would appear that what is inherited is a pre-

and egg cell. Dizygous twins are derived from disposition of the head of the thigh bone to

two pairs of egg and sperm cells. They are slip out of its socket in the pelvis, but that

ordinary brothers and sisters who happen to something else is required, some environ-

have been conceived within a few days of mental strain to actually pull the head out of

each other, they are often called for this its socket. Faber (I928) in Germany, sug-

reason fraternal. Dizygous twins, like ordinary gested that what was inherited was a mal-

brothers and sisters, have on the average development of the socket of the hip so that

only half of their genes in common. Now the it was unusually shallow. He claimed that

environment of identical twins before birth he was able to recognise this shallow state of

is, with one exception, no more alike than the socket in some of the near relatives of

that of fraternal twins, and so it is reasonable affected children, though these relatives had

to attribute a greater similarity of identical never suffered from dislocation. Further, he

twin pairs to their greater genetic similarity. claimed that while the pedigrees of congenital

The exception is that most identical twins dislocation itself did not suggest any simple

have an inter-communicating circulation form of inheritance, the distribution of

-however, this is probably not important. shallow sockets in the families did behave as

Isigkeit (1938) in Germany studied over if it was due to a dominant gene. This work

200 of the twins of children with club foot needs confirmation, but it is obviously a

and found that whereas 30 per cent. of the sensible way of looking at the problem.

identical twins of affected children also had Again, one environmental factor concerned

club foot, only 3 per cent of the fraternal may be the position of the foetus in the

twins also had it.

uterus since there is evidence that children

This much greater resemblance of identical with congenital dislocation of the hip are

twins indicates strongly that there is an unusually often breech-born.

important genetic basis to the causation of Among the other common congenital

club foot, though it does not tell us in any deformities Spina Bifida Aperta and Anence-

detail about the genetic factors concerned. phaly not uncommonly go together in

A second deduction from this twin study is families. Penrose (1946) and later Record

that the genetic factor is not all-important. and McKeown (I95i) have shown that the

If it were, Isigkeit would have found that all probability of brother or sister of an affected

the monozygous twin brothers and sisters child being also affected with one or other of

would also have had club foot. In fact, only these conditions is about I in 40 instead of

30 per cent, three out of ten, had it. There the random chance of about I in 200.

must be some other factor, presumably Another factor, in some way environmental,

environmental, required. Denis Browne has perhaps, that affects the incidence of Spina

suggested that the immediate causative Bifida Aperta and Anencephaly is the

CONGENITAL MALFORMATIONS

number of children that the mother has had
previously; first-born children and children
born later than sixth in the family are more often affected than are children in intermediate positions. Naturally enough, genetic investigation is handicapped by the fact that anencephalics never have children, and it is very rare that individuals with Spina Bifida Aperta survive to have children.
With Mongolism, the familial concentration is less obvious than with the other conditions that have been discussed. Nevertheless it probably exists. Penrose has estimated that the overall chance of brothers and sisters being affected may be about I in
IOO; this must be compared with the
general incidence of about I in 6oo. The striking feature of Mongolism, however, which has been known for a generation is the way that the incidence varies with the age of the mother. Some figures from a number of London maternity hospitals (Carter and MacCarthy I95I) showing the number of mongols born to women in different age
groups are illustrated in Diagram I.

Number

of

mongoflisve

born to IOOO women year oge-grOups.

in

250 _ -

260

200

150 -

~~~~140

100 _

0 2.4 2.5
AGE-15-*9 2042S-293 5-9404445
DIAGRAM I
There is no good explanation for this astounding phenomenon. It is more likely to represent an environmental than a genetic process. On the other hand, all recorded identical twins of mongols have also been- mongols, while fraternal twins of mongols, like non-twin brothers and sisters are rarely mongols. This suggests that genetic factors are important in determining the incidence of Mongolism. It is most unusual for mongols to have children, but there are two examples on record and these

two cases are most remarkable. One mongol
woman in America had a girl who was not only normal and still alive but had an intelligence quotient of I20; the other mongol woman in France had a child who also was a mongol, the child died in infancy.
Among the other common malformations Harelip with or without a lateral Cleft Palate, midline cleft palate, Pyloric Stenosis,
are all found more commonly in the near relatives of affected individuals than in the general population; but, in all, the incidence, even in brothers and sisters, is considerably less than the i in 4 required by a recessive inheritance, and in all of them only a proportion of the identical twins of affected persons are themselves affected. With congenital heart disease on the other hand it is not certain that there is any increased incidence within certain families at all.
Prevention
It will be clear to you that our knowledge of causation of, at any rate, the common congenital malformations does not enable us to more than speculate on the ways in which we might reduce their incidence. Nevertheless it is worth speculating and considering some of the general principles that must underlie any attempt to reduce the incidence of common malformations. One cannot remain content with one childin fiftyborn malformed.
The simplest problem is presented by the malformations which are, for all practical purposes, entirely caused by environmental factors. For example, it should not be very long before it is possible to inoculate or vaccinate all women who have not already had German Measles, when they marry or even in childhood so that they will be immune to the disease. In the meantime, we should encourage parents to expose their girls to German Measles at home and at school rather than try to protect them from this illness which is a very minor one except to the fcetus.
Where malformations are, for all practical purposes, entirely caused by single
genetic factors it will be difficult to reduce the number of affected persons beyond a limit set by the mutation rate of the gene concerned, and I imagine it will be a very

92 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

long time before methods of reducing the till the number of those affected again equals

mutation rate are discovered. Where the the mutation rate. The position, however,

genetic factor is fully dominant and where will be very different once it is possible to

the condition always causes death in child- recognize the presence of the recessive gene

hood then all cases are due to mutations. in the normal carrier. If these carriers were all

There are a pair of chromosomes on which recognized, and if they planned the number of

the mutation can occur, and so the incidence their children at well below replacement rate,

of these diseases will be twice the mutation then the frequencyof the normal carrierwould

rate. It is just conceivable that novel approximate to twice the mutation rate as

environmental means will be found to prevent with a lethal dominant gene. With a recessive

such genes taking effect, but with new gene, however, this would mean in practice

mutations it will be difficult to know when that the number of affected individuals who

to apply environmental prophylaxis.

have the abnormal gene on both that pair of

Where the disease does not interfere with chromosomes would fall to quite negligible

the ability of the affected person to reproduce, proportions. The detection of carriers will

the incidence of the deformity could be cut not be easy in human beings. The poultry

down to that which was twice the mutation farmer can cross a cock with a score of that

rate if all affected individuals refrained from cock's daughters and so make sure that it is

having children. This decision on whether not carrying any harmful recessive genes.

to refrain from having children or not can With humans we must use other methods,

reasonably be left to the parents themselves but we already know of one blood disease,

once they are informed of the facts; the Mediterranean anemia, where the carrier

affected person is probably the best judge of state can be recognized with some certainty

the disability caused by his deformity and by laboratory test on the red blood cells. All

whether it is something which he or she would carriers, however, of recessive genes cannot

like to transmit to children. I do not think be encouraged to have small families at the

anyone would mind much about transmitting same time or the population would fall

short fingers to their children, but they might drastically. We are probably all carriers of

well be deterred by Achondroplasia, even at least one such gene. It would be necessary

though Achondroplasiacs, if they survive to take them one by one as part of some co-

infancy, can and do lead happy and useful ordinated scheme; but nevertheless it is

lives. Such individuals need not of course clear that the possibilities of improvement

deny themselves the pleasure of any family are much greater with deformities due to

at all provided that they plan their families recessives than with those due to dominants.

at well below replacement rate, say, two For the conditions where both genetical

children. The life of the new mutation will and environmental factors are involved the

then be restricted to only a few generations. most profitable immediate line of attack

Where the genetic factor is recessive there would probably be on the environmental

are much greater possibilities of reducing the factors. For example, if women had their

incidence of the defect. It can be shown families before they were thirty-five, which

that the number of persons with a severe physiologically they could easily do even if

defect due to recessive gene tends to equal they planned to have five or six, the number

the mutation rate of the gene concerned. It of mongols would be reduced by nearly two-

has been suggested that the incidence of thirds. Again if we could recognise the

such deformities could be reduced for a time environmental factors that play a part in

if the amount of inbreeding is reduced, say, by congenital dislocation of the hip we could

forbidding cousin marriages. But in the long take care that they did not occur to those

run this would be futile since the number of children whom there was reason to suppose

harmful genes eliminated in each generation were genetically predisposed to this condi-

is also reduced for a time, and in consequence tion. Such environmental prophylaxis, how-

the number of harmful genes build up again ever, by itself would be unsatisfactory since

CONGENITAL MALFORMATIONS

93

it would tend to reduce the rate of elimination of the harmful genes and so increase the
number of persons who would need special
treatment to prevent the gene taking effect, but as it becornes possible to recognize the genetic predisposition in individuals who are
apparently normal it will become possible to reduce the frequency of the predisposing genes by advising such predisposed persons
to have small families. This will reduce the
number of predisposed children for whom special environmental prophylaxis has to be
supplied to reasonable numbers so that they
will not be missed and will get the necessary special treatment.
An illustration of the technical and social problems involved is given by hemolytic disease of the new-born. It is probable that before long means will be found of neutralizing the antibodies in the mother's blood as
they are formed by repeated injections; but this would be a tedious procedure, and unless some practical way of preventing the sensitization of the mother is found, communities will have to consider seriously whether they
should not all try to become Rh positive. Some peoples such as the South American Indians and the Chinese are fortunate in that they are already practically all Rh positive so that haemolytic disease of the new-born is practically unknown. The proportion of Rh negative women in England is about i6 per cent; this would be reduced to a little over IX per cent in one generation if al couples of whom at least one was Rh negative planned two-child families and failed to replace
themselves by about 30 per cent, while of the remainder those couples who are both
Rh positive but carried a Rh negative gene just replaced themselves, and those couples of whom at least one carried no Rh negative gene at all more than replaced themselves
by 20 per cent, planning families of, let us say, five children. In practice, as with most eugenic plans the difficulty will be to
encourage the last group to plan large families, rather than to persuade the first
group to plan two-child families. In this way, even with incomplete co-operation from the
parents, one would get a great reduction in

Rh negative genes in half a dozen generations, a result that would only be achieved in many thousands of years by natural selection.
With other conditions the detailed procedure necessary would be very different, but the principle of getting the co-operation of the public in planning family size to achieve desirable changes in gene frequencies remains the same. Where the causative factors of congenital malformations have been fully elucidated this knowledge must be made available to parents through the medical profession generally and through special clinics. The final decision as to size of family must, of course, rest with individual parents, but they need guidance on the issues and chances involved. Where it is desirable that families should be small I am sure there will be no difficulty in getting the co-operation of the parents in limiting their aspirations to two children. I am also of the opinion that where families should be large parents will respond to guidance and moral encouragement.
I would like to end on the optimistic note that human communities will be able in the
not-too-distant future, by taking reasonable trouble, to bring down the incidence of congenital malformations to the limits set by the mutation rates of the genes concerned.
REFERENCES Aycock, N. L. and Ingalls, T. H. (1946). Am. J.
Med. Sci., 212, 366. Brzezinski, A., Branberg, K. and Braun, K. (I947).
J. Obst. Gyn. Brit. Emp., 54, I82. Carter, C. (I950). J. Obst. Gyn. Brit. Emp., 57, 897. Carter, C. and MacCarthy, D. (195z). Brit. J. Soc. Med.
In press. Faber, A. (I928). Untersuchungen 4ber die A etiologie und
Pathogenese der angeborene Hiaftverrenkung. Leipzig. Goldstein, L. and Murphy, D. P. (I929). Am. J.
Roentgen, 22, 207. Gregg, N. M. (1942). Tr. Ophth. Soc. Australia, 3, 35. Isigkeit, E. (1928). Arch. Orthop. Mech. Ther., 26, 259.
Lowe, C. U., May, C. D. and Reed, S. C. (I949). Am. J.
Dis. Child., 78, 349.
Mollison, P. and Cutbush, M. (1949). B.M.J. (i), 123. M0rch, E. T. (I942). Chondrodystrophic dwarfs in
Denmark. Univ. Institute for Human Genetics, Copenhagen. Murphy, D. P. (I947). Congenital Malformations. 2nd. edn. Univ. Pennsylvania Press, Philadelphia. Penrose, L. S. (I946). Ann. Eug., 13, 73.
Record, R. G. and McKeown, T. (I949). Brit. J. Soc.
Med., 3, I83. - (z95I). Ibid. In press. Roberts, J. A. F. (I950). Mother and Child, 21, 128. Stevenson, S., Worcester, J. and Rice, R. (1950)
Pediatrics, 6, 37.
Eugeis RLeview, VoL XLIII, Nlo. 2

