Havelock Ellis

H AVELOCK ELLIS was born on February 2nd, 1859. In this year of the centenary of his birth many appreciations
of his work and character have appeared in the Press and in full-scale biographies. As a tribute to a one-time Fellow of the Eugenics Societyfrom 1921 until his death in 1939-as well as to a figure of world-wide renown in the field he made his own, we print below some of his thoughts on eugenics and race-regeneration followed by a note on Havelock Ellis contributed by Mr. Paul Bloomfield.
Thus had come about the recent expansion of that conception of Eugenics, or the science and art of Good Breeding in the human race, which a group of workers, pioneered by Francis Galton-at first in England and later in America, Germany and elsewhere-have been developing for some years past. Eugenics is beginning to be felt to possess a living actuality which it failed to possess before. Instead of being a benevolent scientific fad it begins to present itself as the goal to which we are inevitably moving.
... Human eugenics need not be, and is not likely to be, a cold-blooded selection of partners by some outside scientific authority. But it may be, and is very likely to be, a slowly growing conviction-first among the more intelligent members of the community and then by imitation and fashion among the less intelligent members-that our children, the future race, the torch-bearers of civilization for succeeding ages, are not the mere result of chance or Providence, but that, in a very real sense, it is within our power to mould them, that the salvation or damnation of many future generations lies in our hands since it depends on our wise and sane choice of a
mate.
The Task of Social Hygiene. (1912)
For those who have been taught to believe that man was in the first place created by God, it should not be difficult to realize the Divine nature of the task of human creation which has since been placed in the hands of men, to recognize it as a practical part of religion, and to cherish the sense of its responsibilities. Moreover, it is not true that men have ever felt free to choose their mates for life at random. The savage and the civilized are alike bound by restrictions which few dare

to overpass. There have always been castes and classes into which a man is free to marry, and a much greater number of castes and classes from which by rigorous custom, or even severe penalties, he was prohibited from marrying into. There is no great hardship in the injunction to marry into the caste of the well-born, the class of the healthy, and the less hardship since those castes and classes will always be, on the whole, the most attractive. The Problem of Race-Regeneration. (1911)
Eugenics constitutes the link between the Social Reform of the past, painfully struggling to improve the conditions of life, and the Social Hygiene of the future, which is authorized to deal adequately with the conditions of life because it has its hands on the sources of life. On this plane we are able to concentrate our energies on the finer ends of life, because we may reasonably expect to be no longer hampered by the ever-increasing burdens which were placed upon us by the failure to control life; while the more we succeed in our efforts to purify and strengthen life, the more magnificent become the tasks we may reasonably hope to attempt and compass.
The Task of Social Hygiene. (1912)
Every fall in the birth-rate means a fall in the death-rate, in the disease-rate, in the rate of misery, an immense saving not only in money but in human happiness and social effort. Thus it is that though the birth-rate in England has steadily fallen during the past ten years the increase in the population, though at a somewhat lower rate, has been, absolutely, greater than ever before, for the death-rate is also falling. Any attempt to put a spoke in the wheel of progress by reducing the fit to the uncivilized level of the unfit, even if it were possible, would be useless, for it would merely serve to increase the death-rate, the diseaserate and the misery-rate. It is worse than idle, therefore, to listen to those who pine for the days, seventy years gone by, for at that time in some of our great cities (such as Manchester and Leeds) of every thousand children born, six hundred died before reaching the age of five. The Problem of Race-Regeneration. (1911)
Henry Havelock Ellis, the son of a sea captain and of a fundamentalist mother related to the hero of Lucknow, died in 1939 in his eighty-first

2-UN

'45
THE EUGENICS REVIEW, October 1959, 51, 3.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

year after maldng two important contributions to study medicine. This also left him free to

to human welfare. He had laid humanity at re-interpret the late "Wizard", and the result

large under an obligation to himself by his was not an attempt to found some new Oneida pioneer effort to study the natural history of community but an impetus towards "progres-

man's sexual behaviour in all its variety (as if sive" thought in general. The Fellowship of the this was natural), and secondly, by his life as New Life, started by Ellis and others in 1883,
well as by what he wrote, he helped to give developed under the influence of Frank Pod-

people, especially the inhibited English people, more into the Fabian Society-it seemed more

the courage to start talking about sex, love and intelligent to most of the idealistic New Livers

marriage more openly and rationally.

to direct their efforts to social reform rather

The Ellises were lower middle class; and this than personal perfection. Ellis, who was not

was fortunate. For the well-born and rich politically minded, was again left free, this minority had usually had plenty of common time to get on with his medicine and improve

sense about sex, at any rate heterosexual sex, his already considerable knowledge of litera-

and in the main had managed to do what they ture.

wanted-had practised without first nerving Free-without being heart-free. The first of themselves by preaching. No member of the the five principal women in Ellis's life now

Establishment would have found it necessary came on the scene. She was the talented South to start a pseudo-religious movement, like African writer, Olive Schreiner, who had in

Thomas Lake Harris or James Hinton, in order common with Ellis, if not much else, a prone-

to provide himself with mistresses. In polite ness to rather complicated personal entanglecircles the Amphitryon situation could be ments. Since what was sympathetic and creative

laughed off, but even if it led to a duel or a in Ellis was correlated with his curious blend divorce, that was nothing to the peculiar of emotionalism with intermittent sexuality-a

ignominy it can still mean in a suburb, a slum sort of reflection of his mother's necessarily inor a housing estate where the police news is termittent connubial life-it would be wrong taken seriously. Till lately Church and State to be impatient with the details his biographers have required the ordinary man and woman to give us of his relations with the temperamental

be lucky in their sexual relations, or else ... Early in life Ellis was impressed by the
enormous over-simplification, or untruth, that official morality sustained in this matter. He knew it wouldn't do, because he, an honest
man, had, with his narcissistic self-regard, a real gift for introspection, and was himself a kind

Olive, the Lesbian Edith (whom he married), the comfortable Amy, the very remarkable Margaret Sanger and the devoted Fran9oise. Two eminent homosexual friends of Ellis's
early days, J. A. Symonds and Edward Carpen-
ter, brought out the paladin in him: he had Symonds' co-operation for the first draft of

of fly-paper for interesting individualistic people what became the first volume of the Studies in and neurotics. When at the age of twenty-one the Psychology of Sex: the subject, sexual he came back from a spell of teaching in the inversion. This marked an epoch.

Australian bush, where he had experienced a The book appeared in 1897. Six months later, kind of "conversion" (getting from it, whatever owing to his unfortunate choice of a publisher, it was, a sense of mission), there was a moment Ellis became involved in an irrelevant prosecuwhen his want of sophistication-and of back- tion for obscene libel known as the Bedborough ing-might have let him down. He came into Case. At the end of it he found it expedient to

the orbit of the free-love prophet Hinton. But there was always a tendency for Ellis to be lucky, not purely lucky, since up to point it no doubt is true that character is fate; and now his luck held. To begin with, Hinton was dead.
Further, Hinton's sister-in-law was so pleased

publish his further Studies in America: at the same time he had become, at the age of forty, a world figure, respected by serious psychologists and looked on-and up to-by a great
many unhappy and maladjusted people as "a Sage of Sex, a healer possessed of rare powers".

with Ellis that she put up the money for him To Mr. Collis* he is a Sage; to Mr. Calder-

146

HAVELOCK ELLIS

Marshallt he would be one but for his want of Ellis was modest; he was not out for money theology. Ellis had an equally pragmatical view or honours, and since there is a certain truth of religion and love, since both seemed to him in the nursery proverb that "those who don't equally real to those who felt them: equally ask don't get", he was not overwhelmed with

real, and, according to him, equally "natural" either. His independent vein of literary criticism -and of course to his Christian biographer this and causerie provoked one man of letters to will not do. A marked difference between Ellis remark, lately, with avowed snobbism, that

and the Kinsey team, of whose Reports he was Ellis was never "accepted" in the best literary so to speak the grandfather, is that while they circles. Yet it was something to have planned

compile records of people's sexual habits with- and launched the Mermaid series of Elizabethan

out mentioning "love", Ellis, full of solicitude
for human sensibility, was always talking about
it. About the time of the Bedborough case, too, Ellis and Freud, his senior by three years, began a correspondence and kept it up spasmodically for the rest of Ellis's life. Mr. Vincent

dramas, and From Rousseau to Proust is good and readable. Though, for all his work gathering data for the medical psychologist, Ellis had not moved much in medical circles either, it was a fitting tribute that the Royal College of Physicians paid him (at the instance of Lord

Brome's$ account of this relationship is of the Horder) when they made him an Honorary
greatest interest. Approaching the subject that Fellow. The occasion was to have been cele-

Ellis had made his own from a very different brated by a banquet, but "Ellis said he would direction, Freud, with his formidable, hard rather forgo the Fellowship than speak in

intelligence was soon to offer the world an public. A compromise was reached by Horder irresistible hypothesis and to score a success and two of his colleagues taking him out to an

that at moments, no doubt, piqued Ellis. For he also had had intimations of the truth about auto-eroticism and the significance of dreams, and had guessed that incestuous feelings were far from unusual. There were some collisions, as for instance over homosexuality. Freud had noted that all the male inverts he knew had had a childhood fixation on a woman, usually the mother; Ellis believed there was an inherited
element in it too. The importance of the study of heredity, and
of a forward-looking policy for eugenics, was clear to Ellis, and he discussed the matter in his Task of Social Hygiene and elsewhere. The

informal dinner." When Ellis knew he was dying he charac-
teristically wished to do something useful about it: "it should be a blow struck for euthanasia."
But it was Franwoise who would have had to
strike the blow and bear the consequences; he died in time to save her from having to take either of two grievous alternatives. For his faith, his courage and his works we can reckon him a great Englishman. He helped society to understand itself better, and our society to become more consistent and more charitable, in the moral sense.
PAUL BLOOMFIELD

increase of human numbers worried him more and more-thus in the last volume of Impressions and Comments he comes back to it three times, declaiming bitterly against those who seemed afraid "that Man is not multiplying at the rate at which it is theoretically possible for
him to multiply".

* Calder-Marshall, Arthur. Havelock Ellis: A

Biography. London, 1959. Hart-Davis. Pp. 292. Price

30s.

t195C9o.llCiass,seJlol.hnPpS.tevwiair+t2.45A.nPrAircteis2t5so.f Life. London,

t Brome, Vincent. Sigmund Freud Ellis, London, 1959. A contribution

and Havelock to the March

number of Encounter.

'47

