THE HEREDITY OF THE STENWARTS
A Remarkably Varied Family

By W. T. J. GUN, F.R.Hist.S., F.S.G.

T HE Stewart heredity presents more were based on his plebeian appearance, want

problems than does that of the of dignity, and extreme personal timidity,

Tudors, which was treated in the last none of these characteristics, except possibly

number of the REVIEw, and inherent diffi- the second, appearing in any of the ' offi-

culties face us from the commencement, cial ' ancestors. The assumption, however,

when we consider the character of the first of a complete plebeian descent would seem to

of the Stewart line to ascend the throne of be unwarrantable, not only from its in-

England.

herent improbability, but even more from

the fact that no one of these traits re-

KING JAMES I

appeared in any of James's own descendants,

PARENTS. Henrv, Lord Darnley.
Marv, Queen of Scotland.

which on such a hypothesis, must surely have occurred.
There is certainly a greater likelihood of the paternity of Rizzio, both from the

GRANDPARENTS.
Matthew Stewart, Earl of Lennox. Margaret Douglas.
James V, King of Scotland. Mary of Guise.

circumstances of the moment, and from biological theory. David Rizzio was the son of an Italian musician, but of the general characteristics of his father and of his remoter ancestry we know nothing; he himself was plain in his person, physically

GREAT-GRANDPARENTS.
John, Earl of Lennox. Anne Stewart.
Archibald, Earl of Angus. Margaret Tudor.
James IV, King of Scotland. Margaret Tudor.
Claude, Duke of Guise.

timid, and showed a complete absence of
tact and savoir-faire when raised to the posi-
tion for which he was totally unfitted. While James, as has been said, was also uncouth in his person and physically timid, he by no means altogether lacked tact and
savoir-faire; the absence of these qualities
was more marked in some of his descendants.

Antoinette de Bourbon.

James was, of course, extraordinarilv un-

As in the case of the Tudors, the ostensible ancestry of James I is set out as above, and one is immediately struck with the fact

like his mother, in whom good looks and natural dignity were conspicuous; the former she inherited chiefly from her father, the latter from her mother. On Darnley's

that his characteristics have but little resemblance to those of any of these ancestors. This fact was so obvious, that from an early

side there were equal good looks, but neither he nor his father, Lennox, were in any way noted for dignity of bearing, though Lennox,

period doubts arose as to his parentage, at least, did not lack physical courage, while

some considering that he was the son of his wife, Margaret Douglas, was a woman Mary by David Rizzio, while others con- of strong and virile character, as befitted a

tended that he was a changeling. Both of these assumptions, but especially the latter,

descendant of the Douglases and the Tudors. Neither a plebeian appearance nor

I95

I96THE EUGENICS REVIEW

physical timidity could well have descended of Denmark, has been questioned, but with

therefore on James from his ' official ' an- little reason, and in their cases the ostensible

cestry, though the Lennox line might pos- ancestry adequately accounts for their

sibly be responsible for his lack of dignity, characters.

and it is certainly conceivable that the Henry, Prince of Wales, whose early

timidity was a purely ' acquired ' charac- death was so deeply lamented, showed pro-

teristic, occasioned by the brutal murder mise of a high order, and was undoubtedly

of Rizzio almost before his mother's eyes abler than his younger brother. Elizabeth

shortly before his birth. A Rizzio pater- was a woman of much charm, considerable

nity seems, however, to be indicated by mental vigour, and inexhaustible vitality,

another trait in James's character, his very tenacious both in her affections and her

curious pedantry mixed with a good deal of dislikes. Charles's dominating characteris-

shrewdness, qualities which may well have tics were undoubtedly obstinacy and lack

been derived from a partly middle-class an- of tact, allied, however, to many excellent

cestry; there would, in any case, be some qualities, great dignitv, high morality, and

Tudor descent to account for his attachment much love of culture.

to learning.

It is obvious that Charles, and to an even

On the whole, James's own character greater extent his sister Elizabeth, bore

seems to indicate a Rizzio rather than a many resemblances to their grandmother,

Darnley descent; considerations which Mary Stewart, and to her immediate an-

point the other way on this question of his cestry. From Darnley quite as much as

paternity can be more fully discussed in the from Rizzio the tactlesslness shown by

next section.

Charles may have emanated, and in the

cases of all three of James I's children, a

CHARLES I

Darnley descent fits the position better than

PARENTS.
King James I. Anne of Denmark.

one from Rizzio.
Turning to the Danish ancestry, we find Anne of Denmark a good-humoured woman, very fond of gaiety and amusement, with

GRANDPARENTS.

ordinary mental abilities, but not below the average. Frederick II of Denmark was a

Henry, Lord Darnley.

quiet, prudent man, of rigid principles, par-

Mary, Queen of Scotland. Frederick II, King of Denmark.

ticularly with regard to religion, while his wife, Sophia, was a woman much above the

Sophia of Mecklenburg.

average, of great intellectual capacity, noted

especially as a patroness of scientists.

GREAT-GRANDPARENTS.

Turning to the great-grandparents of

Matthew, Earl of Lennox.

Charles I, Christian III of Denmark was an

Margaret Douglas.

excellent and upright monarch, very simple

James V, King of Scotland.

in his manner of life, hardly a strong

Mary of Guise.

character, being much under the influence

Christian II, King of Denmark.

of his domineering wife, Dorothea. No

Dorothea of Saxe-Lauenburg.

definite character-picture of Ulric of Meck-

Ulric, Duke of Mecklenburg.

lenburg or of his wife seems to have come

Elizabeth of Denmark.

down, but the Duke, who was a lover of the

Charles I, his brother Henry, Prince of Wales, and his sister Elizabeth, Queen of Bohemia, were thorough patricians by

arts, appears to have been a sensible ruler. His wife was a sister of Christian III, and their father, Frederick I of Denmark, was therefore doubly the ancestor of Charles I.

nature, totally unlike their father in this respect. The fidelity of their mother, Anne

Frederick was a somewhat hard and unloveable character, but showed sagacity and pru-

THE HEREDITY OF THE STEWARTS

I97

dence in the difficult times following the

GRANDPARENTS.

introduction of the Reformation.

King James 1.

Common sense and prudence seem, on Anne of Denmark.

the whole, to have been the keynote of the Henry IV, King of France.

ancestry of Anne of Denmark, particularly Marie de Medici.

among the men; two at least of the women

showved higher mental attainments, coupled

GREAT-GRANDPARENTS.

perhaps with less prudence. Prince Henry Henry, Lord Darnley.

probably took mainly from this side, Mary,. Queen of Scotland.

Charles obviously took less; his wrong- Frederick II, King of Denmark.

headedness has no counterpart among his Sophia of Mecklenburg.

immediate Danish and German ancestors. Antoine de Bourbon.

Determination some of them certainly Jeanne d'Albret.

showed, but determination of a more sen- Francis, Grand Duke of Tuscany.

sible kind, and the more unfortunate fea- Joanna of Austria.

tures of Charles's character were almost

certainly derived from his paternal grand- There are few more interesting studies in

parents, and more particularly from the history than the characters of these two

grandfather, whether Darnley or Rizzio, brothers, both so strongly marked, and

both of whom and also Mary Stewart, were both so different in almost every respect.

alike wrong-headed.

Selfishness was the keynote of Charles's

Charles's love of culture was derivable character; he hated taking trouble, but

from several sources, his high moral charac- could work hard enough when he liked.

ter, in the sexual sense, from his grandfather, Frederick of Denmark, a most upright man in this respect, and like Charles himself, devoted to his wife. This strong

He possessed an excellent memory, strong powers of observation, and was probably the wittiest monarch that ever lived. By disposition he was tolerant and good-natured,

family affection was equally conspicuous in Anne of Denmark and in her daughter Elizabeth.

and, though, of course, a complete sensualist, not given either to drink or to gambling. Withal he took great interest in both

The character, in short, of Charles is far more obviously derived from his ostensible

literature and science, particularly in the latter.

ancestors than is that of his father, and a James's intellectual attainments were of

study of James's family seems finally to an obviously lower order, but he not only

tilt the balance in favour of the Darnley could work, but loved hard work. Of a

descent, strengthened as this also is by the commanding appearance, better looking

characteristics of the next generation. This than Charles, he was stiff and restrained in

leaves a part of James's character quite manner, though not incapable of a gracious

unexplained by any known heredity, we can courtesv. Tactless obstinacy was clearly

in this evenlt only conclude that some quali- both his worst defect and at the same time

ties, dormant for an exceptional number of the keynote of his character. The differ-

generations, re-appeared in him, and in ence between. the brothers was well summed

him only.

up by Buckingham, " The king could see

things if he would, the duke would see

CHARLES II AND JAMES II

things if he could." Licentiousness was the one characteristic that the two shared in

PARENTS.
King Charles I. Henrietta Maria of France.

common. Of their two sisters who lived to maturity,
the character of Mary of Orange, which will be further considered when we come to her

i98 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

son, William III, bore, on the whole, more wife shared the bigotry, which together with

resemblance to that of James; but the lively her cold hauteur and lack of charm, was so

and vivacious Henrietta of Orleans, with eminently characteristic of her first cousin,

her intense love of pleasure coupled with Philip II of Spain, and indeed of many other

considerable mental ability, was almost subsequent Hapsburgs.

the female counterpart of her brother It is obvious that of all his ancestors,

Charles.

Charles II most resembled his maternal

Let us now turn to the maternal ancestry grandfather, of whom, indeed, he was a

of this very interesting family. Henrietta weaker copy. " Paris vent bien un messe,"

Maria, a woman of a somewhat frivolous and how Charles would have echoed that saying!

shallow mind, incapable of concentration, His mental gifts he certainly derived mainly

showed a great want of tact and judgment from the line of Jeanne d'Albret, though the

when tested during her husband's troubles; influence of the unstable Antoine de Bour-

her disposition was, however, affectionate, bon is also apparent. From the Medici

and her nature pure. She transmitted some line we can only trace in Charles his love of

ability from her brilliant father, but showed science, though this may also be attributable

little of that ability herself. That father to Sophia of Mecklenburg. There are also

was, indeed, a ' preux chevalier,' ' sans certain resemblances in his character to the

peur ' if not altogether ' sans reproche.' latter's daughter, Anne of Denmark, and in

Courageous, dashing, vivacious in company, another line to Mary Stewart. Unlike both

attached to learning, Henry IV of France his parents in most respects, Charles took

was dowered with all the graces, but his something from several of the ancestors of

private life was completely licentious, and both, but the maternal line certainly pre-

cynicism, albeit an enlightened cynicism, dominated. This line was entirely southern

was the keynote of his public policy. His bet- in its composition, as the paternal line was

ter qualities he quite obviously derived from almost entirely northern, and Charles was

his mother, Jeanne d'Albret, " a queen in perhaps the most complete southerner of all

whom nothing was woman but her sex, a who have occupied the throne of England.

soul given wholly to manly things, a mind James was certainly more of a northerner,

capable of great affairs, a heart invincible by but by no means entirely so, and much as he

adversities." She was the third of a line of resembled his father, his bigotry was cer-

singularly brilliant women. Her husband, tainly mainly derived from his Medici-Haps-

Antoine de Bourbon, was an altogether in- burg descent. Henry IV he resembled in

ferior character, at once irresolute and licen- no respect but licentiousness, and the in-

tious, personal courage being his best attri- fluence of the latter's ancestry is otherwise

bute. negligible; nor is the influence of the sound

On the mother's side the heredity of and sensible Danish stock at all perceptible

Henrietta Maria was far less satisfactory. in his case. Obstinacy, that most marked

Marie de Medici was an unreasonable and feature in his character, is traceable in the

hopeless type of woman. Very vain and direct male line, and affords another pre-

accordingly ambitious. she proved quite sumption of the greater probability of the

unable to use power when it came to her, Darnley descent. But with it may be

and after perpetual quarrels with her coupled a possibility of the descent of both

husband during his lifetime, was there- obstinacy and bigotry through Mary Stew-

after governed by unworthy favourites. A art from the Guises.

genuine love of art was the best feature of As the characters of all the eight great-

her character, as a genuine love of science great-grandparents of Charles II and James

was the best feature in the character of her II are sufficiently well known, a rare occur-

father, Francis of Tuscany, who, however, rence even in royal families, a summary of

in the administration of affairs showed him- the characteristics of the brothers as

self a mere bigoted tyrant. His Hapsburg derived from these eight may be added:

THE HEREDITY OF THE STEWARTS

(I) Darnley (who may be taken as the an- King James 1.

cestor). Little or nothing to Charles, Anne of Denmark.

tactless obstinacy to James,

Henry IV, King of France.

(2) Mary Stewart. Charm to Charles, Marie de Medici.

little direct to James, but perhaps

bigotry from the Guises.

Though not a Stewart in the male line,

(3) Frederick of Denmark. Nothing to obviously William III's characteristics may

Charles, perhaps some slight bigotry be studied in connection with his immediate

to James.

predecessors on the British throne, owing

(4) Sophia of Mecklenburg. Love of to his maternal descent from that family.

science, and intellect generally, to The most striking of these characteristics

Charles, nothing to James.

in his case were clearly his considerable

(5) Antoine de Bourbon. Licentiousness mental ability, and his excessively cold and

to both.

reserved nature. Its ability was not many-

(6) Jeanne d'A lbret. Mental ability gene- sided, he cared nothing for learning or for

rally to Charles and perhaps his wit, the arts, and his great qualities were purely

conspicuous in her mother Marguerite those of the statesman. This ability was,

of France; nothing to James.

without doubt, mainly attributable to the

(7) Francis of Tuscany. Love of science direct male line. WTilliam ' the Silent,'

to Charles, bigotry to James.

Frederick Henry of Orange, and William

(8) Joanna of Austria. Nothing to II of Orange, all alike showed qualities of

Charles, bigotry and hauteur to the highest statesmanship, though the last-

James.

named lived too short a time to leave any

considerable reputation behind him. Be-

Roughly speaking, five of the eight seem fore his early death he had, however, proved

to have transmitted characteristics to himself to be a man of the greatest vigour

Charles, and five also to James, while every and determination. Probably in the whole

one of the eight had some influence on one of history there is no other case of such re-

or other brother. In the case of James, it is, markable ability descending for four succes-

curiously, the direct male and the direct sive generations in the direct male line. The

female lines in which this influence can be intermarriages were sound; Louise de

most clearly traced.

Coligny, who belonged to a highly distin-

guished family, was herself a woman of

WILLIAM III PARENTS.

much charm and force of character, and was adviser to both those able leaders, her stepson, Maurice, and her son, Frederick

William II, Prince of Orange.

Henry. Amelia of Solms was almost as

Mary of England.

notable a character; of her parents little

seems to be known, but she herself was

GRANDPARENTS.

vigorous and determined, always respected

Frederick Henry, Prince of Orange. Amelia of Solms.
King Charles I. Henrietta Maria of France.

if not alwavs liked; of a distinguished appearance, she was fond of state and magnificence, and still more fond of her own way.
The third marriage into the Stewart family would prima facie have hardly

GREAT-GRA2NDPARENTS.

seemed likely to have kept up the ability, but this Mary Stewart was the ablest of the

William ' the Silent,' Prince of Orange. children of Charles 1, and would seem to

Louise de Coligny.

have taken as a whole from the ablest of her

John, Count of Solms.

ancestors. Celebrated as a girl for her

Agnes of Sayn-Wittgenstein.

grace, beauty, and intelligence, Mary

200 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

showed gravity and decorum beyond her

GRANDPARENTS.

years when called upon to preside at state King Charles I.

functions after her early marriage, and as a

Henrietta Maria of France.

young widow exhibited determination and Edward Hyde, Earl of Clarendon.

sang-froid in difficult times. She was, how- Frances Avlesbury.

ever, somewhat tactless, and her nature was

cold, in both respects bearing some resem-

GREAT-GRANDPARENTS.

blance to her brother James, and the frigid King James I.

character of her son William was almost cer- Anne of Denmark.

tainly inherited from her, as in this respect Henry IV, King of France.

he differed entirely from his Orange an- Marie de Medici.

cestors.

Henrv Hyde.

WVilliam ' the Silent,' in whose character Mary Langford.

taciturnity was not in reality a prominent Sir Thomas Aylesbury.

feature, was " constant in disaster, devoted Frances Denman.

to duty, hopeful in defeat," qualities shared

by his great-grandson, but he " bore the Neither Mary nor Anne left much mark

load of a people's sorrows with a smiling in history, but in Mary's case her compara-

face," and a smiling face the great-grandson tive insignificance was largely due to ex-

lacked. Frederick Henry was a handsome trinsic circumstances. Amiable, cheerful,

and chivalrous man with a conciliatory, and equable in temper, she, unlike her hus-

genial temper, and his son, William II, bid band's mother, gained the hearts of the fair to be of much the same type. Amelia Dutch people; she was, moreover, far from

of Solms, too, was far from reserved by unintelligent and her nature was singularly

nature. We must, therefore, attribute William
IIf's cold disposition to the maternal side, this being perceptible in his grandfather, Charles I, as well as in his mother and his uncle James. It is not easy to trace it
further back; it was not apparent in the Danish line, from which line, however, Wil-
liam may well have derived some of his prudence. Most probably this coldness was
mainly due to the ultimate Hapsburg des-
cent, but there was also, if the Darnley paternity is correct, a double descent from Henry VII, and to that monarch William III bore obvious resemblances. As a quality
it may have been latent for several generations, at any rate it was certainly part of the Stewart complex. The origin of William's ability as a statesman remains, however, easier to ascertain than the origin of his cold and reserved nature.

pure. With some of the vivacity of her
uncle, Charles II, she was very unlike him
in most respects. Of a most unselfish dis-
position she subordinated herself entirely
to her husband. Had she been the survivor and had reigned as a sole queen regnant,
there is little doubt that she would have left a far deeper mark on history. Her unselfish disposition she can hardly have inherited from her father's side.
Her mother, Anne Hyde, had borne herself well in a difficult position; a woman of many talents and accomplishments, she was gifted with discretion and tact, together
with a certain grandeur of both manners and spirit. Clarendon was eloquent as a speaker, gifted as a writer, consistent and upright as a statesman, though his abilities in some directions were limited and he was
specially unable to adapt himself to changing circumstances. His father, Henry

MARY II AND ANNE

Hyde, was a man of learning and parts who

preferred to live the life of an honoured

PARENTS.

country gentleman " with great cheerful-

King James II.

ness and content." Sir Thomas Aylesbury,

Anlne Hyde.

father of Lady Clarendon, was a man of

THE HEREDITY OF THE STEWARTS

20I

erudition, particularly in mathematics, and James I, but prima facie, with her ancestry

"a great encourager of learning and learned she ought not to have developed into so

men." Of the women of the family but little stupid, if well-meaning, a woman.

is recorded, but Lady Clarendon was a most The heredity of the Stewarts presents far

devoted wife, and it was probably from her more complications than does that of the

that the sweetness and unselfishness of Tudors. The characteristics of the earlier

Queen Mary's character was derived.

line are comparatively simple, efficiency was

In anv case Queen Mary was more of a the dominating note. The Stewarts were

Hyde than a Stewart, and some of the intel- not efficient, but their characters were

lectual qualities of the former family un- remarkably varied. Certainly the fatal

doubtedly descended to her, but her sister quality of tactless obstinacy, with its

Anne inherited neither the intellect of the momentous historical consequences, ran like

Hyde connections, nor the accomplishments a thread down the direct male line, not least

of the Stewarts. Anne undoubtedly had conspicuous in James II's unfortunate son.

certain resemblances to her father James, But to this quality there were marked excep-

a distinct share of his obstinacy and lack of tions, and the picture on the whole is one

tact; her better qualities, her naturally of great variety. Remarkable, for example,

affectionate disposition and her attachment are the unlikenesses between Mary Stewart

to the English Church, were certainly de- and James I, between James I and Charles

rived from her mother's side.

I, between Charles I and Charles II, be-

Anne was, without question, a weak tween James II and Mary II, between Wil-

character, decidedly below the. average, and liam III and Anne.

Mary can scarcely be described as above it. The ancestrv, in fact, varied from the

Their ancestry was curiously varied, the beginning, grew more and more varied as

result was morally good, but not at all the successive intermarriages took place.

brilliant. They can have derived little from The earlier Stewarts of both lines, the

the more distinguished of their ancestors. Danish, Bourbon-d'Albret, Medici-Haps-

Henry IV of France, Clarendon, Ayles- burg, the Orange, and the Hyde families

bury; but among the others there were suffi- differed markedly in their group character-

cient elements of weakness or commonplace- istics, and the results did not, as in the

ness to account for the sisters, for Mary, Tudors, combine into a harmonious whole.

however, rather better than for Anne. The Hence the striking contrasts in this line of

origin of the latter's character is certainly monarchs, hence also their inexhaustible

more explicable than the origin of that of interest.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXII, No. 3.

