JEWS AND GENTILES

Their Intellectual and Temperamental Differences
A psychological study which reveals the innate superiority of London Jewish children over their Gentile school-mates.
By A. G. HUGHES, M.Ed., B.Sc.

AN investigation into racial differences
'sA4 need no longer be prefaced by apology
.L1or defence. We have become accustomed to the hard facts discovered by experimental psychologists in the field of
individual differences, and no one now c.bjects that it is wrong to lay these differences bare. We recognize that the welfare of the individual and of the community is best served, not by ignoring or denying the existence of such differences, but by getting an ever-increasing knowledge of them. We have learnt exactly the same truth in connection with sex differences, though in this latter case the differences proved surprisingly small while in the former they were surprisingly large.

than another, but to measure as accurately as possible specific differences between
them.* That Jews differ from non-Jews is gener-
ally accepted as an axiomatic truth. Unfortunately, most of the descriptions of such differences are based on unscientific observa-
tions heavily biased by strong feelings, and there are consequently wide divergencies of opinions as to their nature and extent. This is particularly true in regard to alleged differences in temperament and character. It is interesting, however, to note that the relative incidence of certain diseases among Jews and non-Jews suggests quite definitely that temperamental differences are likely to exist.

Just as the measurement of individual and RACE AND DISEASE

sex differences is helping us to understand one It is well known that the incidence

another, and is contributing towards a solu- of tuberculosis among Jews is relatively

tion of the problem of fitting each individual low,' and the incidence of diabetes relatively

man (or woman) into his most suitable niche high.' Fishberg says that some writers

in the world of work, so may we hope that affirm a high incidence among Jews of

the measurement of racial differences will arthritism-" diseases usually due to dis-

some day help in the solution of national turbances of the normal metabolism which

and international problems. The race manifest themselves primarily as chronic

problem in America, for example, is par- rheumatism and gout, but which also in-

ticularly acute and has stimulated most of clude other morbid processes such as dia-

the experimental observations on racial betes . . . and obesity."' Articular rheu-

differences which have so far been made. matism, being an important etiological factor

Though notions of ' Chosen Races ' are in organic heart disease, the relatively high

more modest than formerly, and boastful rate of mortality from this disease among

proclamations of racial superiority are less Jews' is further evidence in the same direc-

frequently heard, it does not mean that the tion. These diseases, tuberculosis and ar-

existence of race differences has been dis- thritism, are, according to Kretschmer,'

proved. Even the most ardent internation- correlated with specific types of tempera-

alist would admit that if races ought to be ment; and in any case the generally accepted

reckoned as equal, it is on a basis of facts regarding the incidence of disease

diversity of usefulness and not of identity show that Jews seem to inherit a somewhat

of capacity. The result of this change of distinct physical constitution, probably

attitude is that we can now approach our problem in a relatively dispassionate scien-

* It should be pointed out that the term ' race ' is used in this article in a very loose sense. Its use

tific spirit: the aim of the psychologist is not to prove that one race is more valuable

is not intended to imply more than that the Jews have been a relatively inbreeding group for a long space of time.

go THE EUGENICS REVIEW

dependent upon glandular balance, and psychological tests to the subject of Jews

therefore very likely to carry with it mental and non-Jews in particular. I have traced

qualities of a particular kind.

eight previous investigations carried out in

A similar conclusion is suggested by the America, which yield relevant data based on

high incidence of insanity and nervous the use of standardised tests. Most of the

diseases among Jews, both in Europe and investigators were primarily interested in

America. In Italy, the proportion of Jewish the problems of immigration: four of them

insane has been observed to be four times find that Jews are not more intelligent than

that of the non-Jewish population; in Ger- the non-Jewish American population, and

many the Jews appear to be twice as liable four of them find that they are; none of them

to mental disease as the non-Jews, and there gives any precise absolute measure of the

are similar statistics for Russia, Denmark, differences.

Vienna, and New York.' Jews are also In this country Pearson and Moul,' as a

more subject to hysteria and neurasthenia result of an investigation based on teachers'

than non-Jews; and hysteria among males, estimates of intelligence, concluded that

which is very rare in other races, is quite frequent among the Jews. This high incidence of insanity is the more remarkable because organic nervous diseases are uncom-

" the Jewish girls have less intelligence than the Gentile girls in any type of Council
School," and that the Jewish boys " are not as good as the boys of the medium or aver-

mon among Jews, commensurate with the in- age schools, but are better than the boys of

frequency of alcoholism and syphilis among them.'
But we have practically no direct scientific data on temperamental differences between Jews and non-Jews, nor does it seem likely that psychological tests of temperament will for many years be sufficiently developed to

the poor type of school." They found on an average that the Jewish population they tested was " somewhat inferior physically and mentally to the native population." But it should be noted that their data were
collected in 19I3 when most of the Jewish children were those of recent immigrants,

reveal and measure them precisely and accurately.
Turning next to special abilities, we find a similar paucity of data and abundance of

suffering from a severe language handicap. Further, since the Jewish and non-Jewish children were not rated for intelligence by the same teachers, the comparisons so made

opinions. There is, however, somewhat are not likely to be very reliable.

more unanimity among the opinions in this In I926 a grant from the Jewish Health

field than in the field of temperament. Jews
are very generally credited with more ability than non-Jews in music, mathematics, and languages, but with less ability in handwork, drawing, and painting. These

Organisation of Great Britain made possible the carrying out of an extensive investigation into the subject in London elementary schools. It was conducted by the present
writer, with the assistance of Miss Mary

are matters to which it is now possible to apply psychological tests, and some data on drawing ability which have already been obtained, seem to confirm popular impressions.

Davies and under the direction of Professor
Cyril Burt. Three schools were chosen, each containing about an equal number of Jews and non-Jews in one and the same school. The three schools were representa-

PREVIOUS STUDIES

tive of three levels of social and economic

It is in regard to differences in general status: thus School A, situated in North

intellectual ability that most psychological London, contained both Jews and non-Jews

work has hitherto been done. But even from better class homes; Schools B and C,

in this department most of our know- situated in East London, contained, respec-

ledge exists as a by-product of investiga- tively, poor and very poor children. All

tions into broader subjects, rather than as the children from 8 to I4 years of age in

the result of any systematic application of the three schools (a total of nearly 2,000),

JEWS AND GENTILES

9'

were given the Northumberland Standardized ' norms,' as they are called), we can tell

Tests' in General Intelligence, English, and at once by looking at a child's score if he

Arithmetic. These tests are printed book- is above or below the average for his age.

lets, each containing about two hundred and For example, in the intelligence test, the

fifty little questions which have to be an- average score made by a large group of chil-

swered rapidly, in some cases by writing dren who were 8 years old last birthday

down one-word answers, in other cases by was 95. The average chronological age of

underlining the correct answer chosen from this group must necessarily be 82, since

among several printed answers given.

their ages range from 8.o to g.o. If, there-

TYPES OF QUESTIONS The following are illustrations of the types
of questions:
General Intelligence. If it takes longer to boil an egg than it
does to boil potatoes, write " egg "; if not,

fore, a boy scores 95 marks, he is said to have an ' intelligence age ' of 8$, no matter what his chronological age may be. If he
happens to be 82 years old, his intelligence is obviously average or normal. The degree of abnormality is generally expressed in

write XXIII in ordinary figures.

terms of the ratio obtained by dividing

If MARMALADE contains more M's than MINIMUM, write M; if not, say how many capital M's there are in this question.
In the following the right word has to be

the intelligence age by the chronological age, and converting the quotient into a percentage. Thus the boy who scored 95

underlined:

marks would have a mental ratio of ioo if he

Ancient . Antique . Same, opposite, unknown money people much- not have poor . True, false, not known.
A (kind, tall, short) man is (often, always, never) cruel to animals.

were 8X, of 89 if he were 9$ and of II3 if he were only 7$ years old.
Mental ratios in English and arithmetic are obtained in a similar way.

May is darker than Lucy, but fairer than Kate. Who is fairer-Lucy or Kate? . . Kate, Lucy, I cannot tell.

JEWISH SUPERIORITY The results of these tests were very strik-

English (including reading, spelling, geography, ing. The Jewish children, both boys and

history.)

girls, in all three schools, at almost every

" Every rule, even this one, has an excep-
tion." Can this be true? Yes, no, I do not know.
Daily means . . bread, every day, always,

age from 8 to I3, proved to be superior to the non-Jewish children, alike in intelligence and in attainments in English and arith-

for ever.

metic. In only two out of one hundred and

She spoke kindly to you and (I, we, me). New York is a large city in (Yorkshire, India, America). (Raleigh, Nelson, Drake) defeated the Spanish Armada in (1488, Iz88, I688, z788).

twenty-six age groups tested, did the nonJewish children appear to be superior. Such uniformity in the results suggests at once that they are not due to chance sampling,

Arithmetic.

and in point of fact in more than half of the

What fraction of £i is a third of a shilling? age groups the differences satisfied the

In 12 years' time Tom will be twice as old as he is now. How old is he now?
(In addition to this type of question, the arithmetic booklet contained straightforward

statistician's usual criterion of reliability.* On an average, the mental ratios for in-
telligence of the Jewish boys in each school

sums in adding, subtracting, multiplying, and were about ten greater than the correspond-

dividing.)
The administering and marking of these tests is done in accordance with precise directions. This is very important, for the tests are standardized, that is to say, they

ing mental ratios for the non-Jewish boys. Thus in School A, in a good district, the average mental ratio of the Jews was 105, whereas that of the non-Jewish boys was about 96; in School C, in a very poor dis-

have been given to large numbers of children under exactly the same conditions, and

trict, the respective average ratios were 95

the average score at each age has been calculated. From these average scores (or

* The complete statistics are given in the British Journal of Psychology, Vol. XVIII, Part 2, October,
1927.

92 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

and 84. This means that, at the age of IO, results, the superiority could still justifiably

Jewish boys are on an average equal in in- be called a ' racial ' difference, though it

telligence to non-Jewish boys of ii. A might not be a fundamental or even a per-

similar result was found in arithmetic: in manent difference. With the spread of

English the Jewish boys were even more education and infant welfare work, this

superior, the equivalent of a year and a half differentiating factor (if it exists to any

at the age of io. Among the girls the appreciable extent) may tend to disappear.

differences were not quite so great, slightly But in School A, the school chosen as repre-

less than a year in intelligence and arith- senting the best neighbourhood, several of

metic, and a little more than a year in the Jewish children belonged to an economic

English.

class not usually represented in non-Jewish

It is often alleged that, though Jewish elementary schools. One Jewish boy, for

children are precocious, they do not fulfil example, had just returned from a holiday

their early promise. But our results on the Riviera; another had spent his holi-

(which so far refer only to children day motoring. Well-to-do Jewish parents

of 8 to I 3 years of age) show no such are perhaps more ready to take advantage

premature arrest of development. If of the educational facilities provided by the

there are any variations of ability with State, and they are less enamoured of pri-

age, it would appear that Jewish children vate schools than non-Jewish parents. The

develop most rapidly about the age of io; disparity is still further accentuated by the

during the next two years progress seems fact that many of the Jewish parents are ris-

to be slower, but at the age of I3 they ing in social status; their economic position

have apparently regained their original is less static than that of the non-Jewish

degree of superiority. These variations population. A few years ago they were

may quite possibly be due to the fact that alien immigrants, ready to take up humble

pubertal influences occur at different ages, work to provide the bare necessities of life.

the Jewish children being affected somewhat As their economic position improves, they

earlier than the non-Jewish children. In will migrate to better districts. But gener-

view of our results and of the widespread ally they are cautious about such removals,

opinion that Jewish children do not maintain so that, especially in poor districts, it is not

their superiority in the later ages, further uncommon to find Jews who are superior in

investigation with older children appears to economic standing to their non-Jewish

be desirable.

neighbours. They are consolidating their

RACE AND CLASS
A second possible criticism of our results is that the Jewish and non-Jewish children attending the same school may not belong to the same social and economic classes. It
must be remembered however that the three schools were specially chosen with a view to getting Jewish and non-Jewish children of approximately equal social status in approximately the same proportions. Nevertheless, it did appear that in each school the Jewish children were on the whole rather better clothed and fed than the nonJewish children. In many cases this was doubtless due to the acknowledged care which Jewish mothers bestow on their children. If this careful nurture were chiefly

position before they seek a better home such as they can now really afford.
It is therefore important that we should try to discover to what degree the differences observed are attributable to differences in social status between the two populations tested: any remaining differences can then with some justification be attributed to innate ' racial ' conditions. At the same time, it should be noted that if the populations tested are fairly representative of the occupational distributions of the two races, disparity in economic status is itself an indication of a racial difference in general intelligence. The choice of the three schools in this investigation was made in order to get some such representative samples.

responsible for the superiority in the test Previous investigators have given us some

JEWS AND GENTILES

93

idea of the extent of the variations in intelligence with variations in social status. Burt,"0 for example, compared the in-

The following are the chief details of each group: i. Manufacturers, merchants, travellers, Rabbis,
teachers, higher grade clerks.

telligence of children attending two London 2. Engineers, electricians, cabinet makers, metal

schools, "selected as representing opposite workers.

extremes of the social scale," " as typifying the best and the worst from a representative

3. Shopkeepers, dealers, and small masters. 4. Policemen, postmen, bus and taxi drivers,
conductors, soldiers, sailors, railway porters.

borough." Taking age groups from 7 to 5. Makers of boots, clothes, umbrellas, buttons,

14, he found an average difference of 2.2 boxes, cigarettes.

mental years: " the ' superior ' school is nearly a year ahead of the general average;
the ' poor ' school more than a year be-

6. Bricklayers, carpenters, painters, plumbers7. Shop assistants, hairdressers, tobacconists. 8. Carmen, coalmen, caretakers. 9. Labourers (mainly in docks), hawkerg.

hind." If the disparity in social status Two miscellaneous groups must be added

between Jewish and non-Jewish children io. No father; ii. No occupation.

attending the same school were as great as The results of our analysis on this basis

that between children attending an ' aver- are summarized in the following table:

age ' school and the ' best' school, or an average ' school and the ' worst ' school, then it might be argued that the differences

AVERAGE MENTAL RATIOS (INTELLIGENCE) OF JEW-
ISH AND NON-JEWISH CHILDREN BELONGING TO DIFFERENT OCCUPATIONAL GROUPS.

measured in this investigation were fully

accounted for. But our study of the social GROUP

I23456

conditions of the several families indicates

that the social difference is far smaller than Jews .. .IO9*7IO7*7IIO*lIO5*4IO3*9IO5 the differences described in the investigation Non-Jews . . IO3 5- IOI * 3 98 4 IOI * 5 97.3 93.7

just cited.

Differences . . 6*2 6.4 II.7 3.9 6 6 II*4

OCCUPATIONAL GROUPING

In order to rule out as far as possible

the irrelevant influence of social status, we

compared the intelligence and attainments of groups of Jewish and non-Jewish children,

these groups being arranged according to

the occupational status of the parents. Since none of the groupings of occupations
used by previous investigators11 appeared to
be satisfactory for our special problem, the following scheme was devised:

Division I Masters

Class

Group.

A. Professional i. Professional

men and mas- men, manufac-

ters (higher turers.

grade)

B. Craftsmen 2. Craftsmen

and masters 3. Shopkeepers

II Employees C. Employees 4. " Assured" (higher grade) workers 5. Factory
workers 6. Builders 7. Shop assist-
ants
D. Employees 8. Unskilled workers
9. Labourers

GROUP

7 8 9 IO II

Jews . IO20II2*4IO3*8IOO*6 8S.8
Non-Jews . ..88.7 92-8 9o.i 93-0 90-7 Differences .. ..1I ig6 13.7 7.6 -4*9
* Less than 20 children in the group.
In groups 4, 6, 8, 9, and ii the numbers of Jewish children were too small to give any reliable result. There is a very steady superiority in the mental ratios of the Jewish children in Groups I, 2, 5 and io, amounting to about 6.5, the equivalent of more than half a year at the age of ten. In Groups 3 and 7 the difference is about twice this amount. These groups, it will be noticed, are the ' shop ' groups. This result, especially in Group '3, seems to indicate that commerce attracts Jews of good intelligence, men of the calibre who, if they were non-Jews, would probably enter the professions. Group io, children who have no fathers, may be considered as a random group and in the light of the figures from the other groups, the difference (7.6) is prob-

94 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

ably a very fair measure of Jewish racial It is interesting to speculate why Jews

superiority when differences due to social should appear so much more intelligent than

status have been eliminated. These results non-Jews. We have already noted the sug-

suggest that part of the difference revealed gestion that the superiority is more apparent

in the original investigation is due to differ- than real; that it is due to more rapid

ences in social status between the two growth, both physiological and mental, and

populations tested, but that after allowance that in time the non-Jewish children will

has been made for this, there still remains overtake their precocious Jewish classmates.

a ' racial ' difference equivalent at the age Others suggest that the Jewish superiority

of io to about 0.7 mental years.

is not temporary, but that it is a result

ON THE POVERTY LINE
We next attacked our problem from another angle. With the help of head teachers and Care Committee workers, and of Mr. W. H. Winch, L.C.C. District Inspector of
Schools for Stepney, we chose School D, as the school attended by the poorest Jewish children in London, no regard being paid to any other condition. (It will be remembered that though School C was chosen as representative of a very poor district, the choice was restricted by the need of having equal numbers of Jewish and non-Jewish children.) The same standardized tests were given as in School A, B, and C.
On an average, the children in School D

of generations of " breeding for intelligence." They point out how it was for years a tradition for rich Jewish fathers to seek out men rich in learning rather than in goods, as husbands for their daughters. Then there is, of course, the unnatural selective influence of years of persecution. In this connection, it should be remembered that the data given in this article refer to Jewish children living in London. It should not be assumed without further investigation that they are equally true of Jews living in a different environment, or of Jews who have been subjected to a different process of selection from that which operated in the case of Jewish immigrants into this country.

(they were all Jewish) proved to be but BIBLIOGRAPHY

slightly inferior in intelligence to the gene- i. R. N. Salaman, Anglo-Jewish Vital Statistics,

ral average of unselected non-Jewish children; in English they were superior, and in

Jewish Chronicle Supplement, July, I921.
W. Osler, Principles and Practice of Medicine, p. i6i, I925.

arithmetic they were equal to the general 2. R. N. Salaman, loc cit.: W. Osler, Op. Cit., p. 433.

average.

3. Jewish Encyclopedia, IV, 574, Article on

The poorest Jewish children in London are therefore very much in advance of the

Diathesis.
4. Jewish Encyclopedia, IK, I-7, Article on Mor-
biditv.

poorest non-Jewish children, who in Burt's 5. E. Kretschmer, Physique and Character, trans.

investigation already quoted, were found to be more than a year behind the general average. Taking into account the relative sizes

by W. J. H. Sprott, 1925.
6. Jewish Encyclopedia, VI, 6o3-5, Article on Insanity.
7. Jewish Encyclopedia, IX, 225-7, Article on Ner-

of the two populations, we should not expect

vous Diseases.

the poorest Jewish children to be as low in intelligence as the poorest non-Jewish chil-

8. Karl Pearson and M. Moul, " The Problem of Alien Immigration into Great Britain," Annals of Eugenics, 1925, I.

dren: such equality would only be found if 9. Northumberland Standardized Tests, prepared

the general average of Jews were distinctly lower than that of non-Jews. But the
poorest Jewish children, according to our

by Cyril Burt, Univ. of ILondon Press, I925. io. C. Burt, Mental and Scholastic Tests, pp. igo ff. ii. J. F. Duff and G. H. Thomson, " The Social and
Geographical Distribution of Intelligence in

results, are so far superior to the poorest

Northumberland." Brit. Jnl. Psych., I925, XIV,

non-Jewish children as to be practically

192-8.
D. Caradog Jones and A. M. Carr-Saunders.

equal to the general non-Jewish average, a

" The Relation between Intelligence and Social

fact which points very definitely to ' racial' superionrty.

Status among Orphan Children," Brit. Jnl. Psych., 1927, XVII, 343-364.
K. Pearson and M. Moul, op. cit.

