-- be £ugenfcs Ebucatfon Zoctet*2.

boto. Secretartes:

MRS.

- resibent: MAJOR LEONARD DARWIN. A. C. GOTTo. DR. E. SCHUSTER. ton. Creasurer:

MR.- VON

FLEISCHL.

ton. Members:

THE RT. HON. A. J. BALFOUR, P.C., F.I.S.

SiR ARCHIBALD GEIKI-E, K.C.B., F.R.S.

HER GRACE, THE DUCHESS OF ME ARLBOVRtOcUeGaHV.regibentPR:O-FESSOR A. WVEISMANN.

DR. RICHARD ARTHUR, M.L.A., President, New South Wales Branch.

SIR JAMES BARR, President, Liverpool Branch.

DR. BENHAM, President, Dunediii, New Zealand, Branch. Mr. H. W. BISHOP, S.M., President, Christchurch, New Zealand, Branch.

SIR JAMES CRICHTON-BROWNE, F. R. S., Ex-President, 1908 to I909.

BISHOP D'AR*CY, President, Belfast Branch. PROF. STARR JORDAN, Chairman, Education Committee, American Genetic Association.

PROFESSOR H. B. KIRK, M.A., President, Wellington Branch.

MR. W. C. MARSHALL, M.A,, President, Ilaslemere Branch. THE RIGHT IHON. LORD MOULTON, P.C., F.R.S., President, Birmingham Hieredity Society.

MR. J. L. OTTER, J. P., President, Brighton Branch.

M. EDMOND PERRIER, President, Societe Fran9aise d'Eugenique. DR. A. PLOETZ, President, Internationale Gesellschaft fir Rassen Hygiene.

N

PROFESSOR E. B. POULTON, F. R. S., President, Oxford Branch.

PROF. SERGI, President, Comitato Italiano per gli Studi di Eugenica.

PROF. SEWARD, F. R.S., President, Cambridge Eugenics Society.

BISHOP WELLDON, President, Manchester Branch.

Members of CounIci:

MR. CROFTON BLACK.

MRS. HENDERSON.

SIR E. BRABROOK, C.B.

MAJOR HILLS, F. R.S.

MRS. THEODORE CHAMBERS.

VERY REV. W. R. INGE, D.D.,

HON. SIR J. COCKBURN, K.C.M.G. Dean of St. Paul's.

MR. R. NEWTON-CRANE.

MISS KIRBY.

MR. A. E. CRAWLEY.

MR. ERNEST LANE, F.R.C.S.

SIR H. CUNNINGHAM, K.C.I.E. PROF. MACBRIDE.

DR. ARCHDALL REID. MR. JOHN RUSSELL. MR. F. C. S. SCHILLER, D.ESc. PROF. A. SCHUSTER, F.R.S. MR. EDGAR SCHUSTER, D.SC. DR. C. G. SELIGMANN. PROF. C. SPEARMAN.

JR. LANGDON DOWN.

LADY OWEN-MACKENZIR.

PROF. J. !A.- THOMSON.

MR. HAVELOCK ELLIS.

MR. ROBERT MOND.

PROF. J. FINDLAY.

DR. F. W. MOTT, F.R.S.

MR. E. G. WHELER GALTON. MR. G. P. MUDGE.

MR. M. GREENWOODJUN. M.R.C.S. MRS. G. POOLEY.

DR. A. F. TREDGOLD. MRS. ALEc TWEEDIE. MR. W. C. D. WHETHAM, F.R.S. DR. DOUGLAS WHITE.

DR. W. HADLEY.

MR. W. REA, M.P.

DR. FLORENCE WILLEY.

Branch Representalives on -e General Counwil, 1914-15.

- 1rmingbamn:

MR. CARiY GILSON.

MR. IIUNMPHREY HUMPHREYS.
Liverpool:

MR. PERCIVAL MILLS.

MR. R. T. BODEY.

MR. R. D. LAURIE.

ALI). T. R. BULLEY.

- taz[entere:
MIr. WV. C. MARSHALL.
1Rew Xeataln:

Mancbe9ter:
DR. MUMIFORD.

:elfast:
PROF. J. A. LINDSAY.
R. tfort:

THs lIoN. T. A. MACKENZIE.

Me(7wT

Soutb Wlales: be appointed.)

AIR. E. SCHUSTER.
-rtoibton:
MR. A. J. HALL.

llesearcb Comnmittee:
MR. EDGAR SCHUSTER, D.SC., Chairman.

Ebucation Committee:
MRS. T. CHAMBERS, Secretary.

MR. A. M. CARR-SAUNDERS, Secretary.

PROF. J. A. THOMSON.

PROF. MACBRIDE. '

PROF. FINDLAY.

PROF. SPEARMAN. DR. T$tRDGOLD. DR. GREENWOOD, --MR. LIDBETTER.

MISS BULCRAIG. MISS TRENCH. MR. DIXON KINGHAM. MRs. GoTTo.

MRS. GOTTO.

iub[icationtThis

Committee

consists

of

the

-
Executive

Officers

Committee:
of the Society, Chairmen

and

Secretaries

of

Sub-Committees

and

thE

Branch representatives. N.B.-Other Committees are appointed from time to time for special purposes.

"Eugenics is the study of agencies under social control that may improve or imPair the racial qualities of future generations either physically or mentally."

OBJECTS.

-Persistently to set forth the National Importance of Eugenics in order to sibilit in the respect of bringing ail matters pertaining to human parenthood under
I1-T spread a knowledge of the Laws of Heredity so far as they are surely

modify public opinion, and the domination of Eugenic

cirdeeaaltse.

a

sense

known, and so far as that knowledge may

of respfou
affect the

ipveetof the race.
II..-To further Eugenic Teaching, at home

in the schools and elsewhere. SUBSC-RIPTION.

MAsesmebeeirastehiMpembersh-ip

;PRIVILEGES.

One Guinea Five Shillings

per per

Annum. Annum.

.;

tA~tt~e- ndance at Lectures,. Discussions, and General Meetings, Use of Library.

- Members only receive THE EUGENICS REViEW, free.

.Fws

of
O

A-pFlIGiFcFatiHoHnOfUo,rRFSMFe:ImbeCeo1Mrn0s:.hb8ei0pKo&bIaatnnanig.dnse-tAdwstosaooo!fyc*itaahWtseI_Meom.bme-r5eshcirpeaXnttdO.?fai8url0l.a..ar.6tmiiulatros

of
'-

Mt

<Sovcitya

252 EUGENICS REVIEW.

While the moral ideal of a man's sexual life is regarded by the

author as strict monogamy-chastity before marriage and faithfulness

after-he is doubtful whether this corresponds to the inherent tendencies

and feelings of the average man, and thinks that, generally speaking,

the men who remain chaste are men of little worth. He hopes that we

may develop towards a state in which " the number of instances may be

diminished in which the first love and the first lover are not coincident,"

but he does not think that this desirability will be postponed by a greater

toleration of lack of control. Our own judgment is that the way out is

by heightening not lowering the standard, and we regard his depreciation

of the continent as untrue and unwholesome. We believe also that he

exaggerates what may be called the normal imperiousness of sexual

desire. This varies, of course, with race and other variables, but there

is much reason to believe that man often allows himself to drift into

hyper-eroticism and then supposes or tries to suppose that this is

"(natural."

The author is so much impressed with the evils of "honeymoons"

that he discusses, in a hesitating sort of way, a change, for the elect at

least, in the existing morality of the betrothal period. He seems to us on

sounder lines when he protests against the general loss of the woman's

family name when she marries, and against the impertinent distinction

between Mrs. and Miss. We agree also with his plea for making more,

not less, of the organic factor in love, and with his argument for the

ethical justification of consciously regulated sexual intercourse within

the bonds of matrimony. We differ from the author mainly in rejecting

as ethically unsound his apology for the Don Juan and his compromise

in regard to chastity. We think, too, that there are many details in the

book that are unnecessary and unwholesome, and that there is much which

he would not have written if he had enjoyed some acquaintance with

" puritan England."

J. ARTHUR THOMSON.

OFFICIAL PUBLICATIONS.
STATISTIQUE INTERNATIONALE DU MOUVEMENT DE LA POPULATION. Vol. II., Annees I901 i 19IO. (Ministere du travail et de la prevoyance sociale: Statistique generale de la France). Paris, Imprimerie
In 1N9a07titohnealSet,atiI9sIt3i.quePpG.enexxrxavlieiid.e+lIa6kr*a+nc29e8;pu8bvloi.shed a first volume
of international vital statistics, which included data for all available countries from the origin of reyistration up to the year 1905. The present volume continues the work up to the year I9IO, but for convenience of reference the data are given for an entire decade, and not only for the five years 1906-i9io. The first part of the volume consists of an introduction by M. Lucien March (pp. I.-xxxviii.). This is followed by a general discussion of the data for the decade (pp. I*-I63*), and finally, in the last part (pp. 1-298), the detailed tables are given with the absolute figures for each year. Any data that came to hand too late for inclusion in the earlier volume, though referring to years prior to 190I, are also published in the present volume. These include, for example, several life-tables for the decade z891-i900.
During the decade I9OI-IO the birth-rate and death-rate have alike continued to fall in the vast majority of the countries for which we have data, but the fall in the former has been in general the greater so that the rate of natural increase has dropped. In England the birth-rate fell between I9OI and I9IO from 28'5 per thousand of the population to 25'8; in Denmark from 29-7 to 28'2; in Austria from 37'3 to 32'6; in Hungary
from 38-9 to 35 7; in Holland from 3i18 to 28'6; in France from 22-0 to i9-5; in the German Empire from 35'0 to 29-8. The fall in the case of
some of the component States of the German Empire is remarkable; thus in Saxony the rate dropped from 35 9 to 27-2 or by practically 25 per

OFFICIAL PUBLICATIONS.

253

cent. To the almost universal rule of a fall in the birth-rate there are
very few exceptions. Italy is one of the most remarkable, the birth-rate, apart from some fluctuations, having been practically stationary, viz., 32I5 in I9OI and 32'7 in I9IO. The same is the case in Ireland, and in
Australia and New Zealand also the fall seems to have been arrested.
Against the above-mentioned decreases in the birth-rate may be set decreases in the death-rate, in England from I69 to 14-6 per thousand;
in Denmark from I5'8 to I3'3; in Austria from 24(9 to 203; in Hungary
from 27I to 23'6; in Holland from W63 to I*6; in France from 20-I to I9 i; in the German Empire from 194 to I1&2. In Italy the change is very slight, the rate being practically stationary, viz., 22'0 in I90I and 217 in I9IO. In the Australian Commonwealth the death-rate, already remarkably low at the commencement of the decade, fell from I2'2 to 10-. while in New Zealand it has remained practically stationary at a level slightly under io per thousand. It must be remembered that the above are crude death-rates-the simple proportions of deaths to every thousand of the population-and are therefore affected largely by the age and sex-compositions of the several populations in question. The rates cannot be compared as measures of the conditions affecting health in the several States. What we most miss in the present volume is a series of standardised death-rates for the different countries, all based pn one and the same standard population. Possibly M. March might be able to
attempt this in the next volume.
Space does not permit of any detailed examination of the data relating to causes of death, but a glance at the figures for infantile mortality may be of interest. In most of the countries of Europe this fell during the decade, but in some cases the fall has been but slight. In Austria and Hungary though the rate was appallingly high, little improvement has been effected. In Austria the deaths of infants under I year of age per thousand births averaged 2I6 during the years 1901-5, 202 during I906-Io, the corresponding figures for Hungary being 212 and 204. In Germany on the other hand the improvement has been considerable; for the Empire as a whole the rate fell from I99 deaths per thousand births in the first quinquennium to I74 in the second. In Bavaria the rate fell from 240 to 217 per thousand, and in Saxony from 246 to i98. The lowest rates are shewn by New Zealand and by Norway which both experienced only 7o deaths per thousand births during the quinquennium I9o6-io. In England the rate fell from 138 per Iooo during 1901-5 to 117 in I906-IO. The great waste of life implied by the high rates of infantile mortality ruling, for example, in Germany, is well illustrated by some of the life-tables given. Few of these have yet been published for the decade I9OI-IO, but we can compare, as two extremes, Germany and the Commonwealth of Australia. In the German Empire on the average of the decade I9OI-IO, of I,OOO males born alive only 798
survived to I year of age; in Australia as many survived to age 32. A special section of the second part of the volume is devoted to a
study of the statistics of divorce, which should be useful in view of recent discussions. It includes brief notes as to the law of divorce in
each country.
M. March and the staff of the Statistique Ge'nerale de la France deserve the hearty thanks of all students of vital statistics for the time
and labour devoted to the compilation of this most useful volume. G. U. Y.
BIRTHS, DEATHS, AND MARRIAGES IN ENGLAND AND WALES (1912).
Seventy-fifth Annual Report of the Registrar-General. 1914. "The[Cds.ali7e0n2t8.f]eatPurriecseof5st.hegdv.itaPlp.stactxiisit.ic+s6ioif.I9I2 are as folIows: The marriage-rate was 15'5 per I,OOO, being o'i above the average for the ten years 1902-I9I1. It is satisfactory to note that in each of the three
years 1910-1912 the marriage-rate has shown an increase upon that in the
preceding year. The provisional figures for 1913, however, do not indicate a continuance of this rise, the rate remaining at I5.5 per i,ooo.

254 EUGENICS REVIEW.

" The birth-rate in 1912 was 23'8 per I,000, and was 3'o below the

average for the preceding decennium; it was the lowest rate on record,

being no less than o.6 below that of 19i i, which was the next lowest."

The death-rate in 1912 was I3'3 per I,ooo, and was I'9 below the

average for the ten preceding years. It was the lowest rate on record,

being 0O2 per I,ooo below the lowest previously recorded, that in I9I0.

Although the climatic conditions of the two years were very similar the

advantage of 1912 was mainly due to greater diminution of the mortality

of children under the age of five years.

Infant mortality was 95 per I,ooo births, being 30 per I,00o below the

average for the preceding decennium. It was the lowest rate on record,

being io per i,ooo births below the lowest rate previously recorded, that

for igio. It is of interest to note that if mortality from diarrhbea-

naturally low on account of the cool and wet summer-is excluded from

the comparison the infant mortality of 1912 still remains the lowest yet

recorded."

" Cancer caused a higher death-rate both among males and among

females than in any preceding year, but the rate from tuberculosis as a

whole was the lowest on record."

The data on which the general results summarized above are based

have been analysed and tabulated in a detailed and lucid manner by the

new and improved methods which were introduced in I9II. The data

themselves admittedly leave much to be desired, but their improvement

would involve fresh legislation providing for a complete revision of the

present system of registration. Such legislation the Registrar-General

refers to as most desirable both from the administrative and statistical

standpoint.

The special features of the present report are (i) the detailed treat-

ment of the deaths in igi i and 1912 from syphilis and diseases dependent

on it, based on the report prepared for the information of the Royal

Commission, and (2) the tabulation of births registered in I9II by parents'

occupations.

(I) Although the deaths certified as due directly or indirectly to

syphilis are not regarded as giving a reliable basis for an estimate of the

mortality truly attributable to this disease, they are a useful indication

of its relative prevalence in different localities and in different social

groups. It appears to be far more common in large towns than in rural

districts, and among the highest and lowest social strata than among the

remainder. Miners, weavers and agricultural labourers seem particularly

free from it, and unskilled workmen particularly liable to it.

(2) The legitimate birth-rate for I9II arranged according to social

classes is shown in the following table:

Social Class

Rate per iooo Males Rate per IooO Married aged Io years and over. Males aged under 55

I. Upper and Middle Class ... ... 47

years.
II9

II. Intermediate Class ... ... ... 46

132

III. Skilled Workmen ... ... ... 73

153

IV. Intermediate Class ... ... ... 70

158

V. Unskilled Workmen ... ... ... 90

213

VI. Textile Workers ... ... ... 50

125

VII. Miners

107... ... ... ...

230

VIII. Agricultural Labourers ... ... 49

i6i

III.-VIII. Working Class ... ... ... 76

175

All Classes

62... ... ... ...

162

An interesting discussion of the significance of these figures is also

included, but cannot be conveniently summarized here. The Registrar-

General and Dr. Stevenson are to be congratulated on the production of

a report which is of great interest and practical value. They have made

a dreary wilderness of official figures to bear fruit in season if not to

blossom.

EDGAR SCHUSTER.

PERIODICAL LITERATURE.

ENGLISH.

THE SCIENTIFIC PROCEEDINGS OF THE ROYAL DUBLIN SOCIETY. Vol. xiv. (N. S.), NO. 22. June, 1914. Polygamous Mendelian Factors.
JAMES WILSON, M.A., B.Sc. PP. 302-3I2. From a consideration of the
behaviour of the coat colour of horses and cattle in inheritance the author draws the conclusion that each colour is produced by a single factor which may " mate " with the factor producing any other colour.

JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY. Vol. xvii. No. 2, March, i194.

The Action of Various Anesthetics in Suppressing Cell-division in Sea-

urchin Eggs, by Ralph S. Lillie. This is an interesting paper dealing

with the inhibitory action of certain anaesthetics upon cell-division.

It is suggested that the rhythmical process of cell-division, as

well as the rhythmical contraction of heart muscle and cilia,

depends upon some reversible change in the permeability of the

cell-membralne to salt solutions, and consequently that neuro-

muscular anaesthesia is caused by inhibiting these changes in the

permeability of the membrane. It is concluded, since the concentration

in a great number of anasthetics investigated, required to arrest cell-

division in the egg, is the same as that required to produce neuro-muscular

anaesthesia in the larva, that both phenomena depend upon the same

alteration in permeability.

H. 0.

UNITED EMPIRE MAGAZINE, Vol. v., No. 8, August, 1914. The Problem
of Population, by J. Saxon Mills. Pp. 648-654. The writer deals with
the difficulty in retaining our Colonies when we can no longer supply emigrants in large numbers, and instances the fact that we contributed only one third while America and Continental Europe supplied two-thirds of the emigrants to Canada between I900 and I913. "A few more emigrants and a few babies less each year, and our population will be absolutely diminishing."

THE ENGLISHWOMAN, Vol. xxiii., No. 67, August, 1914. The Unmarried Mother in France, by Mrs. Gertrude Austin. Pp. 138-I5I. This article describes the Asile Nuchalet in Paris, a municipal establishment for the shelter of pregnant women, which is run on admirably humane and scientific lines. There are also maternal canteens, and financial assistance is offered in cases of breast-fed babies and boarded-out children. Every effort is made to encourage mothers not to abandon illegitimate children to the Hospice des Enfants Assist6s.

THE JOURNAL OF STATE MEDICINE, Vol. xxii., No. 8, August, 1914, has a note on the scheme to preserve infant life, recently brought forward by the Women's Co-operative Guild.

ARCHIVES OF NEUROLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY. Vol. vi. 1914. This periodical, published by the London County Council, contains an account of research work done in the pathological laboratory and asylums maintained by the Council. It is edited by Dr. F. W. Mott, the pathologist to the asylums, and the memoirs contained in it are based on work carried out either by himself or under his direction or at his suggestion. In the preface Dr. Mott reviews clearly and briefly the overwhelming evidence that general paralysis is caused by syphilis. More than fifteen per cent. of the male admissions to the asylums are general paralytics,
and as the total cost of the asylums amounted in 1913 to £6oo,ooo, the
expenditure of a considerable sum annually in the prevention of syphilis by the Council would be justifiable on purely commercial grounds.
The Nature of the Condition termed Parasyphilis, by F. W. Mott, M.D., F.R.S. Pp. 1-50. This paper is the report made to the neuro-

256 EUGENICS REVIEW.

logical section of the International Medical Congress, modified in conse-

quence of certain discoveries made public after it was originally written.

There is a bibliography referring to works by more than fifty authors.

Statistics regarding General Paralysis in the London County Asylums,

by F. W. Mott, M.D., F.R.S. Pp. 51-58. These statistics were prepared

for the information of the Royal Commission on Venereal Diseases. As

is mentioned above, more than fifteen per cent. of the male admissions

to the asylums are general paralytics. The actual numbers for the quin-

quennial period I908-1912 are: Total number of admissions-males,

9,o87; females, IO,174. General paralytics-males, I,469=i6'x per cent.;

females, 268 = 2'6 per cent.

A Study of the Neuropathic Inheritance especially in Relation to

Insanity. F. W. Mott, M.D., F.R.S. Pp. 79-98. In this address, which

was delivered at the opening of the Henry Phipps' Psychiatrical Clinic,

Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, U.S.A., Dr. Mott described his

system of ascertaining and recording those inmates of the London County

Asylums who have or have had relatives in the asylums; 3,485 cases of

this kind are now on record. Among the problems discussed is that of

"c anticipation." By anticipation is meant that the insane offspring of

insane parents become insane at considerably earlier ages than the

average. Dr. Mott brings forward the following tabular comparison in

support of the view that this occurs:

Percentage comparison of the age at the time of onset of insanity in

the insane offspring of insane parents, and the general admissions to the

London County Asylums.

Age 95y9 direct

663 insane

of admissions during offspring of

Onset.

last four years.

insane parents.

Under 25

20`I 44...

...

... ...

...

o

25-34 ... ... ... 19 9 ... ... ... 27 9

IS5'35-44 2I 7... ... ...

... ... ...

4.5-54 ... ... ... 18'2 ... ... ...

8.5

55-64 7... ... ... 12

... ... ...

65-74 ... ... ...

5'8 ... ..

.

3.2 7

75 ... ... ...

I S ... ... ...

The differences are large enough to be a convincing proof of the theory of anticipation if there were not a possible source of error in the greater likelihood of insanity of the parents escaping detection in persons admitted to the asylums late in life than in those admitted early.
Another problem discussed is the origin of epilepsy and insanity in healthy stocks. Dr. Mott, while recognising the difficulty of obtaining evidence conclusively demonstrating that alcohol and syphilis may, by poisoning the germplasm, give rise to these defects, brings forward pedigrees which tend to show that such poisoning does actually occur.
T'he Investigation of Twenty-Five Pedigrees of Insane Persons, by Dr. H. Wilson White. Pp. 99-126.
The Investigation of a Number of Family Histories of Patients in Cane Hill Asylum, by Dr. J. C. Wootton. Pp. 127-138.
Hereditary Resemblance in the Fissures of the Cerebral Hemispheres, by Dr. Edgar Schuster. Pp. 139-172. The interest of a study of this kind depends largely on the fact that the fissures indicate, in some cases at
any rate, the boundaries of regions of the brain cortex differing from one another in structure and function. The extreme difficulty of obtaining brains of persons related to one another has prevented much attention
from having been given to the subject. Material, more complete and satisfactory than any hitherto available, is being collected from the London County Asylums by Dr. Mott, and this forms the basis of the
present paper, which is published as the first instalment of what may be an extensive study of the subject. The author first describes the most

PERIODICAL LITERATURE.

257

important previous work on the subject, that of Karplus, and provides a rough statistical analysis of the data obtained by him. The results obtained amply prove the justice of his conclusion that " inheritance of the fissures of the brain does take place." Dr. Schuster next gives a detailed nomenclature of the fissures and gyri of the brain, based on the names used by Gustav Retzius and with respect to the occipital lobe by Elliot Smith. Two pairs of brains are next described in some detail, namely, those of a mother and daughter and those of two brothers. The points of similarity between the brains of the relatives in each pair are many and striking, they are pointed out in detail in the text and clearly shown in outline figures traced from photographs.

FOREIGN.

AMERICAN ANTHROPOLOGIST. Vol. xv. No. 4. October-December, 1913. The Relative Time of Fertilization of the Ovum and the Sex-Ratio
amongst Jews, by Raymond Pearl and Redcliffe N. Salaman. Pp. 668-674.
The authors conclude from a consideration of some statistics of Jewish
families collected with particular care that " (a) there is no evidence that
in the human race the time of fertilization of the egg relative to the
catamenial period has any influence on the sex-ratio exhibited by the offspring. (b) The higher male sex-ratio shown by Jewish statistics, if not entirely due to faulty registration, must owe its origin to other
factors than the time of fertilization of the egg."

BULLETIN OF THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF MEDICINE. Vol. xv. No. 3,
June, 1914. Resume and recommendations of the Committee to investigate teaching of Hygiene in Public Schools. Pp. 121-126. This committee, appointed by the American Academy of Medicine, has done its work in a very thorough manner. They first analysed the laws requinrng instruction in physiology and hygiene, then investigated the text books on the subject, and finally visited the schools in eighty Communities east of the Mississippi and north of Mason and Dixon's line. Reports have been published from time to time from 1904 onwards, of which a complete list is found in this article. Their recommendations cover hygiene
in its widest sense, and it will be seen from the section quoted below
that they advocate the teaching of eugenics although they do not mention the word. The passage runs (the committee recommend) " I. That from the Kindergarten up, by progressive steps, children be helped to learn through studies of plant and animal life the essentials of human physiologic processes, parenthood, heredity; the essentials of influence of environment in health and development, including micro-organisms,
insects and other carriers of communicable diseases; that included in
lists with typhoid, tuberculosis and other common contagions, syphilitic
and gonococcus infection be enumerated, corresponding data being given for each in the list."

For this purpose it is urged that Fellows of the Academy concentrate individual influence on institutions training teachers and on boards
licensing them, insisting that they be adequately prepared and tested in
the elements of physical and chemical, biologic and social sciences with
special reference to their practical applications in hyzriene and sanitation.

BULLETIN OF
August, 1914.

THE
The

AMERICAN Relation

ACADEMY OF of Modern

MEDICINE, Medicine

Vol. xv., to Some

No. 4, Social

Problems, by John L. Heffron, M.D. Pp. I85-193. The writer maintains

that scientific investigation into the conditions which are hurtful to society

and diminish human efficiency
medical men should co-operate

should be the with experts in

duty of the medical world, the practical administration

of protective and corrective measures. "What better statement of the

natural way of advancing the study of every variation from accepted

standards of life and of conduct can there be than the one pursued by

physicians in the study of disease, viz., first, etiology; second, pathology;

third, prognosis; fourth, prevention; fifth, treatment." The writer touches

258 EUGENICS REVIEW.
on such subjects as mental deficiency, the teaching of sex hygiene, reform by education in the laws of heredity, racial poisons contributory to insanity, immorality and criminality, etc.
THE TRAINING SCHOOL BULLETIN. Vol. xi., No. 3. May, 1914. A
Study of the Intelligence of Delinquents and the Eugenic Significance of Mental Defect, by Emile Renz. Pp. 37-39. Miss Renz has made a careful investigation of the intelligence of all girls admitted to the Girls' Reformatory of Ohio between January and July, 19I2. The Courts mav
sentence to this institution " Girls from the ages of nine to seventeen, the prevalent charges being incorrigibility, disorderly conduct, larceny, street walking, immorality. All are subject to parole, on condition of improvement in character and conduct, but remain charges of the State till twenty-one years of age. The consideration is wholly one of moral failure. The assumption is that these girls are capable of normal conduct, and that, if they are carefully piloted over several years of life, their release will be warranted, and that a strict course of supervision will reform the offender. The commitment paper vouches for the mental normality of the delinquent." The girls who numbered ioo were graded according to the Binet-Simon scale. Six were equal to or in advance of age, two a year behind, eight from one to two years behind, five from two to three years, and seventy-seven more than three years. Making all possible allowances the author concludes that at least one-third of the whole numbel are of such mental deficiency as to warrant the special care of them as subnormal. Their school records appear amply to confirm the results of the tests.
THE JOURNAL OF HEREDITY. Vol. v., No. 6. June, 1914. Eugenics Program in Utah, by E. G. Titus. P. 248. Dr. Frank M. Briggs,
Superintendent of the Utah School for the deaf and blind, was elected president of the Utah Eugenics Society at its annual meeting in Salt Lake City during April. Many papers were read at the meeting, and "the general trend of the discussions was all to the effect that we are not ready for many of the odd and peculiar Bills which have created enthusiasm in several of the States. That is, it is much better at the present time to devote our energies to education along eugenic lines, endeavouring to reach all the people possible and give them what we consider a proper idea of eugenics, to have all the lectures possible delivered before schools, church organisations and other general assemblies; to endeavour to secure co-operation of libraries in order that they may introduce books on eugenics to secure the co-operation of the various Women's Club, and, if possible, to secure at least one place on
the program of each club for the coming year; to endeavour to secure better care and protection for the classes of people who are unable to care properly for themselves.
THE JOURNAL OF HEREDITY. Vol. v., No. 7. July, I914. Second Report of the Committee on Immigration of the Eugenics Section of the American Genetic Association. Pp. 297-300. The committee urge the necessity of stringent immigration laws sternly enforced in view of such facts as the following: " It appears that while the foreign born in I9IO constituted 3o02 per cent. of the entire population of New York State, the foreign born insane constituted 43-4 per cent. of the patients in the State hospitals on September 3oth, 19I2." On February 4th, 1914, an Immigration Bill (H.R. 6o6o) passed the House of Representatives by a two-thirds majority. This Bill is recommended by the committee as embodying provisions which would result in the more effective detection, exclusion and deportation of mentally and physically defective aliens. It is on the same lines as a Bill which would have become law in 1913 but for the veto of
President Taft. Biological Eugenics. (Address delivered before the First National
Conference for Race Betterment, Battle Creek, Mich., January 8th, 1914.)

PERIODICAL LITERATURE.

259

Leon J. Cole. Pp. 305-312. A plea for eugenics expressed in very moderate terms. The author sums up his practical programme for racial betterment as follows: " Eugenic selection must, I believe, for a long time be confined to cases of marked defect and weakness. In addition more study must be given to those influences which may weaken the germplasm directly, such as alcohol. And medical science, rather than desisting, must push on, especially in the field of general prophylaxy, but with more thought to succeeding generations and the future of the race than it has given in the past. Philanthropy and charities cannot stop, but they must take more counsel of established sciences, and, like medicine, give more thought to the future."
Results of Early Marriage. Casper L. Redfield. Pp. 3I6-7. Eugenists sometimes advocate earlier marriages for the better members of the community that they may increase more rapidly. Mr. Redfield does not believe that early marnages lead to desirable results and offers a prize of Ioo dollars to anyone who can show more than three cases in which "the intellectually superior person has as many as four generations in a century in the tail-male time alone." This is a sporting offer, but we cannot see that the result is likely to prove anything one way or the other.
THE JOURNAL OF HEREDITY, Vol. v., No. 8, August, 1914. The Declining Birth-rate, by F. H. Hankins. Pp. 361-367. This attacks the problem in America, and points out that though the better classes of the population marry earlier and more frequently than in the past, the number of births is decreasing. He considers the cause to be mainly psychological. Individual ambition being the central fact, the interests of the individual conflict with the interests of the race. No special solution of the problem is offered.
POPULAR SCIENCE MONTHLY. Vol. lxxxiv., No. 6. June, 1914. Facts and Factors of Development, by Prof. E. G. Conklin. Pp. 52I-537. This is the first of the Norman Harris lectures for 1914 at North-Western
University, on " Heredity and Environment in the Development of Men," to be published by the Princeton University Press. It contains a clear though very brief sketch account of fertilisation and the development of the embryo, which is admirably illustrated from the classical authorities on the subject.
POPULAR SCIENCE MONTHLY. Vol. lxxxv., No. i. July, 1914. Facts and Factors in Development. II., Development of the Mind. Prof. E. G. Conklin. Pp. 2I-39. The mind develops from simple beginnings contained in the germ, in the same way as the body does, and the elements in the mental processes of human beings have their parallels in the " minds " of lower organisms, as shown by their behaviour. The simplest of these elements which forms the basis of all psychic processes is sensitivity or the capacity of receiving and responding to stimuli, which is a fundamental property of all living matter. At a slightly higher stage one gets tropisms or reflexs, which, when they become complex, are called instincts. Memory also in its simplest form may be found in plants and lower animals, while the basis of intelligence and reason as shown by the adoption of methods of "trial and error" is present even in the protozoa.
POPULAR SCIENCE MONTHLY, Vol. lxxxv., NO. 2, August, 19I4, has two articles of special interest. The Cellular Basis of Heredity and
Development, by Professor Edwin Grant Conklin, pp. 105-i33, and The
Role of Sex in the Evolution of the Mind, by Professor S. J. Holmes.
POPULAR SCIENCE MONTHLY, Vol. lxxxv., No. 3, September. Conclusion of Professor Conklin's article in the previous issue, pp. 232-246.
The Decreasing Population of France, by Professor James W. Garner, pp. 247-259. The writer gives statistics of the birth and death-rates in

260 EUGENICS REVIEW.
comparison with other countries. " The recent census statistics show a declining birth-rate in all the departments without exception. In many of them the rate of mortality exceeds the birth-rate by a third, while in some it is twice as great." After discussing numerous causes which have been suggested, Professor Garner considers that "the principal causes of the low birth-rate are not due to external conditions, social, legal or religious, but are the result of the general attitude of the French toward family life. The relatively high rate of mortality, inadequate hygienic conditions, alcoholism, divorce and other causes mentioned may be contributory factors, but the chief reason is that French people do not desire to have children. This attitude has been powerfully accentuated by neo-Malthusian propagandists. . . ." He concludes that "the true remedy lies not in legislative, administrative or fiscal measures, but in a reform of the morals and customs of the French people. There must be a fundamental change in the attitude of French men and women towards the obligation to rear families; there must be an awakening to the duty which devolves upon the citizen to contribute to the perpetuity of his race through the rearing of children to defend it in time of war or to pay taxes for the maintenance of the Government."
EUGANIQUE. 2e Annee, No. 5. Mai, 1914. Les lois de Naudin-
Mendel dans L'EspAce Humaine, en particulier dans L'Albinisme Humain,
by Dr. E. Apert. Pp. 129-141. This paper is based on an analysis of the genealogies published in " A Monograph on Albinism in Man," by Pearson, Nettleship and Usher. The author argues that when two subjects who are not albinos have among their children one or more albinos, one can say that, if Mendel's law is correct (and if albinism is a recessive character), these two subjects are heterozygotes DR; and one knows that the proportion of recessives RR to be expected among the offspring of heterozygotes is 25 per cent. But if one judges the parents to be heterozygotes from the fact that they have albino children, then one should not get the theoretical 25 per cent. of albinos among their children, but a larger proportion; and this proportion will increase the smaller the size of the family is. If there is only one child in the family it must necessarily be an albino. In families of two, there is one chance in four that the first is albino and one chance in four that the second is an albino, consequently there is one chance in I6 that both are albinos. On the other hand there are three chances in four that the first is not an albino and three chances in four that the second is not an albino; therefore there are 3 x 3=9 chances in 4 x 4= i6 that neither child will be an albino, but these will escape attention because we can only deal with families in which one child at least is known to be an albino. Thus one should expect to find among families of two one family with both children albinos to six with one child an albino; in other words, eight
children in 14 or 57 per cent. will be albinos. In the following table
are shown, first the percentage of albinos to be expected in families of different sizes calculated in the manner indicated above, and next the percentage actually found in the published genealogies. Below this again is given the number of families of each size.

No. of children in 1 2 3 4 5 6
family.

18 0 111 12 13

Percentage of albinos 100 57 43 36 33 30 29 28 27 26 26 26 25 calculated.
Percentage of albinos 1Oo 68 51 40 36 35 32 31 25 26 29 25 26
obse.ved.
No. of families ... 64 8o 96 85 77 74 57 40 34 29 15 II 7

PERIODICAL LITERATURE.

26i

It will be seen that there is a general agreement between the observed numbers and the calculated numbers, except that in the smaller families the former are higher than the latter. This divergence is probably due to the fact that families containing more than one albino are more likely to attract attention and to be recorded than those containing only one. After testing the figures bv considering the distribution of albinos in families of particular sizes Dr. Apert remarks that it is difficult to
avoid the conclusion that human albinism is a recessive character obeying
Mendel's law.

JOURNAL OF GENETICS. Vol. iii., No. 4. April, 1914. The Relative
Lengths of the First and Second Toes of the Human Foot, by Mrs. Merritt
Hawkes, is the paper of chief interest to students of eugenics. She shows that there are three main types of foot; (a) in which the big toe projects well beyond all the others, (b) in which the second toe projects beyond the first, and (c) in which the first and second are of equal length. Of these types the first is much the commonest (89 per cent. of men, 82 per cent. of women), the second is comparatively rare (commoner in women), and the third very rare. Most commonly both feet are of the same type, but in over 5 per cent. of the cases examined one belonged to the "long," the other to the " short " type. Details are given of the anatomical relations of the types, and a considerable part of the paper is devoted to a discussion of their inheritance. Mrs. Hawkes concludes that the long type of great toe is in general dominant over the short type, and that the cases of dissimilar feet are heterozygous, but it must be confessed that the data given do not seem in accord with any such simple hypothesis.
Hybrids Between Moths of the Subfamily Bistoninae, by Messrs. Harrison and Doncaster, describes cases in which reciprocal crosses between two species give only males in one cross and both females and males in the converse. One of these species was found to have four times as many chromosomes as the other, and in the spermatogenesis of the hybrid hardly any pairing of chromosomes took place.
The Transmission of Secondary Sexual Characters in Pheasants, by Mrs. Haig Thomas, gives detailed descriptions of the results of crossing the Swinhoe male with the Silver female, and repeatedly back-crossing the offspring with Silver females. The results suggest that the Silver female is unable to transmit all its typical characters to its female off-
spring. Heredity of Melanism in Lepidoptera, by Mr. W. Bowater. The
author shows from his own experiments that in one species the melan;c form is a simple Mendelian dominant, and gives a valuable summary of the known facts in many other species, in most of which the same conclusion may be drawn.

JOURNAL OF GENETICS. Vol. iv., No. I. June, 1914. Hereditary Left-
handedness, by Prof. H. E. Jordan. The pedigrees leave no doubt of the

hereditary nature of the condition, and some of them strongly support the

conclusion that it is a Mendelian recessive, but in view of the exceptions

recorded, and the several pedigrees in which it might be dominant, it

seems probable that the dominance of right-handedness is somewhat

irregular.

Note on Twinning, by Prof. Jordan, calls attention to the inheritance

of twin-production in man, and shows that the evidence indicates that
production of twins may be influenced by the male parent, perhaps

the by

giving the fertilised ovum a tendency to divide. other papers are:

Inheritance of Weight in Poultry, by Prof. Punnett and P. G. Bailey,

in which they conclude that weight depends on the cumulative action of

several independent Mendelian factors.

262 EUGENICS REVIEW.
Immunity to Fungous Diseases as a Physiological Test in Genetics and Systematics, as Exemplified in Cereals, by N. I. Vaviloff.
The Relations Between Chromosomes, Sex-limited, Transmission and Sex-determination in Abraxas Grosszlariata, by L. Doncaster, which describes the first known case of an impaired heterochromosome in the female.
A Peculiar Negative Correlation in Oenothera Hybrids, by G. H. Shull. In this last paper the author describes reciprocal crosses between Oe. rubricalyx (Gates) and other forms, and points out that in the F, hybrids the red buds of rubricalyx are always associated with green stems, but green or pale buds with red stems. He maintains that in almost all cases the genetic behaviour of Oentothera appears to be inconsistent with a Mendelian explanation, and severely criticises those writers (e.g. Gates and Heribert-Nilsson) who have attempted to show that the many puzzles presented by Oenothera are all susceptible of simple Mendelian solutions.
L. DONCASTER.
ARCHIV FUER FRAUENKUNDE UND EUGENIK. Edited by Dr. Max Hirsch. I Band. I. Heft. March, 19I4. Ueber Ziel und Wege frauenkundlicher Forschung. Pp. I-20. The introductory article by the editor gives the aim of this new scientific journal. It is intended to bring together the various branches of knowledge relating to womanhood, to co-ordinate all that is known about woman in medicine, hygiene, psychology, sociology, etc., etc., and thus pave the way for a complete " Science of Womanhood." As the problem of woman is closely bound up with that of the future generation, eugenics forms an integral part of any such science.
Die Statistik der Fehlgeburten. Dr. F. Prinzing. Pp. 22-33. A useful compilation of statistics of miscarriages as far as known. Miscarriages occur in about ten per cent. of all conceptions, rising very much in certain trades, as rubber, lead industries, etc. They rise with the number of conceptions, and are more frequent in conceptions out of wedlock. The male sex predominates over the female, the proportion being I6o males to Ioo females. Miscarriages are much more frequent among the working-class than among the well-to-do. There seems to be a general concensus of opinion that criminal abortion has been on the increase ot late.
Die Theaterprostitution in Wandel der Zeiten. Dr. Heinrich Stumcke. Pp. 33-55. A historical sketch showing the close connection between prostitution and the theatre throughout the ages.
Die Frage nach dem gunstigsten Heiratsalter. Pp. 57-62. Discusses various estimates of the "Most Favourable Marriage Age of Women," finds as the conclusion that the twenty-first and twenty-second years are the best.
Uber die Sitten Polizei. Dr. Werthauer. Pp. I63-170. The author
advocates the abolition of direct police interference in matters of prostitution, and gives various social remedies which are to take its place.
S. H.
ARCHIV FUER FRAUENKUNDE UND EUGENIK. I. Band, II. Heft, May, I914. Sittlichkeitsverbrechen von Frauen und an Frauen. Dr. M. H. Goring. Pp. 121-129. Gives a review of the various paragraphs of the German Penal Code relating to sexual crime.
Die Hochziichtung des Menschengeschlechts. Dr. Franz Schacht. Pp. 131-139. An argument against active eugenic interference with marriage at the present day. The first object of eugenics can only be to select reliable statistics, for the present, with reference to the transmission of inferior qualities from good stocks, and vice-versa. Legislative interference with marriage at the present time would, according to the author, only increase illegitimacy and concubinage.

PERIODICAL LITERATURE.

263

DIE NEUE GENERATION. io Jahrgang, 5 Heft, May, 19I4. Rassenmis-
chung und Mischehenfrage. Ferd. Frhr. v. Reitzenstein. Deals with the
problem of miscegenation of white and coloured races as affecting the problem of colonisation. The author shows that unfavourable results are due not so much to race-inheritance as to adverse environmental conditions under which half-castes are generally reared.
Von Liebe und LiebesJreundschaft, by Grete Meisel-Hess. A plea for freer relationship between man and woman advocating the right of
" erotic friendship " when and where the " one great eternal love " is unattainable. The article, being short, hardly does justice to the tremendous social implications involved in such revolutionary proposal.
DIE NEUE GENERATION. io Jahrgang, 6 Heft, June, 19I4. Rassenmischung und Mischehenfrage. Ferd. Frhr. v. Reitzenstein (conclusion). As Europeans (the article refers especially to Germans) are generally incapable of permanent acclimatisation in hot climates, while the hybrid coloured offspring are on the whole not undesirable stocks, the author advocates the encouragement of an indigenous coloured population as a means of colonisation.
Daemmerschlaf, by Mary Summer-Boyd. A description of the painless method of confinement by means of scopolamin-morphium injections as practised at Professor Kroenig's Frauenklinik in Freiburg in Br.
S. H. LA REVUE PSYCHOLOGIQUE, VI., 4, December, I913. Sur les Rapport. entre l'Acuite Sensorielle et 1' Intelligence. Mme. Marie Lipska-Librach.
Pp. 425-501. This, the concluding portion of Mme. Lipska-Librach's doctorial thesis, contains the chapters dealing with La Sensibilite a la Douleur, Acuite Visuelle, Acuite Auditive, a Force Musculaire, and Conclusions Generales. Her experiments were carried out upon 420 children in Brussels. The children were divided into three groups according to their age, namely, nine, ten, and eleven years respectively; and each group was again subdivided into two or three sub-groups of fifty or sixty children according to intelligence. She gives average measurements for the various groups and sub-groups. On the basis of her results she concludes that in tactile, visual, and auditory acuity, in sensibility to pain, and in muscular force children of superior intelligence are throughout superior to those of poorer intelligence. The difference is most marked and most constant in the cases of sensibility to touch and to pain and of muscular force. In the case of visual and auditory acuity, the more intelligent children show a greater delicacy at the younger ages; but at older ages they become equal or even inferior. At first sight, these results appear to contradict the conclusions of other observers, and to suggest, as the writer herself remarks, that the cutaneous senses and muscular development are of greater importance for intellectual development than hearing or vision. This inference, however, she disavows. As carried out in these experiments, the process of tactile discrimination was something much more complex than a mere exercise of sensorial acuity. The author herself emphasises in this relation that the aesthesiometric tests required an effort of judgment and of sustained voluntary attention to a far higher degree than the tests for vision or hearing. The tests for pain she considers to have been equally complex. But here the comparative obtuseness of the older and more intelligent children is to be ascribed to their greater control of imagination and fear-both aroused by this test-rather than to their superiority of judgment and attention. Voluntary effort also intervened in the test for muscular force. On the other hand, pathological conditions are more common in children in the case of eyes or ears than in the case of skin or muscles. Children are more liable to be deaf or shortsighted than paralysed or anaesthetic. The frequency of visual and auditory defects increases with age; and the frequency of shortsightedness is greater among the cleverer children. Mme. Lipska-Librach's conclusion thus represents a very complex fact.

264 EUGENICS REVIEW.
It is quite possible that, if she had eliminated the influence of disease from her measurements of sight and hearing, and if she had eliminated (as far as such factors can be eliminated) the influence of intellectual, emotional, and volitional factors from the tests of tactile discrimination, pain, and muscular force, her conclusions would then have been in harmony with that of others. In her final discussion she endeavours to make theoretical allowance for these irrelevant influences; and it appears that she would expect to find that, when this had been done, the highest correlations would be found in the case of the highest senses. If so, this would be in accord with the results of other investigators. That the relations between sensory acuity and intelligence are closest in younger children, that their intelligence is therefore sensorial, and that delicacy of sense-perception is in consequence of great importance for their early intellectual development-these further inferences are of considerable value and interest. It is unfortunate, however, that the writer's statistics should stop short at the calculation of aferages and their differences.
QUARTERLY CHRONICLE.
CENTRAL SOCIETY.
COMMITTEES.
July 6th.-First Meeting of the Local Administration Enquiry Committee.
,, i6th.-Finance Committee Meeting. ,, I7th.-General Council Meeting.
Sept. isth.-Special General Council Meeting.
MEETINGS.
July gth.-Major Darwin before the Junior Constitutional Club on "The Influence of Eugenics on Legislation."
July 28th.-Miss N. March before the Ivy Leaves Girls' Club, Stepney, on " Eugenics."
Mr. C. S. Stock, before the Wealdstone Men's Adult School, gave two lectures on " Eugenics " on September i3th and 20th.
SUMMER SCHOOLS.
At the Oxford Summer School Dr. Schuster gave two lectures on
" Eugenics " on July 23rd and August 5th.
WELLINGTON BRANCH-NEW ZEALAND. President-Professor H. B. Kirk. Vice-Presidents-Dr. J. B. Mason, Dr. F. Hay, Mrs. A. R. Atkinson. Hon. Auditor-J. S. Barton, Esq. Hon. Secretary-Miss England. Council-T. King, Esq., Dr. Hardwick Smith, A. H. Hindmarsh, Esq., Sir Robert Stout, A. Hamilton, Esq., F. G. A. Stuckey, Esq., Sir John Findlay, E. J. Kennedy, Esq., C. B. Morison, Esq., F. W. Frankland, Esq., D. McLaren, Esq., J. S. Tennant, Esq., Dr. Platts-Mills, Rev. W. Jellie, Miss P. Myers.
THIRD ANNUAL REPORT. 19I3-1914.
The work of the past year does not afford much material for comment. Owing to various causes there was no opportunity for any new departure and the work undertaken had to be confined to the always valuable, but not in any way sensational, monthly lectures given at the Society's regular meetings.
1 N.B.-Owing to late arrival it was not possible to include it in the Sixth Annual Report of the Society.

QUARTERLY CHRONICLE.

265

The lectures given during the winter of 1913 were, however, some of the best of those arranged for by the Council since the formation of the Wellington Society. In June Mr. Pope lectured on " The Work of the Industrial Schools of the Dominion)"; in August Mr. Hogben, Inspector-General of Schools, explained with great wealth of detail the results arrived at by the Medical Inspector of Schools in New Zealand; in September Miss P. Myers based an admirable lecture on the facts dealt with in Dr. Russell Wallace's book, " Social Environment and Moral Progress." All these papers provided useful discussion and were much appreciated by those who heard them.
One public lecture was also arranged by the Society and was given on July 7th by Professor Pickerill, of Otago University, at that time in Wellington as a delegate to the Dental Conference. This lecture, which was the result of much original and valuable research by the Professor,
whose services to dental science are well known to the dentists of the world, was illustrated by lantern slides made on purpose and aroused much interest and many pertinent questions from the audience.
In addition, papers hiave been read to various country societies by Miss P. Myers, Mr. G. Nicholas, and other members of the Society, and literature has been supplied for distribution. Requests for information as to the formation of branch societies have been received from Brisbane and Melbourne and information has been received that a society is being formed in the former town.
At the Australasian Medical Conference held in Auckland, the Society was represented by Dr. Hay, but it was not found possible to hold a special eugenics meeting, as the programme was over full and the time limited.
A former member, Rev. W. Jellie, resigned upon leaving the Dominion to take up work in England, but has kindly agreed to act as the Society's representative in the matter of keeping touch with the parent Society. His keen interest in the movement will enable him to render good service to the Society in this respect.
The Society has suffered a most serious loss by the death of Mr. A. Hamilton, late director of the Dominion Museum, and a member of the Council of this Society. Mr. Hamilton was a man whose eminent sanity of view and far-reaching and exact knowledge of biological science gave a peculiar value to his advocacy of eugenics. For this reason, and for his constant and kindly helpfulness, his death is keenly felt and deeply deplored by the Society.
Arrangements have now been made with the London office to supply the EUGENICS REVIEW direct to all members each quarter. It is hoped that this will ensure its regular delivery and be in every way more satisfactory than the former arrangement.
The conditions of membership of the Wellington Branch of the Eugenics Education Society are as follows:-Subscriptions for full members (alone eligible for a seat on the Council), ios. 6d. per annum, including the EUGENICS REVIEW post free. Associates, 5s. Yearly subscription to the EUGENICS REVIEW, 5s. 6d., post free.
CHRISTCHURCH BRANCH-NEW ZEALAND. Lectures. The Hon. Secretary, Mr. W. H. Symes, lectured on " The Feeble-Minded " at a meeting of the Society, and on " Heredity " before the Medical Society; in addition he has spoken at four small meetings at private houses. Professor McMillan Brown has addressed various public bodies and thereby given moral support to the cause of eugenics. Legislation. No eugenic Act has been passed since the Mental Defectives Act of I9Ti. A few persons have been dealt with under this Act, and many more would have been, but that no place has yet been provided for receiving adults. There is a home and school for defective

266 EUGENICS REVIEW.
boys, accommodating about 6o, but room is wanted for three or four hundred. A small home and school for defective girls is now being built.
The asylums are overcrowded and the demand for accommodation increases every year. Home for epileptics and a home for alcoholics are badly needed, although the latter is to some extent provided by the Salvation Army. A start has been made this year with the medical inspection of schools. It is too soon for any detailed reports of the results to be available, but from the partial reports which have appeared in the newspapers, it appears that many serious defects are prevalent, although the proportion is perhaps not so great as in England. The Australasian Medical Congress at Auckland memorialised the Government to provide increased facilities for the free treatment of venereal disease. Owing to the efforts of Dr. Fenwick, the Christchurch Hospital is the first in New Zealand to carry the recommendation into effect.
The Society are trying to promote preference of employment to married men. It is badly needed because nearly all sheepfarmers, i.e., runholders, invariably give preference to unmarried shepherds.
W. H. SYMES, Vice-President and Hon. Secretary.

Leetures for Eugenists at the Imperial College of Sienee and Teehnology, South Kensington.-Professor MacBride will deliver a course of sixteen weekly lectures entitled "An Introduction to the Study of Heredity," commencing in January, igi5. This course was to have been given by the lecturer in zoology, Mr. H. M. Fuchs, but owing to the war he will not be available, so Professor MacBride has very kindly
undertaken to give the lectures himself. The exact syllabus is not yet available, but the outline of its contents, which is appended, shows the subjects to be dealt with. Members of the Society wishing to attend this course should apply to the Hon. Sec., Eugenics Education Society, Kingsway House, Kingsway, W.C.

OUTLINE SYLLABUS. Introductory. The organism, growth and reproduction; the idea of evolution. Variation. The exact study of variability. Statistical investigation of heredity. Methods and results.
Analysis of heredity by hybridisation. Mendel's experiments and his
interpretation of them. More complex cases of Mendelian inheritance; extensions of the
theory. Heredity of sex. Mendelian interpretation; cytological evidence;
sex-determination.
Causes of new inheritable variations. Experimentally produced mutations. The question of the inheritance of acquired characters.
Theories as to the origin of new races. Examples of inheritance in man.

Leetures at the Galton Laboratory.-A course of lectures intro-

ductory to the science of eugenics will be given in the department of

applied statistics and eugenics during the session 1914. In the first term

eight lectures on the biological basis of heredity will be delivered by Dr.

O'Donoghue on Fridays at 6 p.m., beginning October i6th. In the

second and third terms Prof. Karl Pearson will deal respectively with the

statistical basis of eugenic theory and the facts and theories of heredity.

c&A fee of

is. is charged for the whole course, or ios. 6d. for each

term, teachers being permitted to attend the whole course for a fee of

ios. 6d. In addition Dr. David Heron will deliver ten lectures on

elementary statistical metbods on Tuesdays at 6 p.m., beginning October

i3th. These are arranged for the benefit of teachers, and are intended to

illustrate methods useful in interpreting data in the reports of school

medical officers and in the reduction of material which can be obtained

from observations on school children by the teachers themselves. The

QUARTERLY CHRONICLE.

267

lectures will be followed by practical classes, in which the students will apply to actual data the methods explained in the lectures.

Eugenies and Soeial Work.-Owing to the war the course of lectures under the above title to be given during the autumn by Bishop Welidon, Mrs. Clare Goslett, and Mr. Dixon Kingham has been postponed. It is recognised that the social workers for whom the lectures were arranged are now overwhelmed with urgent calls on their time. The same course was to have been given iii Birmingham and is also postponed.

The Duteh Committee for Medieal Examination before Marriage is doing most useful work in the establishment of consultative medical bureaux, at which people who desire to marry and wish to ascertain whether there is any hygienic reason why they should not do so, can obtain medical advice without payment. Many public-spirited physicians have come to the assistance of the committee by offering their services gratuitously, and it appears that eight bureaux are now at work. The object of the committee is to prevent the marriage of persons suffering from venereal disease and the infection of innocent people and the waste of and damage to infant lives which it entails. The Dutch Committee has its headquarters at The Hague, but the British Vice-Consul at Rotterdam has kindly informed us, in answer to our inquiry, that other societies with similar objects are being formed at Naerden, at Amsterdam,
and at Utrecht.

The interest

Ameriean in eugenics

Eugenies Committee.-To aid in along scientific lines, and to increase

tluisidiinntgerepsutblbiyc

propaganda, the President of the American Genetic Association has

appointed the following as members of the Committee on Education and

Extension which was created by the council of this association last

winter:

David Starr Jordan, Chancellor of Leland Stanford Junior Uni-

versity, California (chairman).

Dr. Rupert Blue, Surgeon, U. S. Public Health Service, Washington,

D. C. (first vice-chairman).

Mrs. John Hays Hammond, former National Chairman, Women's

Welfare Department, National Civic Federation, New York, N. Y.

(second vice-chairman).

Dr. W. C. Rucker, Assistant Surgeon General, U. S. Public Health

Service, Washington, D. C. (secretary).

Irving Fisher, Professor of Political Economy, Yale University, New

Haven, Conn.

Dr. Elnora Cuddiback Folkmar, Superintendent of Women's

Auxiliary Clinic, Washington, D. C.

Mrs. Charles Cary Rumsey, New York, N. Y.

The Very Reverend Walter Taylor Sumner, Dean of the Cathedral of

St. Peter and St. Paul, Chicago, Ill.

Talcott Williams, Dean of the School of Journalism, Columbia Uni-

versity, New York, N. Y.

Mrs. Huntingdon Wilson, Washington, D. C.

The letter of invitation sent to those selected as members (all of whom

have accepted) states that " The object of this committee will be to pro-

mote the education of public sentiment throughout the country, in order

that a 'eugenic conscience ' may be formed in as many individuals as

possible; to oppose premature legislation and, if necessary, to suggest

desirable legislation, on the basis of scientific data. The work of this

committee will be focused in the organ of the association, The lournal of

Heredity."

The committee expects to adopt every means possible to further the

interests of conservative and constructive eugenics, but its principal work,

for some time at least, will probably be the formation of local societies

268 EUGENICS REVIEW.
for the study of the subject, the arrangement of public meetings and lectures by men of science, and the publication of results of research which have direct application to the problems of human heredity. The committee will in this way supplement the Committee on Research in Eugenics of the American Genetic Association, and will also, it is hoped, occupy a new field, which has hitherto been left practically unoccupied, but in which there is the possibility of doing a great deal of useful work.
The Wages of Married Employees in German Towns.-In several German towns the married workmen employed by the municipality receive additions to their wages which vary with the size of their families. Through the courtesy of the burgermeisters of Mainz, Strassburg and Ulm, we are able to give the details of the regulations in force in these cities. In Mainz married workmen with two children or less under the age of I6 receive i'So mk. a week additional wages; where the number of children of this age is three or four the amount rises to I"75 mk., and if there are more than four to 2 mk. Single workmen without dependants receive an addition to the standard wages of 075 mk., but where they have to maintain their parents they rank as married workmen without children. In Strassburg married workmen receive an addition of 5 per cent., which is increased to i5 per cent., 20 per cent., and 25 per cent. as their families increase to more than three, more than five, and more than seven children under i6 years of age. In Ulm, since I9I2, all married or widowed workmen with two children, whose yearly wage is less than I,8oo mk., receive a monthly addition to their wages of 4 mk., which is increased by one mark {or every additional child.
Eugenic Problems diseussed at a prominent politieal meeting in Norway.-At a meeting in Christiania, where political delegates of the " Radicals "-at present the ruling party in Norway-met to discuss new lines in politics, Dr. Alfred Mjoen gave a lecture on eugenic problems and outlined his policy of social reform. There were present several Members of Parliament, the Minister of Justice, the Minister of Foreign Affairs, the Minister of Finance, and Ministers of other departments, and the Prime Minister of Norway, Gunnar Knudsen, who conducted the meeting. Dr. Alfred Mjoen's programme for social and eugenic reform is known from the meeting of the Permanent International Eugenics Committee and from his earlier lectures in Norway, Denmark and London. He sketched out his programme and gave further an account of eugenic work in England, Germany and America. Great interest was aroused by the speech of the Minister of Justice, Abrahamsen. On many points he expressed views on eugenics similar to those advocated by Dr. Mj6en, and further he expressed his intention that in the new revision of the criminal law he would, without doubt, take some of these even more radical reforms into consideration. The Prime Minister of Norway concluded by saying that the eugenic ideas deserved the serious attention of practical politicians.
ADDITIONS TO LIBRARY.
ALDRICH, MORTON A., and Others, 1914. Eugenics. Pp. 348.
(L. 671.)
BATESON, W., I909. Mendel's Principles of Heredity. Pp. 396.
(L. 665.)
CORBETT-SMITH, A., 1914. The Problem of the Nations. Pp. 107.
(L. 670.)
GALTON, FRANCIS, 1914. Hereditary Genius. Pp. 379. (L. I02.) GALTON, FRANCIS, i9Ii. Inquiries into Human Faculty and Its
Development. Pp. 26I. (L. 676.) GEDDES P. and THOMSON, A., 1914. Sex. Pp. 255. (L. 672.)

ADDITIONS TO LIBRARY.

269

GOVERNMENT PUBLICATIONS:-

American Papers on Inheritance in Poultry, 1910-1912. (L. 406.)

Criminal Statistics, 1912. Relating to criminal proceedings in police,

coroners, prisons, reformatory and industrial schools, and criminal

lunatics. Pp. I86. (L. 678.)

Report of the Registrar-General of Births, Deaths, and Marriages in

England and Wales, 1912. Pp. 6ii. (L. 682.)

LAUGHLIN, HARRY H., 1914. of Sterilisation. Pp. 150.

Eugenic Record Office Bulletin. As,pects
(L. 68o.)

LOVE, J. KERR, 1913. The Causes and Prevention of Deafness. Pp.

E2A . (L. 679.)

PEARSGaOlNto,n".KAPRpL.,

1914. 246.

The Life, (L. 674.)

Letters

and Labour

of

Francis

PEARSON, KARL, 1914. On the Handicapping of the First Born. Pp.

68. (L. 68i.)

READ, A. B., 1914. Social Chaos and the Way Out. Pp. 364. (L. 677.)

THORNDIKE, EDWARD L., I90;. The Measurements of Twins. Pp.

64. (L. 668.)

VARENDONCK, J., 1914. Recherches sur les Societes d'Enfants. Pp.

93. (L. 673.)

PUBLICATIONS RECEIVED.

Annutal Report of the Registrar-General of Births, Deaths and

Marriages in England and Wales, 1912. (Publishers: H.M. Sta-

tionery Office, London, 1914. C.D. 7028. Price 5s. gd. Pp. 6i i.)

Biology of Sex for Parents and Teachers, by T. W. GALLOWAY. (Publisher:

Heath, London, 1914. Price 2S. Pp. I05.)

Causes and Prevention for Deafness, The. Four lectures delivered under

the auspices of the National Bureau for Promoting the General

Welfare of the Deaf. J. KERR LOVE, M. D. (Published by the

Bureau, 1914. Price is. Pp. I27.) Dr. Kerr Love's conclusions are

of great importance. They were described by Mr. Yearsley in his

paper on "The Problem of Deafness and its Prevention," EUGENICS

REVIEW, Vol. vi., Part 2, p. ii6.

Feeding of School Children, The, by M. E. BULKELEY. (Publishers: Bell

and Sons, London, 1914. Price .s. 6d. net. Pp. 278.)

Great Society, The. A Psychologscal Analysis, by GRAHAM WALLAS.

(Publisher: Macmillan, London, 1914. Price 7s. 6d. Pp. 406.)

Hygsene tor Girls, by E. H. RICHARDS. (Publisher: Heath, London, 1914.

Price 2S. 6d. Pp. 257.)

Making of the Roman People, The, by T. LLOYD. (Publishers: Longmans,

London. Price 4s. 6d. Pp. 136.)

Meaning of Marriage, The, by G. SPILLER. (Publishers: Watts and Co.,

London, 1914. Price is. Pp. 120.)

Native Tribes of the Northern Territory of Australia, by BALDWIN

SPENCER. (Publisher: Macmillan, London. Price 21S. Pp. 5i6.)

Outline ot English Local Government, An, by EDWARD JENKS, M.A.,

B.C.L. 3rd edition. (Publisher: Methuen, London, 1913. Price

2S. 6d. Pp. 239.)

Plant and Animal Children, by E. TORELLE. (Publisher: Heath, London,

1914. Price 2S. 6d. Pp. 230.)

Princsples of Eyugenics, b.y BLANCHE EAMES. (Publishers: Moffat, Yard

and Co., New York, 1914. Price 75 cents. net. Pp. 9I.)

Probation System, The, by CECIL LEESON. (Publishers: P. S. King and

Son London, 1914. Royal commission on

VePnreirceeal35.Di6sde.asePsp..

I91.)
First

Report

of

the

Commis-

sioners. Cd. 7474. Apendix to the First Report of Commissioners.

(Publishers: H.M. Stationery Office, London, 1914. Price 3s. 8d.

Pp. 462. Cd. 7475.)

270 EUGENICS REVIEW.
Significance of a Declining Death-rate, The, by FREDERICK L. HOFFMAN. Address delivered before the National Conference on Race Betterment, Battle Creek, Mich., January, 1914.
Social Chaos and the Way Ou2t, by ALFRED BAKER READ. (Publishers: Hendersons, London, 1914. Price 7s. 6d. Pp. 364.) If this book is a joke it is in bad taste. The author's " way out " of social chaos would lead either to the extinction of society or of civilisation. The "way out " may be indicated by a quotation from the contents"Children are not wanted," " How infanticide will gradually become a custom," " Willing pioneers," " No other means of settling labour disputes."
Some Recent Developments of Poor Relief, by W. A. BAILWARD, M.A. (Publishers: P. S. King and Son, London, 1914. Price 6d. net.
pP. 46.)
Summary of the Laws of the Several States Governing-I. Marriage and Divorce of the Feeble-minded, the Epileptic and the Insane. Ii. Asexualisation. III. Institutional Commitment and Discharge of the Feeble-minded and the Epileptic. By STEVENSON SMITH, MADGE W. WILKINSON, LovISA C. WAGONER. (Publishers: Bailey and Babette Gatzut Foundation for Child Welfare, Washington, 1914. Pp. 87.)
Text-book of Insanity and Other Mental Diseases, by CHARLES ARTHUR MERCIER, M.D., F.R.C.P., F.R.C.S. (Publishers: George Allen and Unwin, Ltd., London, 1914. Pp. 341.)
Theory of Civilisation, A, by SHOLTO 0. G. DOUGLAS. (Publisher: T. Fisher Unwin, London, 1914. Pp. 246.)
Way of God in Marriage, The, by MAY E. TEATS. (Publisher: Macfadden, Physical Development, London. Price S1,20. PP. 307.)
Women under Polygamy, by WALTER M. GALLECHAN. (Publishers: Holden and Hardingham, London, 1914. Price i6s. net. Pp. 332.)
Work and Wealth, A Human Valuation, by J. A. HOBSON. (Publisher: Macmillan, London, 1914. Price 8s. 6d. Pp. 367.)

Eugenics Education Society.

FORM OF APPLICATION FOR MEMBERSHIP.

To THE SECRETARY, EUGENICS EDUCATION SOCIETY,

KINGSWAY HousEc, KINGSWAY, LONDON, W.C.

Please enter my name as an applicant for membership of the Eugenics Education Society. On my election I will forward the Subscription.

Cheque
P.O. . Banker's Order

for

Mebrsi
LLiffMe eMmembebresrhsihpip.-------------------------------------------

Name ..........................

Address.

Occupation or Designation.................................................. Date.
Annual Subscription: Membership, including the EUGENICS REVIEW, Lx is.; Associateship, Ss.; Life Membership, ieo Ics. Associates may join without election by forwarding a Subscription of Ss., which does not include the REvIEw.

BANKER'S ORDER.

To MEssRs............

Banakes

Please pay the LONDON COUNTY AND WESTMINSTER BANK (Bloomsbury Branch), my Annual

Subscriptiun of £-------------- to the EUGENIcS EDUCATION SOCIETY, due on January 1st,

I9 , and the same amount on that day in each succeeding year until further notice.

I am,

Date.----------------.

