BIRTH CONTROL IN GERMANY

By VERA HOUGHTON
(Secretary, International Committee on Planned Parenthood)

(This survey has been compiled from information given by Professor Hans Harmsen, of
Hamburg University, and from the speeches made by Dr. Anne-Marie Durand-Wever and
Frau Ilse Lederer at the meeting of the International Committee in August z.r5i).

The Legal Position
ALTHOUGH under the Nazi regime the practice of birth control had become
increasingly difficult in Germany, there
was no legal restriction to it until I94I. On January 2ISt, I94I, a Police Regulation was issued prohibiting the manufacture, advertisement, sale or distribution of articles and preparations intended to prevent pregnancy. By the same Regulation a doctor or other person applying or using such
articles or preparations was liable to prosecu-
tion. The I94I Police Regulation was subse-
quently embodied in the German Penal Code, when Sections 2I8 and 219 were revised in March I943. Previously, these two Sections of the Penal Code had referred only to
abortion and abortifacients, but in the i943
revision Section 2I9 was extended to apply
to contraceptives. After the capitulation of Germany, when
the Penal Code was replaced by Control Council Law, appeals were made for the amendment of Section 2I9. But even where it was revised and restored to its original wording, as in the British Zone, the effect was not to facilitate reasonable birth-control practices for, in the view of the police, the I94I Regulation was still enforceable. Only in Berlin, and in the Russian Zone, was it considered to be inapplicable. Elsewhere, the Police Regulation remained in force pending legal action for its repeal, and in six provinces in Western Germany it is still applicable.
So far, Hamburg has been the only province to abolish entirely the I94I Regulation. In four other provinces, in Bremen, Niedersachsen, Schleswig-Holstein, and in Wiirttemberg-Baden, it has been partially revoked.

Because of the confusion caused by the different interpretations of Section 2I9 of the law and of the uncertainty, in some provinces, as to the application of the old Police Regula-
tion prohibiting contraceptives, the German
Federal Government intends to regulate, by a law covering the whole of Western Germany, the manufacture and use of contraceptives.
In order to protect the public from dangerous and unreliable contraceptives, Hamburg passed a decree in July I949 placing the manufacture of all such articles and preparations under the supervision of the Ministry of Health.
Other factors which have impeded the promotion of family planning in Germany
since the end of the war have been the attitude of the Churches towards birth control; the ignorance amongst the public, and in the medical profession, of modern
contraceptive techniques; and the widely held belief that Germany must build up her
population against Eastern Europe.
In the difficult social and economic
conditions of divided Germany many women have, in the absence of birth-control knowledge, resorted to abortion as a means of limiting the size of the family. This has not only endangered the life and health of the woman, but has had distressing consequences. Last year, in Southern Germany, information relating to cases of abortion, which doctors are obliged to report to the health authorities, was obtained by the police. Several hundreds of women, mostly in Garmisch-Partenkirschen and WeinheimBaden, were rounded-up and taken to the police station for questioning. Subsequently, a number of doctors were arrested and charged with procuring criminal abortion. Although there was a considerable outcry in the Press,

i85

i86 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

and from the medical associations, at the breach of medical confidence, no interest was aroused in why these women had abortions in the first place, and nothing was done to ensure that in future adequate birthcontrol advice was available.
Although abortion, at first, was permitted in the Russian Zone, on medical, ethical, and on social grounds, there was also
propaganda for birth control. An example of this was found in the Leipzig Frauenklinik where, in the waiting-room, a poster stated: " Interruption of pregnancy does not prevent further pregnancies; it injures women's health; therefore, use birth control." It is believed that as many as 20,000 copies of a birth-control pamphlet written by Dr.
Anne - Marie Durand - Wever have been distributed in the Russian Zone. Unfortunately, because of the blockade, it has not appeared outside Eastern Germany, and no publisher in the Western sector has so far been willing to reprint it.
The social indication for abortion in the Russian Zone was intended to apply only for a limited period. By a new law issued in
Eastern Germany on September 27th, I950, for the " Protection of Mother and Child and the Rights of Women," permission for abortion is withdrawn except where the health of the mother is gravely endangered by pregnancy, or where one of the parents suffers from a serious hereditary disease. Under this new law, " State help is granted to improve the financial position of families with many children and to further an increase in the number of children." It is not yet known whether, as a result of this law, birth-control facilities will be restricted in the Russian Zone.
Attitudes of the Churches
Opposition to birth control from the Protestant Church in Germany has now largely disappeared. Some Church Councils do not take as liberal a view as others, and opinion amongst individual pastors varies.
The conclusion reached in 1950 by the Social Hygiene Committee of the Evangelical Council of the State Church of Hamburg was the first important standpoint to be taken on birth control by a religious body in

Germany since the war. It was recognized by this committee that circumstances might exist in which it was desirable to defer having children, or to limit the size of the family. In considering the means by which
this should be done, the committee saw no moral difference between the use of contra-
ceptives and the use of " the safe period," that is, restricting intercourse to days when conception is unlikely to occur. In conclusion, the committee stressed that birth control must not be used for selfish reasons, and that there must be consideration for the spouse, and for society as a whole.
It is believed that the Roman Catholic Church in Germany, as in other countries, is no longer opposed to the principle of family limitation, but where it differs from the Protestant Church is in the methods to be
used. It is perhaps significant that the predominant faith of provinces wherein the I94I Police Regulation prohibiting contraceptives still applies is Roman Catholic.
Family Planing Facilities
In provinces where there are no actual legal restrictions, or where they are rarely applied, the practical possibilities of birth control depend very much on the co-operation of the medical profession and on the willingness of hospitals and social welfare agencies to encourage husband and wife to discuss this problem and to seek expert
advice. The leading gynacologist of a big hospital
in the suburbs of Berlin advises every woman patient who has had a pregnancy or a miscarriage, or who needs a period of recuperation, to return for contraceptive instruction. Very few in fact do; they say their husbands object to contraception. Consideration is now being given to the printing of a simple explanatory leaflet about family planning which each woman can take home and discuss with her husband.
There is quite a strong body of opinion in Germany which feels that family planning should not be pursued as a separate aim, but should be an integral part of marriage guidance work. A resolution to this effect was passed at a meeting of the Arbeitsgemeinschaft fur Jugend-und Eheberatung at

BIRTH CONTROL IN GERMANY

I87

Detmold in May I95I. The Arbeitsgemein- pre-I933 Reichsverband fur Geburtenregelung

schaft was formed to bring together all who und Sexualkygiene e. V., consists of two

are concerned with sex education, marriage, branches, the Landesleitung Siiddeutschland,

and the family, for the working out of a in charge of the President, Franz Gampe,

common basis of approach to the problems and the Landesleitung Nordrhein-Westfalen,

thereof. Lectures and training are arranged in charge of Willy Karger. There are about

for those already working in the marriage 15 local groups in the two branches, com-

guidance field, or who are about to take up prising a membership of 2,ooo. Monthly

this work. Public lectures on marriage and meetings are held, at which lectures are

sex are also organized.

given by doctors, and there are regular

Many of the big towns of Germany now discussion and consultation sessions. The

have marriage guidance clinics, at some of society arranges for the periodical testing of

which birth-control information is available chemical contraceptives, and refers patients

if asked for. Only in the Marriage Guidance to doctors who fit pessaries. It also publishes

Clinic at Kassel (Hesse) are regular birth- a monthly bulletin, Die Neue Familie.

control sessions held under medical direction. Despite what is already being done in

These were started two years ago at the Germany, there is still a great deal of

instigation of Frau Ilse'Lederer, a prominent ignorance and prejudice about family plan-

social worker. The British Family Planning ning, and many more doctors need to be

Association invited Frau Lederer to England trained in modern contraceptive techniques.

in I949 to study clinic organization and Birth control is now an important part of the

methods. With the help of other enlightened social hygiene and gynecology lectures

people, Frau Lederer established a voluntary in the training of doctors at Hamburg

clinic in Kassel, known as the Family and University and special courses of lectures are

Marriage Guidance Clinic, along the lines of being held for doctors already in practice.

clinics run by the Family Planning Associa-

tion. At first there was criticism of this

direct approach to the problem of family spacing, and valuable support and help

SONS AND

were withheld. Gradually, however, public
opinion locally is changing, and newspapers

DAUGHTERS

and women's journals are now willing to

BY ROGER PILKINGTON

publish accounts of the work of the Kassel clinic.
In Berlin, where Dr. Anne-Marie Durand-

This book presents the mechanism by which the uniqueness of the individual is brought into existence. Dr. Pilkington

Wever is working for family planning, few of the marriage guidance clinics are known to give actual birth-control advice. Apart

describes, simply and with lively humour, the intricate pattem of this brlliant mechanism, and how, though superficially paradoxical, the unpredicted birth of genius

from these, the Social Insurance Company

is possible within it.

of Berlin (Versicherungsanstalt), which covers
about 90 per cent of the population, has established birth-control clinics in several

Contents:
The Road to Babyhood; Everything in the right propor-

districts. At present there are five in West Berlin, and there were four in the Eastern

tions; The basis of Heredity; Equipment for the baby; The origin of difference; Genes

sector. Each clinic is attended by a woman doctor, and contraceptives are provided free of charge in most cases.

and the individual; Genes and the future.
Profusely illustrated. i8s. net

Helping in the promotion of family

planning is the Bund fiur Volksgesundheit

GEORGE ALLEN & UNWIN

und Geburtenregelung. This society, which

4o MUSEUM ST., LONDON, W.C.i

has been built up out of the remnants of the

Eugenics Review, VoL XLIII, No. 4

