C. B. GOODHART
M.A., Ph.D., University Museum of Zoology, Cambridge
Biological Fitness in Man

T HE WORD "FIT, " as ordinarily defined fewer descendants, through infecundity or for

in the dictionary, means "well adapted other reasons. But as geneticists nowadays use

to the circumstances, in good health or it, the phrase "survival of the fittest" is merely

condition." Lately, however, it has been tautological: the fittest are by definition those

acquirng a new and different specialized that do survive, whatever their adaptedness or

meaning in biology. To quote from Professor fitness in the ordinary sense of the word.

Medawar's recent Reith Lectures: "the word

'fitness,' then, has come to mean net reproductive Fitness to Survive

advantage, and geneticists do not deliberately It is well known that sometimes the indivi-

use it in any other sense." Originally, geneticists duals best adapted to external conditions do

would usually have applied the word to particular not have the highest net reproductive advantage,

genes rather than to the organism as a whole, and are, therefore, biologically less "fit."

but it is now being used in the sense that one Deliberate human selection can produce domes-

individual is said to be fitter than another if, and tic breeds which would be quite unfitted to

only if, it is going to be represented by more ofits survive in a natural environment, and sexual

descendants in future generations. Biological selection in wild animals may favour conspicuous

fitness is judged with reference to other members clumsy forms, ill-adapted to life in general

of the same species, and it is not concerned with apart from their advantage in breeding. The

the evolutionary adaptedness of the species itself, same may happen when a species has become

in interspecific competition.

fully adapted to stable conditions, with few

It is rather a pity that a common English possibilities for further evolutionary improve-

word is being taken over and given this quite ment. Intra-specific selection does not then stop,

different meaning by biologists, especially as but it tends to become concentrated upon other

its biological use probably derives from Herbert factors, especially those increasing fertility,

Spencer's famous phrase "the survival of the rather than on further adaptation to the external

fittest", where it is used in the original non- environment.

technical sense. When in 1867 he wrote:

Other things being equal, those that produce

Plants depend for their prosperity mainly on,
air and light ... Such of them as happen, by

the most offspring will leave the most descendants, and so they will be preferred in selection

variations in the mode of growth, to get at all even if in other ways they are less well adapted.

above the rest, are more likely to flourish and leave offspring than the rest. That is to say, natural selection will favour the more upright-growing forms: individuals with structures that lift them

The "fittest", biologically speaking, those with the highest net reproductive advantage, will be the types to survive but the competitive

above the rest, are fittest for the conditions: and advantage ofthe species as a whole, and its fitness

by the continual survival of the fittest, such struc- in intraspecific competition, may be undermined.

tures must become established.

This is perhaps the reason for one of Evolution's

by "the fittest" he clearly meant those that were most general empirical Rules, that the large

best adapted-the tallest and the strongest- majority of species in the end neither survive

which he believed would thereby be enabled to unchanged nor evolve into something else, but

survive and leave most offspring for future become wholly extinct.

generations. It would not then have been

considered a contradiction in terms to suggest Selection in Civilized Man

that the "fittest" might possibly sometimes leave In his lecture, Professor Medawar discusses

83
THE EUGENICS REVIEW, July 1960, 52, 2..

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the suggestion that mankind may now be going downhill, our overall fitness undermined by advances in medicine and hygiene, and by all that goes with civilization and the Welfare State. He points out that, if by "going downhill" is meant "declining in biological fitness," the argument is self-contradictory. If what may be considered inferior types are going to increase in future generations, they will do so only if they
have a higher net reproductive advantage, and so by definition they will have shown their superior biological fitness in intra-specific selection.
There are several ways in which the human stock could appear to be degenerating. First of all, as civilized man leads a physically easier life than his primitive forebears, the relative selective
advantage of strength and hardiness, good eyesight and so on, will be reduced. Since selection will tend to become concentrated upon other characteristics, there is bound to be some loss where it is relaxed. Provided these other characteristics involve things like intelligence and social adaptability, however, there will be no overall loss in adaptedness at all, but a gain. There is no question here of mankind going downhill, and we would not wish to reverse the trend, even if we could.
Secondly, advances in medical technique now allow people suffering from certain specific disabilities to live more or less normal lives. Diabetes, severe myopia, even bad teeth, must once have been practically lethal but they are now no more than minor inconveniences, and doubtless others will be added to this list in the future. If those who carry such defects are otherwise competitive they may prosper and transmit their disabilities to future generations. They will have become "fit" in the biological sense of the word, at the expense of some loss in the competitive vigour and adaptedness of the species as a whole. That may not matter very much, since the defective individuals will presumably go on being able to maintain their social effectiveness by artificial means. And if some of them can make a contribution to the
human cultural inheritance, the biological loss may be offset by a social gain.
Unfortunately, however, it is much easier to preserve the lives of those afflicted with hereditary

weaknesses than to bring them up to full effectiveness. Further improvements are to be expected here, but it seems excessively optimistic to hope that there will ever not be some residue who would better never have been born. But although some of these may be able to reproduce, the really defective are unlikely ever to achieve a net reproductive rate to compare with the normal, and the quality ofthe better part of the population should not be affected, despite a decline in the average level. An increasing proportion of defectives may constitute a serious social and economic burden on the community, but it will not really be an evolutionary threat to the biological future of humanity.
Intelligence and Biological Fitness It is not the obviously defective that are the threat: the real danger lies in the possibility that some large section of the population marginally below the average standard may gain a net reproductive advantage over the rest, and so be preferred in selection. Domestic animals show how selective breeding for a preferred type can lead to large changes in quite a short time, and not all of them are changes for the better. The same could happen in Man, with both his physical structure and his innate intelligence. Intelligence is the most important and most distinctive of human characteristics and, as it is certainly inherited genetically, it must respond to selection in evolution.
Human intelligence has evolved to its present level because the more intelligent have been biologically the fittest, and have had a net reproductive advantage over the rest. There is no reason to think that the human brain has yet reached the limit of its evolutionary potentialities and, if this selection continues, intelligence may be expected to increase still further. But equally if there is a change in net reproductive advantage, so that the less intelligent become biologically fitter and leave most descendants, the course of evolution will be diverted, and the level of intelligence will start to fall.
Any genetically inherited character is maintained in a population by a dynamic balance of selective forces, and if these change the balance changes with them, up or down. This may happen

84

BIOLOGICAL FITNESS IN MAN

slowly and it will be hard to detect, for there is no that human evolution was progressing "uphill"

question of the really defective suddenly starting or "downhill," but most probably it would be

to outbreed the rest. The large majority of the heading towards disaster. Some experts believe

less intelligent half of the population consists of that this may already have begun, but the evid-

normally useful and responsible people, but if dence is open to other interpretations and the

they should ever gain a net reproductive ad- question is still in dispute. At least, there is here

vantage over the more intelligent half, then a potential danger to the future of humanity,

intelligence will start to decline and will stop and one that ought to be taken seriously.

doing so only ifthe balance of selective advantage

is again reversed.

Conclusions

As our physical, biological and social environ-

Cultural Evolution

ments are brought more and more under control

It has often been pointed out that the evolution we can no longer be content merely to applaud

of human societies has taken on a new and or deplore the course taken by human evolution,

uniquely different form, because of the non- when it is possible deliberately to encourage or

genetical mode of inheritance of human culture to check its progress. This is, of course, already

and traditions. It may be true that this cultural being done, though quite unintentionally:

evolution is now much more rapid, and prob- medicine and education, social conventions and

ably more important in its effects, than is the taxation, warfare, invention and commerce, all

biological evolution of the human species, but it of these must have had important effects upon

is quite wrong to conclude from this that natural the genetical inheritance of mankind, hard

selection in human populations has ceased, or though it is to determine precisely what they

is likely to do so. Unless it is the result of inten- will have been.

tional choice, any non-random elimination is Man's biological evolution will not come to

properly to be termed natural selection, however an end so long as he continues to exist, but

artificial the environment in which it occurs. we cannot assume that'it must inevitably be

Until the breeding adults in each generation progressing in the most desirable direction

represent a random sample not merely of all the There is little comfort in the thought that if

zygotes conceived but of all that potentially less desirable types are to gain a net reproduc-

could have been conceived, this will continue to tive advantage, this can only mean that they

operate, and that will surely never happen. have"proved their superior biological fitness in

Cultural evolution might well continue its intra-specific selection. Man is beginning to

advance while innate intelligence was declining, gain the power, and with it the responsibility of

because of changes in the relative biological making sure that those types which are best and

fitness of different sections of the population. fittest to survive are, in fact, the ones that do

It is a nice point whether we should then say survive into future generations.

8S

