HAIR AND ITS HEREDITY.
By MAURICE H. CANE, B.A.*
IT is the object of the present paper briefly to attempt a further and more satisfactory elucidation than has hitherto been offered of the mode of heredity of pigmentation in human hair. With this end in view, I have been asked to summarise, from a more extensive article, the more important facts with regard to hair, especially in so far as they bear on the question of its heredity and possible eugenic value.
I will, for the most part, pass over the many interesting problems of pigmentation from an anthropological aspect,-the questions of racial migration and mixture, the theories of " Whence," the puzzles of " When," the guesses of " How " and " To what extent." I must likewise leave untouched the chemistry, physics and physiology of pigmentation, nor have I space to deal in any adequate manner with its permanence throughout successive generations, nor with colour-change in the individual.
It is frequently stated and very generally accepted that beyond Europe and contact with Europeans black hair and dark eyes are almost everywhere the only type. Such statements, however, appear to have been somewhat exaggerated,
for, quiite apart from the present existence of blond populations,
there appear among many so-called pure dark races a number of individuals with red, auburn, or reddish-brown hair. Many of these cases may be accounted for by the incomplete concealment of the red lipochrome by the overlying granular pigment, a condition which usually tends to disappear with adolescence.
* I am indebted to my friend W. B. Alexander, B.A., for Pedigee J. and his encouraging assistance.

258

EUGENICS REVIEW

M. H. Cane:

Other instances are undoubtedly due to artificial effects produced by the use of lime or other substances, such practices being common not only in several parts of the world to-day,-and not least in our civilised cities,-but also in bygone years, as witnessed by such evidence as that of Pliny and Ammianus Marcellinus. The sporadic occurrence of red hair may also,
in my belief, be due, in certain instances, to racial intermixture, probably, in some cases, at an extremely remote prehistoric
date, and not necessarily mixture with a blond type. In many cases of the occurrence of hair other than black outside Europe, a mixture of races is known or believed to have taken place either in recent or remote times, and in others such intermixture
can in no case be conclusively and definitely denied. Further, we have the case of the Jews. "Of our modern Jews,"-writes Haddon,'-". . . . II per cent. have fair complexion," and adds later on that "the fair element among the modern Jews is best explained by an old, as opposed to a post-biblical, racial mixture." Jacobs2 points out that red hair seems to be only a natural complement to black, and that blue eyes, as well as red hair, are a kind of minor albinism; but his conclusion that these features are due to defective nutrition I would lay on one side in favour of a racial explanation, since not only is there strong
evidence of racial intermixture at a remote date, but also the facts, so far as they are known, accord well with what we know of Mendelian alternative inheritance. Dr. Haddon sums up this question in the following words :' " We may then accept the conclusion that the Jews have remained a persistent type for thousands of years, and that though they do now present variations in their features, these are due not so much to subsequent miscegenation as to a primitive complexity of origin, as is
partly evidenced by the Assyrian reliefs." One would expect, on certain Mendelian and other hvpotheses, when dealing with cases of racial mixture (either remote or recent), that a certain small but definite proportion of erythrism would appear amongst individuals of quite another type, this proportion depending solely upon the nature and number of interacting factors of pigmentation, and such expectation is amply fulfilled. Facts of the above nature, with much other anthropological and

HAIR AND ITS HEREDITY

259

morphological evidence, together with a study of the pigments present in human hairs, would lead one to suspect, without any further investigation, a very extensive distribution of the diffuse red lipochrome pigment, which is, however, usually covered by a denser pigment of granular nature. Such suspicions, however, are further confirmed by a close and careful study of
pedigrees.
Dr. Beddoe3 has, in his own words, "come to estimate
very highly the permanence of the colours of hair and eyes." As a very marked case of permanence of pigmentation he mentions4 that of " the Budini, plausibly identified with the Vod or Votiaks, still found in or near their ancient locality. They were noted as red-haired in the classic age, and now, after 2,000 years, they have among them a larger proportion of redhaired persons than any other tribe or nation." Isaac Taylor5 also refers to these people: " Of the Wotiaks,"-he says," 50 per cent. have blue eyes; the rest are grey, green, or brown eyed, black eyes being unknown. In only two per cent. the hair is black. It is usually brown or red, and occasionally flaxen." An example, on a smaller scale, is that of the village of Stiffkey, in Norfolk (pronounced by the natives as " Steukey "). Some years ago this village and its neighbourhood are stated (by a reliable inhabitant of the place) to have been occupied almost entirely by red-haired individuals of the bright " carroty " type. It was a more or less isolated and out-of-the-way place and constant inter-marriage occurred generation after generation, very extensively, with the result that many entire families were " carroty " throughout for many generations. In recent years, however, the development of communication and wider intercourse have spread this community about the country, the younger members, for the most part, going into the towns, whilst at the same time fresh families have come and settled down in the neighbourhood, and now one can find, I am told, no greater proportion of red-haired individuals than are to be seen elsewhere.
The almost universal darkening of hair that occurs not only from birth onwards till even middle life, but also pre-natally, and the numerous ways in which this phenomenon affects the

2600

EUGENICS REVIEW

M. H. Cane:

collection of statistics, cannot be further dealt with here,* except to mention the observation that the bright red or extreme " carroty " type normally remains unaltered from infancy to old age. It is to be noted, however, that the colour of the eyelashes is usually in advance, so to speak, of that elsewhere, or, in other words, represents in the young what the scalp hair may be a few years hence. With the exception of red-haired children, even though their colour remain red till old age, this fact, indeed, enables one to say, within limits, what the adult hair-colour of a boy or girl may be. Only with the most marked examples of red hair are the somewhat uncommon, bright, fiery, red eyelashes to be seen. The beard and moustache, on the other hand, together with hair on parts other than the head, exhibit the contrary phenomenon, and may often remain much lighter throughout life than the scalp hair, and frequently, indeed, remain red, in spite of the increase of other pigment, even to a very dark colour elsewhere.
I have not space here to deal with the whitening of hair with age by phagocytosis, nor with the many interesting cases of abnormal whitening, either permanent or temporary, many of which are associated with various mental conditions or due to the influence of the nervous system, probably, as in the winter whitening of many animals, through the production of bubbles of gas in the hairs. I have an extremely interesting case of a boy seen on several occasions at St. Bartholomew's Hospital, whose remarkable colour-changes, throughout a number of successive years, in association with fits of an epileptic nature, throw much light not only on the phenomenon of colour-change but also on the general physiology of colourproduction in human hair. The record of this case, however, is too lengthy for insertion here. I also have a good example of hereditary depigmentation occurring a few years subsequent to puberty in successive generations.
I cannot enter here upon the extensive subject of " pattern" and its heredity, nor the evidences of such in the human

* Vide-Beddoe's " Colour and Race" for his method of obviating this difficulty. He adds twice the index of nigrescence to once the index of the eyes, and from this pigmentation index for adults subtracts 50 to obtain that for children.

HAIR AND ITS HEREDITY

26I

species, but will briefly draw attention to some few cases of absence of colour over certain areas, in fact to the existence of human piebalds. Sir Jonathan Hutchinson has called attention6 to the apparently direct ratio between the extent in many of the larger quadrupeds (horse, sheep, goat, dog, etc.) of " white stockings " on the lower parts of the extremities and that of white " blazes " or " flares '' on the face, and these he compares with certain recorded cases of a similar nature in the human subject. iHe further points out " that although we speak of them as ' white markings,' they are not invariably white, but that when in other tints they are, as will be easily understood, less conspicuous. This circumstance it is which, to some extent, explains their being less easily observed in the human subject." He publishes two human portraits, one a reproduction of Buffon's engraving of a piebald negress, with, amongst other interesting markings, the white dagger-shaped " blaze " on the forehead involving to some extent the hair in front, of whom there is a portrait in oils in the museum of the Royal College of Surgeons7; the other copied from a photograph given him by Professor Neisser of Breslau, and representing three sister negresses who, in addition to a piebald skin, a white forehead "blaze" and patch on the chin, exhibit the same phenomenon in their white forelocks of hair.8
These cases are remarkable mainly for the piebald condition of the skin, but that of the hair is undoubtedly part of the same phenomenon, and cases exist (whether strictly analogous or not I cannot say) in which the white forelock alone is conspicuous. Bateson publishes9 a case of the inheritance of a lock of congenitally white hair, recorded by Rizzoli, " which clearly behaved as an ordinary dominant," the transmission only occurring through the affected individuals. I have myself met with a similar family, containing, so far as I have at present been able to trace the pedigree, 23 individuals possessing, in various degrees, a white forelock, called in colloquial language a " cows-lick." In this case also, as in the above-mentioned, the descent is, in every case, through affected individuals. I was further informed by one of these that a lady (whose name he had unfortunately forgotten, and whom he thinks is now

262

EUGENICS REVIEW

M. H. Cane:

dead) had some years ago traced the congenital white forelock of this family back in detail through a period (he stated) of about 200 years. In these individuals, not only was the forelock white, but the skin beneath this patch of hair was of an albinic nature. Had the condition appeared in a negro family, I imagine that these cases would be considered as analogous to some extent with those referred to above. I have not, however, had the opportunity of examining the skin elsewhere on the bodies and limbs of affected individuals. The following is the pedigree of this family so far as it concerns the characteristic
in question: -

Descent of a Congenital Fore-lock of White Hair.
The dark symbols represent the affected individuals.

A

0000g "td<S99 d99 9
It is to the correlations of colour with disease that one must, for the most part, look, in order to ascertain the eugenic value, if any, of investigations with regard to the heredity of pigmentation. Dr. Shrubsall10 has shown an association of acute rheumatism, heart disease, tonsillitis, and osteoarthritis with blond, and of nervous diseases, pulmonary tuberculosis, and malignant disease with brunet traits, and further puts forward evidence to the effect that " the difference in physical type between urban and rural populations may be due to a process of selection by disease." Dr. Beddoe3 years ago pointed out the correlation in this country between phthisis and the brunet type, and also the greater liability of brunets to cancer. The following figures are extracted from his " Races of Britain " and put side by side, as a sample illustration of this point:

HAIR AND ITS HEREDITY

23

Relation of Colour to Disease.-Phthisis.

Comparison of the percentage index of nigrescence* in phthisical patients with that in the general population, for the districts mentioned.

[COMPILED FROM TABLES IN BEDDOE'S " RACES OF BRITAIN."]

General Index of Phthisical Index of Differences
Population. Nigrescence. Patients. Nigrescence. indices.

Bristol

27 3 English-mostly 40'3

13-0

Edinburgh 24'o

SactoEtcdhi-nmbousrtglhy

36-2

12'2

Wales and Cornwall

552299

Welsh and Cornish

8833-3304

304

Average for General
Population

34 7

Average for Phthisical Patients

53.3

18 *6

This means that phthisical patients are, on the average, about half as dark again as the average of the general population, or, in other words, that their darkness bears to that of the population in general, roughly the ratio of three to two. Again, this correlation of colour with disease is, according to Dr. Shrubsall, "even more marked in the case of nervous diseases in general, and epilepsy in particular," whilst "lunacy presents a somewhat lower index than that shown for other affections of the nervous system," "asylum" diseases, however, presenting " an entirely different distribution of physical characters."t He also states that " anamia in women occurs
more particularly among dark individuals." Tocher11 mentions
a negative correlation between lunacy and red hair. David
* The Index of Nigrescence, as employed by Beddoe, is obtained by subtracting the number of red and fair-haired persons from that of the darkhaired, together with twice the black-haired, while brown (chestnut) hair is regarded as neutral. From this gross index the net or percentage index is readily obtained.
t. " In lunatic asylums one sees the victim of mania usually with sanguine traits, the melancholic and the insane epileptic most often with straight, dark hair. Persons of highly nervous temperament, thought-readers, seers, prophets, are mostly either very black or extremely fair." Beddoe-Huxley Memorial Lecture for 1905.

264

EUGENICS REVIEW

M. H. Cane:

Macdonald12 has shown statistically that in cases of scarlet fever, diphtheria, measles and whooping cough, among Glasgow school children, the jet black and dark-haired class shows least liability to infection and highest recuperative power when infected; that this class, in fact, is least handicapped from severe cases with subsequent disability and from extermination by death due to the four acute fevers dealt with, whilst the fairhaired class is thus handicapped rather more and the red-haired class rather less than their proportion in the general population.
Turning to Albinism, we again come across an association with disease. Bateson9 says that " albinism in man differs greatly from that in other forms in the fact that it is very often associated with disease, especially of the nervous system," and that " in studying the subject of human albinism . . . one meets not infrequently features indicative of a widespread and multiform degeneration in the affected family not at all resembling the simple course of Mendelian inheritance where natural variations are concerned," and adds that " it is at least doubtful whether there may not be some distinction between albinism thus appearing and that less definitely associated with disease." Internal albinism,-the absence of pigment in the brain, internal ear and suprarenal gland,-has been found accompanying the external manifestations of this condition in man, and it has been suggested that senile imbecility, and in its milder form senility, might possibly be associated with a weakening of the intensity of pigmentation in certain of the brain centres, the disappearance of superficial pigment being one of the marks of senility, and affecting both hair and eyes alike.
With a view towards extending and placing on a firmer basis our knowledge of the heredity of hair-colour in man, I have collected some few pedigrees and subjected them to Mendelian analysis in order to determine, first of all, whether they are capable of being so interpreted, and, if so, what explanation of this kind is best suited to their case.
We are not without facts, in the first place, suggestive of the possibility that a theory founded on Mendelian principles may ultimately afford an adequate explanation of the com-

HAIR AND ITS HEREDITY

265

plicated phenomena here presented. It has long been known that amongst the Jews an alternative inheritance of hair
colour exists:' from time immemorial red-haired individuals
have been observed to appear sporadically amongst the direct
descendants of this dark-haired race. I have already referred to the extreme probability of their primitive complexity of
origin, resulting, no doubt, from " the intercourse of the old native Syrians with the Amorites and other Canaanites
(Deut. ix., 2), 'a people great and tall,' who were fair and had blue eyes, as the old Egyptian painted monuments show
us."' So long as one and the same pigmentation factor,-
which may for the time being be known as A,-be present in
pure (i.e., homozygous) form in every parent, no hypostatic red can ever appear: once introduce individuals with the
absence of A, and,-although some other factor, B, not present in the former people, may conceal the red hypostatic in these also (and never appearing for the same reason that it
never appeared in the first set of people,)-it is obvious, fronm
Mendelian considerations, that this intermixture of individuals
will, ipso facto, incur the possibility of offspring appearing
(in the second hybrid generation) with the total absence of both A and B, and consequentlv exhibiting the hypostatic red common to, but latent in, both peoples, as the result of mating persons both heterozygous for both A and B. This, in all probability, is precisely what has taken place in the case of the Jews; and the fact that in this case one of the intermixing races was fair-haired makes no difference whatever: the same effect
would be produced if both had been separate and distinct pure dark races, each introducing a different factor of pigmentation, but containing in common the same concealed or latent red. Of coulse, in cases such as this, we cannot be absolutely certain of our theory, but the facts fit well and undoubtedly suggest the possibility of Mendelian explanation. Other examples of the sporadic appearance of red hair have been referred to in a previous paragraph, and some of these may perhaps be accounted for by a similar explanation. Again, the hereditary transmission of red- hair in pure lines, as in such cases as those, already mentioned, of the Votiaks or Budini and of the Norfolk

266

EUGENICS REVIEW

M. H. Cane:

village of Stiffkey, together with the fact that the percentage of these pure reds tends rapidly to decrease whenever they be brought into close contact with other colours, is undoubtedly suggestive of the Mendelian phenomenon of epistatic and hypostatic allelomorphic pairs, the existence of such pairs themselves being supported by evidence amongst which is that obtained from families possessing an albino parent. Further, -in addition to all this human evidence, which cannot now be amplified nor further dealt with here,-what might reasonably be expected to be analogous cases in the animal and vegetable kingdoms are also strongly suggestive of the applicability to the hair-colour of Man of the Mendelian theories of inheritance. It seems plausible, for instance, to suppose that phenomena observed in the hair of mammalia should find some analogy with those existing in Man, and that the Mendelian inheritance established for coat-colour in many animals should also be found in some form or other in the human species. Already the Mendelian nature of the trans-
mission of other lhuman characteristics, both normal and
abnormal, has been established, and some assert that already hair-colour has been placed on an equally firm foundation: but the exact form of Mendelian inheritance has, to my mind, not yet been demonstrated to complete satisfaction. It is with the object of stimulating further investigation into this subject that the following brief report is published.
From a prelinminary consideration as to the best method
of procedure, it appeared probable that the most advantageous initial step would be to investigate first the relationship of red hair to hair of other colours. A number of pedigrees have therefore been collected, shewing the relatives of persons with red hair as far as they can at present be traced with any degree of certainty. The utmost care has been taken to ensure the accuracy of these records. The precise meaning of terms, such as " fair " and " dark," has not been left, as some investigators of this subject appear to have left it, to whatever interpretation may be placed upon them by the recipients of circulars asking for information with regard to colour. The information has been received viva voce after a thorough understanding has

HAIR AND ITS HEREDITY

267

been arrived at with respect to the standard of terms employed. In every case where practicable, such information has been
independently verified from as many additional sources as possible, whilst personal direct inspection has, of course, been the rule in every possible instance, and no pains have been spared to obtain such final observation of the individuals themselves. In cases, however, where it has been impossible to inspect personally individuals mentioned in the pedigrees, owing to their previous death, their absence in distant parts of the kingdom, or other causes, the method of comparison has
proved extremely valuable, it being comparatively easy to comIpare the colour-shades of one's relatives with those of persons actually present in the room at the time, or with the colours of children playing in the road outside. The reliability of such methods as these is, to my mind, impossible of attainment through the medium of the post. Of the pedigrees thus obtained those about which there is still doubt as to the reliability of the information received have been placed on one side altogether
rather than introduce an element of uncertainty. The remainder are incorporated in this report. The difficulty of dealing with human cases is well known to all who have had experience in this connection. Direct experiment is out of the question, and the families, however large, are always too small to give thorough satisfaction to the investigator. In the present state of our knowledge there is always the possibility
of some uncertainty, and it is always well to miaintain a certain reserve in the making of definite statements and the founding thereon of complex hypotheses. The following results must therefore be taken for what they are worth,-no more, and, I trust, no less.
From an analysis of the pedigrees the following facts have been ascertained and tables drawn up with regard to the inheritance of red hair
(I) In the first place, when both parents have red hair, all the children are also red, without exception.

268

EUGENICS REVIEW

M. H. Cane:

Table shewing the colour of offspring resulting from two red parents.*

Reference to Children. 1

Children.

Pedigree. Generation. Red. Non-red.

A III 5 0

B II NV

0
20

M III oI

TOTAL

JI

0

Attention should also be called to the case in Pedigree N, Generation IV., where five children appear, all red, as the result of a cross between a red mother and a father (not seen personally) whose colour was described as " sandy."
Major C. C. Hurst, at a meeting of the " Eugenics Education Society " on November i6th, I9II, mentioned, in an address on " Mendelian Heredity in Man," another case, in which two red-haired parents produced five children, all with red hair.
G. C. and C. B. Davenport13 give a case of a cross between a " light red " father and a " dark red " mother, producing three children, two "light red" and one "dark red." It appears probable, however, that what they call " dark red " is a red partially obscured by another pigment, so that this case is not quite comparable with mine. For the same reason, I can place no reliance on a case they give (admittedly " unchecked ") of the marriage of two " dark reds," which produced nine children, none of which were red. I know of no case where two clear red-haired parents have produced non-red children.
(2) Secondly, when one parent has red hair and the other has hair of some other colour, one of two possible alternatives
* It may be objected that some of these families are too small to receive consideration. I can only reply that they are all that are available.

HAIR AND ITS HEREDITY

209

result: either none of the children are red, or else some are red in the proportions shewn in the following table:

Reference to Children.

Children.

Number of Pedigree. Generation. Children
in family.

Red.

Non-red.

J II 6 5 I

MI

5 41

M III 13 9 4

E III 9 5 4

J III I0 5 5

G II 6 3 3

C IV 5 2 3

D III 5 2 3

G IV II 4 7

C IV 9 3 6

B III 6 2 4

NV 4 I 3

B III

5

4

TOTAL

94 46 48

The case in Pedigree I. III. should also be noted: two of the children possessed hair which was red when young, but which changed to an auburn later on: it is possible that they should still be considered as truely red, making the proportion three

270

EUGEN'ICS REVIEW

M. H. Cane:

red to three non-red, but the fact that a brother has changed from red to dark brown with no suspicion of red except in his red moustache, would suggest that the two who at present are auburn, merely exhibit an earlier stage in the process of change, whereby the red becomes obscured by the gradual development of melanic pigment. rhis case, as being of a doubtful nature, has consequently been omitted from the above table.
We are left, then, with I3 sibsons, in which at least one red appears as the result of a cross between red and non-red parents. In these there are 94 children in all, 46 of whom are red and the remaining 48 non-red,-a close approximation to equal division.
Here a few words are necessary with regard to the size of families, since it is probable that in many small families with like parentage, no red may as yet have appeared, though this in no way guarantees that no red would appear in future children of the same parents. The only method approaching satisfaction, by which this serious difficulty may be obviated, is to compensate matters by omitting all small families. Hence, here and throughout the remainder of this account, in giving percentages of different colours, I omit from consideration altogether those families containing less than four children, and in fact, the majority of such have been omitted from the pedigrees also, in order that the latter may be condensed into as small and compact a form as possible. Care has, however, been taken in order that no fact of value should be omitted in this process of condensation from the much fuller pedigrees that are in my possession.
(3) In the third place, when neither parent has red hair,
in the great majority of cases none of the children have it red: but statistics drawn from my pedigrees shew 24 families with non-red parents, producing at least four children, some of whom in each case are red. Before tabulating, however, the details of these families, I must call attention to the introduction here of an obvious error, to which due consideration must be given. This defect arises from the fact that only those non-red
parents who have alreadv succeeded in producing at least one
red-haired child can be included in this class. We have no

HAIR AND ITS HEREDITY

2I

knowledge at present of any close and direct adherence of the order of birth to the order of greatest probability according to the laws of unrestricted chance. My figures, in fact, so far as they go, tend to shew that such is not the case, since the larger the number of children in these families at present under con-
sideration, the less the percentage of reds. The red frequently appears in several successive children, who may be preceded or followed by a similar series of non-reds, so that whilst the proportions for large numbers may be fairly correct, yet a few cases only prove nothing upon which one can place reliance, and our difficulty ensues from the fact that many non-red parents who have as yet actually produced no red offspring, may yet possess the potentiality for doing so, but cannot be included in my list since there are no other means whereby one may ascertain this fact; whereas those who produced their red offspring early are all included in the list, and consequently tend to influence the resulting figures in the direction of shewing an apparently larger proportion of reds than can actually be the case amongst children of non-red parents both possessing the potentiality for producing reds,-who are the parents we here wish to consider. Mathematics, working on the basis of the theory I support, provides one with the chances against the non-appearance of a red-haired child from such parentage amongst any given numnber of offspring; but mathematics does not take into account, in such cases, the vagaries of Nature, and can tell one nothing with regard to the actual order of birth in any particular instance, nor gives one any hint, for instance, of the approaching appearance perhaps of several reds in succession towards the younger end of a large family
of non-reds, which occurrence would completely alter proportions; and that such families do occur is merely a matter of observation, though I have as yet collected no statistics on this point. The fundamental difficulty lies in the small size of the human family.
The following table, then, presents those sibsons of nonred parentage containing at least one red-haired child, and must perforce leave out of consideration those sibsons which must undoubtedly exist, but which cannot with certainty be recog-

272

EUGENICS REVIEW

M. H. Cane:

nised as such, containing as yet no red-haired child from parents who, nevertheless, both possess the potentiality for
producing reds.:

Reference to Children.

Children.

Number of

Pedigree. Generation. Children

Red. Non-red.

in family.

B IV J IV JV K III H II J IV J IV N IV DV A II A IV L III C III
IV A IV D IV F III H II C III A IV A II J III K III CV
TOTAL

4 4 4 7 5 5 9 i6 5 8 8 8 9
3I
4 4 4 4 6 7 8 Io II 14 I75

3I 3I 3I 52 32 32 54 79 23 35 35 35 36
8 I3 I3 I3 I3
5 I6 I7 I9
13 59 ii6

HAIR AND ITS HEREDITY

273

In the above table 33'7I per cent. of the children are red, all sibsons containing less than four children being omitted. If, however, one omits all sibsons with less than six children, the proportion of reds is 28`79 per cent., whilst still closer approximation to accuracy may be obtained by further restriction still, the proportion in sibsons with nine or more children being only 26'25 per cent. of reds; and I have little doubt but that the unknown number of non-red children in sibsons containing no red, but yet produced by parents both possessing the potentiality for red, would reduce the true percentage of reds resulting from such parentage to a proportion not far removed from 25 per cent.
The facts thus far recorded afford fairly conclusive evidence that red is hypostatic to non-red. This conclusion, in the case of red and dark colours, has not only received independent support from a number of Mendelians, but was also foreshadowed in the days when little was known of Mendel's work and the far-reaching results of his discovery.2 G. C. and C. B. Davenport, 13 however, have come to the conclusion that although dark colours are epistatic to red, yet red in its turn is epistatic to fair hair. Unfortunately there is no case in my pedigrees of a marriage between red and fair, but Davenport gives two examples which should probably be included in this class, namely:

Reference Letters. I Swe

Father. flaxen

Mother. light red

Children. 2 tow I golden

2 Hur light brown light red I flaxen 3 light brown

From these it would appear that fair shades offer no exception to the general rule that red is hypostatic to other colours. G. C. and C. B. Davenport, however, adopt the explanation that the red individuals in these cases are heterozygous, and that both the above families should shew equal numbers of red and fair children. It is difficult to find any evidence for this conclusion amongst- the families which they publish.

274

EUGENICS REVIEW

M. H. Cane:

I have now concluded my account of the main facts to be considered with regard to the inheritance of red hair and its relationship to hair of other colours. It remains to determine whether data gathered from my pedigrees can justify any conclusions with respect to the relationship of other colours inter se.
A summary of conclusions shall follow later on, along with a statement of the theory I adopt.
If one proceeds with fair hair, precisely as was done with red, the following facts emerge:
(i) First, when both parents have fair hair all the children
also are fair.

Table shewing the colour of offspring resulting from two fair
parents.*

Reference to Children. Pedigree. Generation.

Children. Fair. Darker.

C V4 C IV 3 B IV I

0 0
O

TOTAL

80

If previous conclusions be correct with regard to red hair, one must suppose that two fair parents may occasionally produce a red-haired child in something approaching 25 per cent. of their offspring, but of this occurrence I have no evidence in my pedigrees. If, however, one groups together Davenport's " tow," " flaxen," " yellow," " golden," and " light brown" classes as " fair," one finds that when both parents are " fair," all the children are " fair " with the exception of
* It is unfortunate that I have no more cases of this class recorded in detail at present. It must be remembered, however, that my pedigrees here recorded have been primarily collected in order to determine the colour of relatives of red-haired individuals, and data concerning the question of fair hair has only been recorded, so to speak, by chance, whenever it happened to occur, without any definite search being made for fair-haired families.

HAIR AND ITS HEREDITY

275

those in the family Hal-A, where a " flaxen " father and " light brown " mother produce four children, of whom two are " light brown," one "yellow," and one red. This is exactly what one would expect on my hypothesis, the red forming in this case precisely one-fourth of the total offspring. Davenport has to assume, however, that the very small amount of pigment which is sufficient to produce the difference in appearance between " light brown " and shades of less intensity, conceals the red, which he regards as forming an independent factor, by no means present in every individual. I find it hard to assume sufficient to enable me to accept such explanation, in the presence of the simpler theory which the facts lead me 'to adopt.
(2) In the second place, when one parent has fair hair and the other has hair of some darker colour, either all the children may be dark, or else some fair individuals may occur.
The following table shews the colours of hair in sibsons of four or more children, one at least of whom is fair, resulting from crosses between one fair parent and one of a darker
colour:

Reference to Children.

Children.

Number of Pedigree. Generation. Children
in family.

Fair.

CV5 5

CV8 7

B IV 4

3

C IV

5

2

A III 7

2

V4

I

TOTAL

33 20

Darker.
o I I 3 5 3 13

276

EUGENICS REVIEW

M. H. Cane:

In the above table 6o06I per cent. of the offspring are fair. It must be remembered, however, first, that only those sibsons are included where fairness has already appeared, and secondly, that some of the children are still somewhat young. A defect similar to the former has already been dealt with in connection with red hair, and this, together with the phenomenon of darkening, that renders the investigation of the heredity of fair hair more difficult than that of red (though even with red some intensification may occur), would tend to reduce the above proportion, in all probability, to something approaching 50 per cent.
(3) Lastly, when neither parent has fair hair, either none of the adult offspring are fair, or else some fair children occur that maintain their colour, in proportions as shewn in the following table:

Reference to Children.

Children.

Number of Pedigree. Generation. Children
in family.

Fair.

Darker.

D IV

6

2

4

B III 4 1 3

B III 5 I 4

A IV 5 I 4

A III 6 I 5

C IV 6 I 5

TOTAL

32 7 25

Of the offspring here represented, 2o088 per cent. are fair, but, as in the two previous tables, the figures are too small to encourage confidence.

HAIR AND ITS HEREDITY

277

It may here be added that it is often comparatively easy to distinguish between the type of fair that darkens and that which remains persistently fair, though the precise distinction is not always easy adequately to explain in writing. In addition to this slight distinction of type, one is also frequently assisted by the colour of the eyelashes, to which I have already referred. The test of time, however, is final.

Small and, in many ways, deficient though my figures may be with regard to fair hair, yet the data thus gathered from my pedigrees may perhaps be considered to justify at least the strong suspicion, supported by other investigators, that fair hair is hypostatic to shades of darker colour.
In conclusion of this account I will now tabulate the results obtained from the foregoing investigation, along with the theoretical values of the percentages, from which I believe the practical figures deviate merely to the extent of the error involved in the collection of the statistics.

Table shewing the combined results of the foregoing investigation.

Sibsons excluded Number of Number of rcentae of Red offspring Crosses. with less children sibsons children
than counted. counted. Actual. Theoretical.

Red x Red (
Red
x
Non-red
Nonx-red
Non-red

4 II
r4 :'3 3 9944
I_
4 24 175
6 14 132 9 7 8o

o00% I00%

Either
o%
O
~~~48-94%

Either
o%
Or*50%

Either

Either

o% o%

Or. 33.71%

Or-

Or

28.79%

25%

Or:-
26-25%

278

EUGENICS REVIEW

M. H. Cane:

Sibsons excluded Number of Number of PercentagesofFairoffspring. Crosses. with less children sibsons children
than counted. counted. Actual. Theoretical.

Fair x Fair

3 8 I00% o00%

F Fair j

Either:- Either o% o%

Darker
F Darker
x
Darker

4 4 I4

6 66

33 Or

Or

I66o-6i% 50%

Either o%

Either:-
o%

r3322

~~~2~o~-8~8~%~

Or
25%

I admit that my figures are small and statistics insufficient, by themselves, to justify the complete establishment of a definite theory of inheritance; but, so far as they go, they are significant
in that they undoubtedly indicate some of the fundamental points with regard to the heredity of hair-colour in Man.
The following is the hypothesis I uphold:-Excluding
albinoes, red hair results from the total absence or non-development of any pigment other than the diffuse lipochrome, which is universally present in human hair in homozygous form * All other colours depend on the additional presence of a granular pigment, which is responsible for the appearance of dark or fair hair according to the presence or absence, respectively, of a Mendelian factor which appears to act as an intensifier.
If R represent the presence of the Mendelian factor for the diffuse red lipochrome pigment, and r its absence; P the presence of the factor for the production of the granular melanic pigment, and p its absence; and I the factor for the presence of the intensifier, and i its absence; one may account for the different colour-types as possessing the following constitutions:
Dark types:- (i) P P I I R R (2) P P I i R R
(3) P p I I R R (4) P p I i R R
Fair types :- (i) P P i i R R
(2) P p i i R R
* This diffuse reddish lipochrome pigment is absent from the hair of
albinoes, and possibly also from that of certain races possessing black hair with a bluish tinge. I have, however, had no opportunity of testing this statement.

HAIR AND ITS HEREDITY
Red types:- (I) p p I I R R
(2) p p I i R R (3) p p i i R R

279

It cannot be supposed that this hypothesis provides a complete scheme of inheritance that embraces all the complex phenomena to be observed in the hereditary transmission of hair-colours, though, even in this form, it is suggestive of several different types of dark, two types of fair, and more than one of red. It would, moreover, explain the cases of a mixture of darks and reds occurring in a population without giving rise to fair,-the darks being PPIIRR and PpIIRR, whilst the reds are ppIIRR. Similarly, fairs and reds may co-exist for any length of time, without giving rise to darks,-the fairs being PPiiRR and PpiiRR, whilst the reds in this case are ppiiRR.
In the above tables dealing with fair-haired individuals, it was found necessary to omit families where red appeared in the children in addition to fair, since one could not tell whether the reds would have appeared as dark or fair had they possessed the pigment-factor, P, or, in other words, one did not know whether they possessed the intensifier, I, or not, which was really what we want to know. If one or both of the parents be red, even whilst their sibson possesses as yet no reds in addition to the fairs, such a family must also be excluded from such tables as the above, an example of which is seen in pedigree B,
generation III., where six fair, three dark, and no red children result from a cross between a dark father and a red mother. The difficulty arises from the fact that we do not know in which table to place the case, since the mother may either possess the intensifier or not, and we have no a priori means of determining this fact': to argue from the colours of her children and the particular theory one holds, is merely to argue in circles.
An interesting case is seen in B. IV., where a very fair father and dark mother produce two fair boys, a dark girl and a boy red at first but who changed to fair by the time he was nine months old, thus not only showing his absence of the intensifier, but also providing a rather striking example of a fairly common occurrence which helps to demonstrate the phenomenon that red

28o

EUGENICS REVIEW

M. H. Cane:

is hypostatic to all other colours, including fair, the post-natal development of a small quantity of the granular pigment, even in the absence of the factor for intensification, being quite sufficient, in this case, to conceal the underlying red. Often, however, a tinge of red remains visible, especially if seen in certain lights, beneath hair of any intensity whatever of melanic pigmentation, but such individuals can in no case be said to possess true red hair. Sometimes the underlying red remains for a considerable number of years (even into middle life or later) unconcealed by melanic pigment in the forelock: two such cases are noted in pedigree E. The beard and moustache and body hai'r very frequently indeed remain red throughout life, though no signs of red may be seen elsewhere. Such facts as these may, perhaps, be taken to indicate the existence of a
" restriction factor," that tends to limit the development of melanic pigment, but of this I have no proof as yet. The change from red to other colours, that so often takes place in early life, may, perhaps, be merely the result of retarded development of pigmentation which normally takes place pre-natally. The rapidity of developmnent may or may not also be governed by definite hereditary causes; the late post-natal change being observed frequently to appear in a number of individuals of the same stock: vide, for example, pedigree I., where the number of reds who became dark throws doubt on the future colour of the red-haired boy in the last generation, whose father and mother themselves both changed, and both belong to stocks containing others who changed in a similar way.
It is not my intention here to deal further with the phenomenon of the dominance of any one factor over its own
absence: this has been investigated by others through the
medium of albino families. I have indicated the presence of an almost universal factor for the production of red hair: without even this, the hair would be that of an albino. In addition
to this there is, I believe, the allelomorphic pair responsible for the appearance of the granular pigment: in the absence of this
second factor the red can alone appear; in its presence the hair is fair. Thirdly, there would appear to be yet another allelomorph, whose presence intensifies the melanic pigment to

HAIR AND ITS HEREDITY

28I

produce the darker shades of hair. The evidence, such as it is, indicates that the darker colours are epistatic over the fairer shades, and that red is hypostatic to all, each factor being dominant over its own absence, and albinoes thus recessive to all shades. A red, however, may carry the intensifier with apparently little effect on itself, and an albino with no effect at all, but once introduce the granular pigment, even by means
of only a fair-haired mate, and a dark hair may result. It is not as yet known whether the factor for red is necessary for the development of the granular pigment, or, in other words, whether red is a sine qua non in the production of fair and dark hair, just as the intensifier may be in the production of dark, nor whether, indeed, it be identical with the so-called " colourfactor " (referred to in experiments on animals and plants), without which no other pigment can take effect. These are
questions for future investigation, to stimulate which this paper is written. My pedigrees merely represent a preliminary move in the matter, and may, perhaps, serve as a stepping-stone for others in a subject as interesting as it is complex.
Man is always asking " Why? " and " How? "-he always has, he always will. He is always seeking the "Whence?" and " Whither? "-and each answer gained begets another query, but with redoubled zeal when the question affects his own self and his kith and kin. Not only, however, has this subject its purely academic interest: the future may reveal its more practical human side, amongst other things in connection with disease. Indications are already forthcoming as to the advisability of taking active preventive measures more
especially in cases of children with certain definite shades of hair and colour of eyes, to which reference has already been made; whilst, when once the disease is contracted, the colours may count for much in prognosis. Further, if once there can be established a definite association between certain susceptibilities to disease and corresponding colours, and the essential
similarity of inheritance in each, such knowledge may lead Mankind of the future far on the way towards the control and mastery of some of his most troublesome sources of complaint.

282

EUGENICS REVIEW

M. H. Cane:

NOTES ON THE PEDIGREES.

i. The pedigrees that follow contain all that is of value in the more detailed records that are in my possession. Some IO or more types are specified in the original tables, but will here be found grouped together into about half that number of classes.

2. Symbols employed(I) Red . . . . . . . (2) Fair . . . . . . . (3) Darker . . . . . . . Q

(4) Red that changed to dark or fair respectively .

(5) Dark or fair respectively with a red beard (moustache etc.)

(6) Combination of (4) and (5)

....

(7) One or more individuals whose precise shade was not

known with certainty, but who, in the majority of

cases, were described as " not red" . . .

(8) The usual symbols for male and female, respectively .

eM
Q 4&
Ca, ELX1,f,t.
d'Q9

3. The pedigrees do not represent the chronological order of birth.
4. Pedigrees H and J record colours merely as red or non-red; in all the rest a distinction was made between fair and darker shades.
5. The two individuals marked with an asterisk(*) in Pedigree I, Generation III., possessed hair which was red when young, but which changed to an auburn later on. A brother in the same sibson has changed from red through auburn to dark brown.
6. It appears to me a little doubtful whether I am correct, statistically, in counting identical twins as two separate individuals, from the point of view of Mendelian analysis. The numbers of such are, however, insufficient, to affect materially the proportions.

REFERENCES. 1" The Study of Man."
2 " On the Racial Characteristics of Modern Jews." Journ. Anth. Inst. XV., x885.
3 " The Races of Britain." 4 " Colour and Race." Journ. Anth. Inst. XXXV., I9o5. 5 "The Origin of the Aryans."
6 "On Palaeogenetic Face-Pattern in Acroteric Piebalds." British Medical
Journal, June i8th, IgIo. 7 Vide also two articles (by Arthur Keith and Graham Renshaw respectively)
in the British Medical Journal, Sept. 3rd, I9IO. 8 Vide also a note by A. E. Taylor on " Palmogenetic Face-Pattern in
Acroteric Piebalds." British Medical Journal, Sept. 24th, I9IO. For reference to piebald men of New Guinea.
9 " Mendel's Principles of Heredity."
10" Physical Characters and Morbid Proclivities." St. Bartholomew's
Hospital Reports, Vol. XXXIX.
LI "Anthropometry of Scottish Insane." Biometrika, Vol. V.
12 "Pigmentation of the Hair and Eyes of Children Suffering from the
Acute Fevers, its Effect on Susceptibility, Recuperative Power, and Race Selection." Biometrika, Vol. VIII.
13 "Heredity of Hair Colour in Man." The American Naturalist, Vol.
XLIII.

PEDI GEE A
X9

AL

-,

I r

0 exc:s9()Q 1@

dQ d

~Ir.-I

-

I
I

I

f,r~$xr1

'0(s QI~'

I I8

4,
c69d.x9r=9d!~f54-I?d
II
i gXoQQ t

HAIR ANI) ITS HEREDITY. PEDI4R2-E B.

x~
@t--
toa r,4

'9

'9

........

.I x

9 Xdc 8X[xX9 xdX9QxcQ
[ 99 4Ti A A

@9 9 9 I

IQ I9 le

PEDIGREE C

I -1
It (.

9d

4-.XI

4-, d3 9 dX9
A-0x9 9AXd qAx~(dS4xq

4 (gdX99(3E1
IIAclx9 9X(S9X(

d~ 4(o(odd R9x (

(S ( x 9

9d 9

4-,
dx-g 9x 9XS 6 ?

dg

Ar',QXQ

,(FgLu-Iz /E,zQ xI9<XSAQX
(4( o (~&d9 c(

PED@13EE D
4~C@

5x9

p IS

X9

96(SMxg dxg xlm (5xQ Qx a

CXS X
W.95 d$ T?

T'o face page 2'S? Eutgenics Rleview.

PEDIC.REr E

axQ tgjIt

IXQQ?

la.dY. QLJ d
&) (9) IUUR -
AGU UA

C3

-n

IN ROW

-I

Q99 F99"

PED ,R E E F.
I
,a~ I(9tr(SX,99 9)Xx6(V(

PEDirGREE 0.
(5 Q

XQ

. , rI

I1

I)Cc)< S0ME rl- -I ~SANDY '

PED16REE
I
(3 x 4 x Q WQ xrouisilis
t (. 4 9 6xI i 4 i

PEvor.REE|

LiID ID
QXm WX
r
oXx O^QQ4;X4XWpXd3S<

PEDICrREE J.

,(0IY

C3 4?

E;1~U U

L21 121 U2 LAj

1M91rvEEu K

clx9(3xQ

OyX4 .(P

9

&txj rL4xy dxop dxg--9r--

.

(g (

0

I(I ?X5

-1
(

'PEPICGREE NL1.

...........

96--....... 9X----Q-Q-X-------8---3 X Q

UQ m4- IV 9Q

Q
1
r,

QI I
Y 0Q2

PEIDIGUEE L.-
rd r- I 1
d*fC! X (I7C.) d" Itt9t

PE914REE M.
9(1 1 T-T6 X QDX t4tXQ Qd'
toQ It

A( (I .-Q-;S,6
4. |T~ ((

9

HAIR AND ITS HEREDITY

283

OTHER WORKS TO WHICH REFERENCE WAS MADE IN THE ORIGINAL PAPER, OF
WHICH THE PRESENT ARTICLE IS AN EXTRACT.
1 R. C. Punnett, " Mendelism." Third edition, 19II. 2 J. E. Adler and J. MacIntosh, " Histological Examination of a Case of
Albinism." Biometrika, Vol. VII. 3 K. Pearson, " Note on Internal Albinism." Biometrika, Vol. VII. 4 C. Darwin, "Variation of Animals under Domestication." 5 G. C. and C. B. Davenport, " Heredity of Skin Pigmentation in Man,"
Section E., " Inheritance of Albinism." The American Naturalist, Vol. XLIV. 6 A. C. Haddon, " The Races of Man." 7 T. H. Huxley, " On the Methods and Results of Ethnology." 8 Elie Metchnikoff, " The Nature of Man." English translation-edited by P. Chalmers Mitchell. 9 C. Darwin, "The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals." 10 Sir J. Paget, "Lectures on Surgical Pathology." Third edition. Revised by Prof. Turner, I870. 11 E. B. Poulton, "The Colours of Animals." 12 J. Brownlee, "A Note on the Possibility of Analysing Race Mixtures into their Original Elements by the Mendelian Formula. Journ. Anth. Inst., Vol. XLI., I9II. Etc., etc.

