MODERN DEVELOPMENTS IN MENTAL WELFARE WORK*

By EVELYN FOX, C.B.E.
(Honorary Secretary, Central Association for Mental Welfare)

T HE subject for this paper is so wide control; he drifted from one social organiza-

that I can approach it only from the tion to another, from prison to workhouse

side with which I am most familiar- and often to the asylum, always a failure,

the administrative and social. On the scien- always presenting an insoluble problem to

tific aspects of the problem I am not qualified those from whom he or his family sought

to speak, but I hope it may be of interest to help. From all sides, evidence was collected

you to hear of the progress that this century pointing to the defective as a stumbling

has seen in the care of defectives-more block in the path of those who were devoting

especially of defectives living in the com- themselves to the work of rehabilitation.

munity.

Workers in prisons and in the Poor Law ad-

How far have we advanced in the direction ministration, in Rescue Work and in the Social

of securing for defectives, in the words of the Services, all emphasized the urgent need for

Mental Deficiency Act, " care, supervision the control of defectives by the State and

and control for their own protection or for emphatically contended that once this group

the protection of others"? To what extent was segregated, the problem of the readjust-

can we, under our present laws, achieve both' ment of other social failures-prostitutes,

these objects-the protection of the defective recividists, and unemployables-would be, in

himself and the protection of the community a great measure, solved.

and of future generations ?

HISTORICAL
Two main factors led to the setting up of the Royal Commission on the Care and Control of the Feeble-minded in I904, and to the subsequent passing of the Mental Deficiency Act in I9I3 and of the Education (Defective and Epileptic Children) Act in I9I4: (i) The rapid growth, during the nineteenth century,
of humanitarian sentiment, finding practical expression in the establishment of social services for the less fortunate members of the community; (2) the educational problem presented by the number of children driven into schools on the establishment of compulsory education who, for mental or physical reasons, proved to be incapable of benefiting by educational methods adapted
for those who were normal. At the beginning of the century no auth-
ority existed for a defective's care and

THE POSITION TO-DAY
The position to-day is very different. On the one hand, we have an ever-growing number of institutions provided by local authorities for the care and training of defectives, together with a highly developed system of community care with social services for their assistance of a type which twenty years ago was hardly even contemplated. On the other hand, the results of these activities have widened our conception of the part played by mental endowment in the successful conduct of even the simplest existence. The knowledge gained from the active administration of measures of protection for defectives has brought out two very important considerations: first, that the provision of care and protection made for certifiable defectives does not cover the larger group of social failures whose incapacity for responsible citizenship is due to poor mentality; sec-

* The substance of a paper read before the Eugenics Society on March 29th, I938.

ondly, that in the combination of temperamental emotional instability with poor

i65

i66 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

mentality the vital factor calling for the A MODEL ADMINISTRATIVE AREA

protection of the individual is his tempera- Are the measures taken to-day to secure mental rather than his mental make-up. the protection of defectives adequate also for
This emergence of the dull sub-normal the protection of the community? If not, group, showing a high percentage of social where do they fail ? failures (to whom the legal definition of the These measures are very complicated and feebleminded, namely persons requiring care, involve much technical knowledge, and supervision and control for their own protec- therefore-in order to simplify the picturetion and for the protection of others, might I have collected all the activities that are equally be applied), has demonstrated how legally possible, and centred them in one hard it is to draw the line between the mythical area. It is a mythical area because

"mentally defective " and the " dull." Yet on one side there is found the mentally defective individual who has a legal right to state assistance, to the services of local authorities, to specialized training, institution care, etc., and against the results of whose
failures the community can claim to be protected; whereas on the other is found the
" dull" individual who is deprived of all these protective measures and left to face a difficult and complicated civilization without specialized help of any kind, and against the results of whose social inefficiency the com-
munity is denied any facilities for taking preventive steps.
The various experiments in training and community care so successfully carried out for the benefit of the high-grade feebleminded who come under the Mental Defi-
ciency Act have shown that they are desirable for the uncertifiable " dull and
temperamental " if these are to be prevented from becoming social and economic failures.

no one authority, so far as I am aware, completely carries out all its duties or uses all its powers, but all the measures I am about to describe are in actual use, some of them in one area, some in another.
It should be borne in mind that defectives are not dealt with by local authorities merely because they are defectives, but because certain conditions or circumstances call for their " care, protection and control."
The mental deficiency committee of a
county council or county borough council is responsible for " ascertaining " defectives in
its area for whom protection is needed, and for providing institutional accommodation, guardianship or statutory supervision. The defectives towards whom the committee has this duty are those who can be certified under one or other of the definitions in the Act. In addition a defective must be:
(a) Neglected, abandoned, without visible means of support or cruelly treated, or be a person with regard to whom a representation has

The close connection between the two

been made to the local authority by his

groups was pointed out by Dr. Lewis in the Wood Report published in I929:

parent or guardian that he is in need of care or training which cannot be provided in his home; or (b) a person found guilty of a crimi-

If, as there is reason to think, mental de-
ficiency, much physical inefficiency, chronic pauperism, recividism, are all more or less
closely related, and are all parts of a single focal problem, can it be that poor mental endowment, manifesting itself in an incapacity for social ad-
justment and inability to manage one's own

nal offence or ordered or liable to be ordered
to be sent to a certified industrial school, or be undergoing imprisonment or in a reforma-
tory or industrial school or in a mental hospital; or (c) a woman in receipt of poor
relief at the time of giving birth to an illegitimate child or when pregnant of such child.

affairs, may be not merely a symptom but rather
the chief contributory cause of these kindred social evils ?

A mental deficiency committee has no duties in regard to defective children be-

If so, then the problem of mental inefficiency, tween 7 and i6, except those who have been

of which mental deficiency is an important part, notified to it by the education authority

assumes a yet wider and deeper significance, and must indeed be one of the major social problems

because they are:

which a civilised community may be called upon (a) Imbecile-i.e. incapable of deriving benefit or

to solve.

further benefit from instruction in a special

MODERN DEVELOPMENTS IN MENTAL WELFARE WORK

I67

school or class; or (b) so difficult tempera- DEFECTIVES IN AREA OF ALL AGES DIVIDED INTO

mentally that their presence in a special

GROUPS

school is detrimental to other children; or (c) about to leave a special school or class and

Feeble-minded Imbecile

Idiot

in need of supervision, guardianship or insti- Urban areas

200

47

II

tutional care.

(40,000) (5 * 02 per (I * I9 per (0o 28 per

I,OOO)

I,OOO)

I,OOO)

The education authority's duties in regard

Rural areas (6o,ooo)

504 (8*4I per

III
(i* 85 per

25 (o 41 per

to defective children are, first, to ascertain

1,000)

I,000)

I,000)

them, and secondly, to notify those who are imbecile (or idiots), and to provide education

County Boro' (150,000)

753 (5 .0 per
1,000)

I78 (1* I9 per
I ,000)

42 (0o 28 per
I,000)

in a special school or class for those who are

feebleminded.

Total 1,457 336

78

Let us now suppose an administrative

county with a population of I00,000 of which Education

40,ooo are in three small urban areas. In Let us begin by describing how, in these

addition, let us suppose that there is a county model administrative areas, the problem of

borough with a population of I50,000 en- the high-grade mentally defective child is

tirely independent of the county for all pur- dealt with by the various education authori-

poses. In these areas, the Acts relating to ties concerned.

defectives are fully and vigorously carried First comes ascertainment-the basis of all

out, the various authorities are working in work for defectives. The group of children

complete co-operation with each other and to be kept under observation by teachers for

with voluntary bodies, and are united by a the purpose of deciding whether any are so

common aim and determination.

defective as to be incapable of receiving

The county mental deficiency committee benefit from education in an ordinary ele-

is responsible for the administration of the mentary school is a very varied one. It in-

Mental Deficiency Act in the county area cludes, besides the child of poor mentality

and in the three small urban areas. For pur- ranging from the definitely defective to the

poses of education, there are in the county " just below normal "-the child of normal

four education committees (one for the intelligence but backward in school subjects

county as a whole, and one each for the from extrinsic causes such as ill-health, bad

urban areas).

school attendance, or bad teaching, the child

The number of defectives (including chil- of unstable and difficult temperament with

dren) in the whole area is as follows :* in the marked emotional handicaps, and the child

rural area (6o,ooo) 639, in the urban areas whose difficulties are mainly caused by the

(40,000) 259, and in the three county boroughs adverse environmental conditions of his

(150,000) 973-giving a total of I,87I.

home or even of his school life.

Dividing this total number into the differ- Nor are any of these factors exclusive of

ent grades of defect we get the following each other; they may occur in any combina-

figures (top of next column).

tion.

The problem of the lower-grade defective is, The head teachers are aware of the supreme

as these figures show, a simple one numeric- importance of ascertainment, and the educa-

ally. It is simple also so far as care and pro- tion authorities have arranged for many of

tection are concerned, for low-grade defec- them to attend courses on the mentally

tives are generally sterile or their condition defective and retarded child. The child who

is so obvious as in itself to constitute a safe- is probably defective is reported to the

guard.

school medical officer for exanmination. This

generally takes place during the time the

children are in the junior schools, for, except

* Figures based on Wood Report, i.e. in urban areas 6-49 per I,OOO population, in rural areas Io-66 per
1,000.

in cases of imbecility or pronounced behaviour difficulties, a feeble-minded child

i68 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

can usually hold his own in the infant school For defective children with undesirable

where modem individual methods allow him homes or with character defects so serious as

to progress at his own speed and give him to show their need of more stabilizing in-

concrete material to work on.

fluences covering their whole life, vacancies

If, on examination, the child is found by are secured by the education authorities in

the school medical officer to be so defective the special residential schools which may be

as to be incapable of receiving benefit even under the control of an education authority

from the methods used in a special school, he or of a voluntary committee. Other children

is promptly notified to the county (or county again, of the tractable, stable type, are

borough) mental deficiency committee to be boarded out with foster parents lving within

dealt with under the Mental Deficiency Acts. easy distance of the county borough's day

If, however, he is considered to be only feeble- special school.

minded, the education authority tries to The county education authority, in addi-

carry out its duty by sending him to a day or tion to using for its rural children the facili-

residential special school.

ties offered by the residential school and by

At any given moment, the following is the boarding out, has to consider the children

approxinate number of educable mentally whose parents refuse consent to their leaving

defective children with which our four home, and those who present no particular

education authorities are dealing: in the problem other than an educational one. For

rural area I9I; in the three urban areas 83 these, the authority has on its staff one or

(approx. 28 in each); and in the county more visiting teachers who visit the schools

borough 3IO.

attended by the children (in which, although

The first difficulty that faces each local there will be other children retarded to a

education authority in these areas (except lesser degree, there may be only one defec-

the county borough committee) is that there tive) for the purpose of helping the teachers

are not enough children to make it possible with schemes of training and with advice

to organize a day special school; in the about management, etc. In this way every

rural area the numbers are too scattered, in " ascertained" child is under special super-

the urban areas they are not large enough to vision throughout his school life.

warrant a separate school with proper classi- Educationally, such a comprehensive

fication. If no day special school is possible, scheme may be as satisfactory as conditions

how is the duty of providing suitable educa- permit, but there is one insuperable diffi-

tion for defective children to be carried out ? culty which our authorities with all their

Our education authorities attempt to solve zeal and sense of responsibility are unable,

the problem in various ways, of which the under present conditions, to surmount-a

following are examples.

difficulty which constitutes the most serious

In small urban areas, one or more ele- handicap to the adequate care of defectives

mentary schools are organized to deal with and the protection of the community. The

the defectives from the area who can suit- defective child who has been educated in a

ably be educated in the same building as special school can-as I have indicated-be

normal children. Classes are set aside for notified to the mental deficiency committee

juniors in suitably placed schools, and for for home supervision, guardianship or insti-

boys and girls respectively in selected senior tution care on leaving school at i6. He can,

schools. To these classes are also admitted therefore, be protected during his subsequent

other very retarded children who yet are not, career and the community can be safe-

so far as can be diagnosed at present, certi- guarded. But the defective child leaving an

fiable or likely to be certified under the ordinary school at I4 cannot be notified for

Mental Deficiency Act. The teachers in statutory supervision and-except in very

charge of these classes have been specially special circumstances-cannot be brought

trained for the work and their methods are under protection of the Mental Deficiency

adapted for subnormal children.

Acts at all until he becomes i6, and then

MODERN DEVELOPMENTS IN MENTAL WELFARE WORK

I69

only for some specific reason such as neglect, etc. (see p. i66). He must prove by failure that he needs such care and control.
This administrative gap has for many years been a matter of the utmost concern to those who work for defectives and until it is closed by legislation allowing the notification of defective children on leaving ordinary schools, the machinery set up under the Mental Deficiency Acts is bound to be incomplete just at the point where completeness is particularly necessary-the control and protection of the high-grade adolescent defective from the moment he leaves school.
The following figures amply illustrate the present state of affairs and the failure of
our system: Estimated number of feeble-minded chil-
dren in England and Wales who should be in special schools, io6,ooo.
Number actually in special schools (March
31st, I937), I3,8I5.*
To return to our ideal area-the county borough has one or more day special schools in which it may place all its defective children or only those showing disorders of conduct or those with low intelligence quotients, and the high-grade stable defective may be left in the special classes for dull children in the elementary school (these cannot be notified). There is also an experimental day schoolt for " problem" children (often dull but probably not defective) who, for the time being, are misfits in the ordinary schools. Here we shall find a considerable percentage of the dull children who present difficulties of conduct and some children of permanent temperamental instability who will eventually be dealt with under the Mental Deficiency Acts. If fortunate enough to secure a vacancy, the local education authority may send the difficult child needing psychiatric treatment and special understanding to a home.
These ideal areas have also on their staffs an educational psychologist (employed
* This figure was given by the Parliamentary Secretary to the Board of Education in answer to a question in the House in March 1938.
t Only two such schools actually exist, namely, in Leicester and in Oxford.

jointly by the county borough and the county council) to whom any child can be referred.
There is also, in the county borough, a Child Guidance Clinic, whose facilities are available, by arrangement with the different authorities, for the whole area.
Lastly, provision is made for the special psychological examination of any child coming before the children's courts in the area who appears to be retarded or abnormal in any way. For this purpose full reports from the child's head teacher and school medical officer are made available to the court and there is a remand home in the county borough which accepts for observation delinquent children from any part of the area.
After-Care*
All the education authorities of our area are alive to the importance of after-care by social workers in the case of defectives leaving school. As I have emphasized above, only those leaving the residential school or the day special school in the county borough, can be notified for institution care or for statutory supervision, but every child who has been ascertained to be defectivewhether he is leaving a village school or a special class in an elementary school in one of the urban areas-is reported for voluntary supervision to the mental deficiency committee or to the mental welfare association.
What are the results of this special education? It is very difficult to get reliable statistics because the results depend so much on the grade of child admitted to the school, as well as on the type of training; but judged by the power of the children to get and keep employment, the results are good. Day special schools show in some areas over 50 per cent. of " school leavers " in employment. A residential school with IOO " schoolleavers" in six years, shows 74 per cent.
* " After-Care " includes not only help in finding suitable employment for the defective (sometimes this can only be secured by moving him to another area), but the provision of suitable recreation-such as a club with an understanding leader-as well as a constant readiness to intervene in the innumerable difficulties which arise when a subnormal individual is struggling to keep his place in a normal community.

170 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

wholly or partially self-supporting. The treatment to the mental deficiency com-

stable defectives keep their jobs and make mittee to be provided for in a manner be-

decent, if humble, citizens. The unstable fitting their needs and for as long a time as

often get notified to the mental deficiency may be necessary.

committee, and after a few years' training in For these reasons-and through the auth-

institutions settle down to routine work and orities' connection with social agencies

make good. A proportion of the failures throughout the whole area-the ascertain-

will remain in institutions permanently. ment figures in the model districts we are

But those who make an economic success considering, are high-namely, 7-30 per

of their lives cannot be controlled or directed. I,ooo. In other areas whose work has not

They have passed out of the mgis of the been so thorough, the figure may fall as low

Mental Deficiency Acts.

as i o6.

So far as imbecile children are concerned, As already indicated, the number of defec-

the duty of an education authority is limited tives in our area is approximately I,87I

to their ascertainment and notification to the (see p. I67).

mental deficiency committee. In the areas Subtracting from these figures the number

we are discussing, this duty is systematically of educable feeble-minded children who are

carried out, and no imbecile child remains in the responsibility of the education authori-

the elementary schools once his condition ties, there remain 624 notified children and

has been diagnosed. Thus, from the outset, adults in the administrative county for whom

the mental deficiency committees are made it may become responsible at any time, and

aware of every defective child for whom they 663 in the county borough. Of these, let us

are responsible.

say that there are, " subject to be dealt

with" at any given moment, 500 in the

The Mental Deficiency Committees

county area and 580 in the county borough.

The mental deficiency committees of the For these, provision is made as follows:

county and of the county borough in our model area vigorously administer the Mental (a) Institutional Accommodation

Deficiency Acts.

Of the total number of defectives " sub-

The first duty of a mental deficiency com- ject to be dealt with" in the county area,

mittee is that of ascertainment, and upon it it may be estimated that roughly 225 will

depends all the possibilities of protecting need colony accommodation. For an efficient

both the defective and the community. modem colony this number is too small, and

Under the present disability, by which defec- to run a small separate home is uneconomical.

tive children leaving ordinary elementary Therefore the county mental deficiency com-

schools cannot be notified, complete ascer- mittee joins with the county borough com-

tainment is impossible, and most mental mittee (and possibly with other' adjacent

deficiency committees hear of defectives authorities) and shares with them a colony

over i6 only when they have already become large enough to admit of adequate classifica-

delinquent or have fallen into other trouble. tion, an efficient school department for the

On the other hand, since the Local Govern- children, and workshops and other forms of

ment Act of I929, those defectives who were occupational training for the adults.

formerly under the Poor Law have been The county borough is responsible for

ascertained by the mental deficiency com- approximately 260 defectives who are trained

mittee and have come under its care to be in the colony.

dealt with, not temporarily as " paupers," but by reason of their mental defectiveness. (b) Community Care

The provision of adequate institution accom- Community care has, in our area, been

modation in our ideal areas has allowed the developed to its fullest possible extent, and

mental hospital committees to transfer the fact that a large number of defectives

defectives who do not need mental hospital remain safely in their own homes (or in the

MODERN DEVELOPMENTS IN MENTAL WELFARE WORK

I7I

homes of carefully selected foster-parents or control-the mental deficiency committee

employers) is due to the use of trained and does its best to provide some form of train-

experienced social workers With special ing and occupation, particularly in the case

knowledge of mental deficiency, who keep in of the children and young adults.

close touch with their cases and are quick to In each of the urban areas there are

discern indications pointing to inadequate roughly 30 defectives under supervision; in

control or the beginnings of disordered be- the rural areas there are some I85 scattered

haviour.

about in ones and twos. The problem of

A large number of patients will remain in training and occupation is, therefore, not an

the colony over a long period of years, but at easy one but, in view of the fact that their

least IO per cent. at any given time are to be provision was laid upon local authorities

found on licence, on leave of absence, or in by the Act of I927 (namely, " to provide

a hostel, going to and from daily work in the suitable training or occupation for defectives

neighbourhood of the colony. The selection who are under supervision or guardianship or

of such cases is made, in the first instance, by have been sent to certified institutions "),

the medical superintendent, and his dis- every effort has been made to solve it in the

crimination in this task is, of course, one of following ways:

the major factors in determining whether the For the children and young adults in the

system is a success.

urban areas, there is, in each area, a small

A large proportion of the girls placed out occupation centre, open daily morning and

on licence from the colony are put into afternoon, and organized by the voluntary

private families as domestic servants, and so association. The attendance at the centre

suitable does this arrangement prove that may not be more than ten or fifteen, but

there is always a demand for them greater its existence ensures that every defective in

than the supply. Great care is taken to choose the area who is capable of benefiting by

mistresses who fully understand the position, training is given the possibility of obtaining

and who are willing to exercise the special it.

supervision needed-and equal care is shown For the defectives in the rural areas of the

in the choice of the particular mistress for the county, who are too far away from any

particular girl. The boys are placed out, for centre to be able to attend for group training,

the most part, on farms-although the but who are yet trainable-say approxim-

county borough committee also makes use ately i2o-the committee has a staff of

of foster homes in districts of the town where home teachers who visit at fortnightly

there are facilities for simple factory work. intervals for the purpose of helping both the

All these persons on licence-which often is defective and his parents, by providing him

subsequently converted into "guardian- with simple occupational work. Each teacher

ship " under the Mental Deficiency Act-are may have thirty cases on her books and by

visited monthly, and the trained staff of the means of a car is able to cover the ground.

voluntary association or of the local authority In this way, the majority of defectives are

itself is always at hand to advise in difficulty kept under adequate supervision, and official

or to take action in emergency, making statutory visits to the homes by officers of the

arrangements in case of illness, or for holi- voluntary association working for the com-

days, or when necessary for recall to the mittee are supplemented also by visits from

institution.

voluntary visitors living in the neighbour-

hood.

(c) Statutory Supervision

In cases where the home is good and the

For the 275 defectives in the county's defective is tractable and easily managed,

administrative area under statutory super- but where there is an income inadequate to

vision in their own homes-left there either ensure that his physical needs are fully met,

because the parents object to institution the committee may adopt the plan of placing

care or because they can provide adequate the child under guardianship-the guardian

172 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

being one or other of his parents-and this their duties, providing sufficient institutional

enables a weekly allowance to be made to- accommodation and an adequate trained

wards his maintenance. Occasionally, also, staff of social workers for community care, it

such a lower-grade defective child is placed should be possible to control and protect the

under the guardianship of a foster-mother majority of defectives.

living in the vicinity of an occupation centre. The results of community work for defec-

For the county borough, the provision of tives are, on the whole, very satisfactory. It

training and occupation is a simpler one. has been proved over and over again that,

On behalf of its 300 or 320 defectives under after a period of training in an institution,

statutory supervision, it provides occupation the stable high-grade defective can " hold

centres in different districts of the town, these down" a good situation, earn adequate

centres accommodating the large majority. wages and lead an orderly life. For those

In addition, there are industrial classes for whose capabilities are not great enough to

the higher-grade boys and girls capable of merit adequate payment, grants for main-

simple manual work but unable to earn their tenance can be paid to foster-parents by the

living in the outside world, and clubs for authority concerned. The social worker-as

those who are in employment but need I have indicated above-is always at hand

properly supervised recreational facilities. to help in difficulty, and should the defective

In this area the official statutory visiting is fail he can be transferred to another foster

carried out by the authority's staff of trained home or domestic situation where the pro-

social workers.

tection is greater and where the necessary

recreational facilities are forthcoming.

Delinquency

Finally, he can, if necessary, be recalled to

Throughout both the county and the the institution.

county borough areas, use is made of section When, however, we turn to the question

8 of the Mental Deficiency Act, whereby any of how far the community is protected from

defective appearing before a court and found the danger of defectives producing children

guilty of an offence can be dealt with under who are themselves defective or who may be

the Act instead of as an ordinary offender. carriers of defect, and from their inadequacy

As in the case of feeble-minded children, pro- as parents, the position is a far more serious

vision is made for the special medical and one.

psychological examination of any person Under the existing law, it is not possible to

brought before the magistrates in whose case deny parenthood to a defective simply on

there are signs of mental defect or mental the grounds that he or she is a defective, and

abnormality, so that at the outset of what in any case, all defectives are not " subject

may be a series of criminal offences adequate to be dealt with." If they are leading orderly

measures are taken.

and well-conducted lives, supporting them-

selves (and possibly others also), not asking

CONCLUSIONS

help from any authority or forcibly brought

At the beginning of this paper I quoted the to official notice through any dereliction of

definition of " feeble-minded persons "- duties as citizens, they are outside the pro-

those who need, for their own sakes and for visions of the Mental Deficiency Acts and can-

that of others, " care, supervision and con- not be dealt with under them in any way. The

trol," and asked how far our present methods facts that they are likely to transmit mental

have succeeded in achieving this double aim. defect to their children, or that such children

I have no hesitation in saying that if we may be carriers though not themselves defec-

could secure the notification of all defective tive, or that (if only potential parents) they

children irrespective of the schools attended are likely to prove inadequate for parent-

by them, and if the education committees hood, do not in themselves constitute reasons

and the mental deficiency committees for being " subject to be dealt with." No one

throughout the country fully carried out can legally prevent the marriage of defectives

MODERN DEVELOPMENTS IN MENTAL WELFARE WORK

I73

who are not certified. We may know that What we can do is to try to keep the group

they have a bad family history and that they not only as small as possible, but in continu-

are likely to make bad parents; or we may ous touch with trained social workers. If

feel that though they may make as good a voluntary sterilization were legalized its

job of parenthood as their limited capacity members might apply for the operation in

permits, their children are likely to be defec- youth.

tive or carriers of defect. Yet under our This group is closely allied to the " dull"

existing laws we can do nothing except offer and, as experience shows, its members will

advice.

not be likely to be certified unless they com-

So far as our present experience indicates, mit some anti-social action or are brought by

the sole possibility of preventing any defec- unstable conduct or economic failure (and

tive from becoming a parent (short of per- economic failure may be, and often is, the

petual segregation in an institution) lies in result of defects of temperament no less than

voluntary sterilization, which means that the of intelligence) to the notice of the authori-

defective in question must be able to under- ties. The close resemblance between the

stand the potential danger to others of dull and the feeble-minded offers a hope that

parenthood and the need for avoiding it. we may eventually secure some measure of

In addition he must appreciate that success control over the former, through the same

in maintaining economic independence is not means that we use for controlling the latter.

the sole criterion to be taken into considera- Through specialized post-school training,

tion. Let us for a moment consider the through the selection of suitable employment,

difficulties involved in this proposal, as through help in finding safe social contacts,

applied to defectives not in institutions. through the friendly advice and assistance of

A defective tends to find his industrial the social worker, and through the possi-

level in the humblest groups of workers- bility of moving the individual to a home

those who complacently continue in easy environment suitable for him, much could

routine jobs which are irksome to those be achieved for his protection in the future,

intelligent active individuals who seek pro-
motion and greater responsibility. In this
lowly group, out of which numbers are con-
tinually falling into unemployment, the mere fact of securing and " holding down " a job is an achievement. It is unlikely, therefore, that it will be possible to convince the defective who has kept a job that he or she is unfit for parenthood.
Frankly, I think that this type of defective
-and it is the type to which belong the

always provided that the subnormal individual who is also unbalanced, unstable, and a danger and misery to himself and others,
can be brought under some form of care and control. Whether that control should be exercised under the Mental Deficiency Acts or whether (as I hope) we may look for some further legislation based on the needs of the individual who is a social failure is very uncertain. But I am sure the day is not far

majority of the stable high-grade who are distant when this whole group of subnormal

unlikely to be certified or to remain under members of the community will be dealt

the Mental Deficiency Acts-will always with as needing " care, supervision and con-

constitute a danger to the community from trol for their own protection or for the pro-

the point of view of future generations. tection of others."

Egenics Review, Vol. X, No. 8.

