OUR NATIONAL BURDEN

A Survey of the Report on Mental Deficiency

By ELDON MOORE

VTINDICATION induces pleasant feel- by Dr. E. 0. Lewis on an Investigation into

ings; and eugenists may perhaps be the Incidence of Mental Deficiency."

forgiven if they indulge for one This investigation, which occupied two

moment in a shout of ghoulish triumph over and a half years, was in many ways similar

the Report of the Mental Deficiency Com- to that of the Royal Commission of I904,

mittee.* Seldom have uneasy suspicions, from which it chiefly differed in being en-

warnings, direct prophesies, been so utterly tirely the work of one man-assisted, of

justified as those of biologists and eugenists course, by a secretary, preliminary investi-

for the past twenty years are now justified gators, local advice, etc.-instead of several.

by this Report.

Such slight personal bias, therefore, as is

It confirms-and amplifies-our fears on inevitable in deciding the condition of

all three main counts:

border-line defectives, was entirely uniform.

(i) We have asserted the hereditary Dr. Lewis's investigation also differed from

nature of amentia. The Report endorses the that of I904 in being more concerned with

assertion and goes further, strongly sug- administrative than scientific problems. But

gesting (as has E. J. Lidbetter) that the the scientific, and particularly the genetical,

disease is largely segregated among a few aspects of amentia were far from neglected:

thousand family stocks who breed in and indeed, Dr. Lewis gathered more scientific

through, but not much with, the normal data than it has hitherto been possible to

population.

correlate and publish, and he promises its

(2) We have warned that the falling death appearance later. Meanwhile he gives us a

rate would cause an increase in the number few significant pedigrees and details of

of aments. The Report shows that they have families containing mental defectives.

increased-terribly.

Evidently, too, there is a lot of valuable

(3) We have found that amentia was work on the heredity of amentia in the

linked in the same families with other suppressed Part 3, as hints at it abound in

human deficiencies, insanity, pauperism, the published parts, and there is one specific

' slumdom,' unemployability-general in- reference to a chapter on " Mental Defici-

nate inefficiency-and constituted with them ency as a Social and Genetic Problem."

a major national danger. The Report com- Six .areas, of approximately ioo,ooo popu-

ments again and again on this link, regard- lation each, were chosen, as nearly repre-

ing the deficient and the inefficient as but sentative as possible of the geographical,

different aspects of the same racial problem, social, and industrial conditions of the

and outlines a scheme, on national lines, for country as a whole. Apparently the inhabit-

dealing with the two as one group.

ants or local authorities were not anxious for

The Report is in four parts: Part i, this type of publicity, so the areas are

"General," and Part 2, " The Mentally ' anonymous.' This is a pity, since it makes

Defective Child," both by the whole Com- it impossible for others to check their repre-

mittee; Part 3, hitherto suppressed by order sentative character. But later, if anyone

of the late Cabinet; and Part 4, " Report wishes-and it would be most desirable-to

follow up Dr. Lewis's work, it should not

* Report of the Mental Deficiency Committee, prove difficult to identify the areas in the

being a Joint Committee of the Board of Education Census or Statistical Review from the popu-

and Board of Control. Parts I, 2, and 4. London,
3929. Stationery Office. Pp. xi and z68, and x and
220. Price cs.

lation details given. The first of them, Area A, is urban, an

"7

II8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

extra-metropolitan district with a popula- one which manifests itself in failure of

tion of I05,065; B is also urban, being one social adaptation." (Part i, p. 2I.) This is

of the chief centres of the weaving industry in line with the standards adopted in 1904

in the north of England, with a population by the Royal Commission, and since then

of I03,344; C, urban too, is a Midland coal, by Tredgold and other expert investigators,

steel, and engineering district, with a popu- and it agrees with the definition of the

lation of I09,280; D is a typically rural Mental Deficiency Acts of I9I3 and 1927.

district in the eastern counties, population But it was also necessary, in ascertaining

99,204; E " must be regarded as a hybrid children, to conform to the educational

rural and urban area " in the south-west, standard laid down by the Education Act of

population I03,937; F is a " typically rural 192I. This, therefore, is a new standard,

bilingual district in Wales," population not previously used, and draws into its net

I06,742. Together they constitute about a certain proportion of children who escape

one-sixtieth of the population of the country, the other Acts, children who, while not

and do really seem, from the details given, capable of benefiting by instruction in the

to be representative. Moreover, the ascer- schools, are yet able to manage themselves

tainment of amentia by local authorities and earn their own living in after life. While

averaged out for these areas as practically not personally so undesirable as the children

the same as that for the whole country, while who later fail to adapt themselves to life in

the i:qcidences of insanity and of the men- the community, these are really part of the

tally infirm in receipt of Poor Relief were same problem. At the same time, it is

also fairly close to normal.

necessary to deduct them from the total

The method was to attack the schools number of defective children ascertained,

first, weeding out the backward children when making the comparison between the

with the aid of preliminary investigations, incidence to-day and that in I906.

teachers' estimates, and group tests, until Table I (from p. I70 of Part 4) sum-

the residue of apparent defectives was left marizes the ascertainment.

for Dr. Lewis's personal examination. This

part of the investigation was probably complete: it tells neither the best nor the worst,

HIGHER RURAL INCIDENCE

but the truth. From information gathered So aments are commoner in the country

at the schools, from local authorities, than in towns-a point to be discussed later

charitable institutions, police, clergy, -and it is necessary to make allowance for

medical men, and so on, the adults were this when estimating the total incidence

then traced. Practically all were personally throughout England and Wales, whose

examined, and no doubtful cases were in- population is three-quarters urban and only

cluded in the ascertainment figures. This one-quarter rural. Dr. Lewis, therefore, has

part of the investigation, therefore, was not applied " the incidence rates for the in-

complete, but was probably at least as vestigated Urban and Rural areas to the

thorough as that of 1904.

Urban and Rural populations of the coun-

It is impossible to describe here the try." Table II (adapted from Tables io and

standards and classification adopted in de- ii (B) pp. I80-83 of Part 4) gives the results.

fining the grades of amentia. The import- This Table, however, does not fully re-

ant definition is the upper limit, that separ- present the situation, and the first thing to

ating the feeble-minded person from the do is to eliminate the children who are only

normal, if very dull or backward, indivi- defective in the educational sense. Dr.

dual. The criterion adopted was " the Lewis had found that about one-third of

ability of the person concerned to suit him- the feeble-minded children who attended

self to his environment and live an inde- special schools were afterwards able to fend

pendent life as an ordinary citizen. The for themselves, and could not, therefore, be

nature of the deficiency in fact is essentially said " to require the care and control which

OUR NATIONAL BURDEN

i '9

TABLE I-SUMMARY OF ASCERTAINMENT

Total Numbers Ascertainment

Area.

oafscDeerfteacitnievde.s TotpaelrPIo,pouoloatoifon.

Urban A ... Children* Adultst ...
Total ...
Urban B ... Children ... Adults ...
Total ...
Urban C ... Children ... Adults ...
Total ... Rural D ... Children ...
Adults ...
Total ...
Rural E ... Children ... Adults ...
Total ...
Rural F ... Children ... Adults ...
Total ...
Six Areas ... Children ... Adults ...
Total ...
* Under i6.

332 268
6oo 326 377 703
457 375 830 498 468 966
500 635
1,135
49I 6og 1,100
2,604
2,730 5,334
t Over I6.

3.I6 2*55
5.71
3e15
3.65
6*8o
4.19 3.42
7.60 5.02 4.72
9.74
4.82 6*II
10.93
4.8I
5*97
10.78 4. 8
4.38
8.57

TABLE II-ESTIMATED INCIDENCE OF MENTAL DEFECT IN ENGLAND AND WALES

Incidence

Area.

Age.

Total Population".

per a,ooo toltaatlipoonpiu-n

nEustmibmearteidn whole

vseismtiiglaaterdin-comntrry

areas.

Urban ... Under I6 31,233,100{ 314 98,185
Over :i6 j ' h 3.34 I04,447

Rural ... Under i6 ' Over i6 j

8,o56,goo

f i

5I6 51

41,558 44,366

Allareas Under I6 39,290,000/

Over i6 '

'

3.56 3.79

I39,743 148,813

All Areas All Ages... 39,290,000 7.34 288,556

'Registrar-General's estimates in July 1927.

is necessary in the case of a feeble-minded adult." So he deducts one-third of the total feeble-minded children (I10,956), and arrives at a round figure of 250,000 aments of all ages and grades. Even this he does not consider sufficiently accurate, on account of the inevitable failure to ascertain all defective children below the age of 7 and
from ages I4-I6 (i.e., after school age), as
well as all adult defectives in the investigated areas. The latter he is forced to disregard, but he feels justified in assuming that all children aged o-i6 are proportionately as numerous as the fully investigated
group aged 7-I4. "The figure thus ob-
tained enables us to state with some measure of confidence that the mean incidence of mental deficiency for England and Wales is about. 8 per i,ooo population.* This incidenice applied to the total population yields an estimate of about 3I4,000 mentally defective persons of all ages and grades in the whole country." (Part 4, p. 82.)
At least one person in every I25 is inherently incapable of rising to that minimum of citizenship, the ability to look after himself-and this does not include the insane, epileptic, generally ' neuropathic,' and subnormal, the estimation of whose probable numbers had best be attempted later.
The important question at the moment is whether the aments, taken alone, have increased not only absolutely, but relatively to the general population; for that figure of 3I4,000, high as it is, need not cause us such very great concern if it only represents a normal state of affairs.
DOUBLED IN TWENTY YEARS?
The Royal Commission reported that in I906 aments numbered I49,000, a figure which Tredgold (on the gro.und that it included a number of non-defective epileptics) reduced to I38,529-4.03 per I,00o, or one person in every 248.
* A footnote to this statement runs, " It is of interest to note that when the Group Tests were applied to the American Army during the Great War the incidence of persons who scored a mental age of 8 or less (approximately the standard adopted for adults in the present investigation) was also eight per thousand."

120 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Taken at their face value, the figures has been said above [about the greater

seem incredible, for they imply that aments thoroughness of Dr. Lewis's investigation]

have increased over ioo per cent. during that the lower grade defectives would have

twenty-one years, while the normal popula- borne a considerably higher ratio to the

tion has only increased I4 per cent. Since, feeble-minded in the earlier investigation,

therefore, we can be sure that the 1927 figure and the strikingly close similarity between

is not a bit too high, it seems as if the I906 the findings of the two investigations in this

figure, thorough as that investigation was respect is by no means easy to explain."

believed to have been, was too low. Prob- (Part 2, pp. 78-9.)

ably it was: but this can explain only a part This, in fact, is very strong internal evi-

of the apparent increase. Dr. Lewis and the dence that the two investigations were

Committee evidently think that there has almost equally successful in discovering the

also been a real increase; and one of their true facts*; and it is worth while to pause

reasons for thinking so is interesting:

for a moment and see whether it would be

" According to the findings of our investi- biologically possible for the numbers of

gation the incidence of lower grade defect, aments to double in twenty-one years.

that is, of imbecility and idiocy, in the areas It is tolerably clear that there are many

investigated was I.87 per thousand popula- forms of amentia, inherited in different ways

tion, a figure which is almost exactly double -some recessive, some dominant, some

that found by the investigators under the' probably sex-linked, or due to multiple

Royal Commission, namely, .98 per thou- factors, and possibly others which are the

sand. It is highly improbable that the reflection of a hybrid condition of different

earlier investigators would have failed to complementary factors. But pedigree and

discover any large proportion of the lower statistical investigations show that the

grade defectives, since these must have been commonest form (or forms) behaves like a

recognised by the various authorities, simple recessive or semi-recessive to normal

clergy, doctors, social workers, police mentality. If so, and if we take the round

officers and others who formed the main figure of I40,000 aments in I906, then there

sources of information, and the large would be at that date about 280,000 hetero-

majority of them must therefore have been zygous ' carriers.'

brought to the investigators' notice. No Remembering that, theoretically, a very

doubt our ascertainment was more complete healthy, long-lived, and fertile population

than the earlier one, even in respect of can just double its numbers in I7Y2

lower grade defectives, but this factor years, it does not seem so impossible that

would certainly not account for the doubling I40,000 aments and 280,ooo ' carriers 't

of the numbers found.

should, with a fair degree of inbreeding,

" It is, moreover, a striking coincidence produce 300,000 aments in twenty-one years.

that notwithstanding the disparity between It is, of course, true that their death rate

the numbers of lower grade defectives found, would be high, higher than normal; but

the relative incidence of the three grades against that must be put not only the

should have been almost identical in the notorious fertility of aments, but also the

two investigations. Dr. Tredgold has calcu- equal fertility of the parents from whom

lated on the basis of the figures of the I906 they spring. This high fertility of the

investigation that in every hundred aments families which produce aments is less well

in England and Wales there were found to

be six idiots, eighteen imbeciles, and seventy-six feeble-minded persons. According to

* It is also significant that though there were several investigators in 1904-06, each covering a

Dr. Lewis's investigation the corresponding numbers were five idiots, twenty imbeciles,

different district, their ascertainments and estimates of the amount of amentia coincided with remarkable closeness.

and seventy-five feeble-minded persons. One would naturally have expected from what

t Possibly many more were scattered about the population.

OUR NATIONAL BURDEN

121

recognized, though it is equally well estab- than mentally defective children." (Part 4,.

lished; and the Lidbetter studies suggest p. 84.)

that ' carriers ' are perhaps more fertile While agreeing in the main with this.

than aments themselves-a factor in the passage, biologists and statisticians will be

increase of amentia which has hitherto been apt to quarrel with certain points in it.

too little considered.

What, for instance, is true of lower grade-

defectives applies equally to the higher

THE FALLING DEATH RATE

grades: more of them are living-as Dr. Lewis indicates in other passages-and are-

The excessive fertility of aments and their living to breed. Secondly, it is by no means

kin is sometimes resentfully regarded as a certain that better care has saved " more-

sort of wantonness on their part. In fact, normal than mentally defective children."

it is an essential and inherent part of their Thirdly, if it is literally true, it is statistic--

make-up. Defectives of all types are com- ally misleading. Without any care, only

mon throughout the world of life; but only healthy and normal children would survive.

those whose fertility is sufficiently high to Care that results in the survival of

compensate for their high death rate have a even one defective child increases the

chance of racial survival. Human defectives proportion of defect, even if at the same

can only exist in the same world with time it saves double the usual number of

normal people as long as they have more normal children. The disproportion is

children; if fertility fell even to average, emphasized when the birth rate of normal

they would die out in a few generations. It children is falling while that of defectives

would also be a mistake to ascribe their in- remains high.

crease primarily to this excessive fertility,

since it is the quality which has always marked them. The important factor is the

THE RURAL CONCENTRATION

one that is comparatively new, the fall in Dr. Lewis and the Committee alike attach

the selective death rate. Upon this Dr. much importance to one of the most marked

Lewis and the Committee are insistent, discoveries of the investigation, the great

making constant references to it, with some difference in the incidence of amentia.

exact comparisons of the correlation between between the rural and urban areas, and they-

healthy living conditions, a low death rate, tend to look upon it as one of the causes of

and the high incidence of amentia. In one the general increase in the defect. The dis-

passage Dr. Lewis writes:

parity is certainly very marked, aments in

" The fact that there are larger numbers rural areas numbering io.66 (per I,ooo sex

of lower grade defectives living to-day than population) against the 7.34 of those in

twenty years ago does not necessarily prove urban areas.

that larger numbers have been born. A Possibly the ascertainment of adult:

more probable explanation is that a larger aments was not quite so thorough in urban

proportion survive; and this may be attri- districts, which lack social cohesion, as in

buted to the attention given by public the country, where everyone knows his

authorities in recent years to Maternity and neighbour. But the disparity, which is con-

Infant Welfare work. These services can firmed by the findings of the Royal Com-

scarcely be claimed to benefit the community mission, is undoubtedly real; and Dr. Lewis.

if this were the only result achieved by writes: " The actual numbers of mentally

them; but there is ample evidence that they defective persons in rural areas are increased

have succeeded in saving for the nation not by the tendency of families with mentally

only its liabilities but, to an even greater defective sons and daughters to move from

extent, its assets. Antenatal care and im- urban to rural areas. . . . The high inci--

proved midwifery and better infant nursing dence of mental defect among adults in ruraL

have undoubtedly saved many more normal areas is also partly explained by the fact

122 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

that mentally defective persons live longer large numbers of families of sound stock

in the country than in the town. The higher would in itself increase the incidence of

rate of child mortality in the urban districts mental defect in the population in these

would lower the incidence of mental defici- districts even if the actual birth rate of

ency; mental and physical weakness are mental defectives remained the same; and

closely correlated, especially in the lower conversely, the incidence of mental defici-

grade cases, and undoubtedly a relatively ency in urban areas would be decreased. If

larger proportion of mentally defective than this is all that has occurred there is no cause

normal children die at an early age.... for anxiety; but the possibility, and even

Even when allowance has been made for the the probability, that the high incidence of

factors we have just mentioned, it seems im- mental deficiency in rural districts may be

possible to avoid concluding . . . that the due to two or three generations of selective

incidence of mental defect among adults is breeding from the poor mental stock left in

intrinsically higher in rural than in urban these districts should make us apprehensive.

districts." (Part 4, pp. 7I-2.)

The same laws of heredity, according to all

Further on he writes, " The agricultural the scientific evidence we have, determine

depression of the last century and the the transmission of mental endowments as

phenomenal development of industries in that of physical features; and it is inevitable

urban areas caused a steady stream of that the cumulative effects of inbreeding of

migration from the countryside to the town; a group of persons of low intelligence should

and, in the main, it was the young and virile result in an increased incidence of mental

section of the population that left the coun- deficiency. It may be that for the first time

tryside. It is not unreasonable to suppose in the history of this country the distribu-

that this section also comprised the more tion of the population, due to the phenom-

intelligent members of the rural community. enal industrial developments of the last cen-

This selective process has been at tury, has become such as to make intensive

work on a large scale in this country for the inbreeding of poor human stock possible on

greater part of the last hundred years. ... a relatively large scale. If so, the problem

It is not improbable that the cumulative is a serious one." (Part 4, pp. 73-4.)

result . . . is that the rural areas have been In a later passage he adds that if the

left with a population containing a relatively selective process can be proved to have taken

large proportion of persons of low mental place, " leaving behind in the rural areas

endowments." (Part 4, p. 73.)

many persons of an inferior stock who have

He notes that his results confirm those of inter-married, then it is difficult to avoid the

the Royal Commission, and adds that the conclusion that there has been in the rural

disparity between town and country appears to have increased. " Therefore," he continues, " if the incidence of mental defect is really increasing in this country, the increase is occurring chiefly in rural areas. The mental deterioration, if there be any,
is not associated primarily with the bad housing and industrial conditions of our large towns-although there is much evidence in our data that these contribute
materially-but rather with the biological
selective process in our rural districts,

areas an increase in the birth rate of the mentally defective. A close study of the family foci of mental defect in some of the rural districts which we investigated caused us to feel that this conclusion cannot be dis-
missed as altogether impossible." (Part 4,
p. 85.)
The Committee write in much the same
strain.
I have quoted these passages at some length not in order to illustrate the gravity

where, according to available vital statistics, of the situation and the confirmation of

the conditions are most favourable to health eugenic theory, but rather because they

and longevity.

modify old theories and indicate that the

" The removal from rural districts of situation is not as dark as it seems.

OUR NATIONAL BURDEN

123

THE ENCOURAGING ASPECT

occasion, in the course of a few generations.

While I, like many others, knew that amentia was probably confined to a rela-
tively few strains among whom there was a certain degree of inbreeding, I do not think anyone was prepared to find the inbreeding
so close nor the concentration of the defect
in certain areas so intense. If these are really the facts, far from viewing them, as do Dr. Lewis and the Committee, with gloomy forebodings, I look upon them as the brightest spot on our racial horizon. If

But that cheerfulness requires some modification. Dr. Lewis says that the disparity in incidence between rural and urban areas appears to have increased since the Royal Commission. He may be correct, but he does not give the two sets of figures, and
a rough calculation I have made from those
of the Royal Commission (taken from A. F. Tredgold's Mental Deficiency, 5th edition) indicates, on the contrary, that the disparity has somewhat decreased:

aments are mating at random, they are

poisoning healthy stocks; if heterozygotes are continuing the process, the genes of

Date.

I9o6. | 927.

% Increase.

defect will be so widely scattered among the population that nothing short of drastic

Urban average* ...

2.63

6*7I

155

natural selection could save us from racial Ruralaverage* ... 4.38 10.49

139

decay. But here we have evidence-I have

not quoted a third of it-that the reverse is

* Incidence per I,ooo population.

happening: defectives and ' carriers ' are breeding together, concentrating the defect in certain areas, and bringing it to the surface. Very little of the poison is escaping into the main stream of the nation's blood.
Here is precisely that process of inbreeding, growing progressively more intense, which, as I mentioned earlier, would render
the rapid growth of the disease possible or even likely in comparatively few years. Here, too, is remarkable confirmation of the opinion expressed some years ago by
Lidbetter that a few thousand family stocks, breeding in and through, but not very much with, the normal population, are responsible for almost the whole national burden of disease, defect, and pauperism.
As everyone knows, the worst is over when the gumboil gathers in a gross, un-
sightly swelling on the jaw. Most of the poison is out of the general system, and has
concentrated where it can be eliminated by
the lancet.
If the evil is not lanced, the poison flows

If any reliance can be placed on this calculation, it suggests that the proportionate numbers of aments in towns are beginning to catch up with those in the country. This does not, of course, imply that amentia is
not concentrated in certain family ' pockets ' in the country, because it obviously is. Neither need we assume that where it occurs in towns it is widely disseminated among the normal population. On the whole, it appears to be only a little less con-
centrated in urban areas than in rural. The towns, as other social enquiries suggest, are now breeding their own types of population, which may include an urban variety of amentia. Certainly the Lidbetter studies indicate the existence of a defective type which flourishes in slum surroundings and outbreeds its normal neighbours.
In surveying the Report, one feels crippled by the lack of Part 3-what, indeed, must the writers think of its suppression ? The published parts, for instance, make comprehensive recommendations for

back into the blood.

dealing with defective children, but these

It is a cheerful thought that the causes of are of little use without the recommendations

racial decay should now be presenting them- in Part 3 for controlling defective adults. It

selves in such a tangible, manageable form, is quite clear that the Committee consider

to be eliminated, if we have but the courage amentia, either in children or adults, cannot

and common sense to rise promptly to the be separated from the borderline conditions.

124 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

In their view, retarded children and ineffec-
tive adults present different aspects of the
same racial problem, and they definitely recommend that ament and retarded children
should be embraced by the same administra-
tion.
The biologist here would be apt to
murmur that the retarded were heterozy-
gous ' carriers ' of mental deficiency: the
Committee explicitly suggest this explanation (Part 2, p. 92), and Dr. Lewis's find-
ings are certainly most suggestive. He " formed the opinion in every school that he visited that for every child whom he
classified as feeble-minded there were two or more children of only slightly higher
mental and educational capacity." (Part 2, p. 9I.) If this rough proportion held, on the average, for individual schools, it would strongly suggest that the retarded were the hybrid ' carriers ' of the same defect in a semi-latent form.
It is difficult to guess from their hints how the Committee suggest adult defectives
should be controlled; but I have reason to believe that sterilization is at least discussed in Part 3, and that the main proposal is for the setting up of a Ministry which will enforce existing laws, introduce new ones, and
generally tackle the whole problem on national lines.
Again, Part 3 contains such data as emerged from the investigation on the fertility and families of aments, on their biological pedigrees, on the links between amentia, insanity, pauperism, and the restall vitally important stuff, without which the rest is mutilated, incomplete, full of tantalizing hints. For example, one of the chief methods of tracing defective adults was through their relationship to defective children examined in the schools. Dr. Lewis
also found that in those districts where amentia was high among children, it occurred with similar frequency among adults, especially in the country. " In town and country the mental defectives were mostly found in ' pockets '; there were geographical foci of mental deficiency. . . . In the large towns our work in connection with the ascertainment of both adults and chil-

dren was mostly in slum areas. So much was this the case that we were inclined to
generalize rashly that slumdom is largely
the problem of the subnormal mentality of
the inhabitants. Slumdom, not poverty, it is necessary to emphasize, for the distinction
is important. Some of the homes we visited, where there was real poverty, were by no
means slum homes. . . . (Part 4, p. 74.)
" When a cluster of mentally defective persons was found in a rural district we
discussed the matter with some responsible person who was interested in social problems and who knew the district well. Not infre-
quently the explanation given was that a
generation or two ago a family of poor intelligence had settled in that part; the children had married others of much the same
mentality and had produced the present stock of mental defectives. We were able to
obtain fairly conclusive evidence of this in
some districts. . . ." (Part 4, p. 77.) Similar passages, stressing consciously or
unconsciously the hereditary cause of amentia, continually occur; and the Committee remark that when the geographical foci, in town or country, of the disease were studied, they were found to be family foci.
I have barely skimmed the main outlines of the Report, necessarily leaving much of the utmost importance unmentioned-such, for instance, as the discovery that the feeble-minded seem to derive proportionately
more benefit (as reflected in death rates) than the lower grades from healthy sur-
roundings, and also more benefit than does the normal person: ". . . the physical fitness and longevity of the normal person is not so dependent upon environment as those of the mentally defective person."
A further very interesting discovery, confirmatory of much random observation, was that idiots and imbeciles were relatively as common in good as in bad homes and seldom had family histories of mental disease, while the feeble-minded, who had usually bad pedigrees, were by far the most common in homes of the poorest type. This suggests that while feeble-mindedness is hereditary in origin, the grosser grades of defect are simply due to accidents of development.

OUR NATIONAL BURDEN

125

THE AMENT IN INDUSTRY

do not include those who have previously

Dr. Lewis also sheds a sidelight on the frequent statement that aments and their kin are in reality a- social asset, since they
supply the need of our civilization for hewers of wood and drawers of water. He found that for many years a large number of girls
in the Midland area C had been employed at a box factory, but that of late it had
become increasingly difficult for the subnormal girl to get work there. " We found that the employers had opened a school at

been under care and discharged as ' cured ' -though most of them will return to the asylum from time to time-nor those children and young persons, at present below the age of insanity, who are destined to lose their reason. Also there are no data for even
guessing at the numbers of epileptics. So
it is an under-estimate simply to add up the aments, ' carriers,' and insane-I,076,ooo, over 2 per cent. of the population, or about
one in every forty persons.

the factory; and all girls admitted were

expected to spend six months on probation

at this school before they were permanently Members of an official enquiry such as this

employed. During this time each girl was would be false to the responsibility entrusted

judged from various standpoints-general intelligence, educational attainments, voca-

to them if they allowed their personal theories, however sound or likely, to outrun

tional fitness, temperament and character- the facts: it is their duty to be conservative.

and if she were deemed unsuitable on any of
these grounds she was rejected. We were given to understand that the employers found the experiment a distinct success in securing the most efficient type of girl.
Several of the retarded girls we interviewed were among the rejected, much to the dis-
appointment of the girls themselves and their parents. The rejection of a number of feeble-minded girls by these employers in a single town may not in itself be of much importance; but if as is probable in the future employers in all parts of the country adopt simitar methods of acquiring the best
human material for their factories and work-
shops, this trend of events is of considerable significance. . . ." (Part 4, p. 95.)
After all, it is not so very surprising to find that if you want good work you need

The passages which follow, therefore, should carry added weight, and they may perhaps
show those who still doubt us, that eugenists, on the whole, have not exag-
gerated the need for racial reform. I quote from p. 82 of the whole Commit-
tee's survey:
this feature of our findings . . . seems to establish the fact that feeble-
mindedness is more likely to occur among populations of a generally low mental and physical level than elsewhere, that is to say, in slum districts and in rural areas with a poor type of inhabitant, and that broadly speaking it is likely to be most prevalent in a certain limited group, which may be termed the sub-normal group, of the general population. The evidence is not conclusive, but it does at least point to there

good workers.

being some relation between the slum prob-

lem and the problem of mental defect, as we

THE TOTAL OF MENTAL DISEASE

shall see below [the reference here is to Part 3].

Finally, the following estimate may give

a rough idea of the total amount of those heritable mental diseases which reduce the

"A MAJOR SOCIAL PROBLEM"

sufferers below the rank of human.

" Certain other features in Dr. Lewis's

To the 3I4,000 aments should be added Report point in the same direction. It is

double that number of ' carriers ' and the generally accepted that certain diseases and

134,000 insane persons known to the Board physical defects . . . are more commonly to

of Control. The latter, it should be noted, be found in slum areas and in association

xz6 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

with poor and dirty home conditions than
elsewhere, and it is not without interest to know that according to the findings of our
investigation the occurrence of these very diseases and defects is many times more frequent among mentally defective children
than it is among the general school population. Again, a fact which has some bearing
on this question and which has been observed elsewhere was noted in one of the investigated areas, namely, that after a slum area has been cleared and the population moved to well-designed houses and to generally hygienic surroundings, the very conditions which it was hoped to remedy soon recur and oblige the Local Authority to in-
tervene to prevent the emergence of a new slum area. It was in such a district as this
that our Investigator found one of the

highest incidences of mental defect found in any area of comparable size.
" If, as there is reason to think, mental
deficiency, much physical inefficiency, chronic pauperism, recidivism, are all more
or less closely related, and are all parts of a
single focal problem, can it be that poor
mental endowment, manifesting itself in an incapacity for social adjustment and in-
ability to manage one's own affairs, may be
not merely a symptom but rather the chief contributory cause of these kindred social evils? If so, then the problem of mental inefficiency, of which mental deficiency is an important part, assumes a yet wider and deeper significance and must indeed be one of the major social problems which a civilized community may be called upon to solve."

PART, THREE PUBLISHED
PART 3 of the Report has just been published, at the moment of our going to press. It largely deals with the administrative problems to be faced, and will therefore be reviewed, with the recommendations in the other parts, in the October REVIEW. It does practically involve the creation of a new Ministry.
Sterilization is definitely recommended in certain cases, and hesitatingly considered in others. But it is thought-on weak grounds,

in my opinion-that it would only go a short way to reducing primary amentia. Better segregation and " socialization " are the other alternatives suggested, although they would be no more effective in achieving this main aim.
The fertility of aments and ' carriers,' the heritability of the defect and its connection with slums, pauperism, etc., are further enlarged upon, but there are few of the exact details we had been led to expect.
E. M.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXI, No. 2.

