SOCIAL PROBLEM FAMILIES IN THE LIMELIGHT

eyes from subjects- of more immediate students in stimulating others. " Is this what import. Galton himself prepared a list of Professor Penrose would class, and stigma-

such topics which we hope will not be. tize, as propaganda?

ignored by the Foundation which carries his name.* One of these is called " Co-opera-
tion " and calls for " the influence of eugenic

* "Studies in National Eugexics," included in the
symposium Essays in Eugenics, by Francis Galton,
1I909.

t

SOCIAL PROBL J4 FAMILIES IN THE LIMELIGHT

By C. P. BLACKER

T HE social problem group, always tolerable and degrading burden to decent

of interest to eugenists, has been people forced by poverty to neighbour with

periodically exposed to the limelight of publicity.
Charles Booth's Life and Labour of the People of London (I889), The Royal Com-

it. Within this group are the 'problem families,' always on the edge of pauperism and crime, riddled with mental and physical
defects, in and out of the Courts for child

mission on the Poor Law (I909), the Royal neglect, a menace to the community, of

Commission on the Care and Control of the Feeble-minded (i9i2), the Mental Deficiency

which the gravity is qut ofdall proportion
to their npimbers. It is a serious matter

Committee (I930), the Brock Committee that no study of this class of the population

(x934), all provided phases of illumination.
But this is not the place to describe the

exists, and if this book serves only to focus attention upon the need for one, the authors

effects of these reports. Two recent events will be well satisfied."

have thrown new light on the subject. The Comprehensive medical services and com-

first was the war-time evacuation of children; prehensive National Insurance wi4 neces-

the second was the Beveridge Report-the sarily draw further attention to this group.

midwife of twins whose comprehensive Indeed, investigations of the kind demanded

growth will transform the internal structure by the author of the report just quoted are

of our society. I refer to the new Health already in evidence. Five papers by medical

Services and to National Insurance.

officers of health have been published in the

" The effect of evacuation," says the last two years (i) (3) (4) (8) (9); another

author of an important report which has investigation (I2) promoted by Dr. Frederick

had a wide influence (II) " was to flood the Grundy, M.O.H. of Luton, and ably carried

dark places with light and to bring home to out by Mr. Charles G. Tomlinson, senior

the national consciousness that the ' sub- Administrative Officer of the Public Health

merged tenth' described by Charles Booth Department of that town, has just been

still exists in our towns like a hidden sore, published; and the Qouncil of the Eugenics

poox, dirty, and crude in its habits, an in- Society has recently awarded a sixth Darwin

II8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Research Fellowship to facilitate a further inquiry.
The object of this article is to summarize the recent investigations and to discuss some of the problems which may arise from them.
What, in the first place, do we mean when we talk about a " social problem group " or about " social problem families"?
Definitions
Four tentative definitions have been advanced by the authors mentioned above. Mr. Tom.linson (I2) designates the families in question as
Those who, for their own well-being and the well-being of others require a substantially greater degree of supervision and help over
longer periods than is usually provided by
existing services.
Dr. C. 0. Stallybrass (3), Deputy M.O.H., City and Port of Liverpool, tentatively
defines them as
Families presenting an abnormal amount of subnormal behaviour over prolonged periods with a marked tendency to backsliding.
Dr. S. W. Savage, County Medical Officer for Herefordshire, defines the " problem mother" in these terms:
A " Problem Mother" is a woman who does not give her children at least the miimum of care, and refuses to co-operate with the health
visitors and make effective use of the technical advice available to her.
Dr. R. C. Wofinden (8), Acting Deputy
M.O.H. and V.D. Officer, Rotherham C.B.:
writes:
It is difficult to define such families, but one
is tempted to borrow from a description of feeble-mindedness and to call them those families " with social defectiveness of such a degree that they require care, supervision and control for their own well-being and the wellbeing of others "; one might add " and the removal of children belonging to such families to a more satisfactory environment would be in
their interest and the interest of the community. This author gives a vivid description of a typical Social Problem Family on page I28.
Another definition, never precisely formulated, but emerging from the experience of the Wood Committee (I929) might stress the fact that these families present multiple

social problems to the various agencies concerned. with education and with social services.
The Brock Report has the following statement:
From some points of view it may be true that the economic residuum of the population must always constitute a social problem, but it is contended that, within this fraction, there
is a smaller, perhaps a much smaller group,
which constitutes a far more acute problem than the remainder.
Caracteristics
The Brock Committee contended that, within the circle of problem families composing the " economic residuum of the population " (within the problem families viewed in a statistical perspective), there is to be found a small and refractory sub-group with special characteristics. This contention is supported by several of the writers above mentioned. Here are some of the features of the sub-group.
The parents are often of subnormal mentality, the father being a ne'er-do-well, the mother a conspicuously incompetent housewife. Distinguishable from the mental subnormality, which does not usually amount to mental deficiency in the legally defined sense, there is often present in either or both parents, but commonly in the mother, a temperamental instability which expresses itself in fecklessness, irresponsibility, improvidence and indiscipline in the home wherein chaos reigns. The same quality, if evinced by the father, may- produce occupational instability or long-term unemployment, alcoholic intemperance, gambling habits, and recidivism (frequent relapse into petty crime), thus bringing the family into trouble outside the hM6e. Illegitimacy, promiscuity, and, among the females, prostitution are common.
The combination of mental backwardness and temperamental instability, sometimes coupled with inebriety, results in the birth of numerous and unwanted children, as well as in high wastage rates (miscarriage and still-births). The same combination results in the parents being very difficult to reeducate. This characteristic of intractable

SOCIAL PROBLEM FAMILIES IN THE LIMELIGHT

ineducability impressed itself on the Pacifist out and ne'er-do-well head of a problem

Service Units (5) who, during the recent war, family. The astute criminal who, perhaps

set themselves the task of reclaiming such in association with others like himself,

families in Liverpool, Manchester and Step- systematically preys on society, is mani-

ney. The records of these units, edited by festly a more undesirable, because a more

Tom Stephens, contain the following re- dangerous, person than the petty recidivist

mark:

of low intelligence who is continuously

The number of families who have shown chargeable. But he belongs to a different themselves capable, with the assistance provided social category. The problem he presents

for them, of rising far above their original low calls for different methods of diagnosis and

standard of life is not large. Of the families
encountered by the Units, barely more than one-
tenth have responded in this way (page 9).

different remedies from the one now under consideration.

Mental backwardness, temperamental instability, and ineducability are then conspicuous qualities in the small sub-group distinguished by the Brock Committee as constituting, within the "economic residuum of the population," a far more acute problem than the remainder.
A word about these three features. Mental subnormality alone is not enough to produce the typical picture. Most mentally subnormal (but not certifiably defective) persons are educable, though the educative process is laborious and pains have to be taken over it. Many such persons hold down simple jobs in field and factory; indeed, they often make reliable and stable workers. They may even lead harmonious married lives provided that they do not have many children.
Temperamentally unstable persons occur in all classes of society and are of every degree of intelligence. Many artists and not a few geniuses are temperamentally unstable. These persons present problems to their parents, to their wives or husbands and to

Plenty of socially undesirable individuals
and associations of individuals are to be found outside the social problem group.
The ineducability of problem families is usually the result both of their mental subnormality and of their weak and vacillating characters; but in some families the dullness is the more conspicuous feature, while in others it is the fecklessness. The dullness is measurable by tests such as those applied by Dr. S. W. Savage (4). The temperamental defects are not subject to measurement; but they can be roughly assessed by the history of the individual and by his reactions to efforts to educate and
reclaim him.
Every investigator of social problem families pleads for further systematized study. Some, Dr. A. E. Martin (io) and Mr. N. R. Tillett (6), for example, think that these families should be the concern of the Ministry of Health or the Ministry of Education. But how should they be investigated? We can learn much from the inquiries mentioned above.

their children, to Whom they cause much stress and unhappiness. But they do not

Recorded Surveys

often fall into complete financial destitution. The starting-point in most cases was a

Their families come to the rescue in various specific group which in one way or another

ways. They become family rather than was causing difficulties. Dr. S. W. Savage,

social problems. Many highly intelligent whose definition of the problem mother was

criminals have unstable characters. They quoted above, approached his group via the

may make a success of crime, and may end children, whose unsatisfactory condition was by organizing it on a large scale. They may reported to him by school medical officers,

form round themselves rings and gangs and, health visitors, school nurses, and the

in troubled times, may acquire political N.S.P.C.C. Eighty-nine families were re-

power. Their capacity for evil is then great ported. " In all these cases," he writes,

-far greater than that of the down-and- " the homes were visited and the mothers

I20 TH1, EUGENICS REVIEW

were instructed by the health visitors. spector were invited to subnit lists of suspect

When the mothers persistently failed to take problem families.

advantage of the teaching, and continued We may here consider earlier and more

in their inefficient domestic practices,, the comprehensive inquiries. Dr. E. 0. Lewis,

family was recorded in the problem groAp." the investigator of the Mental Deficiency

Where there was doibt, a special visit was (Wood) Committee, took as his starting

made by the supervisor of the health visiting point mentally defective persons, for the

staff. Dr. Savage himself personally visited most part chilc4ren. In the process of ascer-

most of the families.

tamuing the presence of these in his six

Dr. C. F. Brockington, M.O.H. of the West sample areas, he made inquiries of such

Riding of Yorkshire, used as the starting statutory and voluntary bodies as might be

point of his inquiry children who, for various in a position to give information. He found

causes, had been removed from their homes that the names of the same families were

or had become homeless (i). These he calls supplied by more than one of the agencies,

"unparented children." Of a total of i,I95 and was thus led to the conception of a

children from three parts of the country, group which presented multiple social prob.

some two-thirds were removed from their lems.

parents on the initiative of the local authori- Mr. E. J. Lldbetter* was concerned with

ties or by order of the magistrates because families and persons who were in receipt of

of the unsuitability of their surroundings. public assistance. The records he investi-

Dr. R. C. Wofinden has co-ordinated in- gated were very complete and went back

formation about 243 families in Rotlherham, for more than a century. He was led into

the names being supplied to him by health an ever-widening maze of interrelated

visitors and school nurses during th& years families of high fertility which exhibited

I939-44 (8). These 243 families comprised much insanity, mental defect, and here-

85 who were persistently verminous, 5i who ditary physical disease as well as heavy

were persistently scabietic, and 96 who were wastage rates. Mr. Lidbetter's families were

referred to the N.S.P.C.C. The figures, more than the isolated units consisting of

which are only an approximation, showed parents and children which are described as

that the 243 families included 90I children. " families'" by most other investigators;

Mr. N. R. Tillett's report on derelict they were broadly ramifying and ascending

families was based on the records of sanitary connections comprising many parent-child

inspectors and health visitors, which were units. His is a unique genealogical study

included in the Public Health Department's covering three or four generations:

files't6).

A book I edited, published.in I937, con-

Mr. C. G. Tomlinson says of his investiga- tains papers by various authars on aspects

tion (I2): " Certain outstanding cases, in- of the social problem group. Each author

cluding those which constituted a hard core approached the group from a special angle

of persistent and recurring lousiness, were -mental retardation in children, mental

already well known to the senior officers of disorder, epilepsy, inebriety, recidivism,

the Public Health Department, and these prostitution, etc.t

formed the nucleus round which the basic

data for the survey were accumulated." Questions Raised

Health visitors, district midwives and sanitary inspectors were then asked to submit particulars of all families known to them which fell within a definition based upon that quoted below (p. I27) by Dr. Wofinden.

What questions are raised by these investigators ? The first is quantitative. What are the dimensions of the problem group ? How many problem families are

At a later stage, school inquiry officers, the 0'-fJerediy and tg Sooial Probem GrGuP, Eclward

borough treasurer, the probation officer, the relieving officer, and the N.S.P.C.C. in-

Arnold. I933.
t A Social Problem Group? Qxford University
Press, ig37.

SOCIAL PROBLEM FAMILIES IN THE LIMELIGHT

there in a town, a county or other administ Here then are four authorities who discern,

trative unit The Wood Committee ten- within a large statistically conceived problem

tatively suggested that they comprised as group, a smaller sub-group displaying what

much as po per cent of the whole country's might be described as innately inferior

population. Many to-day regard this esti- qualities.

mate as too large. As remarked above, the . However satisfactory our definition of a

Brock Committee distinguished a sub-group social problem family, difficulties of intern

within the group. Their views are borne out pretation will arise in the borderline case.

by several of the recent investigators. Dr. The demarcations of the group, like the

A. Querido, the Director of Mental Hygiene frontiers of neurosis and of mental deficiency,

of the City Medical $ervice of Amsterdam, depend on where one draws the line, A

distinguishes three groups of problem fami- small difference in standards may make a

lies which he calls the conditional-social, the big difference to the numbers included in a

conditional-unsocial and the unconditional- category arbitrarily dawn within a con..

unsocial (2) The first is easily reclaimed; tinuous series.

the second founders without outside help; Apart from difficulties- of definition and

of the third he writes "social assistance is interpretation, there are further uncer',

powerless to prevent their deterioration." tainties introduced by varying environ-

Dr. Savage excluded from his original list of mental factors. The extreme case is little

families those who responded to the in- affected by fluctuations of his surroundings.

structions of health visitors (4). And Mr. But there are many marginal cases wherQ

Tomlinson (ia) removed from his first list of such changes have noteworthy effects.

q5T problem families no less than 84, wherein A severe cycle of unemployment may

the misfortunes which had plunged them into blight the industries of an area, throwing

dependency were outside their control. many families into the extremities of want.

Some of these families he classified as " social Conversely, a favourable trade cycle or local

and biological casualties"; others dis- development of industry may bring pros-

played problems which were resolved in the perity, lifting many families out of penury.

course of the inquiry. After the sub- A rapidly expanding and prosperous town

traction of these and certain other cate- with good social services will show different

gories, there remained I67 families whose features from old-established cities like

predicaments wore partly or even largely Liverpool or Glasgow which are pock-marked

hQme-made.

witfh age-old slums. London with its densely

Dr. A. E. Martin (g) discusses three groups populated boroughs in the East End and

of parents who neglect their children. The elsewhere, containing relatively static popu-

first group is characterized by ignorance, lations, probably has unique features.

the second by wilful neglect, the third by Rural populations again differ from urban.

mental defect in one or both parents. The Life is more stable and less exacting in

third group is the most intractable: "it Is country districts. There are fewer dis-

a nightmare to all concerned." Dr. Martin's tractions and temptations to unwise spend.

second group-that showing "wilful neg- ing and immoral behaviour. There is

lect"-is marked by what I have above probably more neighbourliness and goodwill.

called temperamental instability rather than The idiot who is kindly treated in a village,

by mental subnormality. The parents here where he may be accepted almost as an in..

comprised are in many cases " aware of the stitution, would be lost in an urban or

neglect, but are either too lazy to look after metropolitan slum.

their children properly or, alternatively, These considerations make it difficult to

allow their time, energy or money to be answer what I have called the quantitative

frittered away on outside interests-alcohol, question--how large is the social problem

gambling, excessive visits to entertainments, group ? But they do not make the question

and immoral living."

meaningless. The question continuously

I22 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

obtrudes itself whenever a problem family moved. Had she not been thus sterilized,

impinges on the educational and social she would almost certainly have had a

services.

sequence of unwanted pregnancies and her

A last comment on the quantitative prob- large family would have presented multiple

lem. One can, I think, safely predict that social problems. As things are, she may

the frontiers of the group will become more well escape unfavourable notice. The fer-

widely embracing in the measure that our tility of social problem families is therefore

educational and social services improve and not to be treated as on a par with the fertility

our consciences become more discriminating. of, say, miners, agricultural workers, or even

Such has been the development in the three the Registrar-General's Group V.

comparable fields of mental disorder, mental Agricultural workers, for example, become

defect and crime.

subjects of demographic study solely because

The frontiers of mental disorder are rapidly they are agricultural workers. Their fer-

widening. A hundred years ago none but the tility has nothing to do with their becoming

grossest form of lunacy was a public concern; such subjects. Not so the social problem

now local authorities may provide clinics for families. It is therefore hardly surprising,

the treatment of neuroses and psychopathic it is indeed almost inevitable from the design

personalities.

of the inquiry, that their fertility should be

The frontiers of mental defect were for- high.

merly drawn by legal definitions of certifiable

groups; now they include subnormal or Methods of Inquiry

retarded persons who are far from certifiable. From the quantitative problem I now turn

Indeed, the Wood Committee proposed to to the connected question of method. Social

bracket together in a single educational problem families are well recognized by the

category feeble- minded and retarded authorities of our educational, medical and

children.

social services as well as by voluntary

In our dealings with crime, we are no longer agencies. Such families are a thorn in the

solely preoccupied with detecting and punish- flesh of the M.O.H.; they are responsible

ing the criminal. We now concern our- for ugly blots in the copy-book which he is

selves with the juvenile delinquent, whom, by concerned to make neat and clean.

means of the probation system, the Borstal What can we learn from the recorded

Institutions and the approved schools, we investigations above noted ? Each was

do our best to reclaim. The demarcations concerned with a special problem-Dr.

of the social problem group may similarly Martin with child neglect, Dr. Savage with

widen as we progress in social enlighten- intelligence and infant mortality in problem

ment. families, Dr. Brockington with homelessness

A 'word, parenthetically, about the high in children, Mr. TomJinson with families in

fertilities of these families, as to which trouble of different kinds, Dr. E. 0. Lewis

misunderstanding can easily arise. Their with mental defectives, Mr. Lidbetter with

high fertility is the cause of many, perhaps families in receipt of relief. We may note

of most, of their problems. Problem families in passing the preoccupation with children's

are selected as such largely as a result of this problems. By these different approaches,

feature. Without the high fertility, many the separate investigators were led into the

of the relevant predicaments would not arise. same " waste land "-that inhabited by the

There can be no cruelty, neglect, lousiness, problem families. But the methods used in

homelessness and mental defect of children the separate inquiries had a common feature.

if there are no children. On the day I write Statutory and voluntary bodies were ap-

these lines I saw in a psychiatric clinic a proached and asked for a list of names of

woman of low mentality whose husband was families which had caused trouble. The

a tramp. There were complications after search might be for mental defect, for home-

her first pregnancy, and her womb was re- lessness, for lousiness, for child neglect, for

SOCIAL PROBLEM FAMILIES IN THE LIMELIGHT

infafitile mortality, for cruelty. Whatever List B: Authorities concerned with Social

the search, much the same authorities were

Problems

approached. Let us first consider the problems and then the authorities concerned with them.

i. Medical Officers of Health and, if the posts are established, Medical Officers
of Mental Health.

List A: Social Problems

2. Head Teachers of Schools. 3. School Medical Officers.

i. Families containing juvenile delin- 4. School Nurses.

quents.

5. School Attendance Officers.

2. Families from which it has been neces- 6. N.S.P.C.C. Inspectors and heads of

sary to remove children-i.e. families

other voluntary organizations, of which

containing " unparented children" (I).

there may be many; among them the

3. Families containing lousy, scabietic,

Family Welfare Association, till lately

dirty or neglected children (8).

the Charity Organization Society.

4. Families wherein parents are known by 7. Health Visitors.

the N.S.P.C.C. to have ill-treated their 8. Sanitary Inspectors.

children.

9. District Nurses and Midwives.

5. Families with high miscarriage, still- IO. Public Assistance Officers.

birth and infantile mortality rates (4). ii. Probation Officers.

6. Families which have been chronically I2. Relieving Officers.

dependent on public funds (" chronic I3. Chief Constables.

dependency" could be defined).

I4. Borough Tr.easurers.

7. Families which exhibit the features I5. Directors and Social Workers of Child

mentioned in the Wood Report as

Guidance and Child Psychiatric clinics.

characterizing the social problem i6. Directors and Social Workers of Psy-

group-i.e. mental defect and retarda-

chiatric Clinics for adults.

tion, mental disorder, epilepsy, in- I7. Superintendents and Social Workers of

ebriety, prostitution, unemployability,

Mental Hospitals and Certified Insti-

and crime or recidivism.

tutions.

0

i8. Officials of Labour Exchanges.

By a " family " is here meant either a

married couple and their children or else a Of the eighteen groups of persons above

sibship and its dependants. Thus a father, mentioned, the first six are specially con-

mother and dependent children would con- cerned with children; and so are several of

stitute a family. So would a sibship of the remaining twelve. The social problems

grown-up persons with dependent children. with which most of these eighteen officers

In the first five of the above categories, would be concerned are obvious. The

the circumstances which bring the families borough treasurer, whose help was invoked

into notice all relate to children. A list of by Mr. C. G. Tomlinson in Luton, was able

families, based on these five categories, to throw light on the indebtedness of some

would therefore be very likely to contain of the families. The chief constable and the

families of high fertility. Childless families probation officer could throw light on crime,

would be automatically excluded. But they recidivism, juvenile delinquency, inebriety

would not be so excluded from the sixth and prostitution. Health visitors, sanitary

and seventh categories.

inspectors and district nurses and midwives

Here is a list (which could easily be know what the homes are like from the in-

expanded) of some of the officers of statutory side, and are in a good position to make a

and voluntary bodies who might be asked general assessment of the tenants.

to give particulars of families notorious to Having decided what are the family

them in respect of any of the seven features problems on which he wants information,

or groups of features mentioned above: and having settled what agencies he is going

THE EUGENICS REVVEW

to approach, the investigtor can proieed in be readily spared, and co-operativetiess might

one or two ways. Firstly, he might build be lost.

on a selected group as a starting point; or But whichever method is followed, there

secondly he might conduct his inquiry on a will eventually result a number of lists.

broad front, without special preoccupation These should be analyzed with a view to

with a single group.

determining the frequency with which the

According to the first method, the in- members of the same families occur on more

vestigator might compile a list of families than one list. This frequency will reflect

exhibiting some specific problem (see List A), the multiplicity of the social problems pre-

such as mental defect (E. 0. Lewis), home- sented which could be shown on a consoli-

lessness (C. P. Brockington), chargeability dated list. The More numerous the men-

to public funds (E. J. Lidbetter), etc.

tions of a family, the more eligible would

The first assemblage of names the investi- it become for recognition as a problem family.

gator might call his " primary list." This The investigator, when in possession of his

list could then be circulated to as many of consolidated and classified list, might think

the authorities in List B as he felt inclined it worth while to call a conference of as many

to consult, asking them to give brief parti- as possible of the persons consulted in

culars of any family mentioned in the list List B, and to go through the consolidated

which had been brought to their notice, and list with them so that their various views

further requesting that they should add to could be compared. A penultimate list of

the list the names of any other families which families to be visited by a psychiatric social

were to them notorious. Several lists of worker, health visitor or other competent

families would result; the lists would be as investigator could thus be prepared by

numerous as the authorities in List B who appropriate consultation. Some investi-

had been consulted.

gators might wish still further to prune this

According to the second possible method list as a result of later experience. Thus,

of inquiry above mentioned, the investigator Dr. Savage (4) included among his 89

dispenses with what was above called a problem families only those wherein " the

"primary list." He might designate some mothers persistently failed to take advan-

or all of the social problems mentioned in tage of the instruction and teaching of his

List A, and invite some or all of the persons health visitors"; and Mr. Tomlinson re-

mentioned in List B to give him the names moved from his penultimate list 84 families

of families which they connected with these among whom were included those who were

problems. Again there would result a deemed to be " biological and social casual-

number of different lists.

ties," those whose problems were resolved

Something can, I think, be said in favour in the course of the inquiry, and those who,

of both methods of inquiry. The first, on being visited, were found to be outside

wherein a " primary list " is prepared and the spirit of his definition. The final list

circulated, gives to the auithorities in List B would therefore comprse families which

something to bite on, thus exciting their exhibited multiple social problems and whose

interest and enlisting early their co-opera- home conditions, as seen by an investigator,

tion in the inquiry. But at the same time, conformed with such definitions as had been

the "primary list" might provide an laid down as guiding the inquiry. The

element of bias by drawing special attention object of an assessment of the farnily by an

to the families whose names are mentioned. investigator who visits the home is to

The second method, wherein no " primary separate the reclaimable from the irrecliim-

list" is prepared and the inquiry is carried able families; the distinction is practically

forward on a broad front, may put a severe important because the two groups require

strain on busy people. The spontaneous quite different handling.

preparation, without aids, of a long and If different surveys-of whole counties, of

difficult list may call for more time than could industrial areas, of agricultural areas, of

SOCIAL PROBLEM 1AMILIES IN THE LIMELIGHT

urban areas-were undertaken and their finidings compared, a general similarity of method should be attainable. Minor vriaa tions in standards of assessment could hardly

dttd it will be shown how the whole scheme *111 revolve around him, and depend fot Its suCetss
upon the energy and enthusiasm with which
he is able to inspirt his colleagues and assistants.

be avoided; but in due course an estimate These three suggestions, which contain the

of the national dimensions of the social same essential idea, surely reflect cotmon

problem group should be possible.

sense. The obvlous way of dealing with

In attempting to standardize a method of any obtrusive social problem is to make some

investigation, it would probably be wise to designated person responsible.

begini with a small administrati've area with Te second main proposal mentioned

a population of under a hundred thousand. above is one advanced by fr. A. Querido as

The thorough Inquiry here possible should a result of experience in Holland. This is a

enable us to develop the right technique for bold proposal. It amounts to no less than

use in large towns which provide the real that we should be empowered to place whole

setting of the social problem group.

families, as we do simgle individuals, under

superVision and restraint. Dr. Querido

Disposal

says (2) The idea of curing the family,

It is clear that ascertainment logically precedes disposal; nevertheless disposal is
discussed in the recent articles above considered. Two main proposals only will here
be mentioned. Here is the first. Three writers propound

as the individual mental patient is cured, seems to me the only solution." He proposes first that the obstinately refractory family should be placed in an observation camp-a place analogous to the observation
ward.

closely similar suggestions as to the allocation of responsibilities for problem families. These responsibilities, they believe, should
be vested in an accredited individiual or

'Here a psychiatric, medical and social in-
vestigation will take place, in order to obtain an accurate analysis and diagnosis. It will be decided whether the family will remain together or whether some members, especially the older

authority. Many persons and agencies, remarks Dr. C. 0. Stallybrass (3), fake cognizance of problem families. " Should there not be," he asks, "some specific body entrusted with the duty of bringing first-aid [to these families], to whom this information cani be brought Of a city of some IOO,OOO inhabitants with a very good health record, Mr. N. R. Tillett wrote in April 1945 (6):
One iew valuable approach to the problem has been made.... Some eighteen months ago the Cotnicil appointed a " Home Adviser" with the special task of visiting derelict and

children, will be educated elsewhere. Durihg the observation, the family is isolated from social tontact ottside the camp.
After the necessary period of observation, dwring which a diagnosis (or rather an assessment) of the family's condition has been made, the family is transferred from a place with a diagnostic to one with a therapeutic orientation. This is the education camp. " These are small camps, richly differentiated, situated throughout the country and each providing for aboUt fifteen families." Contact with the outside world is here encouraged. The children go to the

near-dereliet hotnseholds and endeavouring by local schools; work is provided in farm,

advice and persuasion to rescue them.

factory and development scheme; furniture

Dr. A. E. Martin (g) writes:

and utensils are provided. In short, the

The first essential of alty schenme is that there
would be some person on the central staff of the

family undergoes a supervised course of
social rehabilitation which has some of the

Health Authority to whom all cases may be features of a system of probation. If the

reported, who is available for advice, and who family responds appropriately, it is returned

can devote a portion of his time to the admini stration and supervision of the scheme.... For convnenience bf description, this person will
be termed " the administrative imledical officer,"

to its native town or village, where it still remains under supervision for a time. If all goes well, the supervision is abrogated by

I26 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the judge. Dr. Querido's article ends with these words:
The course proposed involves a serious in-
fringement of personal liberty and oifers possi-
bilities of abuse. On the other hand, the problem family oilers serious dangers, is an infectional focus to society and presents an intolerable state of human indignity, so that strong measures are justified.
Dr. Wofinden's definition, quoted above, of a social problem family was borrowed from the legal definition of feeble-mindedness. Here is the germ of the idea, carried to its logical conclusion by Dr. Querido, of applying to " sociopathic " families the system of probation and perhaps of restraint which we are by law entitled to apply to psychopathic and psychotic individuals. The idea is one which the social therapist may find worth while to bear in mind.
Eugenic Considerations
It will have been noted that, in the above discussion, stress has- been laid upon the tribulations of children. Children are the special concern of eugenists, for they are the only visible embodiments of posterity. In the Society's statement of Aims and Objects, and in the Memorandum of evidence it submitted to the Royal Commission on Population, reasons were given for thinking that eugenically valuable qualities were especially to be found among parents who produced, by intention and design, numerous children and provided for them happy and healthy homes.
But this picture has a converse. What about parents who, through fecklessness and stupidity, misbeget a sequence of unwanted children who are then so ill-treated or neglected that they have to be removed from their parents' homes ? Are not such parents the best available examples of the eugenically undesirable type ?
We estimate the eugenic value of parents indirectly by the way they discharge their responsibilities as parents; and we assess it directly by the qualities of their children. The indirect assessment can be made earlier in the lifetime of the parent than the direct; for a happy and healthy home can be dis-

tinguished from a brutal and squalid home however young the children; while the qualities of the children cannot be adequately assessed at the earliest till they have reached school age.
The approach to the problem family via its children is therefore one which should commend itself to us on eugenic grounds. That it also commends itself on humanitarian grounds bears out the principle, so often stressed by Galton, that eugenics substitutes for the intrinsic ruthlessness and cruelty of nature the quality of foresight, the ideal of co-operativeness and the spirit of compassion which he regarded as among the prerogatives of man.
I am indebted to Mr. D. Caradog Jones, to Dr. E. 0. Lewis, to Professor A. J. Lewis, and to Dr. D. V. Glass, for helpful criticisms of an early draft of this article.
Recent Papers on the Social Problem Group
(Since I943)
I give the following publications in the order of their recency, number I2, the most recent, being out of order. An impression is received that the subject is exciting a widening interest. The month given is that of publication.
I. June 1946. " Homelessness in Children," by C. F. Brockington, M.D. Camb., D.P.H., Barristerat-Law, M.O.H. West Riding of Yorkshire.Lancet.
2. May I946. " The Problem Family in the Netherlands," by Dr. A. Querido, Director, Department of Mental Hygiene, City Medical
Services, Amsterdam.-The Medical Officer. 3. March I946. " Problem Families," by C. 0.
Stallybrass, M.D., D.P.H., Deputy M.O.H., City and Port of Liverpool.-The Medical Officer.
4. January I946. "Intelligence and Infant Mortality in Problem Families," by S. W. Savage, M.D., D.P.H., County M.O.H. Herefordshire. British Medical Journal.
5. Undated I945. "Problem Families. An
experiment in Social Rehabilitation." Edited by Tom Stephens, Pacifist Service Units, 6 Endsleigh Street, London, W.C.i.
6. April I945. " The Derelict Family," by N. R. Tillett.-New Statesman and Nation.

PROBLEM FAMILIES

7. March I945. "'The Social Problem Group:
Poverty and sub-normality of Intelligence," by D. Caradog Jones, M.A. Reprinted from the Canadian Bar Review. Published by the Canadian Bar Association, Osgoode Law School, Toronto, Canada.
8. September i944. " Problem Families," by R. C. Wofinden, M.D., B.S., D.P.H., Acting
Deputy M.O.H. and V.D. Medical Officer, Rotherham C.B.-PubNic Health.
9. Summer 1944. "Child Neglect. A Problem
of Social Administration," by A. E. Martin, M.D., D.P.H., Assistant County M.O.H., Leicestershire County Council.-Public Administration Summer Number.

io. Undated 1944. " The Care of Neglected Children." Special Report by the Assistant School Medical Offwr. Lealet by A. E. Martin, MJr., D-P.H.
II. 1943. "'Our Towns: A Close-up." Women's Group on Public Welfare (in association with the
National Council for Social Service).-O2ford
University Press. Booklet.
12. The paper just published (Oct. 1946) of Mr.
Charles G. Tomlinson, B.A. (Admin.), Senior
Administrative Officer, Public Health Department, Luton, is entitled: " Families in Trouble: An Inquiry into Problem Famfies in Luton."

PROBLEM FAMILIES*

By R. C. WOFINDEN, M.DM, D.P.H.
Acting Deputy M.O.H., Rotherham.

TEHE tremendous upheaval in family
life during the recent war and the newly awakened interest in social medicine has served to focus- attention once again on a section of the population originally described by Charles Booth as the " submerged tenth." Within this section are the problem families. These families for one reason or another have not kept pace with social progress and are a brake on the wheels. They are the despair of health de-
partments, education authorities, N.S.P.C.C.
inspectors, and, until recently, of anyone who attempted to improve their lot in life. They masquerade under a variety of names -problem families, social problem families, derelict families, handicapped families and misatisfactory households.
Definition
In spite of the mnltiplicity of names no accepted definition of such families has yet
*An aIdress delivered at a conference on " Problem
Families," held at Manchester on June 22nd, I946.

been produced. In i944 I defined them as
" families with social defectiveness of such
a degree that they require care, supervision
and control for their own well-being and
for the well-being of others." Dr..Burn,
Medical Officer of HeaIth of Salford, has suggested as a working definition " families where the standards of home life are so gravely defective as to damage the normal development of children"'; and Dr. Stal:ybrass, Deputy Medical Officer of Health of Livexpool, has suggested " families presenting an abnormal amount of subnormal behaviour over prolonged periods with a marked tendency to backsliding."' All these definitions suffer from a certain vagueness which, from
the point of view of comparative study, is a
distinct handicap. The Pacifist Service Units have also pointed out the disadvantages arising from the lack of a suitable definition, and the familis of their stuldy
have been selected m-terely by the fact of
their being referred for assistance.
But. does it really matter tha.t a deition,

