IS NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE DECLINING?

By RAYMOND B. CATTELL, M.A., B.Sc., Ph.D.
Leonard Darwin Research Fellow

FOR some years eugenists and psycho- status of the parents. Lawrence,* among

logists have been familiar with indirect others, has shown that this grading according

evidence suggesting that national in- to parental class holds also among children

telligence is declining.

reared apart from their parents in institu-

There is (i) the alleged increase of mental tions. The only hope that the differential

deficiency, set out in the Wood* and the birth-rate is not dysgenic, therefore, lies in

Brock reports; (2) the common observation the unlikely contingency that in any one

of clinical psychologists and school medical class the more intelligent members will be the

officers that parents having children in the more prolific, to an extent sufficient to

" dull " category frequently have families not counteract the inter-class difference.

limited to " ordinary " size; (3) the differen- Of all the inheritable endowments of a
tial birth-rate throughout society, uniformly population the most vital for the success of

favouring less skilled as against more skilled civilization and for the growth of all that we

workers.t I am told by Major Leonard Dar- value is undoubtedly adequate mental capa-
win that in one of the last letters which city. Historians have presented facts and

Francis Galton wrote he expressed the view arguments, convincing to most students,

that the differential birth-rate was the most indicating that the periodical declines in

important problem in eugenics. It would civilization and culture level are due to condi-

certainly be the most important factor in any tions which have sterilized and removed the

lowering of national intelligence as a whole. more intelligent strains. Since Europe is still

fairly civilized we cannot suppose that the

The Indirect Evidence
Yet no one would call the evidence anything but indirect and inconclusive, however disquieting it may be. Not that there can be any doubt that inheritable intelligence is socially stratified, being on an average higher for skilled than unskilled workers and for

dysgenic trend, if it exists, has been active
very long. Most research workers agree that the differential birth-rate is quite a recent phenomenon-a matter of the last eighty years-and that before the twentieth century it was compensated for by a differential
death-rate and other factors.

classes of higher earning compared with those
of lower earning capacity. Anyone unfamiliar
with mental testing and inclined to be
sceptical of the findings with adults, may turn to the researches which show that the intelligence of groups of children ranks itself according to the occupations or the social

Method of the Inquiry
Instead of losing ourselves in a maze of doubtful inferences, we can to-day seek the more definite answer which so important a question merits by studying the direct evidence obtainable from an intelligence test survey of a sufficiently large and typical

* Report of the Mental Deficiency Committee, 1929. Dr. E. 0. Lewis's investigation undertaken in 1927 found the incidence of mental deficiency to be 8 * 41 per I,ooo of the total population, as contrasted with 4 6i per i,ooo found in the investigation reported on by the Royal Commission of I906.
t E.g., Dr. Enid Charles gives births per I,ooo in I92I as: Upper and middle class (professional, managerial, etc.), 98; skilled workmen, 134; un-
skilled workmen. I78.

section of our population, leading to the calculation of fertility rates for different intelligence levels.
In what follows I shall describe the conduct of such a survey and the results achieved.
* " An Investigation into the Relation between Intelligence and Inheritance." See EUGENICS REVIEW,
1932, XXIV, 143.

i8i

i82 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Since I shall endeavour finally to predict the change in average intelligence likely to take place between the present and the next generation, it will be necessary to digress into the evidence regarding the degree of innateness and the extent of the inheritance of intelligence.
The facts we require might at first sight be most simply obtained by applying psychological tests of constitutional mental capacity to some sample thousands of our adult population, including in representative measure earls and electricians, tinkers and tailors, waitresses and watchmen. After grading this population in a convenient number of groups in ascending order of intelligence we could work out the average number of children per adult produced by each group and, providing further testing shows that the children of these groups are in the same order of intelligence as the parents, derive figures to show the rate at which the national capital of mental capacity is increasing or decreasing.
In principle this is what we did, but this most simple plan was not deemed desirable for the following reasons: (i) It is unduly time-consuming to assemble a large numb'er of adults, especially in proportions representative of the general population. (2) Mental tests so far developed to a practical stage are not so accurate with adults as with children. An unknown age variation has to be allowed for, and environmental effects through prolonged investment of interest in one occupation may exist. (3) Children, on the other hand, are not so test shy, are in a uniform school environment and are used to expressing their abilities in examinations or intelligence tests.
Consequently we set out to sample the family at the child end of it, as it were.* In order to cover as many families as possible only one child was tested from each, this child being taken as a sample of his brothers
* The only disadvantage of this procedure is that we omit from our calculation all the people who are celibate or childless. Families of otherwise adequate size in the intelligent group will not ensure the survival of this section of the community if many adults belonging to it remain childless. Another population-determining factor, except in the special case of a just adequate family size, is the length of generations.

and sisters ;* and in order to effect a complete sampling of the population, from which no particular group might escape, we took all
the children in the area born in a certain year. A convenient age to take is ten years, since
children are not so scattered in different schools at that age as later, and since they are old enough already to have examination experience and familiarity with intelligence tests at eight and nine.
Our next concern was a geographical one: we had to get typical samples of English population without dissipating our time in too many areas. We therefore chose one typical industrial city with a population of 239,000 inhabitants and one unspoilt rural area of twenty scattered villages and townlets varying in population from 300 to 6,ooo
people. In these areas we tested all the ten-year-old
children with the same specially designed non-verbal intelligence test. Records were kept of parental occupations and the number of (surviving) children in each family sampled. A detailed account of how the sampling was
made representative is given in the footnote.t
* Apart from the slight effect due to " regression to the average," the average figures for the brothers and sisters of, say, one hundred children tested would be the
same (save for sliglxt " sampling error ") as that for
these children themselves, since the brothers and sisters are likely to scatter equally above and below the representative.
The correlation of intelligence of brothers and sisters is well known (giving a coefficient of about o0 ). To those who think from casual observation that the intelligence of children in one family normally varies greatly, I would point to an illusion which causes error in this and in many related fields. The individual gets his idea of " average " from his own family, friends and social class. Few people realize to what extent they do this, or how narrow their field is compared with the ranges of mental capacity in the population as a whole. A man's social environment is always well sifted. At school he is classified with similar people, first by the nature of the school itself, then by class sorting. The same occurs in occupations except in special instances. Few people have attempted to converse with an Einstein and the imbeciles in a defective institution on the same day. Unaware of the heights above them and the depths below, most people magnify the individual differences of members of families and groups which they know.
t METHOD OF SAMPLING POPULATION. Since the greater part of our English population is in
large towns or cities (urban population, 3I millions; rural population, 8 millions) our urban group was larger than our rural group.
I. City group. London is scarcely typical of English urban life. Our results were gathered in a city, Leicester,

IS NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE DECLINING?

i83

Distribution of Intelligence in City and Country
Though at first sight it may not seem a highly relevant matter, we will consider, in passing, the actual distribution of intelligence in city and country, as shown in Figs. ia and ib. They both reveal the " normal " type of curve which psychologists have come to

which strikes an average in tone between London and

the industrial cities of the Midlands and North. For the

rural sample Devonshire was chosen as offering typical

unspoilt conditions. The villages and townlets explored

were (i) in the fertile South Hams farming area south

of Dartmoor and clear of big towns and railways; (2)

to a more limited extent the less favoured area on the

northern edge of Dartmoor, with an extension in one

instance to Launceston. Surveys of intelligence were

being made in the city of Leicester, so that the machin-

ery for gathering the results already existed.

Both in the urban and the rural area we had to find

where the ten-year-old children go to school. In

Leicester we considered we had covered the great

majority of the children in the city area proper by

taking all the following schools:

No. of cases

Special school and special classes for the dull

and defective ... ... ... ...

49

AR elementary schools (24) ... ... ... 2,245

2 preparatory schools (for secondary schools) 141

2 private schools ... ... ... ... 264

i public school ... ... ... ... '74

Total

...

... 2,873

The boys in the public school were naturally not at
ten years of age as were the others, but we included them because it would have been very difficult to get hold of the children of this, a very well-to-do, social group at ten years, when they are so scattered. Of course, in this last contributory section, the size of the family was made accurately comparable by recording the number
of children in the family when the child tested was ten years old. In this group, too, since we were not able to test as many children as we needed to give this class its due proportion, each child was weighted as two.
2. Rural group. The secondary, preparatory and private school facilities are here greatly decreased, and in the small villages practically every child was found in the village school. We added three secondary schools (correcting families to ten years of age) to give an adequate proportion of the children who are sent away
to school.

Our rural group consisted of: No. of cases
22 elementary schools in 22 villages or

townlets ...

. ..

...

...

...

3 secondary schools in country towns draw-

ing on the countryside ... ... ...

758
103

Total ...

...

...

86i

This gives a ratio of elementary to non-elementary of 7 * 5 to I for the country as against 4: i for the city.

expect in such surveys,* but the country group is shifted as a whole towards the lower grades and both show a skewedness towards the lower end. This skewedness may be due to a differential birth-rate acting upon a " normal " curve under conditions of assortative mating and with insufficient time for the curve to readjust itself (see later histograms).
This finding of a slightly lower average intelligence for the rural population is also repeating results already familiar in this
country and America. t
* The " standard deviation " of these distributions is for town and country respectively 2I-9 and 36.9. This betokens a rather greater scatter and variability than has been found in early surveys in America and elsewhere, but confirms the results of the Scottish survey and my own surveys in this country (Brit. Jnl. Psychol., I933, Vol. X. Forum of Education, I928). The deficient scatter of the American results may be partly due to a real absence of extremes in the population, but, as I have argued elsewhere (Brit. Jnl. Psychol., loc. cit.), it is more probably due to the use of defective tests measuring attainment along with intelligence. Owing to class teaching which pushes the dull child whilst allowing the bright to mark time, and owing to the fact that the life experience of a child of eight is less than that of a child of ten with a mental age of eight, any contamination of an intelligence test with education and experience will reduce the real scatter of I.Q.s. That is why I suggest that the greater deviation of the present results is at once a closer approach to the truth about mental variation and an indication that the tests are relatively clear of environmental elements. This fact should be noted in connection with later comments on the early studies of alleged environmental influence on the intelligence of twins.
t What is perhaps the most thorough of American
surveys (Jones, H. E., et. al., I932. Environmental handicap in mental test performance, Univ. Calif. Public. Psychol., 5) shows ten points of I.Q. superiority in town and concludes " about half of the average difference of ten points I.Q. is attributable to factors other than those derived from the social and educational environment." With the more recent tests used here the effect of environment would not be so great, indeed it would be generous to allot two points to it (and that because of the accidental circumstance that the town group was already familiar with intelligence tests). For it is a naive supposition that the town environment is more favourable to the development of intelligence. This allowance for town familiarity with tests would give a difference of town and country of five points which is in agreement with the eventual conclusion on the American results.
As is well known, town children are also superior in general physique, stature, etc. This aligns itself with the fact that positive correlation (of a lower order) exists between good intelligence and good physique, and points to the conclusion that the town's advantages attract a superior biological sample of the population, though (as I have pointed out in Psychology and Social Progress) the city tends to sterilize and kill the very qualities which it attracts. The country continually

184 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Scale: I cm.=50 cases.
232 (665)

Mean 9918

1717'.33
(495)

188
(540)

Percentages in each category
at head of column.
Actual numbers in brackets.

98
(280)

(308)

6'2

W1'~~~~~~~~"~'~(31j7 53*0~~~~~~~~-
(88)22 0'854206

0-35(25)

9

40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110120 130 140 150 160 170

-<---------INTELLIGENCE QUOTIENTS. -

0-

FIG. Ia INTELLIGENCE DISTRIBUTION IN (LEICESTER) CITY AREA

All considerations indicate that the urban superiority is due to a greater readiness of the more intelligent families to migrate to the cities. As one such migrant told me, he had moved away from " small town life, small wages and small opportunities." This higher average intelligence of the city is mainly of interest in illustrating the important sociological principle that, other things being equal, the more gifted biological strains will
supplies the cities with its better men, but the cities do not maintain them. (In this survey, for instance, the average birth-rate in the country was 3 62, in the city 3 * 36.) Consequently the cities are moving towards the present intelligence level of the country.

in time be found where the more attractive conditions exist and vice versa.*
* I have been much impressed in this survey with the differences of intelligence between one village and another. Likewise, one cannot read widely in the literature of intelligence tests surveys without becoming convinced that marked regional differences exist even within the same country and race.
The character of the village itself, its cleanliness, the planfulness of its buildings and the level of its prosperity, were often strikingly related to the level of the intelligence found. In nearly every case an estimate of intelligence made on the appearance of the children and their keenness in work and play was found to anticipate the independent test results. Dr. Allen Price, who has carried out intelligence test surveys in most villages which fall under his supervision as Medical Officer of Health, tells me that he is convinced that there would

IS NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE DECLINING?
Scale (Vertical): f inch = io cases
I M=9350 Mo=91'071
26 5 26'2
(227) I 224)

I
13 7

Percentages In each category at head of column.
Actual numbers in brackets.

131 2

(117)

1'

I(1-05)

I85

49
(42)
1'75
Q3(l5)

I 5'4
I (46)

I ~~~315

I(27) 1'75.
i(20) 15

1,304

(3)I(4

1

50 60 70 80 90 T00 110 120 130140 150 160170 180
...-.---INTELLIGENCE QUOTIENTS.

FIG. ib INTELLIGENCE DISTRIBUTION IN (DEVON) RURAL AREA (Distribution of total number of families-by implication that child is typical)

be a high correlation between the prosperity of a village, its freedom from preventable ill-health, and the level of inborn mental capacity.
At any rate the contention that the average mental capacity in the long run determines the prosperity of
the group, is one which deserves thorough investigation, and one which could well be tackled experimentally by some refinement of the plan of comparing villages for intelligence, income per head, incidence of preventable diseas, etc. In relatively small villages an unusual level of intelligence was often obviously due to the effect of one or two families, the inbreeding of good families producing good intelligence, and of defectives even more defectives. An excess of low intelligence was almst invariably found in small towns of great age which had been important and prosperous in the Middle Ages. Itisasif old cities, like old fires, accumulate much ash.
The study of such connections is of great importance to the population-planning of the country as a whole,

and also with regard to the growing tendency deliber-
ately to shift population about the country in a whole-
sale fashion-e.g. from depressed to prosperous areasfor in some cases the disease (of low intelligence, prolificness and poverty) may be transmitted with the
people. Basing my conclusions partly on proven results and
partly on indications known to research students I
should describe the regional distribution of intelligence in Great Britain roughly as follows: It is in general higher in towns than in country villages, but in very remote villages, never tapped by the towns, it is a little
higher than in the towns. It is higher in Scotland than in England, but the Scottish towns are lowered by Edinburgh and especially Glasgow, which has a big influx of Mediterranean Irish. East Anglia and the Home Counties are probably slightly higher than the rest of England (except Yorkshire), while Greater London itself may well be as much as three points higher than the rest of England.

i86 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

The process deserves to be brought into the diagrams. For a dysgenic trend we were

limelight, for the layman's first reaction is prepared, though not on this scale and not so

otherwise always blithely to assume that the uniformly-it was reasonable to expect, for

good conditions directly produce the better instance, that among the highly intelligent

biological strains (as bad air was once thought the birth-rate would rise again-but there is

to produce malaria).

no redeeming feature to the situation.

A variety of strange and interesting facts Faced with an obstinate and unpleasant

of this kind is generally hauled to the surface fact it is in the nature of the human mind to

when the net of a psychological survey is cast, turn away, to forget it, to refuse to see it,

but, after all, we are most eagerly concerned to rationalize, to invent a pleasant delusion, to

with the main catch-the facts regarding attack those who call attention to it, and so

birth-rates and intelligence-and to this we on. One confidently expects, therefore, far

will now turn.

more determined attempts to find loopholes

in this evidence than would be made if it

Birth-rates and Intelligence

were of a gratifying nature. Lest the value of

Figs. 2a and 2b show, respectively for town thorough discussion from all angles should be

and country populations, the rate at which lost through dissipation on points which the

our population is being recruited from psychologist has already examined, I will

various intelligence levels at the present day. anticipate the more obvious objections; for

A glance suffices to show that in both regions doing so will provide an opportunity to set

the trend of intelligence must be disastrously down the psychological facts regarding

downhill; for, apart from a slight rally in the mental ability, without which all further

upper levels of the city, the rather more interpretations and deductions from the

intelligent are at every level reproduced in above analysis would go astray.

smaller families than the less intelligent.

Most eugenists are familiar with what

The grim evidence runs with relentless follows, but the layman will be asking how

consistency from top to bottom of these intelligence is measured, in what terms it may

be expressed and how far it responds to

I mention these indications not only because they are training. Assertions may be made that the of general interest, but because they suggest that the above effect is due to nutritional differences,*

standardization of the present non-verbal test, which shows rural Devonshire as distinctly below average and a Midland manufacturing city as a shade below average,

since on the whole larger families will not be so well fed as smaller ones, or that the en-

is about correct in level for the composite population of vironment of a small family is more con-

Great Britain as a whole, when London and Scotland are included, i.e. the I.Q.s which it gives have meaning in relation to the " average dweller in Great Britain."

ducive to the development of intelligence, and so on. Those statistically inclined may dis-

It is of interest to get away from mere averages: a comparison of the two charts above shows a marked preponderance of mental defectives and borderline

cuss whether the sampling has been adequate, what the effects of celibacy rates may be, etc.

mental defectives in the rural area, a result in agreement The need for brevity imposes a dogmatic

with the Wood Report of I929, which found IO-49 per I,ooo of the rural population defective and only 6-7I per I,ooo of the urban population. Neurotic conditions

style on the following remarks which is not intended in the exposition.

and insanity, on the other hand, are more common in

the towns, a result in accord with the statement that they are more environmental in origin.

Meaning of " Intelligence "

The shape of the histogram for the country is as if a
slice had been taken off the middling-upper intelligence section, where we should expect a deficiency if there is

The popular usage of the term intelligence has so many meanings that ultimately it has

selective migration to the towns. It is interesting to no meaning at all. As far as possible I shall
notice that Thomson (" The Northumberland Mental

Tests," Brit. Jnl. Psychol., Vol. XII) found a good,

normal level of intelligence in villages too remote from * Thus even a very recent and valuable contribution

towns to be much affected by migration. A Devonshire to education (Stead, H. G.: Full Stature), discussing

farmer tells me that in spite of unemployment he has to the increase of mental deficiency, says with apparent

advertise farming jobs in the most attractive terms, conviction, " these I.Q.s may be affected by a variety

adding " two minutes from nearest bus route to city" of factors . . . emotional disturbances, overstrain and

if he is to be successful in finding assistance.

malnourishment are the most important."

IS NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE DECLINING?

Q180CHILDCRHEILNDREPERPERFAMMIILLY FFAAMIILILESI'ES(SCMHOOITLH DCURREVEN LPAERRGEFRAMIINLTYERVALS)

1 70 _-_ _ _I_2_'0_5 _ _ _ 1 1

19 2'35
_ 1-1(61 FAMILIES)

160

2'48 ------_- ___

II42 _

3'1 9 149

~~~2'92

.9-71 63 (1 1 2 F's)

1

30

_

_

_

_

_

3 _

.06.
___ __

_

_

_

_J 112

120C -__2_,57_____ LS 179

2,82 I 308.

3,1 1 311 1554400

2,76 (291 F's)
S OO
~~~~~~~(F8'48s)

90C ___ ___3-_33____________

__

665
T

8C

____

_

3.99
___

_

_

_

_

_

__

_

1495
I .l

3 60 (1 160 F's)

70----4,-23 ------------- 1280 (346-813F's)

380 1 88

5053 9.6
3,68

--------- 1 25 (238 9F3's) I3

MEAN SIZE OF FAMILY IN URBAN AREA = 3 36

FIG. 2a URBAN AREA: SIZE OF FAMILY AND INTELLIGENCE QUOTIENT

i87

use the term " mental capacity," meaning
thereby " mother wit," natural capacity to understand complexities and grasp ideas, constitutional ability independent of specialized education and training.
Many years of research, in which the relations of all kinds of human abilities and mental operations have been studied, show
that such a general ability exists. This mental capacity has been labelled non-committally, by most English psychologists, " G." The amount of " G " with which a person is
endowed is partly responsible for the degree
of success he achieves in practically anything, but it is almost wholly responsible for the limits of his success in such things as deductive reasoning, power of choosing words correctly in a known vocabulary, mathematical insight, quickness in picking up ideas and in learning generally, especially where abstract notions and complicated relationships are involved. This ability grows very rapidly during the early years of childhood, then more slowly, and finally ceases to develop after about fifteen or sixteen years of age.

Means of Measuring Intelligence
Except when all the people to be tested have been exposed to and been equally interested in a similar education and environment, it is necessary to take great care when designing tests to couch the problems in terms equally familiar to all-i.e. to work within a " least common denominator " of general experience. The test used in this survey avoided the manipulation of words altogether, since widely different vocabularies may exist in different homes. Its pictorial and " shape " items were also such as to give equal opportunity to differing social groups and to town or country children. Like most recent tests it is composed of varieties of tests which have been proved to correlate highly with " G "; has serried, graded items and selective rather than inventive answers.*
* The standardization of the present test is described in the British Journal of Psychology (January I936). Its subtests are: classifications, analogies, mirror images, instructions, essential characters, picture completions, substitutions and mazes. It is published by

i88 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

I,Qk 180o
|'Q8t1171~0 ~Ca~ses~~~~~~~~~~~~~~1(5 F81AM-I8L0IES)
TO0 4

2,45 1 tl
150 mCases 2,20 115

2*31 (26 F's)

3 05 1 20 130 230 1 27

2-62 (47 F's)

2,3027~ ~ ~~~~~~~~32

900 -

90
3489

~C~~a2~s~2~e~7~scases

80~ ~ i17____________s ,1

70

4,38 60 __ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
4,46 50

42
Cases
15 .s

610 -3 40 .

Mean size of family in rural (Devon) Area =363.

((4455121FF'as)
4-21 tI(1C59asFe's) .....
4*72
[Cases (18 F's)

FIG. 2b

RURAL AREA: SIZE OF FAMILY AND INTELLIGENCE QUOTIENT

Units of Intelligence

having an I.Q. below 70.* A child in school

Measurement by an intelligence test is first who is considered " dull and backward" is

in terms of " mental age "-a mental age of commonly found to have an I.Q. below 8o.

eleven, for example, is credited to anyone Scholarship children (for secondary schools)

who just achieves the score of the typical, are almost invariably above I20, whilst a

average child of eleven on that test. Since it strikingly brilliant child has an I.Q. of

is most desirable to be able to compare the I50-I704t

brightness of people of different actual Soon after intelligence tests were first used

(chronological) ages most intelligence mea- it was found that the intelligence quotient of

surements are finally expressed in " intelli- eaeh individual tends to remain constant.

gence quotients," obtained by eliminating Literally hundreds of experiments in dif-

the actual age through dividing the mental ferent towns, social groups and countries have

age by actual age, thus:

since confirmed this general finding.

Intelligence Quotient (I.Q.)

=

Mental Age Actual Age

X

IO1

(The Ioo being to avoid fractions.)

Obviously, by the very definition of I.Q., the average child or adult citizen has an I.Q. of Ioo. By a convention arising from
experience, the mental defective is a person

Messrs. Harrap & Co. in the series of the Cattell Tests under the designation: Scale I, Form A. Non-verbal group and individual test.

* With improved tests, which " scatter " the population more widely, it may be found that 65 is the real upper limit of deficiency as defined by the Mental Deficiency Act on the-basis of social criteria.
t In testing thousands of children and adults over
several years I have only twice met an I.Q. of 200-one in London, one in Leicester. This is an adequate capacity for a genius. See Terman, et. al., Genetic Studies of Genius, for this aspect of the study of intelligence.
I For a brief introduction to the theory and practice
of testing the reader is referred to Dr. R. Knight's small
book, Intelligence and Intelligmnce Testing, or to a

IS NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE DECLINING?

I89

I take at random, from my card index, do not hesitate to make the most authorita-

Arthur J , tested at eight years of age by tive statements about mental testing. It is

my predecessor in office, and found to have obvious that in psychology, as in medicine,

an I.Q. of 65. He was sent to a special school, there is a sense which comes from first-hand

and is now about to leave at fifteen years of experience of and immersion in the facts. No

age. His I.Q., recently measured, without psychologist engaged day after day in testing

awareness on my part of the previous result, and watching intimately the progress of

was 67. Dipping again I find a " problem " children and the reactions of adults doubts

child, I.Q. I4i at nine, years of age. She that there are two distinct entities-the

failed a scholarship examination owing to extensive veneer of education and the inex-

emotional difficulties and an unsatisfactory tensible innate capacity.

home background. Tested recently at twelve

years of age she has an I.Q. of I40. These minor variations of I.Q., up to five points,

Is Mental Capacity Innate?

are found in about half the children tested, The evidence for innateness of mental and may be considered as due to inaccuracies capacity may be summarized under the in the measuring instrument rather than to following headings:

real changes, since they are as marked in i. The feeble-minded (who are not, like

re-tests after a lapse of a few days as after imbeciles, a pathological type apart, but

several years.

" normal " variants of intelligence) remain

Experience of this kind, and much indirect feeble-minded whatever influences of en-

evidence about the nature of intelligence, vironment, through mental stimulation or

together with many direct experiments in nutrition, are brought to bear. (Even the

which physical and mental environment have desperate remedy of opening the skull " so

been altered without producing any signi- that the brain may grow " reveals only that

ficant change in I.Q., have convinced most the brain has reached the natural limit of its

psychologists that in the I.Q. we are dealing growth.)

with something largely inborn and constitu- 2. Brilliant men and men of genius simi-

tional, like the colour of the person's eyes or larly show outstanding mental capacity from

the shape of his skull. Notice that this is not birth, as Terman's studies of the childhood of

entirely the same thing as saying that it is men of genius show.

inherited in any simple Mendelian manner. 3. Among children in widely different

Separate evidence must be considered on that physical and mental environments the I.Q.

point.

remains equally constant.

Unfortunately for the clarity of the issue, 4. Children brought up in the very same

it is not unusual for sociologists, economists, environment-e.g. orphanages-show as big

biologists and philosophers to make holiday variations of intelligence as any other chil-

in the field of psychology, presumably when dren (except when the parents are selected

the confusion of their own subjects becomes from one social or occupational class).

too oppressive. After arranging statistics 5. Identical twins have practically the

concerning psychological facts with which same intelligence quotient, and even when

they have no first-hand acquaintance, they reared apart no marked difference of I.Q.

arises.

chapter in my popular introduction to psychology, Your Mind and Mine. A brief but more thorough study is The Testing of Intelligence, by H. R. Hamley and

6. Groups of children given " intensive education" or special feeding show the same

others. The classical works in this country are Professor " normal" rate of intelligence growth as do

Spearman's A bilities of Man, and Professor Burt's Mental and Scholastic Tests. The former is indispensable to any thorough review of the question, and though it

control groups lacking these advantages. 7. The cessation of intelligence growth at

propounds forcefully the theory of " G " no bias is an early age, long before environment has

given to practical issues, since in practice even the opponents of " G" construct intelligence tests on the same principles.

had its maximum effect, points to an innate basis of development.

B

Igo THE EUGENICS REVIEW

8. The connection of mental capacity with are involved. But it is already practicable

the number of myelinated nerve cells, sug- to predict that the children of a group of

gested by the work of Lashley and others, parents of higher intelligence will have

points to intelligence having the same degree greater mental capacity than the children

of innateness as physical characteristics- of parents of lower intelligence. Since

e.g. skull shape and size-which are known no research in this last category has yet

to be unaffected by normal variations of been carried out in this country we tested,*

environment.

as already stated, a hundred families with

9. The possibility of breeding in an animal the following results.

species a strain possessing distinctly greater all-round learning capacity than that of Results of the Investigation

other strains has been experimentally demon- The parents were first ranked in order of

strated (see Tryon, below).

intelligence (of the mid-parent) and then

Fuller details of the solved and unsolved divided into equal groups (of ten pairs in

problems in this field are given in an appen- each). The average intelligence of the

dix to this paper.

children of each of these groups was then

calculated and set down opposite the average

Inheritance of Intelligence

intelligence of the parents. Since some of the

The evidence regarding the inheritance of parents were over sixty, and since there is

intelligence is as follows:

evidence (see below) of an age-decline of

I. About 75 per cent. of the children of the intelligence, the parents' intelligences were

feeble-minded are also feeble-minded, and corrected for age. The new figures thus

the remainder are not far above the border- obtained are set down opposite the un-

line. corrected raw scores. The ranking of the

2. The children of people of outstanding groups, however, works out the same in

capacity also show (except when one parent both cases, and is the same as the ranking

is much duller than the brilliant one) out- of the children. The correlation of the mid-

standing capacity, compared with other parent with the mid-child works out at

children having the same advantages.

+o 73 ± °0O3.

3. A correlation (of about 0. 5) is constantly found between the intelligence quotients of

AMOUNT OF INHERITANCE OF MENTAL CAPACITY.t
Mean I.Q. of I.Q. Corrected Mean I.Q. of

siblings (brothers and sisters).

Parents

for Age.

4. When school children are arranged in groups according to the complexity and in-

20 parents I47.5
20 ,, I142 e3 20 ,, 135.0

I55-2 I48-3
I45-2

Children.
21 children 148.8
23 ,, 147.0 21 ,, I43-5

telligence demand of their father's occupa- 20 ,, I25 5

tions, higher intelligence is found on test among the children of parents in the more

20 20 20

,, ,, ,,

1I1*0
99.5
88*3

I33.0
123.5
107.0 95.0

2I ,, 137e1
21 ,, I27-I I9 ,I. 8,
26 ,, I02-9

complex occupations. 5. When adults and children are tested
directly with intelligence tests a good correlation* of the mid-parent (parental average) with the mid-child (average of children in the
family) is found. Individual children do not correlate so well with the mid-parent
(thus the child-parent correlation is lowered if only one child is taken), and no one
has yet established how inheritance takes

20 75*3 76.4 I5

93.9

20 " 67.9 71.4 24 ,, 92 5

20 " 63.5 67.6 32

77.0

From such findings it is reasonable to conclude that with groups-even quite small groups-we may regard mental capacity not
only as an innate characteristic, but as one which has been inherited from the previous generation and will be passed on to the next.
Turning to the standard environment

place-e.g. what dominant and recessive 0 See, however, Appendix II, p. 203. factors are concerned or how many genes t A more detailed account of the methods by which

these results were obtained, together with a summary

of other investigations on the inheritance of intelligence,

* See American results, p. 203.

in set out in Appendix II.

IS NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE DECLINING?

Average Present Generation.

Average Last Generation.

99,80 40.44 I

103,81

(37'03)

12.76I
(10-18)

l(32 24) I ---5
*1

Present Generation.
Last Generation.
Percentages In each category.
Present generation thus - 18
Last PR ,, -(18)

(12'12)

_____ ___

I

(0-86)

40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 INTELLIGENOE QUOTIENTS.T -
FIG. 3a
CITY POPULATION: ALTERATION OF DISTRIBUTION OF INTELLIGENCE DURING LAST GENERATION
(i.e. comparison of generation averaging Io years in 1935 with that of 35 years in 1935). Retrospective calculation assuming even distribution of childless
people

versus heredity controversy, the verdict of
the psychologist regarding the psychological field is, in a word, that mental capacity is inherited, but that character, habits and skills
are largely a matter of environment. It is true that psychiatric observations show that the temperamental basis of psychopathic conditions are to some extent inherited, but not with the completeness of mental capacity, and it is in the field of temperament and character, habits and the skills that environ-
mentalists can most profitably apply their
energies.

Social Implications of Results
We are now able to turn to the social implications of our intelligence and birth-rate figures, bearing in mind that the facts are entirely opposed to the popular assumption that an appreciable part of the existing differences in mental capacity are referrable to differences of nutrition or education.* More-
* For that matter, the present results are not based on any assumption of a social stratification of intelligence or of a differential birth-rate between social classes. They cut across classes and study directly the relation of intelligence and fertility.

192 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Average intelligence
of present generation
of children.
93_5

IAveArvaegraegeinnetelllliigoennos

0.-~of
1

p-ste

aoolf(Prleasste9n5gte'n8Aedrualttiso)n

52'70 5032 Il
l

Present Generation.
- Last Generation.
Percentages in each category. Present generation thus r 18 Last o,, (18)

18w57 (1568)

I (19-15)
l 1765

(743) 5.49
2020'1~~I ~~I~~~~I3'0(4366) (1-56) ~~~~~~0'58
40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180
INTELLIGENCE QUOTIENTS.-,
FIG. 3b COUNTRY POPULATION: ALTERATION OF DISTRIBUTION OF INTELLIGENCE
DURING LAST GENERATION (i.e. comparison of generation averaging io years in 1936 with that averaging 35 years in I936.) Retrospective calculation assuming even distributiQn of
childless individuals, etc.

over, whatever the mechanism of inheritance may be, we have seen that, even for quite small groups of families, the intelligence of the average offspring is closely related to that of the average parent. This being so we can proceed to calculate the alteration of average intelligence in city and country resulting from the divergent birth-rates found at
various intelligence levels.
Figs. 3a and 3b show the alterations in the
percentages of population at various intelligence levels which have taken place in this generation. The values are .obtained by dividing the numbers in each category by the

fertility rates, to get the number of parents in that category (i.e., the present parents of the ten-year-old children) and multiplying throughout by the common factor necessary
to bring the population to the same total size (allowance for childless adults, assuming
them to be equally common at all levels). The calculation is only an approximate one
because the birth-rate factor which we apply really extends more widely than to the category to which we apply it, since the child in that category is only a sample of the whole family. Secondly, it assumes that childlessness, celibacy and late marriage are as

IS NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE DECLINING?

frequent among the unintelligent as the in- Before undertaking this survey I had ex-

telligent. I could get no direct evidence of a pected the greatest changes to be in the

complete kind upon this matter,* but the region of borderline feeble-mindedness. The

whole of the indirect evidence indicates changes are certainly great-in thirty years

that the assumption is somewhat incorrect we may expect a 24 per cent. increase in

and that these conditions are more pre- mental deficiency, whilst more than half the

valent among the intelligent. In this population would be mentally defective in

view I have the support of Professor R. A. three hundred years-but the most striking

Fisher, whose acquaintance with the relevant change is in the numbers of able and brilliant

statistical issues is unrivalled. Consequently children. In the country group the very able

my figures are almost certainly not showing children-above an I.Q. of 4-are practi-

so great a decline of intelligence as is actually cally halved, whilst scholarship children-

taking place. Nevertheless the imponderables above I.Q. i2o-are reduced by about 35

in my calculations are not so extensive as to per cent., in one generation.

alter the general order of my results.

Such findings must set us thinking sharply

As regards the averages of the two genera- on their social and educational implications.

tions, the city intelligence seems to decline If the able group is being cut down in this

more than the country-4 'o as against 2-3 way, whence are the skilled doctors and

points-but owing to the migration of the surgeons, the organizers and politicians, the

brighter persons from country to city, which writers and research workers of the next

is still going on, we may suppose that there generation to come? Temporarily one may

will be no great difference in the actual rates look to a better use, through careful scholar-

of decline.

ship combing, of the intelligence already in

Counting a generation as thirty years and the community, but this is a mere exploita-

ignoring as meaningless the decimal points in tion of reserve capital. Moreover, it assumes

our figures, we may say that national intelli- that the jobs needing high education are the

gence is declining at the rate of one point of only ones needing high intelligence,, an

I.Q. for every ten years. This is a staggering assumption which, if worked upon, may lead

rate and one which should admit of direct to bare patches of dullness and incompetence

verification by re-testing with the same tests appearing in unexpected places and to an

in ten to twenty years' time.

impoverishment of the life of the community

Figs. 4a and 4b represent the changes in obscure ways.

deducible from carrying the calculation for- Clearly the foreshadowed increase in

ward to the children of the present generation mental defect betokens a need for education

of children, assuming that the latter have the authorities to set to work at once to provide

same birth-rates as their parents, an assump- more special school accommodation. Since a

tion which, let us hope, time and the efforts of dull child on an average costs twice as much

eugenists will make incorrect.

as the normal child to educate, the increase

From many points of view the changes in implies, further, that unless the total grant

the national average of intelligence are not so for education is augmented the effectiveness

important as the changes in the proportions of the educational system will be reduced at

of very high and very low intelligences. all points. Already there are grumblings that

we are doing too much for the dull child at

The following evidence on partial aspects exists. The percentage of married persons among professional

the expense of the able child who does not go to a secondary school.

people is lower than in society as a whole, at every age Perhaps the chief reason why children run

level. See Occupational Tables, His Majesty's Stationery Office, I934. Secondly, figures for Germany, presumably not essentially different from those which would

away from home to school to-day, where formerly they ran away from school to home,

appear for this country, show childless marriages to is that the schools have very tactfully and

become more prevalent as social status rises. Neue
Beitrage zum deutschen Bev7lkerungsproblem. Sonder-
heft, Nu. I5.

skilfully graded their curricula to the mental capacities of the children. A bright boy in an

I94 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Average intelligence

I

of next generation - . I

of children. 98,31

I (42 60)1

40'44tl

Average intelligence
of present generation of children. 99'80

29*55
l(26@79)

Present Generation. _ ___-Next Generation.
Percentages in each category. Present generation thus - 18 Next ,, ,, -(18)

(15;91) 12'76

I
l

(121)
1102

10'15
(8-48)
3'91
(3-47) (2115)
( 5)

40 60 -0:E

80 100 120 140 160 INTELLIGENCE QUOTIENTS.

180

FIG. 4a
CITY POPULATION: ALTERATION OF DISTRIBUTION OF INTELLIGENCE DURING NEXT GENERATION
(Comparison of 1935 io-year-olds with io-year-olds of I96o.) Calculation assuming numerically stable population, stable conditions and continuation of
present differential birth-rate

A class does more abstract studies and enjoys assimilate rather than what the community

mental gymnastics in arithmetic whilst the needs in its citizens? The discrepancy is

duller boy in a C class is dull no longer, for he most striking in the case of the borderline

does more handwork and practical arith- feeble-minded child who is expected by the

metic, acquiring manual skills which give him business man to have all the accomplish-

as much enjoyment as the mental skills do ments usual at school-leaving, but who, in

the A child. The gain in interest and happi- spite of extra attention, can barely read and

ness among the school children of this genera- is completely helpless with the simplest prob-

tion is rightly hailed as the triumph of an lem arithmetic. Imagine this gap yawnmng

education which is child-centred rather than more widely throughout the whole range of

subject-centred.

intelligence levels. Industry demands more

But what happens when the child leaves children with the A-class type of education,

school, if, through the teacher's appreciation but it is going to get more C-class graduates,

of his true capacity, he is taught what he can since the type of child for whom the C-class

IS NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE DECLINING?

Average intelligence of next generation
of children. l.Q.= 90'9

>l ll

Average intelligence of present generation
of children. l.Q.= 93 5

195

53-80 52l70
l

Present Generation. ----Next Generation.
Percentages in each category.
Present generation thus - 18
Next of ,, -(18)

(21 41)
18'57 2'1)

l I 17'65
_Il_ _ (1 5-86)
l L____.....

549

IlI2*71 )

(3 85) 3 03
(191) 0o58

40 60 80 100 120 140 < - INTELLIGENCE QUOTIENTS.

160 180
N

FIG. 4b
COUNTRY POPULATION. ALTERATION OF DISTRIBUTION OF INTELLIGENCE DURING NEXT GENERATION
(io-year-olds in 1936 to io-year-olds in I96I.) Predicted on assumption of numerically stable population, stable conditions and continuation of present
differential birth-rate

curriculum has been modified and designed is relatively high. Training for the profes-

being produced in larger numbers.

sional, administrative and more highly skilled

This brings us to the second realm in which occupations can only be successful on a

these redistributions of I.Q. are undoubtedly foundation of adequate mental capacity. For

going to be felt-that of employment. example, less than IO per cent. of our popula-

Unemployment - persistent unemployment tion, with the present distribution of mental

-has unfortunately been regarded as a capacity, are capable of making anything out

purely economic problem when in fact it is of university education. The proportion of

fundamentally a psychological one. Any complex occupations is therefore limited to

given culture provides a certain ratio of the supply of mental capacity. And since,

skilled to unskilled jobs, and we may suppose, presumably, the employment of a large

though here we enter the field of sociological number of low-grade workers depends, even

speculation, that in a more advanced culture with the best organization, on the presence

the ratio of skilled to less skilled will be of a proportion of higher-grade workers, a

i96 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

C7

z
z

Curve arising from

(3)

LU

0 >|

\

cc
z EARNINGS (REWARDS)

(1) Distribution of
actual 1. Q's,
(2) __-_Distribution of
demand for 1. Q's.
(3) *e0 000 Rate of Rewards arising
from relation of
FB (1) and (2). 1

A

I

C 3~~~~~~~~*0

I

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~04

0

1 *~~~0

FIG
I
I .00.......
4050607080901 0 0/20\1010 10 10101

A. Supply greatly in excess of demand at 75 I.Q.- negligible wage. B. Supply and demand equal-normal wage. C. Demand greatly in excess of supply-disproportionate wage.

deficiency of numbers among the latter will Originally these two curves cannot'have

result in proportional unemployment in the been very different, since a culture which a

lower grades. There is on the one hand a nation builds and the industries which it is

social heritage providing a " curve of capable of founding depend on the capacities

demand" for intelligence at various levels, of its people, but in time maladaption may

and on the other hand a " curve of supply " arise from (i) a slight upward shift in the

determined by the birth-rates at different curve of demand through an increased com-

intelligence levels. Where these curves do plexity of industry and organization, arising

not fit there is likely to be, in addition to a from the work of a few geniuses of science and

dislocation of educational opportunities, a invention; (2) a downward sagging in the

persistent unemployment.

curve of supply of intelligence through

IS NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE DECLINING?

K Average of
City Population

40 6

36.
33 55

-~S~3 5 City (155)

I _ 3___ -_Country (24)

I97

3 ,17

14
2~~~~~

:4 4

40 50 60 70 80 90 10.40 110 120130140 150 160 170

101

-u*-- INTELLIGENCE QUOTIENTS.

-

FIG. 6

INTELLIGENCE DISTRIBUTION OF CHILDREN OF UNEMPLOYED PERSONS

irresponsible reproduction at lower levels In the above graph I have made a rough

having no perception of the needs and stan- estimate of the relation of the two curves

dards of civilization.

to-day, and shown how the curve of earnings,

An indication of the points at which the as a function of the difference of the demand

curves diverge is given in part by wage rates. and supply curves, would actually corre-

The individual is penalized through no fault spond to the distribution of earnings as it

of his own, but simply because in his genera- exists to-day. Considerable research urgently

tion too many people are produced at that needs to be done to determine so important a

particular level of capacity, relative to other matter as the real shape of the curve of

levels and to the curve of demand. The low intelligence demand. The above diagram is

wage is an indication to the parent as a given more to illustrate the principle than to

parent. Thus if there were a severe restriction present an accurate analysis of present values

of reproduction rates in the 70-80 I.Q. range true at all points. An artificial arrest of

the unskilled labourer might earn as much as falling wage-rates would result in unemploy-

a professional man. Obviously the same ment at the point concerned, i.e., at the point

might happen through an alteration in the where supply greatly overshoots demand.

curve of demand, as when an earthquake We should therefore expect unemployment to

destroys buildings over a large area and be greatest in this country in the 70-90 I.Q.

creates work demands at less complex levels range. I have extracted from my material the

in the service of civilization.

I.Q.s of the children of unemployed. They

i98 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

are not very numerous in the two areas of the upon social tone and political organization.

survey, since both are prosperous. Conse- It is evident that one may expect systematic

quently they may be taken to represent, changes in the economics and the ethical

more than in other areas, the consistently values of amusement and recreation, in man-

unemployed.

ners and morals and social interests. A teacher

Clearly they fall in the section anticipated, who deals with many different classes graded

only a small minority being above average according to mental capacity finds, for

intelligence. If these figures were expressed instance, that whereas among children of

as percentages of the fractions of the whole higher I.Q. freedom and rights of self-deter-

population falling in each intelligence cate- mination can be readily granted, in groups of

gory it is obvious that the tendency to be low I.Q. rigid prescriptions are both needed

unemployed (chances of being so) would rise and demanded by the members for their own

regularly and rapidly from an I.Q. of go social happiness and educational advance.

downwards.

Most social reformers have increased freedom

It is difficult to deal adequately in the and individuality as one of their goals. Their

space available with the definition and the reforms have little chance of taking root in a

implications of the notions of Fig. 5. More- community with falling mental capacity, in

over, from the aspect of social ideals, I would which reactionary political forms and more

suggest that fitness for citizenship rather rigid customs have a greater likelihood of

than the narrower conception of fitness for evoking comprehension and emotional sup-

industry, should be taken as the true basis of port.

the curve of intelligence demand. A recog-

nition of that basis would almost certainly Proposals for the Future

lead to a higher curve of demand, for borderline defectives are often employed and ex-
ploited in industry whilst at the same time
the community has to provide welfare workers to look after their social and
domestic affairs. A psychologist naturally turns first to
repercussions in education and industry
because it is in these two fields-through the techniques of the child guidance clinic, vocational guidance and industrial psychologythat most is known about the implications of mental measurement. We see that the present
drift of birth-rates is likely to lower educational standards and to lead to increased

Since the person diagnosing a disease is usually supposed to be in a favourable position to prescribe a cure, I will conclude by
discussing measures calculated to arrest the decline of intelligence. Indiscriminate family allowances such as have been granted on the Continent will certainly not have this desirable result. Nations, like buildings in a crowded city, must grow upwards rather
than outwards, and the spread of low-grade population which these measures encourage is
most likely to lead to that form of delin-
quency which we know as war.
Four positive measures are indicated:

poverty and unemployment. Observations in i. Since the large families of the low in

the same field, such as, e.g. that a large pro- intelligence are practically never desired by

portion of criminal behaviour, especially them, and destroy what meagre standard of

persistent, petty delinquency, is the form of comfort the parents possess, there can be no

expression prevalent among persons in the doubt that the flood of low capacity could be

lower sector of the intelligence distribution, arrested in a generation by adequate birth-

lead us also confidently to expect an increase control facilities being provided for poor as

in juvenile delinquency.*

well as for rich.

Had I space, however, I should be most 2. Increasing the birth-rate of the more

concerned to follow the more subtle effects intelligent presents a more difficult proposi-

tion. Carr-Saunders and others have shown

* See Burt, Cyril, The Young Delinquent;
Healy, The Individual Delinquent.

and

that, even before the days of simple birthcontrol, the economic value of the child has

IS NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE DECLINING?

been a real factor in its production. The able particular study, but eugenists experienced in

child, wherever it occurs, should therefore be assessing the effectiveness of general eugenic

made an economic asset, by generous educa- measures are required to remould them to

tional allowances and scholarships given finally suitable forms.

without regard to the social status of the To the initial question " Is national in-

parent. Intelligence can now be determined telligence declining ? " my answer is emphati-

at so early an age that the assistance would cally in the affirmative. Others may dispute

come soon enough to encourage the parents the exact rate of decline, and as a research

of an intelligent child to provide it with worker I am interested to join in such a

brothers and sisters.

dispute, but as a citizen I regard the point as

3. Since the income-tax paying section of an academic trifling-it is enough that in-

the community is, on the whole, of greater telligence is declining at all in an era when

mental capacity than the non-contributing the country needs all its available intelligence

group, the introduction of greater tax allow- to help pull civilization out of a critical

ances for children (and lesser allowances for position. And it is a scandalous thing that

marriage alone ?) would tend to reinforce the no Government inquiry has yet been made

stream of higher intelligtence. It is unfortu- into so grave a change, the existence of which

nate that eugenics in some aspects needs to has been indicated by indirect evidence for at

be connected with problems of earning least twenty-five years.*

capacity which have become subjects of obstinate political and moral sentiment. Admittedly the adjustment of birth-rate to earning capacity is far from ideal, since among those who have passed the level of

APPENDIX I
SUMMARIZING INVESTIGATIONS ON INNATE AND ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS IN INTELLIGENCE
A. MAINLY ENVIRONMENTAL
I. Effects of Differing Environments and of Definite

simple comfort it frequently happens that the Change of Environment. The evidence of the constancy

further acquisition of wealth is a sign of deficiency of character or even intelligence

of I.Q. for individuals in different environments is too widespread to be gathered here. (Foran lists titles of eighty researches. " The Constancy of the Intelligence

in comparison with personalities turning towards social service. Nevertheless it is the

Quotient." Cath. Univ. Amer. Res. Bull., Nos. 9and Io.) On an average an individual's I.Q. re-tested after a lapse of months or years is four or five points altered

only index we have and it will become a (see Schwesinger, Hereditary and Environment, p. 52),

better one as a society adjusts its rewards more deliberately to the true value of the

but this alterations is just as frequently up as downi.e. for groups, quite small groups, the I.Q. does not change. The individual changes are, therefore, most

services rendered to it.

probably ascribable to experimental error in measure-

4. Beyond material deterrents and encouragements of breeding lies the yet scarcely

ment. Any imperfection of the test will increase the appar-
ent variability of the I.Q. as will clerical errors, illness

touched possibility of linking religious and moral drives to a matter which certainly

and all manner of chance factors. Since the earlier tests on which this degree of constancy of the I.Q. was recorded were far less perfect, it seems legitimate to argue

should have been their concern from the that with improvements of tests and elimination of

beginning. Educators, moreover, have hardly begun to think of creating desirable attitudes

chance effects-i.e., with approach to measurement of the real I.Q.-there would be a corresponding approach
to real constancy. This general tendency to constancy

towards parenthood and the prestige of of I.Q. throughout the population is itself convincing

parenthood, towards interest in children and towards the social implications of the family.

evidence of a big innate factor in I.Q.; for under modern conditions all people have a considerable environment in common, and any one individual is

(They favour, for example, teaching by childless women, whose attitudes and compensa-

subjected to many different environments. Moreover, in schools there is a systematic tendency to leave the bright to mark time while concentrating on coaching

tory values are necessarily contagious.) A

social psychologist is required to work out the possibilities of influencing birth-rates by

* I wish to thank Professor R. A. Fisher, the Directors of Education for Leicester and Devonshire, and the teachers in these areas for generous assistance in

changing social attitudes.

planning and executing this research. For ideas given

I describe these measures as they appear to be demanded by the findings of my

in discussion I am further greatly indebted to Major
Leonard Darwin, Professor Burt, Dr. Blacker, and Dr. Colin Clark.

200 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the backward and prodding the dull-a tendency which, if environment is effective, should lower the I.Q. of the bright and raise that of the dull.
Distinct change of environment, as from an ele-
mentary to secondary school, or bad homes to good
ones, also produces no change. Rogers, Darling and McBride (Nature and Nurture: their Influence upon
Intelligence. 1928) tested and re-tested sixty-four girls
committed to good institutional care from extremely
poor social and educational conditions. They were
compared with a control group of unselected children in a public (elementary) school. There was no difference beforehand and no significant change of I.Q. afterwards in either case. Lawrence, in this country (" An Investigation into the Relation between Intelligence and Inheri-
tance." Brit. Jnl. Psychol. Mon. Suppl., 193I, No. i6), likewise looked for changes in I.Q. in children of drunken, insane or criminal parents, after shorter and longer
periods of institutional residence, but with all the
changes of personality and character there was no
change in the fixed rate of development of mental capacity.
Freeman (Nature and Nurture) studied seventy-four
children in unsatisfactory conditions adopted into private homes. The average I.Q. beforehand was 9I-2
and four years later was 93 * 7, the difference not being
statistically significant. Shepherd Dawson (Brit. Assoc. Report, 1934) tested
a number of children in slums (Glasgow), about half of
whom were soon afterwards sent to improved conditions
in a new housing estate. The I.Q. of the moved group remained constant and did not differ significantly from that of the group remaining in the slums.
2. Studies of the Similarity of the Intelligence of Relatives and the Effect of Environmental Differences (" Same heredity, different environment.") There is a correlation of the intelligence of sibs (brothers and
sisters) of about o.5. Schwesinger (op. cit., p. 232)
summarizes the results of twenty-two researches, all concordant in showing this agreement. The average coefficient of the six most satisfactory researches (eliminating all working with fewer than 500 pairs of sibs or using the Binet test, which is unduly susceptible to environmental influences) is o-458. Such evidence of heredity is not sufficient, since part of the sibs' environment (the hours spent at home) is common. We are indebted to Burks (Nature and Nurture: their Influence upon Intelligence) for an analysis of measurements on siblings reared apart. The correlation was o 44± .-.07, not substantially different from that found in siblings reared together. Freeman (Nature and Nurture) and Hildreth (The resemblance of siblings in intelligence and achievement. T.C. Contrib. Educ., No. I86) found for sibs reared apart respectively correlations of intelligence quotients amounting to o - 49 and o* 34i.e., averaging about the same as for sibs reared together.
The intelligence of twins-of identical twins having the same genetic constitution-is well known to be strikingly similar. Hogben (" The Intellectual Resemblance of Twins," Herrman and Hogben, Proc. Roy. Soc. Edin., 1933) summarizes the results of the four principal researches, which give inter-twin correlations
ofo0 9 2,0 88±o o2,o 92±-oi,ando 86±o04.
These correlations, as also the actual distribution of differences of I.Q. (see Schwesinger, op. cit., 223), are in fact the same as those which are obtained from testing and re-testing the same identical individuals after a lapse of time-i.e. the apparent differences of twins may express experimental error only.
Here again there is an element of common environ-

ment which, if environment affects I.Q., could be
responsible for part of the complete agreement, and no
really adequate research has yet been made on twins reared apart. Schwesinger (op. Cit., 22I) reports ten
cases of pairs of identical twins reared apart and finds
intra-pair differences of I.Q. of 7 * 7 points as compared
with 5 3 for non-separated identical twins. But this was a Stanford-Binet test which might well react to
differences of cultural background and training. The only evidence suggesting an appreciable environ-
mental factor in determining I.Q. is in this field of twin
studies, and it is provided by Herrman and Hogben (op. cit.). The latter, from a comparison of the variability of non-identical and identical twins, concludes it is extremely " unlikely that genetic differences
account for more than one-half the mean difference between offspring of the same parent." To this estimate
of the contribution of environment, differing so much
from all other studies, one may reply: (i) Their finding
that C2=2-4 indicates a greater hereditary element in
individual differences than that admitted in the above statement. (2) The intelligence test used was one obviously susceptible to environmental in-
fluences. (3) It is admittedly difficult to separate identical from non-identical twins. Each pair mis-
takenly classified would reduce the figure for the con-
tribution of genetic factors. (4) The statement that,
within any family, genetic differences do not play the
major role is misleading if applied to intelligence
differences in general; for among the children of one family we should not expect innate differences to be
very great. Perhaps the most extensive and able research into
the evidence regarding hereditary intelligence derived from twin studies is that of Hirsch (Twins: Heredity and Environment, Cambridge, Mass., 1930), which concludes that the average intra-pair difference for identical twins is two points of I.Q. and for nonidentical twelve points. This makes heredity about five times as important as environment in determining intelligence and is in agreement with studies made of sibs and other relatives.
3. Studies of Intelligence Resemblance of Unrelated People Subjected to the same Environment (" Same
environment, differeot heredity "). There are three
adequate researches as to whether children reared in the same institution for a sufficiently long time tend to become more similar in intelligence. Hildreth (op. cit.) measured eighty-four children reared in an orphanage for 50 to ioo per cent. of their lives. The variation was as great as for unrelated children reared apart. Davis (" The Influence of heredity on the mentality of orphan children," Brit. Jnl. Psychol., i9) divided orphan children into groups according to, length of stay, but found no convergence of intelligence compared with an outside group. Lawrence (op. cit.) found similarly.
Another approach is to correlate the intelligences of unrelated children in the same foster-home, to see if the correlation approaches that of real sibs, in which case some of the resemblance of real sibs could be put down to the home environment. Freeman (Nature and Nurture) found a correlation of o * 4o between foster-sibs and sibs, and Burks (op. cit.) one of 0- 20 between the child's intelligence and the intelligence ofthe (mid) fosterparent. Burks concluded that I7 per cent. of intelligence variation can be put down to environmental influence. Burks, Freeman and Jones (op. cit.) think that about seven points of change in I.Q. may result from a marked change in environment. All this fosterhome evidence, however, is vitiated by an effect which

IS NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE DECLINING?

20I

social psychologists have often pointed out-that consciously or unconsciously those who place fosterchildren tend to place the brighter children, from parents of better social position, in better families, and vice versa. When Freeman investigated this pre-
selection effect on placement he found a correlation of 0o34 of pre-adoption I.Q.s with the Home Rating scores of the homes to which the children went, but in spite of this disastrous discovery (the coefficient is practically that found for true parent-child resemblance) he courageously continues " since all of the observed correlation of o-40 could hardly be due to selection," etc. This error, which runs through all foster-home studies, combined with the fact that the results are in Stanford-Binet measurements affectable by cultural influences, justifies us in concluding that there is no convincing evidence derivable from this field of environmental influence on I.Q.
4. Studies on Intelligence in Animals. There is as yet insufficient evidence regarding the existence of " G" or the means of testing mental capacity in animals. But, owing to the readiness with which experiments in controlled breeding can be carried out, an animal population offers the simplest means of demonstrating the large extent to which changes in learning capacity can be influenced by heredity. Tryon (" The Inheritance of Mental Ability," Psychol. Bull., 29, and Schwesinger, op. cit., 334) started with an unselected rat population and bred two " races "-one from the most able in maze-learning, one from the dullest. In seven generations not I per cent. of the rats in the dull group could, with the same training, equal the performance of even the dullest rats in the " bright " strain.
Summary. The most " environmentalistic" interpretation of these results assigns an influence of about seven points of I.Q. (for an average person) to the environment. But what is this to the I70 points range of I.Q. available in the present hereditary gene endowment of mankind ? Actually, this seven points is, to any broad survey of the evidence, a quite excessive allowance. Most of the evidence yet available was gathered with tests devised before the present advances in the theory of intelligence, poor in " G" saturation and weighted with items of learning and information. Typical of this stage in technique is the work of Woolley (" The Validity of Standards of Mental Measurement in Young Childhood," School and Soc., 21), whose results are interpreted to mean that attendance at nursery school increases the child's I.Q.; though the test used, the Merrill Palmer, is full of nursery school attainment items, success in which is almost uncorrelated with " G " !
Having regard to the evidence from all angles I
confidently anticipate that when testing technique is more perfected and stabilized we shall find that the most extreme changes of environment in the community change the I.Q. permanently from its average position by about 3 to 4 points-at the utmost 5 points -and then only when the influence is at work in early years.
B. PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
Although, as far as mental training is concerned, intelligence seems to proceed practically unhindered and unhastened to its own goal of maturation, psychologists have long supposed that physical influences, affecting the general nervous system itself, might influence mental capacity. Thus Professor Terman in I9I3 wrote that " the effect of malnutrition on mental development is probably very great."
It appears, however, that the general public to-day,

like the psychologists before they began investigations, labours under a serious misapprehension, which may dangerously mislead social reform. The facts, which are now well attested, are as follows:
i. Physique and Intellect. There is a small positive correlation of intelligence with height and weight. (Terman, Genetic Studies of Genius; Kempf, Collins and Paterson, Physique and Intellect.) Terman's group of i,ooo highly gifted children were in practically every measurement larger and stronger on an average than the thousand average children. There is also a tendency for the more intelligent to be relatively free from constitutional physical defects and to have a lower incidence of disease (Terman, op. cit., Paterson, op. cit., Spearman, Abilities of Man). The following are the suggested reasons for this connection: (i) Mental defect is sometimes associated with a general constitutional inferiority of which physical defects are another expression. (2) Children of lower intelligence come, on the whole, from parents of low intelligence and consequently are less hygienically and intelligently healtheducated. They may also be undernourished because (a) the father, if very unintelligent, is unlikely to earn much; (b) the mother, if unintelligent, is unlikely to spend well. (3) In social life, through assortative mating and the inbreeding of social classes, there is a tendency for the most diverse desirable qualities to come together in one hereditary " complex," and for the lack of them also to be associated (as in the " social problem group"), though they have no intrinsic biological (gene) connection.
2. Adenoids, Tonsils and I. Q. Dullness has long been popularly and medically associated with diseased adenoids and tonsils. Rogers (A rchives of Psychol., No. 50, I922) studied 530 children. Those with adenoid or tonsil trouble had the same average I.Q. as those without. A group of twenty-eight children operated on showed, a year after the operation, a gain of I.Q. of 2'25 points, but this is not significant, for the group which refused operation gained 3-28 points. Both are chance gains. This result is confirmed by Terman, Lowe, Hoefer and Hardy. Well-being, freedom from mental fatigue, is increased, but not mental capacity.
3. Other Diseases and Glandular Dysfunctions. No disease not attacking the central nervous system is known to diminish I.Q. Spinal meningitis, epidemic encephalitis and arteriosclerosis may produce a fall of I.Q., but not invariably.
The treatment of thyroid, pituitary and pluriglandular defects has failed to produce evidence of any significant change of I.Q. (Paterson, op. cit., p. I9I), except in cretins, and even there the mental improvement is far less spectacular than the physical.
4. Malnutrition. It is unfortunate that medical diagnosis of malnutrition depends largely on comparison of height and weight with standard values; for in a mixed racial population (such as the British) if the physically smaller racial element happened to be the more intelligent, any effect of malnutrition might be quite obscured.
A group of children suffering from severe malnutrition of two or three years' standing was first studied by Blanton in Germany (Mental Hygiene, I9I9, 378) in I9I9, who was surprised to find that " children with parents of average intelligence very rarely become feeble-minded through malnutrition even of an extreme degree." Later studies have dealt with malnutrition rather than starvation, but their methods have been more exact. Hunt, Johnson and Lincoln, Dowd, Nicholls, Stalnaker and Stoke, have each concluded as

202 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

a result of statistically controlled intelligence surveys that " undernourished children, whatever their other handicaps, are no whit inferior mentally to wellnourished children of the same race and social status." In muscular strength, freedom from fatigue, happiness and activity in school, the well nourished are, of course, decidedly favoured. Dowd, for example, found that the fifty-five studied undernourished children improved when properly fed in all respects but I.Q.
Such direct evidence really needs no check, but it is interesting to notice that indirect evidence of a kind is available through a study of birth order I.Q.; for in families on the malnutrition level, since wages do not increase with parental age, the later children would suffer more from malnutrition. Although birth position has many effects on character it has none on I.Q., as several adequate researches have shown, providing, of course, that only families of the same size are included in the calculation.
One must conclude that Nature has designed so many safeguards around the vital central nervous system that few diseases or unfavourable physical conditions can attack it. This view is in accordance with the physiological studies of Scammon (Paterson, op. cit., p. 175), that even in gross malnutrition which retards physical growth the nervous system continues to grow, apparently at the expense of the bodily tissues themselves.
Contrary to our supposition intelligence is affected, if at all, by mental rather than physical influences. Society may lavish attention on physical improvement and training for the perfectly good object of improving energy and well-being, but not under the delusion that the mentality of the race is improved thereby.
For further investigation of these questions the reader is referred to Schwesinger (op. cit.) for a complete summary of evidence regarding mental environment, and to Paterson for a similar summary with respect to physical factors and intelligence.
The upshot of our investigation is that mental capacity may be increased about 3 to 7 points by some mental environments. I think fuller psychological investigation will show that if, by forcing and overstrain, the individual is adjusted constantly to working at the upper limit of his innate mental capacity, it will be at the cost of other aspects of personality, notably, perhaps, at the cost of producing a schizoid mentality and reducing " fluency of association." When those who hope to do all by environment have stretched the I.Q. of all individuals to the limit of, say, three points, they have still to face the fall of inherited I.Q. in each generation and the possibility that another nation may have raised its average thirty points by one generation's breeding.
APPENDIX II
TESTING OF PARENTS AND CHILDREN, AND EVIDENCE OF OTHER RESEARCHES ON INHERITANCE OF INTELLIGENCE
The adults and children in these families were tested with scales 0, I, II and III of my intelligence tests, the scale being chosen to fit the age of the child or the approximate mental age of the adult. This use of adapted tests has the advantage that more accurate measurements were made than if one coarsely graded scale were used to cover the whole range. On the other hand, error may be introduced into the interpretation of the measurements if the standardization of the various scales is not equally sound. However, even should the standardization figures for these scales alter

slightly as more extensive standardization results come
in, the data will still be of value and can be reinterpreted
more accurately at a later date. The correlations and other measures of agreement of
parents and children may not be as high from this
sample as from a purely chance sample; for there is
undue bunching at the upper levels of intelligence, due
to the difficulty we experienced in getting any but pro-
fessional and ex-university parents to submit to an intelligence test. Indeed, we quickly realized why this obviously necessary measurement of parents and chil-
dren had never been carried out in this country before. Most of these parents were tested with Scale III. When
we came to the duller parents, less literate people and
dull children, Scale I was always used, and we are confident that in no instance was an adult tested with
a test demanding greater vocabulary than he possessed. I have shown elsewhere (Brit. Jnl. Psychol., 1934)
reason to believe that intelligence, or at any rate success in intelligence tests, declines in most people after about the age of 35. There are some striking exceptions to this, and the nature and causation of the effect are not at all
clear. From preliminary observations I should be tempted
to generalize that the greater the original intelligence the smaller the age decline and that the larger individual differences are connected with differences in rate of general physical ageing. Since other investigations, however, show the same trend, I have decided to correct the parental scores by some age allowance, even though such allowance must as yet be approximate. The need for such an allowance in the present results is shown by the decidedly higher score of the children in every group.
My own previous results (loc. cit.), which though scanty are the only ones available as yet in this country, indicate the following fall of I.Q. relative to the adolescent level. The results are from one occupation only, clerks:

35 years 45 years 55 years 65 years

3

I6 31

68

I can only believe that the fall is excessive and I have sought a second standard by averaging in three age
groups the parents studied in the present research:

Parents' age in years 40

55

65

Regression on children's

I.Q. s ... ... 8-5 ptS. I2'5 pts. I4'5 pts.

From a consideration of these and the more extensive American results I have adopted the following approx-
imate rate of age coxiection:

Parents' age in
years ... above 30 35 40 45 50 55 6o 65 70 75 I.Q. correction, in
points ... ... nil 2 4 6 8 1I 14 I7 20 24

This has been applied to the raw I.Q. results of the parents with the results shown in the second column.
Other researches concerning Inheritance of I. Q. Evidence regarding the innateness of I.Q. is given in
Appendix I, above. It was thought best to set out the evidence on inheritance as a separate matter, though there is in some points an overlap. Schwesinger summarizes sixteen investigations of parent, child, grandparent and cousin intelligence relationship. Of these only three give the correlation of the mid-parent and the child or mid-child, and one of them is not based on a direct intelligence test. We are left with Jones's inquiry (Nature and Nurture, etc.), using the Stanford-Binet

IS NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE DECLINING?

203

test and finding a correlation of mid-parent and mid-
child of o 693±o-o35 (105 cases) and Outhit (5I cases)
finding 0.77 to o-8o (Arch. Psychol. No. 149). It is
unfortunate that even in these investigations one is dependent on a Stanford-Binet test result-limited in adult range and tainted with educational effects-whilst one inquiry has only 51 cases. For one parent with one child the correlation is, of course, lower, averaging about 0-49.
The three adequate investigations making direct
measures of parents and children, two undertaken in America and our own in this country (ioi cases), thus agree in indicating a correlation of about 0.7-0o8 between mid-parents and mid-children.
The supplementary investigation that is still required-a comparison of parents and children when
they are not brought up together-has never been made directly; though our own results include several instances of children reared apart, instances which do not differ in amount of parent resemblance from the
other cases.
Dr. Lawrence, however, has brought substantial indirect evidence of a convincing nature (see Appendix I). It is well known (see above) that the average intelli-

gence of parents and of children in different social and occupational groups differs significantly. Lawrence correlated social status of parents with intelligence of children, (a) when the children were in their own homes, (b) among children in an orphan institution. In both
cases the correlation was o024. Elsewhere she shows
that the actual differences are not quite so great in the
institutional children, but on hereditary grounds we
should scarcely expect it to be, for, on an average, the professional man whose child has to go into an institu-
tion may not be quite so successful or intelligent as his fellows. From this effect we should not expect the results to scatter quite so much as for typical members
of these same social or occupational groups. The upshot of these investigations is evidently that
whatever the environment, we can predict reasonably well, from the intelligence of the mid-parent, the intenigence of the mid-child, and that the average intelligence of the group of children, even a very small group, closely appDroaches that of their parental group.
ERRATUM.-A slight arithmetical error, detected by the writer too late to permit correction of the blocks, repeats itself in diagrams I to 4. It is quite negligible
and does not affect any of the conclusions.

PUBLICATIONS OF THE ROYAL ANTHROPOLOGICAL INSTITUTE
52 UPPER BEDFORD PLACE, W.C.1

Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute

IN HALF-YEARLY PARTS

FIFTEEN SHILLINGS EACH

Vol. LXVI. I contains among other matter the following:

CONCERNING HUMAN PROGRESS-PRESIDENTLAL ADDRESS H. S. HARRISON, D.Sc.

A CONTRIBUTION TO THE PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY OF THE SWAT AND

HUNZA VALLEYS, based on Records collected by Sir Aurel Stein

G. M. MORANT, D.Sc.

CRANIOLOGY OF IRELAND

G. M. MORANT, D.Sc.

COEFFICIENT OF RACIAL LIKENESS AND THE FUTURE OF CRANIOMETRY R. A. FISHER

A REPORT OF THE ANTHROPOMETRIC SURVEY OF THE ISLE OF MAN
ELWYN DAVIES and H. J. FLEURE

Man
A MONTHLY JOURNAL OF ANTHROPOLOGICAL SCIENCE. Annual Subscription,
LI; monthly numbers, 2s. net.

Eugics Review, Vol. XVmU No. 8.

