J. M. TANNER
Department of Growth and Development, Institute of Child Health, University of London
Galtonian Eugenics and the Study of Growth:

THE RELATION OF BODY SIZE, INTELLIGENCE TEST SCORE, AND SOCIAL CIRCUMSTANCES IN CHILDREN AND ADULTS*

GALTON IN 1904 DEFINED eugenics as "the science which deals with all influences that improve the inborn qualities of a race; also with
those influences that develop them [these inborn qualities] to the utmost advantage".
In this definition "eugenics" has clearly its
older, pre-Batesonian meaning. It refers to the whole span of reproduction and development
and not exclusively to events which precede the formation of the zygote. (The usage still persists in the title of the Journal of Genetic Psychology which deals with development, not genetics in
the modern sense.) Admittedly Galton puts prominently first the phrase about the inborn qualities; "factors developing them" have a place only below the semi-colon. But it seems likely that thisjust reflects Galton's circumstances and time. In the favoured atmosphere of the upper classes of optimistic expansionist Victorian England, the black squalid back-to-backs, the vast orphanages, the men like pit-ponies must have seemed purely transitory, even when they were noticed at all. Galton's gaze was set on the more distant horizon, a horizon we are beginning to approach in the cold neon light of our meritocratic dawn.
But the eugenic horizon, like the real one, always retreats as we approach it. We are far from providing each zygote with the environment which "develops its inborn qualities to the utmost advantage". And we understand better than the biologists of Galton's day the illusory nature of any division between heredity and environment. Zygote and environment interact, develop together. Galton was, perhaps, more aware of this than the generation of geneticists

immediately following him. So in commemorating this very wise, humane and attractive man I want to draw your attention to this interaction by way of an example from my own field of research. I shall describe and try to analyse the way in which mental ability, physical size and social circumstances are related in children and adults. I shall use this example to develop the thesis that it is precisely at the interphase of heredity and environment that positive eugenics may make a significant impact. The positive eugenist's attention, I believe, should be increasingly directed at providing the environmental stimuli most appropriate to evoke and derive from each zygote those potentialities which would best enrich and humanize our present culture.
Let us now turn to my example.
Body Size and Mental Ability
(a) In Children. In 1892 William Townsend Portert (then Professor of Physiology at St. Louis Medical College), organized a survey of
* The Galton Lecture, delivered in London on Ist June 1966.
t Porter (1862-1949) at this time aged thirty, later became a famous figure in American physiology. His work on children caused Henry Bowditch, the first Professor of Physiology at Harvard, and the first serious student of children's growth in America, to call him to Harvard the following year as Assistant Professor of Physiology. He later became Professor of Comparative Physiology at Harvard (1903-28), founder, first editor (1898-1914) and financial sponsor of the American Journal of Physiology and founder of the Harvard Apparatus Company. His long obituaries make no mention of his pioneer work on human growth.

122

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, September 1966, 58, 3.

GALTONIAN EUGENICS AND TH'E STUDY OF GROWTH

the heights and weights and various other measurements of some 33,500 boys and girls in the public schools of St. Louis. The school classes were organized in grades, and a pupil moved up a grade when he had successfully completed the work of the previous grade,

average figures: Porter, a close follower of Galton, who invented percentiles, calculated the 20th and 80th percentiles in higher and lower grades and showed that the whole distribution of
weight of pupils of the higher grade was shifted upward.)

55 Upper
grades

/ Upper 50
,.Lower
, ,Lower grades
45

40 _
40

Girls 82Boys

35
30

25 _

,,

7 8 9 10 I1 12 13 14 15 16 Age, years
FIGURE 1
Weight of boys and girls of above-average grade and below-average grade in schools of St. Louis in 1892. Cross-sectional data. From Porter (1893).

irrespective of his age. (The same system was used in England at that time and the schools were known as Grade Schools: furthermore in England the teachers in the schools were paid according to the number of pupils who passed each grade exam each year!) Porter (1893) found that the pupils in the higher grades were taller and heavier than pupils of the same age in the lower grades. (Not only was this true of the

Figure 1 is redrawn from one of Porter's papers. It shows the weight at each year of age of children who were above-average in grade and children who were below-average. Though in the Figure the difference does not look very impressive, it corresponds to the amount an average child grows in about six months. The data, of course, are cross-sectional. (The figures for height are similar: for example twelve-year-old
123

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

girls in Grade II are 5 cm. shorter than twelve- and physical growth are correlated, or depend

year-olds in Grade V. Ten-year-old boys show upon common causes; not that mental develop-

the same difference between Grades I and IV.) ment depends on physical growth" (Boas, 1895).

Size in children, then, appeared to be linked in Boas was the first man to realize fully that

some way with ability.

children developed at different rates; it was he

Porter was the first to demonstrate this fact, who invented the phrases tempo of growth and

except for two Russians who independently developmental age. Thus naturally he saw the

in the previous year wrote theses describing the relation between ability and size as probably

same phenomenon in Moscow children (Porter caused by differences in rate of development,

very correctly gives them credit in a footnote). some children being advanced both physically

Porter's finding raised incredulous but ill- and mentally and others retarded. If so, then by

documented opposition then as, sometimes, now. adulthood the "retarded" child would have

Porter (1893) thought that physical strength, caught up the "advanced" and there would no

which he equated with size and weight, con- longer be any difference between them either in

ditioned the amount of mental effort that a physique or ability.

child could make, and wrote "precocious After seventy years the controversy still

children are heavier and dull children lighter continues. Only very recently have we made any

than the mean* child of the same age. This substantial progress towards clarifying what,

establishes a basis of precocity and dullness". after all, is an important and practical issue, to

By precocious, however, he did not mean educationists as well as human biologists.

temporarily advanced, but rather the opposite Porter and Boas were writing a decade and more

of dull; we might say bright. He pointed out that before Binet published his work, yet even now

the growth curves of precocious and dull intelligence tests are constructed and usually

followed a parallel course and that the adolescent interpreted entirely on the basis of "bright" and

increase in weight occurred at about the same "dull". They do not distinguish between the

age in the two groups. He thus indirectly inferred advanced child who will end up, early, with

(though I cannot find him committing himself average ability and the bright child who is not

so directly as Boas implies) that these differences advanced and who will end up, at the average

of size and mental ability would persist into age, with high ability. Worse, they fail to pick

adult life.

out the slowly-developing child of potentially

To this conclusion Franz Boas, the greatest high ability. Such a child may fall through the

American anthropologist of his generation and apple-sorting machinery of an age-linked exami-

the foremost pioneer of studies ofhuman growth, nation like the eleven-plus, and as a result may

objected strongly (see Tanner, 1959, p. 82). "I not have the educational opportunity to "develop

should prefer to call the less favourably developed his inborn qualities to the utmost advantage".

grade of children retarded, not dull" he wrote Modern longitudinal studies of intelligence

"and these terms are by no means equivalent, as test scores indicate clearly that differences in

a retarded child may develop and become quite rates of maturing occur in mental ability just as

bright ... furthermore I do not believe that the they do in height and weight. (Bayley, 1956 and

facts found by Dr. Porter establish a basis of see Tanner, 1961, p. 92).

precocity and dullness, but only that precocious Porter's factual observations on the relation of

children are at the same time better developed body size to school grades have been repeatedly

physically.... Dr. Porter has shown that mental confirmed over the years. Boas himself found

that children in Worcester, Mass. who were one

grade ahead were on average bigger by about

* By mean Porter meant median. In this he followed Galton's terminology, in Natural Inheritance, in a way

six months'-worth of height growth than their co-evals a grade below. When psychological

confusing to us nowadays. Our modern mean ( ) testing was introduced and the school system

was referred to as the average. Boas also used this terminology in some of his papers prior to 1900.

reorganized so that promotion was less dependent on passing graded examinations, the

124

GALTONIAN EUGENICS AND THE STUDY OF GROWTH

relevant statistic became the correlation between it represents something more persistent (Porter's

height* and test score, or IQ, at a given age. view).

In 1947 a sample of 6,490 pupils drawn at Longitudinal studies have shown that early-

random from all eleven-year-old Scottish school maturing children-that is children with an

children, gave a correlation of 0 25±0 01 early puberty-do score higher in tests than

between height and score in a Moray House late-maturing children from at least age six (see

group test of attainment (the effect of age Tanner, 1962 p. 211 for references; also Nisbet

differences from 11 0 to 11 9 having been and lllsley, 1963). They are also, of course, taller

allowed for) (Scottish Council, 1953). An since on average children with an early puberty

approximate conversion of the test scores to are advanced throughout all their growing

Terman-Merrill IQs leads to an average increase period, from early infancy. But for a number of

of about 0 67 IQ points for each cm. of height reasons this does not settle the matter. First, the

or roughly 1 points of IQ for each inch. In longitudinal data, as so often, become very poor

1959 and 1960 amongst approximately 4,000 after about age fifteen and for this reason we

ten- and eleven-year-old pupils in London there cannot really be sure what happens at full

was a correlation of 0-23 between height and maturity. Shuttleworth's (1939) data (illustrated

verbal reasoning test score (Moray House Test in Tanner, 1962 p. 212) suffer from a sharp

61 or NFER Test 9B). The correlation does not reduction in numbers at the older ages, due to

look high, but the effects can be very significant causes which very probably introduce bias; the

for individual children. In the ten-year-old same is true of Abernethy's (1936) and Freeman

girls there was a 9-point difference in IQ between and Florey's (1937) data. The National Survey

those whose height was below the 15th percentile of Child Health and Development data show the

and those whose height was above the 75th usual higher scores in early maturers, and

percentile. This is two-thirds of the standard additionally demonstrate that this holds good

deviation of the test score, and in the 11 + exam, even for children matched for occupational

for instance, corresponds to a difference of about category and number of siblings (see below).

15 percentile ranks at the level usually used for At age fifteen the difference has not diminished;

pass or fail.

indeed it is slightly greater, in both boys and

The children of the National Survey of Health girls, than it was in the same children at ages

and Development provide measurements at seven and eleven (Douglas, Ross and Simpson,

ages eight, eleven and fifteen. This Survey consists 1965). Thus it is dubious whether the difference

of a stratified sample of all boys and girls born between early and late maturers disappears in

in the first week of March, 1946; the sample adulthood. And secondly, even if the difference

considered comprised 2,864 children. At each does disappear completely, that still would not

age four pencil-and-paper tests were given; the prove that all the relation of height and score in

heights were taken by school doctors. The childhood was due to co-advancement, only that

correlations between height and the results of some of it was.

these tests were 0 14 at eight years, 0 14 at Most writers on the subject however (including

eleven years and 0-12 at fifteen years (Douglas, at one time myself) have adopted Boas's view

Ross and Simpson, 1965). (Actually height was that the correlation probably represented only

taken at age seven and the first test at age eight, co-advancement and would disappear at maturity.

but the results were adjusted for this.)

This view has important consequences for

None of these data tell us, however, whether education. According to it, early developers are

the correlation represents simply co-advance- at an advantage in tests such as the 11 plus, for

ment in height and in ability and hence will admission to selective education. Furthermore

disappear in adult life, (Boas's view) or whether they obtain an increasing educational advantage

thereafter, simply as a result of passing these

* It is likely that the true relationship is with body tests. Hence they would remain always ahead,

size rather than height, in children and in adults. Weight, however, is a poor measure of size, since it is so affected by fat.

an example ofthe classical self-fulfilling prophesy or positive feed-back. This effect would also

125

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

bias the results of a longitudinal study to maturity, unless allowances could be made for
differences in educational opportunity.
However, we might perhaps have thought twice before adopting this view too wholeheartedly, even though Boas's side in an argument very seldom lost. Nancy Bayley, one of the most profound of all students of the development of mental abilities, in 1956 published correlations between height and intelligence test score at each year of age from eleven to sixteen in a group of about forty children followed longitudinally in Berkeley till age twenty-one. The correlations were high, mostly between 0 30 and 0 50, and showed no tendency to drop between seven and sixteen, in either sex. Furthermore Dr. Bayley developed an absolute score for the intelligence test, so that it was possible to compute for each individual the percentage of his final twenty-one-year-old score attained at each age. Similarly the percentage of mature height attained at each age was calculated. The correlation between these two measures, of mental and physical advancement respectively, turned out, in these admittedly limited data, to be slightly negative. There was no evidence that an early-maturing boy or girl in the height-growth sense was early-maturing in the mental attainment sense. Indeed there was a slight suggestion that children who were slower in physical maturing reached their twenty-one-year-old intelligence sooner. Or, put the other way around, the less able, though slow in maturing physically, nevertheless reached their twenty-one-year-old intelligence relatively early, slowing down in mental attainment as they approached adulthood. (This could wholly or partly be a result of poor teaching associated with the poor social circumstances, which could also lead to slow physical growth.) This study, then, provides some evidence against the coadvancement hypothesis. *
(b) In Adults. However the main argument against co-advancement as the sole cause of the height-ability correlation in children rests on recent data about the same relationship in adults. The older literature,t summarized in Patterson (1930) concerned mainly students. The restricted nature of their intellectual range (in the statistical sampling sense, that is) makes them a poor guide
126

* Perhaps a model will help clarify this slightly

confusing situation.

CHILDHOOD

ADULTHOOD

/ advanced-ht. average ht.

Tall children

C

G

A

\ tall-as-adult

tall

DH j' advanced-test --*average IQ

High-scoring children E

I

B \high test as adults--high IQ

FJ

Tall children may be divided into those who are

advanced and will end up average as adult and those who

are tall and will end up tall, as explained above. We can

classify the high-scoring children similarly. (In practice

no such crude dichotomies can be made of course; the true situation is a continuum.) Our information is that

there is a connection (on average) between A and B.

This must come about either by connection between

C and E, D and F, C and F or D and E. C-E represents

the co-advancement or Boas's hypothesis, D-F the

adult-persistent or Porter hypothesis. We must assume

that C and D, and E and F are independent. We know that

this is very nearly true of C and D; in fact advanced children end up very slightly shorter than others, so there

is very small negative interaction, larger in girls than boys.

About E and F we know nothing, except possibly from

Nancy Bayley's study quoted above. This might incline

us to think E and F could be if anything negatively

interacting too.

What now can we say about these connections? We have to remember, ruefully, that though we can dis-

tinguish C and D in childhood (by bone age and pubertal

age) we cannot as a rule distinguish E and F. We cannot

therefore say anything about the connections except by

reference to the situation at adulthood, in the right-hand

column. The adult correlations indicate that on average

tall adults have high test scores. Thus H is connected

with J. This then is evidence that D, the generator of H, is

connected with F, the generator of J, since we know

C and H are practically independent and we suppose that

E and J are likewise. Hence we have, of course, the

connection D-B.

The evidence for the C-E or co-advancement connection

is, on the whole, less good. In most data the connection

C-B exists, though whether it is more or less important

than D-B is not clear. In the National Child Health

Survey data D-B was probably more important, since

the height-ability correlation was scarcely at all lowered

by allowing for different stages of puberty, that is eliminating the effect of C (Douglas, Ross and Simpson,

1965). But assuming C-B to exist, our problem is whether

this is via C-E, C-F, or both. The evidence on C-F is

conflicting. Early maturers may perhaps have persistent

high test scores when they are adult. If so, then the

connection C-E need not necessarily exist at all. Nancy

Bayley's data suggest directly that C and E are indepen-

dent or slightly negatively related and carry the consequence that in her small series the connection C-F

does exist.

t Galton's views on this subject were characteristically vigorous. In Hereditary Genius (1869) he wrote "I do

not deny that many men of extraordinary mental gifts

have had wretched constitutions, but deny them to be an

essential or even the usual accompaniment. . . . A

collection of living magnates in various branches of

intellectual achievement is always a feast to my eyes; being as they are, such massive, vigorous, capable-

looking animals".

GALTONIAN EUGENICS AND THE STUDY OF GROWTH

to the population as a whole. There is certainly
a- difference in height between individuals belonging to different socio-economic groups, and there is also a similar difference in intelligence
test scores. Thus one might expect to find a
positive correlation between height and test score in the population at large. This seems indeed to be the case. Husen (1951) reported a
figure of 0-22 for 2,250 Swedish conscripts;
Schreider (1956) 0 29 for 566 French conscripts and a similar figure for industrial workers;
Scott, Illsley and Thomson (1956) 0-24 for a random sample of Aberdeen women pregnant
for the first time (Wechsler test); Udjus (1964) 016 for twenty-year-old Norwegian conscripts.
These figures undoubtedly reflect to a large
extent the association between occupation, or socio-economic class, and both height and
intelligence (Udjus, 1964; Schreider, 1964). But even within a given occupational group the relation persists to a significant degree. In Udjus's
data high school graduates averaged 179-7 cm. in height, compared with a general mean of 177 5 cm. Nearly all were in the top three out of the nine ranks given by the intelligence tests. But those in the top two ranks of the test were
still about 2 cm. taller than those in the third and lower divisions. (Indeed the regression within this educational group was no different from the general regression though its members contributed only about 50 per cent of the top two divisions and 17 per cent of the third one.) When the Aberdeen women are classified by husband's occupation, the height-ability correlation disappears in Registrar General's Groups I +11; but it persists significantly in the less well-off occupational groups, being 0-16 in Group III, and 0-25 in Groups IV +V.
We can fairly confidently assert, then, that there is currently a small but significant tendency for taller adults in the population to score higher in some intelligence tests than short adults of the same sex, even within certain, if not all, crude occupational categories, such as "unskilled and semi-skilled workers".
It is at this point necessary to dispose of an objection sometimes raised by tall men on behalf of their shorter, and admittedly brighter friends. Hard cases make bad law, and soft friends make worse statistics. Just because on average large

boys do well in school it does not follow that every large boy is a paragon of educational virtue. On the contrary schoolteachers frequently query the statistical relationship because they have had the experience of a large, unintellectual uninhibited boy who remains obstinately in the memory when the visions of more tractable pupils have long faded. Similarly with adults: the correlation is far too low, of course, for it to indicate anything as applied to individuals. Perhaps the best analogy is with accident statistics. No-one can tell if he personally will be killed driving on the road next week; yet the total number of people who will be killed in this period can be rather accurately predicted. Equally the correlation we are discussing, like road deaths, tells us something of sociological but nothing of individual importance. It is a sociological symptom calling for diagnosis and perhaps treatment.
We may sum up the situation to date by saying that probably in most data both the Boas and Porter links between height and ability exist; both the co-advancement link and thE adultpersistent link. Their relative importance probably varies according to circumstances. We have now to clarify these circumstances and at the same time to consider how each of the links is brought about.
The Number of Children in the Family
One factor that is clearly associated with the height-ability relationship in childhood is the number of children in the family. In all surveys reported, children are taller if they have few sibs* and shorter if they have many. This is illustrated for data from the London County Council (Scott, 1962, Table 1) in Figure 2. The data are also quite consistent on the subject of intelligence test results; here again children with fewer sibs score higher, as shown in Figure 3 (LCC data, Scott, 1962, Table 1: the test was Moray House Test 61, standardized to a mean of 100 and SD 15).
Hence all or part of the childhood correlation between height and ability might be associated
* By "sibs" most surveys in fact mean children living in the same household, whether or not they are brothers and sisters.
127

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

with differences in number of sibs. In fact in the LCC data about half of the correlation is so associated and half is not. Figure 4 shows the regression in families with one, two, three, four and more children (Scott, 1962, Table 4).
146

.L.C.C.145 GGiirrllss~

Age 11 25

144-
E\
143\

Boys

"
"

at eleven and 1-3 cm. at fifteen, suggesting that by full maturity the association might have disappeared. But for boys the figures were 1[6, 2-5 cm. and 2 3 cm. (Douglas and Simpson, 1964).
Udjus's Norwegian data show that at age nineteen men with no sibs or one sib averaged 178-0 cm. tall, those with two or three sibs 177-7 cm. and those with four or five sibs 176 9 cm. The regression is therefore small. Further, a follow-up study showed that on average the conscripts grew about a further 08 cm. to maturity; hence it could well be that the many-sibbed conscripts were a little delayed and caught up the 1-1 cm. deficit in the ensuing
104 _

I
142 -

\ .A Age 1125

102 - -

L.C.C.

Girls

141- 100 .

1 2 34
Total children in family

54

2~
0)) 98_\

Boys

;

FIGURE 2
The relation of height and number of children in the family in boys and girls aged 1IO to 1 I. London County Council 1959. (From Scott, 1962, Table 1.)
Figure 5 shows the regression of height on test score in families of one or two children only. (Scott, 1962, Table 3). The average correlation in these data is 017, in comparison with the correlation of 0-23 in all children irrespective of sib number.
The association with number of sibs certainly seems unlikely to spring from factors present in the zygote. Probably it reflects differences in nutrition affecting height, and differences either in nutrition or, more likely, in parental attention affecting attainment. The height relationship is established probably by 41 (Douglas and Blomfield, 1958), and certainly by six (Grant, 1964). The National Survey of Child Health and Development data show a difference of height between girls with no sibs and girls with three or more amounting to 3-6 cm. at seven, 3-2 cm.
128

> 96_
94

'

1 2 34
Total children in family

5

FIGURE 3
The relation between verbal reasoning test score and number of children in the family in boys and girls aged
1O to 1 J. London County Council 1959. (From Scott,
1962, Table 1.)

years. In twenty-year-old French army recruits in 1946-48 there was still a difference of 2 cm. in height between those from families of one or two children and those from families of five or more (Tremolieres and Boulanger, 1960). But at this time probably full adult height was not reached by age twenty, owing to the years of
war.

GALTONIAN EUGENICS AND THE STUDY OF GROWTH

The intelligence test score relations with number of sibs are established by age eight (Douglas and Simpson, 1964; Douglas, 1964) and probably persist into adult life (Vernon, 1951).
110

108 _ /1 106

3- C

.2 E

104-
~102
(0
a~100

*

>9/
96 94

Girls L.C.C.
Age 1025

130-0 132-5 137-5 142-5 )145-0
Height, cm
FIGURE 4 Regression of verbal reasoning test score on height for children in 1-child, 2-child etc. families. London County Council 1959. (From Scott, 1962, Table 4.)

increasing numbers of children were the farmers and agricultural labourers (Scottish Research Council 1953, Tables 32 and 33).
Ministry of Food Statistics show that families in the UK spend less per head on food as the number of children in them increases. Recently Abel-Smith and Townsend (1965) have produced data which challenge the widely held notion that in the UK poverty, and particularly poverty in children, is a thing of the past. Defining "poverty" as the level of living of National Assistance Board applicants, they showed that one-third of all the poor were children. As many as 25 per cent of households with four children or more were poor, 10 per cent of households with three children and only 6 or 7 per cent of households with one or two children. Thus there is ample reason for supposing that a substantial number of children in large families in the poorer classes are not adequately fed. Children in these circumstances also have a higher incidence of childhood disease such as bronchitis, though whether this causes a retardation of growth is in dispute (for discussion see Tanner, 1962, p. 130).
148

All in all, it seems likely that the sib-number
effect is concerned chiefly or entirely with the co-advancement link of height and ability and not with the adult-persistent link. If the effect is
purely environmental in origin, as we suppose,
then it ought to be less in the well-off than in the
poor. This appears to be the case. The children of the upper middle class families in the National
Survey of Child Health and Development showed no relation at all between height and number of sibs, either at seven, eleven or fifteen. In girls the regression was present to much the same degree in lower middle, upper manual and lower manual groups, but in boys it became progressively greater as parent's social class declined. In the same data the regression of intelligence test score on sib number in the upper middle classes is about half the amount that it is
in the other three groups, between which there is again little difference. This is at ages eight and eleven (Douglas, 1964). In the Scottish elevenyear-olds it is striking that the only occupational group besides the professional-managerial not to show a decline of height and weight with

146 E

.-
-

144 Girls,'
_ -z /-
142 Boys

-
Age ti-25 L.C.C. Families of 1-2 children only

80 90 100 110 120 130
V R. test score
FIGURE 5
Regression of height on verbal reasoning test score in boys and girls of 1-child or 2-child families only. London County Council 1959. (From Scott, 1962, Table 3.)
The under-nutrition and possibly the disease may well account for retardation of growth in height, and even, perhaps, for smallness at maturity.

129

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

But whether sub-optimal feeding can have any early childhood. In the five West European

effect on either the rate of development of mental longitudinal studies co-ordinated by the Inter-

ability or on the level of mature ability is really national Children's Centre (at London, Paris,

quite unknown. Opinion has for many years Brussels, Zurich and Stockholm) children in the

been quite against any such notion, except better-off classes were already a little longer at

perhaps in cases of extreme starvation in early age one, (though not at one month), and by age

infancy. However, opinion is a poor guide and five the difference in height between those in the

controlled observations are lacking.

top two and those in the bottom two out of

To summarize then: according to present five classes amounted on average to some 3 cm.

data, children with many sibs in the house are in boys and 1l cm. in girls (Graffar and Corbier,

retarded in their height growth from an early age 1966; Graffar, Asiel and Emery-Hauzeur 1961).*

compared with children of the same social class In the 1947 Scottish eleven-year-old boys this

with few sibs. This is especially true of children in difference rises to about 6 cm.; it is independent,

poorly-off families. They also score lower in or nearly so, of the number of sibs. Not all of it

tests of intelligence or attainment. By the time persists into maturity; some is due to advance-

adulthood is reached they have caught up, or ment in height growth in the better-off classes.

very nearly caught up in height; they have not But some part does persist (for reference see

caught up in intelligence tests (Vernon, 1951) Tanner, 1962, pp. 139, 140). Udjus's nineteen-

but this may be the result only of the vicious year-old conscripts, for example, show a differ-

circle in educational opportunity described ence of about 3 cm. between sons of fishermen,

above. The sib number effect on height seems to farmworkers and unskilled labourers on the one

be due to sub-optimal nutrition. The effect on hand and sons of white-collar executives on the

intelligence in childhood may be a direct con- other. This difference is clearly too great to be

sequence of the retardation of physical growth eliminated by growth after nineteen.

rate, factors underlying mental development The same difference arises and persists in

being perhaps to a small extent linked with rate intelligence test scores. In the International

of development of body size; or it may be simply Children's Centre Studies, Terman-Merrill IQ's

due to the influence ofparental contact, this being at three and five already showed a marked

less in many-sibbed families. The sib number differential (Graffar and Corbier, 1966). At age

effect explains to some extent that part of the seven clear differences in reading and arithmetic

height-ability relationship present in childhood attainment tests are present in the children of the

and due to co-advancement, but it does not National Child Development Study 1958 Cohort

explain that part which persists into adulthood. (whose yet unpublished data are quoted by kind

permission of Professor N. Butler and Dr. M.

Occupational or Socio-economic Class

Kellmer-Pringle, Co-directors, and Mr. H. Goldstein, of my department, statistician to the

To explain this we must examine the associ- study). They are also present at this age in the

ation of height and intelligence test score with Aberdeen children (Illsley, 1966).

occupational, or socio-economic class. (We

have never to forget, in this section, that
occupational groups are enormously heterogeneous in terms of income and of social
behaviour, which is what chiefly matters. Occupational classifications really need supple-

Social Stratification and the Steady State
A good deal of the adult-persistent correlation between height and ability is associated, then, with differences in social class. We now have to

menting with assessments of maternal efficiency, child-centredness and sociological affiliations, but these are not available for large-scale data.)
Here we have a different situation from sib
number, for occupational class differences clearly persist into adult life. They begin in

* Numerous studies, including the Perinatal Mortality Survey, have shown small differences in birth weight between classes to exist. But in the International Children's Centre studies the weight differential at one month was insignificantly small. In most data there is a significant correlation between birth weight and later (e.g. age seven) IQ (Illsley, 1966)

130

GALTONIAN EUGENICS AND THE STUDY OF GROWTH

consider two further curious facts. (1) People the job before marriage the taller women marry

who migrate from one part of the country to husbands with more skilled jobs and the shorter

another as children or as young adults are taller, women husbands with less skilled jobs. At each

and score higher in tests of mental ability than choice-point, so to speak, the tall rise in the

the stay-at-homes. (2) Women who migrate social scale and the short sink. The effect is best

upwards in social class on marriage are taller, shown in the daughters of skilled manual workers

as well as brighter (and perhaps prettier too?) (Figure 6). Of these 23 per cent were below

than those who do not.

5 ft. 1 in. in height. Of those who before marriage

Concerning the first of these facts the major took unskilled jobs 28 per cent were under

reports are those of Martin (1949), and Vernon 5 ft. 1 in. contrasted with only 17 per cent of

(1951); (see also Lee, 1957 and Scottish Council, those who took non-manual jobs. Some of these

1953). Martin showed an average difference of girls in non-manual jobs married men in similar

0-8 cm. between soldiers who on call-up in jobs, and others married skilled manual workers.

1939 resided outside their county of birth and Of the former only 10 per cent were under 5 ft.

those who still resided in it. Vernon showed a 1 in. in height; of the latter 19 per cent.

corresponding difference of about three points It is a pity of course that it was not possible

in intelligence test score. People who move away to measure and test the sisters of these women,

from their place of birth are evidently taller and to see what happened to taller or shorter women

more intelligent, on average.

brought up in the same family surroundings.

A greater proportion of the height differences

10 -.Ee-man. between sisters is genetically controlled than

differences between women in different families,

naturally. Thus if the taller sib rose socially

more than the shorter one, we could more

Lr) clearly infer, at least in the absence of prenatal

.c 25 -t 20/
.C 25
CA

_=

< SI.~~~~~~~*k

--k

differences, that this was due to something associated with the inherited element in height, if not to simple height itself.*
Recently Schreider (1964) in an excellent discussion of the whole problem, has tabulated the results of the country-wide Perinatat

30

Occupat io

-U'Sl.

before

Husbands

afringe

eocupatiom

Aberdeen primiparae born to skilled manual workers

Mortality Survey (Butler and Bonham, 1963) to show the same thing. Figure 7 shows the percentage of women 5 ft. 5 in. and over in height according to the occupations both of

FIG URE 6

father and husband. Height increases as hus-

Percentage of daughters of skilled manual workers band's occupation is more skilled. Furthermore

under 5 ft. 1 in. tall taking non-manual and manual jobs, this occurs in women of all social origins,

and marrying men in non-manual, skilled manual and unskilled manual occupations. (Redrawn from Thomson, 1959.)

judged by father's occupation. Thirty-one per cent of women coming from unskilled labouring

Concerning the second fact the classical demonstration is that of Baird and his associates in Aberdeen (Scott, Illsley and Thomson, 1956; Thomson, 1959). In 1950-57 they measured the height of some seven and a half thousand women pregnant for the first time and showed that whatever the occupation of the father, the taller women take before marriage a more skilled job and the shorter a less skilled job; and whatever

* Recently this approach has been used by Laycock
and Caylor (1964) in relation to the height-ability relation in children. They studied children of IQs 120 or over who had an older or younger sib with an IQ at least 20 points less. The gifted sibs were bigger in all five body measurements taken, but the differences were insignificantly different from zero. The average height difference was the equivalent of about 0 5 cm. for instance. Some objections can be raised to the details of this study-for example the sibs should ideally be measured each at the same agebut it does support the notion that much of the heightability correlation is due to factors operating between, rather than within, families.

131

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

homes (throughout the whole country) who married professional husbands were 5 ft. 5 in. or over in height. Only 24 per cent who married in their class or origin were this height. On the other hand, of the women born into professional homes who married semi-skilled or unskilled labourers only 32 per cent were 5 ft. 5 in. or over compared with 46 per cent of those who married in their class of origin.
50 British women, perinatal mortality survey

45 .0 40 _ / '.-i

co 35
(03
00 30

LA.

25

U.skilled

Skilledi

0"|180.8"1

U1pr

middle

m"idde

Husband's occupation
FIGURE 7 Percentage of British women 5 ft. 5 in. and over in height according to occupations of father and husband.
Data of Perinatal Mortality Survey (Butler and Bonham 1963) tabulated by Schreider (1964).

The same process is reflected in the data on the
weights offourteen-year-old school boys reported
by Berry and Cowin (1954). There were consistent weight differences associated with parents' social class amongst boys in grammar schools and amongst boys in secondary modern schools in the same town. But still larger differences
existed between grammar and secondary modern school boys whose fathers had the same type of occupation. The process of social selection had
apparently begun. Similarly Parnell (1954)
showed that Oxford University students from state schools were not only considerably taller than the average ofyoung men from such schools, but actually a little taller even than the private school ex-pupils who failed to get to University.
One must evidently think of social migration or selection acting for body size as it does for

intelligence. Gibson and Young (1965) quote
data showing that some 30 per cent of persons
per generation now move from one broad division of class into another and that it is the less intelligent who move down and the more
intelligent who move up. Evidently the same is
true of height. We have a steady state in the population such that the mean height rises only very slightly at present from one generation to
another, while the persons contributing to that
mean reassort themselves so that a social class gradient is always maintained.
There are probably other examples of such a steady-state process in social selection. Some years ago Morris and Heady (1955), Morris (1959) pointed out that though since 1911 infant mortality had greatly decreased in all social classes, the gap between the classes had, surprisingly, not narrowed. At the same time, while the overall incidence of various adult diseases had risen or fallen, their social class affinities had not changed at all.
It is easy to understand why people who are clever tend to rise in the social scale, but much harder to see why tall people do so. Surely tallness of itself carries no social cachet. It is true that the perinatal mortality in tall mothers is less than that in short ones, even of the same social class (Illsley, 1966), so that there is selection at birth acting in favour of the tall. The effect may well be balanced by an excess of tall women who do not produce children; in any case it would only influence the general level of height in the next generation and not the ability of a given tall child to rise in the social scale.
It seems likely in fact that tall people rise because they are marginally better at certain mental tasks. Schreider (1964) puts this accurately when he stresses that the height correlation is probably with certain aptitudes only, not with some measure of global intelligence. The Aberdeen women showed a higher correlation between height and Wechsler score than between height and the score on the Progressive Matrices, (Scott, Illsley and Thomson, 1956) perhaps because the Wechsler is more verbal. In the National Child Development Survey 1958 Cohort preliminary results suggest that there is a significant relation at age seven between height

132

GALTONIAN EUGENICS AND THE STUDY OF GROWTH

and reading ability, independently of sex, sib On the other side, there are plenty of persons-

number and social class; but none at all between academics especially-who, born into squalor

height and skill at arithmetic.

and penury, yet emerged not only with out-

All this may be interesting, but still leaves us standing minds but outstanding physiques aswel..

in the dark about whether the tall bright upward- These two examples lie at the end of the

moving children are this way chiefly because of spectrum of genetic/environmental interaction.

excellence of antenatal and postnatal care, and As humanists and eugenists we can perhaps do

of intelligent and responsible feeding and little to help the first extreme, and need only

upbringing, or chiefly because they inherited a admire the second. But the vast majority of

gene complex which was predisposed towards persons lie between the extremes. For genetic

developing in this direction.

reasons alone, numerous children would be a

We have no formal estimate of the proportions little smaller and a little less bright than average,

to which heredity and environmental factors are but from conception onwards the environment

concerned. There is the curious fact that in all may also be hostile to physical and mental

countries students are the tallest group in the growth and thus even their genetic potentialities

population (Parnell, 1954) and mental defectives fail to be realized. Heredity and environment

are the shortest (Mosier, Grossman and Ding- interact positively in a vicious circle. It is

man, 1965). Amongst the latter the degree of these children, and even more the genetically

shortness and the degree of mental defect are gifted child born into similar surroundings,

correlated. This does seem to argue that on whom we can help, by locating the areas and

average lack of complexity of brain is linked with families concerned. Once located, these children

lack of skeletal growth. (Perhaps it is significant should be given nutritional and educational

that in Figure 4 above, there may be indications opportunities sufficient to offset their home

of a threshold for test score above a height of environment. This is, of course, the philosophy

137-5 cm. in families with few children. The behind the maternity services, the school meals

relationship may be chiefly that a significant service and that part of the nursery school

number of small children are low in ability.) We movement which particularly concerns itself with

are totally unable to say whether such a link socially deprived children. In its latest and per-

reflects genetic factors or minimal brain damage haps most practical form this approach is

during intra-uterine development. Certainly manifested in a proposal to designate certain

what Sir Alan Moncrieff has recently called areas as educational priority areas and to give

"Antenatal paediatrics" may have great impor- these areas better teacher-pupil ratios and more

tance in this field. In principle intra-uterine nursery schools.

damage could provide a phenocopy of any Finally, I want to develop the thought that

genetic predisposition; but to what extent the such action may be genetically advantageous as

small, not very bright and socially-sinking well as socially imperative. Development con-

persons in the community represent phenocopies sists of an intricate sequence of interactions

and to what extent the workings out of gene some between one part of the animal and

complexes we cannot yet tell. We are ignorant another part, others between the animal and its

too, to what extent bad maternal care in the environment. Some sequences are critical so that

early years can irrevocably fix the constitution animals may only develop properly if the

of the infant.

environment can be relied on to provide the right

We can, I think, say that some of the effect stimulus at the right time. In this sense, animals

must be genetic. Consider those small unintel- are born into "expected", indeed into "required"

ligent women who fall from grace to marry two environments. A duckling will follow the first

social classes below: they cannot all be daughters large object seen at a certain time after hatching.

of drunken eccentric academics whose homes This is usually the mother; if it happens to be

are in squalor and whose wives are incompetent. Professor Konrad Lorenz the duckling follows

Many must have received excellent childhood him and remains pathologically attached to

care, but were unable to benefit fully from it. humans for the remainder of its life.

ER-K

133

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

We do not yet know to what extent such size and scores in various tests of ability and

critical periods occur in the development of attainment, such that larger children score more

children. At least cuddling and optical stimula- highly than smaller children of the same age.

tion are probably essential in early infancy for Though the correlation between height and

proper development to occur. And it needs little test score is only 0 15 to 0 25 the chance of a

extension of this notion to lead to the whole of large child passing an exam such as the 11 + is

the modern concept of education. Clearly as substantially greater than that of a small child.

eugenists we have the duty to seek to improve 2. This correlation diminishes when maturity

not only the gene complex, but also the quality is reached but does not disappear entirely. In

and reliability of this interaction. But can we samples of young adults representing the whole

go further, and assert that improving this population correlations of up to 0-2 remain.

interaction will result in an actual improvement Thus the height-ability relation in children is

in the gene pool, through the mechanism of partly due to co-advancement in both physical

assimilation so elegantly described by Wad- and mental growth, but it is also partly adult-

dington?

persistent.

I think perhaps we may. Consider a desirable 3. The greater the number of children in the

quality (such as the capacity to do differential family the lower their height and the less their

equations) which though based on certain scores in mental tests. This effect is probably

genetic foundations becomes developed only if entirely due to co-advancement and disappears

certain optimal stimulation is provided by the when maturity is reached. It is greater in poor

environment. The genetic bases may be present families than in rich ones.

in only a few persons; when the stimulation is 4. There are also differences in height and

not provided the result is nil. But when the mental ability between children in different

stimulation becomes frequent-that is, when socio-economic groups and these persist to a

modern mathematical notation is invented and large degree into adulthood.

taught-then the quality becomes apparent in 5. On average taller women tend to rise in the

a number of people. Classically, in animal social scale, both in getting jobs and in marriage;

genetics, the quality must then confer a selective and shorter women, on average, tend to sink.

advantage; if so, then its basis will be gradually This is probably due to height being related to

assimilated into the gene complexes of a large ability. The social structure represents a steady

number of the species.

state in which socio-economic group differences

This can only occur when the more gifted remain while individuals change from one group

members of the community leave more viable to another.

offspring than the less gifted; but my point about 6. We do not know in what proportions

interaction refers, 1 believe, to the definition and heredity and environment contribute to these

ascertainment of the gifted. Positive eugenics effects. Minimal intra-uterine damage may well

is most effective against a background of the be important. It is argued that positive eugenics

optimal environment, for only in the optimal should pay increasing attention to the interphase

environment can ascertainment be complete. between heredity and environment, that is to

We all, I think, are searching for some effective those factors necessary to evoke and derive the

way to contribute to the improvement of human full potentialities from the zygote. More

quality, to become positive eugenists as well as efficiency in doing this might also result in

merely negative ones. The study of genetic- changes for the better in the gene pool, by a

environmental interaction may provide one of process of assimilation.

the means by which we can realize this aim.

Acknowledgement

I am most grateful to Dr. Cedric Carter and Mr.

Summary

Harvey Goldstein, who read the manuscript, made

1. Amongst children of school age there is a

most valuable suggestions and drew my attention to several points and papers with which I was

significant though low correlation between body unfamiliar.

134

GALTONIAN EUGENICS AND THE STUDY OF GROWTH

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Abel-Smith, B., and Townsend, P. 1965. The Poor and the Poorest. London, Bell.
Abernethy, E. M. 1936. Relationships between mental and physical growth. Monogr. Soc. Res. Child Develpm. 1, No. 7.
Bayley, N. 1956. Individual patterns of development. Child Develpm. 27, 45-74.
Berry, W. T. C., and Cowin, P. J. 1954. Conditions associated with the growth of boys, 1950-51. Brit. med. J. i, 847-51.
Boas, F. 1895. On Dr. William Townsend Porter's investigation of the growth of the school-children of St. Louis. Science N.S. 1, 225-30.
Butler, N. R., and Bonham, D. G. 1963. Perinatal Mortality. Edinburgh, Livingstone.
Douglas, J. W. B. 1964. The Home and the School. London, MacGibbon and Kee.
Douglas, J. W. B., and Blomfield, J. M. 1958. Children under Five. London, Allen and Unwin.
Douglas, J. W. B., Ross, J. M., and Simpson, H. R. 1965. The relation between height and measured educational ability in school children of the same social class, family size and stage of sexual development. Hum. Biol. 37, 178-86.
Douglas, J. W. B., and Simpson, H. R. 1964. Height in relation to puberty, family size and social class. Millbank Mem. Fd. Quart. 42, 20-35.
Gibson, J., and Young, M. 1965. Social mobility and fertility. In Biological Aspects of Social Problems. Ed. J. E. Meade and A. S. Parkes. Edinburgh, Oliver and Boyd.
Graffar, M., and Corbier, J. 1966. Contribution a l'etude de l'influence socio-economique sur la croissance et le d6veloppement de l'enfant. Courrier, 16, 1-25.
Graffar, M., Asiel, M., and Emery-Hauzeur, J. 1961. La taille et le perimetre cephalique pendant la premiere annee de la vie. Acta paediat. belg. 15, 61-74.
Grant, M. W. 1964. Rate of growth in relation to birth rank and family size. Brit. J. prev. soc. Med. 18, 35-42.
Husen, T. 1951. Undersokninger rorande sambanden mellan somatiske for hallanden och intellektuell prestations f6rmaga. Militar. Hdlsovdnd, 76, 41-74.
Illsley, R. 1966. Early prediction of perinatal risk. Proc. roy. Soc. Med. 59, 181-84.
Laycock, F., and Caylor, J. S. 1964. Physiques of gifted children and their less gifted siblings. Child Develpm. 35, 63-74.
Lee, J. A. H. 1957. Regional variations in intellectual ability in Britain; a discussion of their importance and of the possible effects of selective migration. Eugen. Rev. 49, 19-24.
Martin, W. J. 1949. The Physique of Young Adult Males. Med. Res. Council Memo. No. 20. London, HMSO.
Morris, J. 1959. Health and social class. Lancet, i, 303-5.

Morris, J., and Heady, J. A. 1955. Social and biological factors in infant mortality. V. mortality in relation to father's occupation. Lancet, i, 554-60.
Mosier, H. D., Grossman, H. J., and Dingman, H. F. 1965. Physical growth in mental defectives. A study in an institutionalized population. Paediatrics, 36, 465-579.
Nisbet, J. D., and Illsley, R. I. 1963. The influence of early puberty on test performance at age eleven. Brit. J. educ. Psychol. 33, 169-76.
Parnell, R. W. 1954. The physique of Oxford undergraduates. J. Hyg. 52, 369-78.
Paterson, D. G. 1930. Physique and Intellect. New York, Century.
Porter, W. T. 1893. The physical basis of precocity and dullness. Trans. Acad. Sci. St. Louis, 6, 161-81.
Schreider, E. 1956. Taille et capacites mentales. Biotypologie, 17, 21-37.
Schreider, E. 1964. Recherches sur la stratification sociale des caracteres biologiques. Biotypologie, 26, 105-35.
Scott, E. M., Illsley, I. P., and Thomson, A. M. 1956. A psychological investigation of primigravidae. II. Maternal social class, age, physique and intelligence. J. Obstet. Gynaec. Brit. Emp. 63, 33843.
Scott, J. A. 1961. Report on the Heights and Weights of School Pupils in the County of London in 1959. London County Council.
Scott, J. A. 1962. Intelligence, physique and family size. Brit. J. prev. soc. Med. 16, 165-73.
Scottish Council for Research in Education. 1953. Social Implications ofthe 1947 Scottish MentalSurvey. London, University Press.
Shuttleworth, F. K. 1939. The physical and mental growth of girls and boys age six to nineteen. Monogr. Soc. Res. Child. Develpm. 4, No. 3.
Tanner, J. M. 1959. Boas' contributions to knowledge of human growth and form. In The Anthropology of Franz Boas: essays on the centennial of his birth. Ed. W. Goldschmidt. Mem. Amer. Anthropol. Assoc. No. 89. (Amer. Anthropol. 61).
Tanner, J. M. 1961. Education and Physical Growth. Implications of the study of children's growth for educational theory and practice. London, University Press.
Tanner, J. M. 1962. Growth at Adolescence. 2nd edition. Oxford, Blackwell.
Tremolieres, J., and Boulanger, J. J. 1950. Contribution a l'etude du phenomene de croissance et de stature en France de 1940 A 1948. Rec. Trav. Inst. nat. Hyg. 4, 117-212.
Udjus, L. G. 1964. Anthropometrical changes in Norwegian men in the twentieth century. Oslo, Universitatsforlaget.
Vernon, P. E. 1951. Recent Investigations of Intelligence and its measurements. Eugen. Rev. 43, 125-37.

135

