REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS.

243

vidually acquired structural modifications. There is quite a considerable amount of hard-hitting, all good-humoured, of course, and very dexterous. Professor Hartog has a strong sympathy with the mnemic theory that the germ-cell in some unknown way garners the imprints of some of the organism's experiences, and that these may have their outcome in development. " For the present, at least, the problem of heredity can only be elucidated by the light of mental, and not material, processes." His essay on the biology of Samuel Butler is very good reading. The volume ends with a valuable essay on "interpolation in memory" and some wise counsel on " Nature Study."
We have not forgotten the philosophical chapter on " Mechanism and Vitalism," which appears to us to be the best of the many good things in Professor Hartog's book. It is an admirable statement of the apartness of "vital behaviour," which is self-preservative, self-regulated, and adaptive. The concluding paragraph should be writ large, " We may distinguish all aggregates of matter into three classes:-
" (i) Organisms, which grow and store energy and matter for their needs and for those of their lineage, and which reproduce, and are selfregulated;
" (2) Machines, which are aggregates of matter not in continuity with organisms, and which are selected, constructed, or formed by an organism for the purposes of the organism itself or of its race;
"(3) Things at Large, which do not come into either category, and which are conditioned by their antecedents only."
We have to thank Professor Hartog for these valuable essays, which should be read by all interested in the general problems of life and reproduction. We wish, however, that he could find time to write a book more perfectly unified and with less allusion to other people's right and wrong notions-expressive, in fact, of his own very distinctive outlook.
I. ARTHUR THOMSON.
Drage, GEOFFREY. The State and the Poor. London and Glasgow. Collins; 1914; pp. 264; price is. net.
MR. DRAGE'S book is written rather from the point of view of a Poor Law reformer than of a eugenist. Pauperism in general, in his view, " is the result of the defects of our industrial and in a lesser degree of our educational system " (p. 235). More particularly for the able bodied pauper is the main crux of the situation, " the industrial system is responsible." Even the vagrant he approaches with the open heart and hand of the social reformer. " Care should be taken," he tells us, " to provide that every man should have a chance in the first instance and hope even in the last resort." In dealing with the feeble-minded, indeed, he quotes approvingly the view of Mr. W. H. Dickinson, that our policy as to the feeble-minded mother is a source of the gravest social danger, and is " eating into the very vitals of our nation." But he mitigates this judgment by quoting also the opinion of Mr. Charles Booth, who thinks that "the evil is summed up in a certain number of unsatisfactory babies, most of whom die " (68), while at the same time like all the more enlightened reformers he would concentrate attention on the improvement of the chances of the children, for whom he draws up a comprehensive programme in the short chapter of " conclusions." Apart from what he says, with less, I think, than his usual fullness of information, in the "dry facts" of latter day elementary education, his remarks here might be accepted as the basis of a new Poor Law policy in which all reformers might well unite.
For the rest, his book is a masterly summary of the present state of Poor Law administration, and might have been published by the Majority
as a sequel or supplement to their Report of i9o8, on the understanding
that it was prepared to drop its own proposals as to the new authority, and adopt those of Mr. Charles Booth and Sir Arthur Downe, and to see in much that has since taken place an invidious attempt on the line

244 EUGENICS REVIEW.

of the Minority's recommendations, "to ignore the existing machinery in

dealing with the poorer classes." The believer in the Minority Report

will not be expected to agree with the main line of the book, though

even he will find much to be grateful for in so succinct and up-to-date a

statement of the Majority's point of view in general, and for many of the

suggestions as to the treatment of children, of widows with children and

the industrially incompetent, in particular.

Those on the other hand who take a more detached view of this

historic controversy may well agree with his fundamental principle,

that "the wages of the working man ought to be sufficient to enable

him to make proper provision for the welfare of his family, for his own

old age, and for times of sickness " (236). Before, however, assenting to

the suggestion that the greater part of recent legislation for the benefit

of old-age, for school hygiene and National Insurance is in reality a

system of " State doles," they will ask for a more discriminating analysis

of the present industrial situation. Granted the validity of the above ideal,

what are the main sources from which the wages may be increased to

enable us to realise it? What is the relation between the actual and what

we might call the real wages of labour, which include free education,

cheap tram fares, etc. ? What hope is there in the near future of the re-

quisite advance? And what in the meantime is the least " doleful " method

of assisting the labourer to this larger share of direct civic responsibility?

In view of these questions which ought to concern one who holds that

poverty is the result of the defects of our industrial system more than,

to judge from this book, they seem to do, is there not something to

be said for the policy which was the kernel of truth in the proposals of

the Minority Report, viz., that before we set about reorganising the Poor

Law authority on a large scale, we should do what is possible by school

medical inspection, improved industrial training, unemployment and

sickness insurance, improvement of workshop conditions, enforcement of

minimum wage, to reduce the problem of poverty to its real dimensions?

It must seem to many, besides the present writer, far too early to dismiss

the greater part of these efforts as merely disguised " assistance," and the

new system of taxation which has been devised, not, of course, by the

present Chancellor alone, to find the means for constructive social reform,

as a mere "rake's nropress."

T. H. MUIRHEAD.

Malinowski, B., Ph.D. The Family Among the Australian Aborigines. London. University of London Press; 19I3; price 6s. net; pp. 326.
FEW wild races have been more extensively and closely studied than the Australian Aborigines, yet the accounts rendered are mutually inconsistent and contradictory to an extraordinary degree. This is particularly unfortunate, since these natives are so valuable a document for the study of social evolution. Dr. Malinowski, in this valuable monograph, collates and analyses the whole literature of the subject, and has succeeded in producing order out of chaos. His aim is to arrive at the actual existing state of society. To carry it out he has followed the excellent methods of historical analysis and interpretation of evidence instituted by Langlois and Seignobos, and has avoided the temptation (responsible for much of the inconsistency of the records) to allow theory as to origins to colour presentation of facts.
Taking the much-vexed question of "group-marriage" as an example, we find the author's analysis inevitably long but very judicious.
He arrives at what is probably the true state of affairs, viz., that individual marriage exists and is the fundamental element, but that social interests have developed or allowed a certain amount of sexual communism, which is a very different thing. It is just the same in the economic sphere, every individual has a right to take toll from this or that individual. The author rightly insists that the sexual relation is not the whole of marriage, and he points out that the "grcup-marriage"

