THE EUGENICS OF MIGRANTS
BY CHAS. E. WOODRUFF, M.D.
THERE is one basic biological law which has not received from eugenists anywhere nearly the amount of attention it deserves, and that is the law of adaptation. Biologists who devote themselves to lower species are fairly well agreed that every character, such as colour or size, must be beneficial and of survival value, for if it were harmful it would destroy the species in its competition for existence, and if it were merely of no use at all it would still be a handicap in that it required extra food energy to produce it, so that the advantage in the struggle would be to those who were not so burdened. Hence every character which was once useful, but is no longer so by reason of a change of environment, is undergoing atrophy, but all others must have a use. Instead of saying that a certain thing is useless, when we do not know its function, it is more scientific to confess ignorance and try to discover the use.
Now it generally happens that a character which is of indispensable value in one environment may be so injurious in another, that migrants promptly perish. As a matter of fact nearly every species is limited to a very restricted environment, and those which change residence with the seasons are really more restricted than those able to stay behind and resist the changes of weather.
The medical profession is just beginning to realise that man himself is governed by the same laws of adaptation, and that each type has developed characters which fit it for residence in the place of origin. Formerly migrations were exceedingly slow movements, and by formerly is meant primitive times when man was spreading from the place or places of evolution from simian ancestors. The very slowness permitted evolution of new varieties by survival of the variations fittest for the new environ-

3I14 C. E. Woodruff:
ment, so that in time the types had so diverged that they could not return to the places of human origins. After the earth was overrun social organisation prevented invasion, more or less, and types were still further restricted in residence. Then came the time of organisation of military masses and the rapid migrations which history records, and finally the development of transportation which permits migration to any place on earth in a few days.
What has so cruelly deceived us is the fact that a migrant did not promptly perish, so we thought that man was the sole exception to all living species;-independent of environment, and each type could live permanently anywhere. It was a dreadful error, and has led to frightful loss of life in vain efforts
to colonise where the colonists were hopelessly out of adjustment
to the climate. Moreover, as time went on, and we found out some of the causes of death and avoided them, we were still further deceived and believed that permanent survival was a mere matter of avoiding the infections which were really the final causes of death-like the last straw Dreaking the camel's back.
Luckily we are getting back to safer grounds, now that we are discovering why men must be tall in one environment and short in another, why they must be pigmented in proportion to the intensity of the light which is so lethal to living protoplasm, why the nostril must be narrow in cold climates and open in hot, and so on through all the differences known to exist, even to the differences in the size of the brain and general intelligence.
These facts are now being used to explain the disappearance of races which have migrated in historic times. For instance, Italy has attracted an intermittent stream of invaders from the north from the time when the first Aryan speaking Latins conquered their way to Rome. There is plenty of circumstantial evidence that these first invaders were not of the Mediterranean type at all, but disappeared in some mysterious fashion. What is more important, there is direct evidence that later invaders were of the tall, blonde Teutonic or Baltic type which is now so widely accepted as the original Aryan. It is now known that

THE EUGENICS OF MIGRANTS

3I15

these invaders, who became Romanised to the extent of adopting Italian names, have been the real authors of the Italian renascence,-descendants of Goths and Lombards, and perhaps,
Franks and Vandals too. Their Italian names have formerly deceived us into believing that they belonged to the Mediterranean type, though we should have known better, as their portraits are often available, and in addition many of them are known to have been born in the north even as late as the fourteenth century. Many an Italian University owed its reputation to Danes, Swedes, and Norwegians. Even Charlemagne depended upon scholars from the British Islands.
Now this northern type always tends to disappear from the southern lowlands, but persists longer in the uplands of northern Italy say, which more nearly resemble northern environments. It is the same phenomenon as we see in the Alps, where the plants and animals, as we go up, resemble those of northern zones, until we find actual arctic species.
The same phenomena are also found in America. Francis Parkman quotes Le Houtan, a Lieutenant in the Canadian Army of Louis XIV., to the effect that the women sent over from northern France were mostly blondes, whereas now that type is in a very decided minority in the St. Lawrence Valley, while among the French of New Orleans there are none at all. Ethnic changes which require several generations to culminate are not noticed while they are going on. It is only when we compare the descendants with the ancestors of several centuries back that we see the difference.
In the United States, the life insurance physicians have recently discovered that the overweights are poorer risks than the underweights, and never reach 8o years of age, while many underweights pass it. It has long been known that the big men do not stand the tropics as well as those of frailer physique, who are nearer the type of the native. Likewise the blondes in the American cities and lowlands have a higher deathrate from certain diseases than the rest of the population, and tend to disappear, while those in the mountains are as vigorous after many generations as in the similar environment of the Alps. All European cities are becoming brunette. The south-western part

3I6 C. E. Woodruff :
of Alaska is almost identical with southern Norway, and though it is too soon to see the ultimate effect of the climate on types from northern Europe, yet enough is known to predict that they will survive a long time, if not permanently.
These illustrations are enough for our present purpose, but we might go on almost indefinitely showing in detail the racial decay of types too far out of their zone. Even in southern England, statistics show the greater morbidity and mortality of the intruded blonde type, so different from what is believed to be the brunette primitive stock evolved by the climate.
It must not be supposed that mere length of life has any effect on racial or type survival. If a family has healthy offspring and then the parents die at 40, say, the children may be well able to continue the line. But longevity really means greater vigour as a rule. Now it often happens that a vigorous migrant in America outlives hlis children and even his grandchildren. This is nothing else than decay of developing children from lack of adaptation.
On the other hand, Europeans in India have long been in the habit of sending their children back " home " to be reared, and the lines persist for many generations, although each generation dies prematurely of tropical diseases and the physical decay due to the climate itself.
There is then in the case of migrants a Eugenic movement carried on by nature herself, but it is by the dreadfully expensive way of killing off the least adjusted. In the meantime, those on the way towards extinction are less able to struggle for existence and furnish more than their proportion of social parasites.
This is the point which must be considered in all eugenic discussions. In order to develop properly, people must be bred in a proper climatic environment. Greenland would interfere with negroes as seriously as India with northern Europeans. In other words, the eugenic movement in all colonies is vastly different from that in countries which have been settled for thousands of years and in which nature has long been at work unifying the type by her usual lethal measures. In America we have every type on earth, and to expect them all to develop normally is contrary to known biological laws. Some have wandered

THE EUGENICS OF MIGRANTS

317

here to evaporate like the Vandals in Africa. Degeneration,
then, is inevitable-pessimistic as this seems-unless we can discover the harmful factors and avoid them. This is why the study of anthropology is of such vital importance to eugenists. Otherwise the world seems destined to witness a constant stream of migrants from Europe to all its colonies to replace the ever disappearing earlier colonists. The vast majority of Americans are of stock which has arrived in the last Too years, most of them since I840 or I850, and the stream shows no signs of diminution, although the child-bearing of those already settled is always ample for normal increases. Indeed, the stream is known to check the birth-rate of older settlers. Spaniards have been flocking to Cuba for four centuries but do not survive.
Eugenics must not aspire to the unnatural. One of its rules should be to induce people to have their children reared in the proper climate, even if the parents are compelled to live elsewhere. To this end we must know more about the relative health efficiency and longevity of every type residing in each place-say southern England. We hear a great deal about the bad development of the submerged tenth in London, and there is much said about the effect of the environment, but scarcely a word as to what manner of people they are. What are their characters? Are they mostly tall or short, light or dark, over or under weight ? Let there be investigations along these lines among the "failures" in every city, not only in Europe, but America, Africa and Australia. Perhaps we shall find that certain types are on the way towards a final elimination which cannot be prevented by eugenics. It does seem that in time the course of events is making every local population more or less homogeneous and adjusted to its local climate. They are destined to be the "eugenes " or well-bred, only if they are of the type adjusted to the place, and the present migration streams must continue until adjustment does occur. Climate, therefore, is of vast eugenic importance.
As a practical result let us take the single matter of the benefit of cold air now recognised as of prime importance in preventing and curing pneumonia and consumption, for this alone shows the incalculable value of studying adaptation.

P8 C. E. Woodruff:
Houses are very recent inventions, formerly men used mere rain shelters; warmed houses are really the inventions of the last century or so. It is safe to say that northern men always lived in cool or cold air, and that some kind of adjustment occurred so that hot air is now deadly to northern types. When Dr. George Bodington, of England, saw this self-evident fact in 1840, and insisted that consumptives should stay out of doors in cold air, -which could not be too cold for them,-people were horrified. They said that the disease was so deadly and the sufferers so delicate that protection in warmed rooms was essential. Though Bodington proved his point in his sanatorium he was so viciously attacked that this first modern sanatorium was closed and the anti-tuberculosis movement delayed nearly a half century.
Even tropical monkeys are subjected to very cold air at night in the mountain forests, but when we confine them in warmed rooms under the impression that it is their normal environment, they too die of tuberculosis. Within recent years a movement has been started in Zoological Gardens to keep them out of doors all the winter, and they are surviving in health. So we are now advising people to live out of doors and sleep. out of doors, and to keep their offices and houses cool instead of like monkey cages. The improvement in health is wonderful. What, then, can one expect if he migrates to a place where he never gets a whiff of cold air ? Experience shows that tuberculosis is invariably rapidly fatal in Europeans in the tropics, and it is a routine practice to hurry them north as soon as the disease is discovered. The warm air and other adversities have somehow reduced their resistance. Eugenic development of northern children under such circumstances is utterly out of the question.
There are innumerable other problems connected with such studies, and it may turn out that the production of a higher mental type is really conditioned on first getting a physique perfectly adapted to its climatic environment. Anthropologists and physicians, by studying the " failures " and successes must first tell us what are adjusted types.
Finally, that great stream of Britishers and Anglo-Americans departing from " home " for the uttermost parts of the earth, to do a share of the work of bringing peace and prosperity to those peoples who are not able to govern themselves, should know the dangers they are to meet, and being forewarned will be forearmed. We shall then no longer hear that India is the grave of Englishmen. Kipling will then sing a new song, and if they marry, as commonsense dictates, they will know how to rear the children that may be born to them.

