MATHEMATICAL DARWINISM

A Discussion of the Genetical Theory of Natural Selection*

By Professor J. B. S. HALDANE

SCIENTIFIC books of permanent value follow from certain premisses. Neverthe-

may be divided into two classes. On less it would perhaps have had more

the one hand are the text-books which cogency for the average reader had it been

summarize a branch of science so as to more copiously illustrated by available

render it accessible to a new group of readers facts. For example, the views developed in

or clarify its principles. On the other are Chapters IV and V would have carried

books which, though often inaccurate in more conviction had reference been made to

detail, state a new point of view, and lay the the author's own proof that Pearson and

founidations of new branches of science. The Lee's data on the inheritance of human

book before us is of the latter class. It is stature agree very well with the theory here

extremely difficult and highly controversial. developed. And reference could with ad-

Nevertheless it lays down methods by which vantage have been made to the quantitative

the problem of evolution, including the pre- work of Pissarev, Sukatchev, and others on

sent evolution of man, can be discussed with natural selection in cultivated and wild

a certain measure of precision. No serious plants.

future discussion either of evolution or Perhaps the most sensational and un-

eugenics can possibly ignore it.

expected conclusion which emerges from

The first five chapters are mathematical, the mathematics is that selection for a

though the conclusions are given in non- quantitative character may cause a popula-

mathematical language. The first chapter tion to go on changing in the direction for

is of great historical interest, because it which selection has taken place, even after

shows why Darwin, who believed in the that selection has stopped. We have, there-

blending theory of inheritance, was logically fore, an entirely novel explanation of the

forced to postulate external causes of herit- apparently useless cases of orthogenesis

able variation-and why in the light of our which seem to be shown in the geological

present knowledge, blending inheritance record. The sixth and seventh chapters

cannot account for any appreciable fraction deal with sexual selection and mimicry.

of observed variation, so that this necessity The treatment is less mathematical, and it

no longer arises. The next four chapters is possible that some of the arguments

deal with the effects of selection on popula- would prove to be invalid were they stated

tions whose variance is determined by a in mathematical terms.

large number of Mendelian genes. The But when all such criticisms have been

reasoning is often very difficult, and I believe made, it becomes fairly clear that during

in at least two cases erroneous, though the the next generation any discussions of the

errors do not affect the general conclusions problem of gradual evolution which are

of the book. The argument, like all mathe- likely to be of permanent value will take

matical arguments, is hypothetical. That the form of a development, discussion, and

is to say, it discusses the results which must perhaps in some cases a refutation, of the

arguments stated in the book before us. To

quote the author's preface, " It seems im-

* Fisher, R. A., Sc.D., F.R.S. The Genetical
Theory of Natural Selection. Oxford, 1930. Clarendon Press. This book was reviewed in the

possible that full justice should be done to the subject in this way, until there is built

EUGENICS REvIEw of July 1930.

up a tradition of mathematical work devoted

I"5

ii6 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

to biological problems, comparable to the extremely strong case. Indeed, if his bio-

researches upon which a mathematical logical facts are correct it is probable that

physicist can draw in the solution of special a socialistic state in which no wealth was

difficulties. "

inherited would be more eugenic than our

One important caution must be added. In present society, and it is a little difficult to

the course of evolution there have certainly see why Dr. Fisher's economic views are

been sudden changes, for example changes not even more radical.

of chromosome number, and in all prob- It is clear that Dr. Fisher's opinions are

ability the formation of new species by opposed to those of many believers in euge-

hybridization. Dr. Fisher's theory takes nics. The immediate effects of such a

little or no account of these, and for this system as he proposes would probably be to

reason cannot be regarded as a full account increase the fertility of some sections of

of evolution by natural selection.

the poorer classes, for, as he himself admits,

The last five chapters will be of most it would be extremely difficult to apply it

interest to readers of this journal. The to the small but, on the whole, intelligent

attempt is made to explain the fact that all section of the population which is not in

civilizations previous to our own have de- receipt of fixed wages or salaries, but re-

cayed. Very strong evidence is brought for- warded by fees from many different sources.

ward that the main cause of changes in the Hence the first result of such a system

composition of human populations is the might be the opposite of eugenic.

difference in effective fertility between The following criticisms of Fisher's social

different genotypes. It is further argued theory, among others, might be made. If

that the most important heritable causes of the number of genes concerned in human

such difference are differences of moral intellectual ability is very large, the condi-

temperament. Hence selection has tended tions in the bulk of the population are more

in the past to eliminate the type of human important than those in the most intelligent

character which favoured infanticide and and unintelligent groups. If, however, high

abortion. The variation of fertility in rela- intelligence on the one hand, and mental

tion to social class is examined, though we defect on the other, are due to rather few

miss anv reference to the very remarkable genes, as seems very possible, the eugenist

and perhaps significant state of affairs in may be justified in viewing those sections

Stockholm, where the poor are breeding no of the population in which those genes are

faster than the rich.

concentrated with what would otherwise be

So far most members of the Eugenics an exaggerated interest.

Society will be in agreement with Dr. Again, the arguments regarding the

Fisher. His last two chapters are likely selection of moral dispositions will be rather

to raise a good deal of opposition. He weak until we know more about what is

regards the social promotion of infertility actually inherited. Dr. Fisher writes as if

as the main cause of the differential birth fanaticism were inherited as such. It seems

rate. The argument, which is at times rather subtle, is essentiallv a development

more likely that the innate basis of fanaticism is a special type of suggestibility which

of Galton's demonstration that marriage may show itself as fanaticism in certain

with heiresses, who are rich owing to the environments. Among the well-to-do classes

infertility of their parents, is a potent cause to-day there is a great deal of rather un-

of the extinction of families.

intelligent Malthusian propaganda. In fact

His suggested remedy for the dysgenic character of civilized societies is a very
thorough-going system of family allowances

there is something of a taboo against large families. Hence a large number of the parents of large families are people who, just

on such a scale that infertility would no longer be a cause of social promotion. The reviewer considers that he has made out an

because they think for themselves and react against mass suggestion, have not been affected by this propaganda. People of the

HENRY TWITCHIN

IV/,

same mental make-up would probably have limited their families fifty years ago.
Nevertheless if Dr. Fisher is on the whole
correct, civilization can only be saved by a
very radical change of opinion and practice. And in particular much of the propaganda
of eugenists will prove to have been misdirected. To quote his own words: " The reformer must expect to encounter deepseated opposition in the classes on which he would naturally rely for an intelligent anxiety for the future of their country."
One conclusion is fairly clear. Before the eugenic movement commits itself on the one hand to the further encouragement of the social promotion of infertility, or on the

other to subsidizing the breeding of undesirable groups, a really thorough investigation should be made of the causes of differential fertility. rhere can be no doubt of its existence or of its undesirability, but
several opinions are possible as to the most hopeful method of combating it.
Dr. Fisher's book, then, must be read. But it is not easy reading. It is greatly to be hoped that within the next ten years the sections dealing with evolution and eugenics will both be rewritten in a form which demands less intellectual effort in its readers. Till then it is likely to remain the best discussion of its subjects so far
written.

HENRY TWITCHIN

Some Notes on his Family History By 'W. T. J. Gun, F.R.Hist.S., F.S.G.

I HAVE been asked to make some addi- With regard, however, to the male line

tions to the account of our benefactor descent some interesting facts have been

by Major Darwin in the REVIEW for brought to light by Mr. Fulton. The direct

July I930, and Mr. Leonard Jessop Fulton ancestry cannot, it is true, be definitely

has very kindly supplied me with informa- traced back further than Henry's grand-

tion that he collected some few years ago father, Andrew Twitchin. The name

in connection with Mr. Twitchin's pedigree. Andrew is however significant, as it is fre-

Nothing further has been ascertained with quently found to occur in conjunction with

regard to the maternal family, the Love- that of Twitchin in various individuals of

locks, nor with regard to the descent of the the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries,

Northways, to whom the paternal grand- yeomen farmers for the most part or men of

mother belonged. It is to be noted, how- similar status, residing in Berkshire or its

ever, that on this side Henry Twitchin pos- immediate neighbourhood.

sessed a relative, Edward Northway Butt Having regard to this rather uncommon

by name, who was in business as a chemist Christian name, and very uncommon sur-

and acquired a considerable fortune. It is name, there can be little doubt that Henry's

probably from the Northway strain that grandfather was descended from a certain

Henry Twitchin's business ability was Andrew Twitchin, of Inkpen in Berks,

mainly derived.

whose will was proved November 22nd,

