RECORDING HUMAN CONSTITUTION*

By R. W. PARNELL, D.M., M.R.C.P.

The Institute of Social Medicine, Oxford

I HAVE selected records of human healthy people, care of orphans or children

constitution as my subject for the in approved or ordinary schools, investiga-

following reason. Five years ago, when tion of the benefits or otherwise of games

undertaking to make a long-term study of and physical training, study of fertility

the health, physique and performance of or populations, personal relationships within

undergraduates, I found that I had been the family or in communities, nutritional

trained to record sickness but that my requirements, in surveys of crime, delin-

understanding of how to make useful records quency, and indeed almost every study of

of people in good health was negligible. It mankind. In short there is hardly a topic

was not difficult to adjust the art of clinical of social interest from murder to matrimony

history-taking to include items of interest on which records of constitution do not

and importance to undergraduates, but of touch and cannot quicken interest.

those items of physique which might mean Eugenics may proceed by the avoidance

something in terms of personality, emotional of what is defective, but the procreation of

outlook or performance very little had been good stock depends on the definition of good

mentioned in my training with the exception qualities, qualities not merely desired but

of a few glib hints, such as the uncouth also attainable. This has been the subject

mnemonic to think of gall-stones when a of much discussion, but how closely can the

" female is fat, flatulent and forty I " The practical possibilities be studied? The

initials N.A.D., which adorn so many case poverty of records of physique is notable

notes to indicate that no abnormality has evidence of neglect in studying the normal.

been detected, usually stand equally well for For the purpose in view simple and satis-

a notable absence of description, or worse, factory methods of recording constitution

no attempt at diagnosis, of the person as a are required, methods embracing physical

person, in place of a case displaying disap- and mental disposition.

pointing absence of abnormality. The I propose to illustrate three such methods.

" defect " outlook or, if you will, this defec- The first, the method of photographic

tive outlook, leads to a diagnosis of normal- somatotyping introduced by W. H. Sheldon

ity by the inverted process of excluding in the United States, is probably familiar

abnormality. For the purpose of surveys it to you. Therefore, after a very brief re-

yields hardly a dreg of correlatable data, for minder of its major features, I shall use it to

there is no particular reason why one defect, illustrate the physical accompanent of

itself probably uncommon in healthy folks, current academic selection and] achieve-

should correlate with another defect suffi- ment as found in a sample of Oxford

ciently often to make study profitable. undergraduates.

Hallux valgus and a cauliflower ear might be associated in some slight degree, but even

Sheldon's Method of Somatotyping

if there were it could hardly matter less. On Kretschmer (i92i) described three types

the other hand, a simple discipline for of physique: asthenic, athletic and pyknic.

recording constitution would add greatly to Sheldon's most important contribution to

understanding of individual or group dis- the study of physique has been to replace

position. Such records would be valuable this concept of three disparate types by a

in the practice of medicine, the study of continuous distributive classification in which.

* A Paper read at a Members' Meeting of the Eugenics each individual may be placed and described

Society, January 22nd, 1952.

quantitatively in terms of three components.

20

-| 1: ~ . . .: ._IRECORDINGHUMANCONSTITUTION

2I

_e~~~~~~~ ...

._

....

I - - 1...........

.i -

.i .......

Fig_. '__ S Isetbuild, but~.s.ubcutaneou fat.is. secndry.eaur in.....t...h.icae. i edi uia n otatt honns

FIGF.~~,~_~~~(I~~p~G~h~~~o.~~~~~~~~~)~ . ..ot_

e s d c n r of

E

A mesomorph, 3.6.4, who shows well-developedimusclaes. ba b

._ . Like fi . I,.he is.of pyknic or.thick-

F~-2~~(-pIoGt!1:.74)

oFIfGt.h 3en(dphoomtoorp94h5,)6.I(.Height cube root of weight - I3 he26.)trtn i nte is omoet

An ectomorph, 2.21.6 (or 11.2.61), of extremely linear build, his body ratio heigrht . cube root of weight reaches the high figure of I4-4. The rating in mesomorphy exceeds tbat in endomorphy by a small margin, and his muscles are apparently adequate for his weight for he is an active person.

These components of body build he named endomorphy (roundness associated with fat), mesomorphy (muscle and bone width development), and ectomorphy or linearity. Each person is given a rating on a sevenpoint scale, seven being maximum and one
minimum. This can be done scopicallN, that
is simply by looking at a standard photograph, but it can be checked metrically for
men aged i6 to 20 by taking I7 photographic

measurements and looking up Sheldon's tables. Metric somatotyping is probably the only satisfactory way of training beginners, though a trained observer may, especially with the aid of an index file of known somatotypes, reduce the labour greatly by scopic typing, and maintain high enough accuracy for most practical purposes. At Oxford great care has been taken to type 400 young subjects metrically, as well as scopically, in

Fig. 3

RECORDING HUMAN CONSTITUTION

23

order to be as sure as possible that the standards adopted are the same as those
used by Sheldon.
Physical Cacterstics accompanying University Selection
When comparing the distribution of 4,000 somatotypes at American universities with that of undergraduates at Oxford it is clear that certain physical types do not reach Oxford, although they enjoy university education in the United States. Seen on the map of somatotypes, they include those in the more extreme half of the territory inhabited by mesomorphs and mesomorphic ectomorphs. In addition ectomorphic endomorphs, which are comparatively uncommon in the United States universities, are actually absent at Oxford with the exception of a few centrally placed. The fringe of endomorphic ectomorphs has also gone. What is the explanation ? It lies, I believe, in the present severity of selection. About 0o75 per cent, less than one per cent of the young men in the United Kingdom, reach Oxford or Cambridge, and the sharpness of selection is therefore great. When this notion is examined further in the case of scholars and exhibitioners, and finally in men who attain first-class honours in their finals, the only departures from the central zone lie along the ectomorphic and ectopenic axis (II755I), tailing off in the ectopenes towards endomorphic dominance. Central types are more frequent at Oxford, peripheral types relatively more common in the States, and thus selective influence may be likened to pulfing on a purse-string. Finally, when we reach the few great men who combine a first-class degree with high achievement in the field of sport, the greatest number are concentrated just to the fat and muscular side of the midpoint of the distribution. Here surely is the type of man whom Cecil Rhodes had in mind when he looked to encourage all-round ability. The results are fascinating in that they provide explanation and physical recognition of the all-round character, with centrally balanced physique and temperament. They also provide an explanation for their own previous masking,

because men more muscular, more fat or thinner than average are to be found in each group.
You will have noticed that I referred just now to balanced temperament in association with balanced physique. That reference is to Sheldon's index of temperament, in which a rating is given on a seven-point scale to each of the three groups of temperamental traits (out of some hundreds) which he found to correlate most closely with his three physical components endomorphy, mesomorphy and ectomorphy. The index is expressed in three figures like the somatotype.
Returning to the first-class honours group, with physiques just " north-west " of the centre, one would expect temperament indices of the same order. Actually there is reversal of dominance and a cerebrotonic pull is evident, cerebrotonia being the name for the group of traits most closely associated ordinarily with ectomorphy or linear build. This particular reversal of temperament in combination with the physique just described appears to afford the best chances for academic success.
It has for so long been a habit of mind to consider academic achievement as a function of intelligence, and intelligence almost exclusively, that it may come as. a considerable shock to many people outside academic circles, and perhaps to some within, to find that physical features hold the power not merely to handicap but also apparently to control the highest levels of mental achievement, as far as these can be expressed in examination results.
Men who obtain seconds are sometimes described as the backbone of the undergraduate body. If this is true, then it is
hardly surprising to find that so large a proportion of seconds are mesomorphs, especially endomorphic mesomorphs. Such are anything but spineless; they play strenuous games and join in the activities of societies. Reaching all but the elite level of first-class distinction in examinations they are probably successful, too, in later life.
Among those with third-class honours

24 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

there is a slightly heavier sprinkling of more well known to be smaller than normal

peripheral physiques.

children.

Heights and Weights

Size of Family by Somatotype

Certain aspects of stature and develop- Before describing simpler methods of ment may be considered next. Heights and recording constitution there are one or two weights unfailingly fascinate all who have other points to make showing the diverse
looked into them, with the possible excep- usefulness of constitutional records. Size of tion of publishers who are perhaps allergic family is a subject of special interest in to tables. The mean heights and weights eugenics. Recently there has been a Royal of various groups in the population show a Commission on Population. The possibility
socio-economic grading. Such a grading has that people of varying body build should long been recognized and may be seen both rear families of varying sizes and vigour was
within the university and within the general not one of the many aspects dealt with in community. It is tempting to interpret this the Family Limitation Report, chiefly begrading in terms of nutrition. But before cause little work has been done in this
doing so it is necessary to answer certain connection. Recent analysis of information

questions. Why are university men from provided by undergraduates concerning the
the lower socio-economic level taller and number of their brothers and sisters has heavier than the highest level in the general shown that size of family varies in associacommunity ? Are they selected from homes tion with the student's somatotype. If it where certain priorities in food supply have can be assumed, or shown in the future, operated throughout their lives ? Without that the parents of one physical type tend in any way denying the influence of environ- to reproduce their type or a cross between ment it seems that an overpowering genetic their respective types, then there is,or would influence may be at work accounting for be, a strong suggestion that fat and thin such large group differences in average height parents limit their families (or, alternatively, (2-3 inches) and average weight (up to 20 lb.). their families are limited) to a greater extent Again, when the measurements of Oxford than the families of those who are physically men taken by Schuster in I9II are compared stronger. The possibility certainly appears with those of recent years the difference to be one worthy of further exploration. is found to be almost negligible. Perhaps environment has not really changed to the Disturbance of Autonomic Balance extent imagined between i9ii and I95I. Psychosomatic and somatopsychic are Perhaps the increase in financial awards in two adjectives, one perhaps more fashionrecent years has not really altered the social able than the other, but both used to descross-section of the university, and perhaps, cribe common groups of disorder. Whether too, food supplies were not really so plentiful eggs or hens should have priority I do not in I9II. Here, however, is an even harder know. Evidence pointing first in one direcquestion to answer. When the average tion then in another leads' to perennial measurements of individual Sheldon somato- philosophic debate. But both bird and egg types are compared for Oxford and the describe different phases or aspects of one United States, the Oxford men are almost biological phenomenon, the chicken cycle. uniformly taller and heavier. Is food so So, too, it is more important first, before much better and more plentiful in England arguing causes, to recognize the association than in America? On the other hand, if it between physique and autonomic disis accepted that the major differences encoun- orders. An important key to new undertered are the result of progressive selection standing of disturbed autonomic balance of men with higher genetic endowment the may be found in this way if only we take the evidence falls into line. After all, at the trouble to record constitution accurately. other end of the scale mental defectives are This idea is not new, but the methods of

RECORDING HUMAN CONSTITUTION

25

recording are comparatively new. A prepon- This must suffice here to illustrate the

derance of physiques on the mesomorphic possible application of photographic somato-

side of the ectomorphic-ectopenic axis typing. I agree with Dr. J. M. Tanner's1

reveals the comforting buffer influence of view that photographic somatotyping con-

endomorphy against the chilling stresses of stitutes the greatest single advance yet made

the world.

in the study of human physique.

Chart II illustrates the incidence of

appendicectomy. Hardly anyone on the endomorphic side of the ectomorphic-ecto-

Simpler Methods of Recording Physique

penic axis gave a history of this operation, There would be little excuse for introduc-

although the general distribution shows ing yet more methods of physical classifica-

many subjects in this region.

tion, and less accurate ones, too, but for

Another interesting field of study exists two reasons. Initial expense for the camera,

in the modifying influence of constitution on running and photographic costs are not

pharmacological action. Addicts to cocaine, negligible, and there is, too, the cost of labour

1,T'X- -i- ,'I1 -
vk,"- - " - ; 'ji aZk'I N>

CHART 1.-The chart of somatotypes graduates. The black dots illustrate

is based on the the distribution

range of physique
at Oxcford.

encountered

among

American

under-

CHART II illustrates the incidence of appendicectomy. Very few appear from somatotype II7 to somatotype 55I. In other words appendicectomy with proportionately more fat tha muscle in their make-up.

on the endomorphic side of had seldom been performed

the axis in those

for example, forn clubs, while morphine addicts seek solitude. The differences in temperament are probably associated with differences in physique, and this is certainly true of more normal appetites such, for example, as the demand for sweets. (A slide was shown illustrating the greater demand for sweets in fat people.) This fact has more than academic interest, for witness the recent confusion in sweets rationing to which these facts may well be related.

in interpretation of photographs. It is most unfortunate that such considerations have already handicapped general application. Wherever possible the difficulties are worth overcoming because the photographic record is much more informative than measurements alone. With these limitations in mind, however, two simpler ways may be described of using measurements, both of which yield approximations to Sheldonian dominance of physique.

B

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

The Standard Deviation Chart

fat measurements as abscissa, both with

The idea behind this method is not new. scales in standard score. New axes were

Recently, however, it has been used to drawn at the point of intersection of the

interpret body proportions in the subjects means and four quadrants, A-D, thus

of the Grant Study,' and something similar obtained.

using direct measurements will be found in A. Light build-thinner than average.

Cureton's3 account of physical fitness B. Light build-fatter than average.

appraisal. Standard scales of measurements C. Heavy build-thinner than average.

are grouped in such a way that by linking the D. Heavy build-fatter than average.

measurements of one individual a profile of Each quadrant was then divided by radii

his physique may be obtained at a glance, no at 30 deg. intervals. Thus a method of

further calculation or interpretation of the classification is reached giving the direction

data being necessary.

of deviation of the individual away from

The method is simple enough to be a the distribution centre. A sub-division in

useful clinical instrument. Its power to classification indicates the distance by which

estimate the Sheldonian somatotype is con- an individual deviates from the centre. This

siderable, but it falls short of the photo- is achieved by drawing circles of one, and

graphic record. Its usefulness lies where one and a half standard deviations radius.

nothing better is available.

In this way three physical categories of mid-

range, inner circle and outer circle or peri-

Tle " Clock Method "' of typing, using skin- pheral types are obtained. The whole

fold measurements of subcutaneous fat configuration soon becomes as familiar as a

The third and last method to be described clock face, and it is not difficult to remember

provides a three-dimensional distributive that asthenic persons fatter than average

classification of physique of the simplest appear from I-3, fat persons from 4-6,

possible kind and employs measurements muscular ones from 7-9, and the thin and

which occupy less than two minutes in the wiry ones from IO to I2.

taking, thus bringing the method within the That is the clock. Some evidence of its use-

scope of ordinary clinical practice. The fulness is gathered from the following two

measurements taken are height and weight, investigations. The first was undertaken to

often by a clinical assistant or receptionist, see who and how many people take part in

and three skin-fold subcutaneous fat sport of various kinds at Oxford, where

measurements, on the back of the arm over variety of choice is comparatively good and

triceps, on the back of the thorax near the participation voluntary. A very high propor-

angle of the scapular, and in the suprailiac tion of those of muscular build at the univer-

region of the abdomen, one to two inches sity take part in strenuous field games or

above the anterior superior iliac spine. rowing. In the opposite quadrant, very few

The sum of three fat measurements it was of those of asthenic and fat build participate.

hoped might indicate the general tendency This is obvious enough but it may still be

to obesity, but one of the first observations the case here and there, where, for example,

made was that people tend to put on fat in school games are compulsory, that insufficient

different places. Before going ahead, there- variety or alternative outlets are offered to

fore, inter-correlation of fat measurements permit enjoyable recreation for all. There

was carried out, the results indicating that is some value in being able to recognize by

something in the nature of a general fat simple physical measurements those whose

factor could be derived with remarkable claims to be released from compulsory games

confidence. This agrees with Edwards' (I950) are probably founded reasonably enough on

findings.'

insufficient strength to enjoy them.

On the strength of this a scatter diagram My last illustration comes from a compara-

was made using the ponderal index heights tive study conducted last year by Dr.

/weight as ordinate and the total of three Phyllis Epps and myself on the physique of

RECORDING HUMAN CONSTITUTION

27

women undergraduates and women delin-
quents. The two distributions overlap but are strikingly different, students on the whole being of lighter build. Thus it has been possible broadly to confirm in women the findings in somatotype studies of male delin-
quents reported by Sheldon5 and by the
Gluecks' in America. In ending, may I make a plea for wider
use of simple records of human constitution? Today infection and bacterial diseases are falling back as constitutional causes take all the leading places in the handicap stakes of mortality. Preventive medicine, following its magnificent achievements in environmental hygiene, is being forced more and more against the wall of constitutional disposition. Who knows but that the door to understanding of the aetiology and prevention of hypertensive disease may not be
found among records outlining the path of

changes in human constitution? This is a topic with which I hope to deal on another occasion. In the meantime, let us dream of the day when the Dictionary of National Biography will contain, if not a standardized three-view photograph, at least the height, weight and subcutaneous fat measurement for each decade in the life of its subjects !
REFERENCES
Tanner, J. M. (I951). Lancet, i, 574. " Current
advances in the study of physique."
2 Heath, C. W. (I945). What People Are. Harvard
University Press. Cambridge, Massachusetts.
' Cureton, T. K. (1947). Physical fitness appraisal
and guidance. Henry Kimpton, London. ' Edwards, D. A. W. (1950). Clinical Science, 9,
259. ' Sheldon, W. H., Hartl, E. M., and McDermott,
E. (1949). Varieties of Dilenquent Youth.
Harper and Bros., New York.
Glueck, S., and Glueck, E. (1950). Unravelling Juvenile Delinquency. The Commonwealth
Fund, New York.

" ROAD TO HAPPINESS "
A NEW IDEOLOGY
By
C. WICKSTEED ARMSTRONG
Of this book, just published by Messrs. Watts & Co., London, M. Dachert, Founder of the Jardins Ungemacht, the Eugenic Garden City of Strasbourg, says, in a letter to
the author:
"... I1 y a lk des chapitre fascinants.... Votre autre livre " The Survival of the Unfittest " m'a toujours sembl6 un des livres les plus importants de notre temps."
Of the latter work, Dr. Julian Huxly said: " I believe the underlying thesis is correct, and merits serious attention.... It is very important that such facts should be forcibly
presented to the public."
The Illustrated London News said: " Most of his argument must, I think, be convincing to
unprejudiced minds." The Lancet said: " The author's ideas emerge from a coherent systen of social and
biological theory, which bespeaks original and vigorous thought."
Price of "ROAD TO HAPPINESS " I7s. 6d. net.
Eugeies Review., VoL XLIV, No. 1

