REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS.

71

history of the subject proves that such a result has never in the past followed. So far as the children of dissolved marriages are concerned, he claims that the State need have no apprehension, as the number who would be left to the public charge would be no greater than now follows in case of death of parents or illegitimacy.
R. NEWTON CRANE. Loeb, JACQUES. The Mechanistic Conception of Life. University of
Chicago Press; I912; (London, Cambridge University Press); 6s. net; pp. 227. UNDER this title Dr. Loeb has gathered into one volume ten essays and lectures, all of which have appeared in various publications within the last twenty years. They cover a wide range of subjects, and for the most part summarise recent work in these subjects. The connecting link between them is found in the fact that they all endeavour to explain biological processes on chemical and physical grounds. Three essays deal with the mechanism of fertilisation and consequently with that of heredity, and are thus of particular interest to eugenists. For heredity forms the basis of eugenics, and all those interested in the latter science must wish to follow the latest work on heredity. These essays may be recommended as giving a clear and concise account of the remarkable experiments with regard to artificial parthenogenesis which have attracted the attention of biologists within the last few years, and in which Dr. Loeb himself has taken a leading part.
A. M. CARR-SATUNDERS. Hubbard A. J. The Fate of Empires. London. Longmans, Green
and Co.; price 6s. 6d.; pp. 220. RECENTLY quite a number of books have appeared that aim at setting out the principles which govern the course of history. It has been the fashion lately to lay stress upon the importance of heredity and to attempt to account for the decay of civilisations by the disappearance of the better strains. Though we may be certain that heredity has something to do with the matter, most of these attempts appear to be somewhat immature in the present state of our knowledge. Mr. Hubbard's book, however, emphasises quite different factors. He has been much influenced by Mr. Benjamin Kidd, and the argument follows the lines familiar to those who have read " Social Evolution."
The argument, put briefly, is that at certain periods in history reason leads individuals to seek their own comfort by abolishing competition; in other words, Socialism makes its appearance. Reason again teaches men that it is not in their own interest to make provision for future generations; hence comes the fall in the birth-rate. Both these phenomena are much in evidence at the present day, and " the turning point in past civilisations has been marked, again and again, by the appearance of Socialism coincidently with a failure of the birthrate." Thus civilisation is once more on the decline. What is the cure? How can civilisation be made stable? According to Mr. Hubbard there can be no enduring civilisation that rests on reason alone or on instinct alone, or " any religion that serves their purposes." In China, nowever, we find an enduring civilisation that rests upon "the prepotence of the suprarational method over that of pure reason." That, of course, was Mr. Kidd's main argument.
The weakness of arguments of this kind are their extreme vagueness. What is Socialism? It might be fairly argued that it resembles far more closely certain institutions which are prominent in the early stages of human history rather than anything we can discqver during the decline of Roman and other civilisations. Then, again, it might be argued that the hope of civilisation rests more upon reason than upon anything else. What is required is a much fuller knowledge of many things-especiallv certain biological problems-before we can hope to attack with success

