NATURAL SELECTION IN MAN
And the Evolution of Human Intelligence
(The Galton Lecture, I930.)
By PROFESSOR S. J. HOLMES, Ph.D.
(Professor of Zoology, University of California.)

T HE theory of natural selection which served than relatively sterile ones, but their

was advanced by Darwin as an ex- progeny may come to prevail simply because

planation of evolutionary changes is there are more of them. Frequently high

one of remarkable simplicity. It is based on fertility is an adjunct of general vigour and

the almost obvious assumption that the mem- other qualities which aid the individual in

bers of a species differ in their hereditary the struggle for existence, but in many

qualities and that those individuals which cases, as notoriously in man, lethal selec-

are best adapted to their conditions of life tion commonly works in one direction, and

are more apt to survive and propagate than reproductive selection in another. The sur-

their less fortunate rivals. All that is vival rate, or the net reproductive rate

required, therefore, to demonstrate the arrived at by deducting deaths from births,

actual operation of natural selection is to is a resultant of the action of these factors.

prove that some variations are better able to The interaction of these factors varies with

survive than others. As a result of several time and place. Now they co-operate to-

investigations the operation of natural selec- wards the production of superior types, and

tion is shown to be not merely a plausible again they may work at cross purposes.

possibility, but an actually demonstrated There is quite general agreement that in our

fact. Reasonable difference of opinion, present civilization the differential birth rate

therefore, is only possible as to the extent is favouring the more rapid production of

to which natural selection is operative and an inferior breed of humanity which lethal

how far it affords an adequate explanation of selection is not succeeding in eliminating.

the course of organic evolution.

Although reproductive selection just at

Now, differential survival rates depend present is perhaps the most potent factor

upon two quite distinct factors, both of in modifying the heredity of man we shoull

which may be included under natural selec- not lose sight of the ever-active and dis-

tion in the broad sense in which this term criminating operation of mortality. It is to

was employed by Darwin. The first fac- this aspect of our subject that I shall con-

tor, and one which is the most commonly fine myself this evening, and I shall for the

stressed in discussions of the subject, is the time being employ the term natural selec-

differential death rate, or what has some- tion in its narrower sense of a differential

times been termed lethal selection. The death rate. Most discussions of natural

second is the differential rate of reproduc- selection in man, as in lower forms of life,

tion, or what Pearson has called reproduc- are concerned with the ability of this theory

tive selection. These two forms of selection, to afford a theoretical explanation of evolu-

or varieties of natural selection, differ in tionary changes. There have been few

that the first depends upon the preservation attempts to demonstrate its actual existence

of the individual, while the second is con- or to determine the extent of its operation.

cerned primarily not with the individual The most important of the earlier efforts to

per se, but with its progeny. Fertile make good this deficiency of our knowledge

organisms may be no more apt to be pre- are due directly or indirectly to Professor

7

8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Karl Pearson. It was shown statistically infant mortality produce an immunity

that long life and good health run in fami- among the survivors. Several of the com-

lies, and that they have a positive correla- mon causes of early death such as measles,

tion with fertility. Hence the strains with scarlet fever, whooping cough, and

long life tend to increase more rapidly than diphtheria, leave their survivors immunized

those with shorter life.

against a subsequent attack. In the case of

The problem of natural selection was diphtheria, it has been shown that epi-

also attacked in another manner in the demics are followed by a larger crop of im-

attempt to show that a high death rate in munes as revealed by Schick tests, due not

infancy leaves a stronger group of surviv- only to recovered patients but also to indivi-

ing children, as is indicated by a relatively duals immunized by very mild and usually

low death rate in the same group in later unnoticed infections. Let us suppose that as

years. In an elaborate statistical investiga- a result of an unusual epidemic of contagious

tion Dr. Snow endeavoured to show on the diseases there is a high death rate in the

basis of data from Prussia and England and first year of life. Let us suppose that

Wales that when proper allowance is made another epidemic comes along five years

for various disturbing factors, the infant later. The children who were spared and

mortality rate shows a negative correlation immunized during the first epidemic will

with the death rate in childhood. The suffer a relatively low death rate in their

mathematical labour involved, the statistical fifth year, and we might thus obtain a

pitfalls to be avoided, and the paucity of negative correlation between the mortality

good data available for treatment probably of infancy and that of childhood, whether

explain why, with very few exceptions, the diseases concerned were selective or not.

similar studies have not been made by the It is unfortunate that the influence of im-

methods employed by Pearson and Snow. munity is able to bring about the same kind

The result of these investigations on the of correlation as that due to differential

selective character of infant mortality mortality, because it renders the demon-

attracted widespread attention and elicited stration of a differential death rate by the

much comment. Various objections were methods employed by Pearson and Snow

raised against this work on grounds which an almost insuperable task.

I shall not discuss, but granted that the

statistical methods employed are sound and that it is established that there is a negative

SEX DIFFERENCES IN DEATH RATES

correlation between the death rate of infancy There is, I believe, strong presumptive

and that of later childhood in the same evidence of a differential death rate in early

cohort of individuals, does it necessarily life which is furnished by the distribution

prove that selective elimination is the cause of sex mortality. It is well known that

of this relationship? The validity of the the death rate of young males is consider-

reasoning is dependent upon the exclusion ably higher than that of young females.

of other factors which might cause the same The ratio of male and female deaths in the

result.

first year of life varies considerably with

time and place. Where the infant death

MORTALITY AND IMMUNITY

rate is high, the mortality of the two sexes

As I have elsewhere* pointed out, a high death rate in the first year may cause a low

comes to be more nearly equal. Where it is low, and in proportion as it is low, we find a relatively high mortality of males.

death rate in a subsequent year not neces- It is a somewhat curious coincidence that

sarily as a result of selection, but as a consequence of the fact that many causes of

this relationship was pointed out independently and nearly at the same time by Dr.

* Studies in Evolution and Eugenics. New York,
1923.

F. Lenz, Dr. T. H. C. Stevenson, and in a paper by Miss Goff and myself. The sex

NATURAL SELECTION IN MAN

9

ratio at death, or the ratio of male deaths known in certain cases. In general, the

to ioo female deaths, varies from I04 in male ratio from defects of development, or

Chili (I9I9) where the infant death rate is what might be called faults of organization,

304, to 135 in New Zealand (I922-3) where is high. This is illustrated in the ratios

the rate is 43. The conclusion drawn by for malformations of the heart (I43.8), in-

Miss Goff and the writer was that the male testinal obstruction (i62.8), and hernia

by virtue of his peculiar complex of chro- (37I.2), as compared with a ratio of I28 for

mosomes is inherently the weaker sex.

all causes combined. Nervous diseases,

There has been some discussion as to which in large part are due to internal fac-

whether the high mortality of young males tors, have also a high male ratio, I34.6.

is due to recessive sex-linked genes, as it Measles, diphtheria, scarlet fever, and en-

demonstrably is in some cases, or, as sug- teritis show a relatively low male ratio.

gested by Miss Goff and myself, to the The ratio for epidemic diseases in general,

peculiarities of male organization-as is evi- excluding the anomalous case of whooping

dently the case with the high male death cough, is I24.3. In striking contrast to the

rate from inguinal hernia, and doubtless preceding, the deaths due to accidental

with the very high relative male mortality causes show a male ratio only slightly

from injuries at birth. But whether the greater than that of the two sexes at birth.

frailty of the male is to be attributed more The proneness of the male to die from

to sex-linked factors or to mere differences constitutional causes manifesting them-

in sex, it is evident that it is due to the selves in very early life and leading to more

hereditary constitution of the male sex. frequent defects of organization, the fact

Since the reduction of infant mortality has that in early infancy when the death rate

resulted in a relatively high male death is highest the male ratio at death is also

rate, it is a fairly good inference that this highest, and the fact that the reduction in

reduced mortality is due largely to a dimi- infant mortality has taken place largely in

nution of deaths which are non-discrimina- the later months of the year leaving

tory or mildly discriminatory as to sex, and neo-natal mortality little affected, all go

therefore have relatively little association to indicate a selective influence of mortality

with differences in vitality. All admit that associated with inherent differences in con-

many infant deaths are due to causes that stitutional vigour and normality.

are about as apt to kill a healthy baby as a

puny one. If such causes are so far as possible removed, the death rate which re-

INHERITANCE OF VITALITY

mains becomes relatively more discriminat- Another indication of the selective charac-

ing on the basis of vitality as it demon- ter of mortality is yielded by the relation

strably is on the basis of sex.

between the death rates of parents and their

If this be true, the sex ratio at death young children. It should be borne in mind

might be used as a sort of rough index of that the early death of one or both parents

the selective influence of different causes of might deprive a young child of proper care

mortality. This possibility led me to and hence lead to an increased liability to

undertake a compilation of the data on the death. This objection cannot apply, how-

relative death rates of the two sexes from ever, to deaths at advanced ages, when all

various causes. The first year of life was the offspring are past the period of early

chosen on account of the similarity of en- youth. If, in such cases, low infant and

vironmental influences for both sexes dur- child mortality is associated with long life of

ing this period and because extensive data parents, it is reasonable to infer that the

were available in our statistics on mortality. low death rates of parents and offspring are

The results of this study showed that the both due to the inheritance of superior

sex incidence of death varies greatly with vitality. This relation has been found by

different diseases, as had indeed long been Pearson in his study of pedigrees derived

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

from the Society of Friends. The percen- not always completely so, often leads to

tage of daughters who died under five years relatively early death. Among diseases

of age was found to decrease with increased dependent on disorders of metabolism men-

longevity of both father and mother even in tion may be made of hereditary family

advanced years. Also, the longevity of jaundice, goitre, and diabetes. CEdema,

daughters was found to increase as that of which, like diabetes, commonly requires the

their parents increased. Ploetz has found co-operation of an environmental factor,

that the percentage of children dying under shows a tendency to run in families. Crow-

five years of age decreases as the parents der and Crowder give a family pedigree of

live to more advanced ages. In a study of five generations of cedema of the glottis

parental longevity and infant mortality in affecting 20 individuals, IS of whom met

two very different groups, the royal families their deaths from this cause. Death may

of Europe, and families recorded in Ameri- also be attributed to hereditary peculiarities

can genealogies, I have found, in agreement of form. Achondroplastic dwarfs expe-

with Pearson and Ploetz, that where the rience great difficulty at childbirth, when a

parents live into advanced age groups there C~esarian operation is commonly necessary,

is a marked decrease in the mortality of a fact indicating a strong tendency of

their children. There seems to be no natural selection to eliminate such stocks.

plausible explanation of all these results, If natural selection fails to eradicate

except by the hypothesis that long life in strains exhibiting club-foot, syndactylism,

parents is correlated with inherited vigour and congenital dislocation of the hip, it is

in infancy.

because the afflicted individuals are shielded

by the helping hands of their fellows. Un-

ELIMINATION OF DEFECTS

questionably mutual aid has greatly checked the elimination of individuals having many

If, for lack of adequate data, the statis- kinds of hereditary disorders. The -here-

tical studies of natural selection have thus ditary anomalies and defects of the eyes,

far yielded rather meagre results, we have such as cataract, displaced lens, absence of

an abundance of evidence of a differential iris, and numerous others are seldom causes

death rate furnished by our rapidly increas- of death in our modern, civilized society.

ing knowledge.of human heredity. To the Neither is deafness. One can get along

extent that people die of causes of a here- with almost any kind of physical deformity

ditary character, to that extent natural and have a reasonable expectation of marry-

selection can be said to be in operation. I ing and attaining old age. It is not upon

shall give, mainly for the purpose of illus- such anomalies that natural selection is now

tration, only a few cases of the selective acting with any considerable degree of

elimination of hereditary strains. Hemo- vigour. It is rather upon more general and

philia, popularly known as ' bleeding,' is a obscure differences in constitution which

stronigly hereditary taint, being trans- affect the resistance to disease and cause a

mitted usually as a recessive sex-linked proneness to the degenerative maladies of

character. On account of the difficulty of middle and later life. These differences of

stopping hemorrhage, individuals who in- constitution give rise to proclivities, or dia-

herit this trait not infrequently bleed to theses, to various diseases which are not

death. In fact, affected males usually do transmitted as clearly defined Mendelian

not reach adult age. There are also seve- units, although they doubtless depend, like

ral related defects of the blood system that other hereditary characters, on unit factors.

frequently prove fatal.

We have evident hereditary diatheses to

Gutmann reports a family of 38 persons, asthma, nephritis, rheumatism, heart

I5 of whom died of apoplexy and 5 others disease, and a host of nervous disorders

suffered from heart disease. Hoematuria, which tend to reduce vitality and shorten

apparently a Mendelian dominant, although life. There are hereditary differences in

NATURAL SELECTION IN MAN

II

susceptibility to various germ diseases, in- a streptococcus invasion. The Negro is also

cluding probably tuberculosis and pneu- peculiarly resistant to diphtheria and to a

monia. The problem of a hereditary pre- somewhat less extent to measles, and he has

disposition to tuberculosis is one of unusual a very low rate for diseases of the skin.

difficulty, on account of familial contagion On the other hand, the high Negro mor-

and the development of immunity by mini- tality from tuberculosis and pneumonia

mal infections in early life; but it is not affords strong presumptive evidence of a

without significance that hereditary differ- hereditary susceptibility to these infections.

ences in susceptibility to tuberculosis and We may explain a part of the Negro's mor-

pneumonia have been demonstrated in ani- tality from these diseases as a result of

mals through carefully controlled experi- unfavourable environment, but the fact that

mentation. The strongly hereditary dia- our Negro recruits for the late war who

theses to cancer which are demonstrable in passed the same tests for physical fitness as

mice suggest that a similar diathesis may the whites when they were admitted to the

occur in man. And there is a fair amount army, and were kept under similar condi-

of evidence from human pedigrees giving tions in camps, nevertheless showed a rate

independent support to the same conclusion. for lobar pneumonia over three times as

high as the whites and a much higher rate

SOME RACIAL FACTORS

also for pulmonary tuberculosis and other respiratory diseases, affords strong evidence

When we compare the reactions of differ- of a hereditary diathesis for pulmonary

ent races to disease, the evidence of here- diseases. In the inter-racial struggle going

ditary racial variations in susceptibility is on between Negroes and whites in the

often quite clear. Here there is a great need United States, the selective influence of

for caution because differences in food, sani- diseases is, I am convinced, destined to play

tation, habits of life, and especially in an important' role. Although different

degrees of slowly acquired direct immuniza- diseases affect the two races in quite different

tion to various infections, afford many ways, the influence of lethal selection is, on

opportunities for erroneous interpretations. the whole, quite strongly in favour of the

For these and other reasons the great bulk whites.

of the literature on the racial incidence of

disease is quite inconclusive as to the real influence of race.

UNDIMINISHED LETHAL SELECTION

In order possibly to throw some further While the progress of medicine and

light on racial susceptibility to disease, I hygiene has reduced the action of patural

have made a compilation of all of our avail- selection in relation to defects and diseases,

able data on the mortality of Negroes and the contention that this evolutionary factor

whites from various causes in the United has been practically eliminated is quite un-

States. In general the Negroes have a justified. In one respect natural selection

much higher mortality than the whites, is probably acting with undiminished, if

and therefore the fact that there are some not actually increased vigour in our present

diseases from which they suffer relatively civilization, and that is on the basis of

little affords all the more evidence of a true native differences in intelligence. Among

racial immunity. As has long been recog- the lower forms of mental defectives, which

nized, Negroes have a remarkably low death are really pathological in origin, we find

rate from scarlet fever, the mortality of the a high death rate. Most low-grade idiots

whites being frequently over three times die before adolescence. The high death

that of the blacks. Probably for much the rates among the epileptic, the insane, and

same reason, the Negroes have a very low other victims of grave nervous disorders

death rate from erysipelas, since this indicate that those with hereditary diatheses

disease, like scarlet fever, is attributed to to such maladies tend to be eliminated by

I2 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

lethal selection. Among the kind of feeble- to about half of that of their rivals. That

minded that we commonly meet with in these differences in occupational mortality

such stocks as the Jukes and Kallikaks, should be relatively larger in the early age

physical development is probably quite as groups is of especial significance in relation

good as in the rank and file of intelligent to natural selection, because the individuals

people. Nevertheless, the death rate of are in the early part of their reproductive

such stocks is high. Vagabonds, paupers, period. After the reproductive age relative

inebriates, prostitutes, and ne'er-do-wells mortality rates have very little significance

of all sorts are not, as a rule, good actuarial for racial heredity.

risks. But another fact of the highest impor-

tance in relation to selective mortality is

SELECTION FOR INTELLIGENCE

that the death rates of infants vary enormously in different occupational groups, and

The great mass of dull-minded human that this mortality is distributed in much

beings who are incapable of acquiring more the same way as that of their parents.

than the mere rudiments of education and Tables of infant mortality according to the

are unable to succeed in occupations requir- occupation of the father were compiled for

ing skill or executive ability are forced into England and Wales after the censuses of

the ranks of unskilled and poorly-paid I91I and I92I. Occupations were graded

labour. They are compelled to live upon into a few major groups largely on the basis

relatively poor food and in insanitary of knowledge and skill. The first consists

homes; and they suffer from inadequate mainly of the professional classes, the

medical assistance when they are ill. Con- second of semi-professionals, the third of

sequently their mortality is high. If we skilled artisans, the fifth of unskilled

study tables of occupational mortality the labourers, while the fourth group is made

broad general fact will become apparent up chiefly of semi-skilled workers. In the

that the death rate, barring a number of first group infant mortality is strikingly

individual exceptions, tends to be high in low, 76.4; in the second somewhat higher,

proportion as the occupation requires little I06.4; in the third it is II2.7, and among

intelligence and skill. In our present in- the unskilled workers I52.5. Although the

dustrial society, we find an occupational major occupational classes were not quite

stratification on the basis of levels of intelli- the same in the I92 I census, the relation

gence. The differences in occupational between parental occupation and infant mor-

mortality which appear so striking are tality showed much the same gradation as

partly the direct effect of mental differences, in I91I.

and partly an indirect effect resulting from

the varied environments into which different mental levels tend to segregate. If we com-

THE EUGENIC SIGNIFICANCE

pare the death rates of general shopkeepers There is no question that the mortality

or innkeepers with those of clergymen and of some occupational groups is much higher

schoolmasters between the ages of twenty- than in others, but the eugenic significance

five and thirty-five, as given in the census of this fact depends entirely upon the extent

report for I91 I, we find that the second to which our occupational groups are charac-

group has a death rate about five times that terized by differences in hereditary endow-

of the first. In the next decade, from ments. Inasmuch as membership of the

thirty-five to forty-five years, the death first group requires rather more than usual

rates of the shopkeepers and innkeepers are mental ability, and since the mentally in-

about four times as high as those of the capable tend to gravitate into more poorly

clergymen and school teachers, but in the paid employments, we should expect, a

more advanced age groups the mortality of priori, to find a certain degree of corre-

the shopkeepers and innkeepers is reduced spondence between occupational level and in-

NATURAL SELECTION IN MAN

I3

telligence level. Thanks to several studies I40, or above the highest one-half per cent.
on this subject we have now a considerable of the school population. The financial
body of data which confirms this conclusion. status of the parents of these children was The very extensive series of mental tests not above that of the parents of children
given to American Army recruits during of ordinary intelligence who served as a the Great War reveal a marked average control group. The home environment of reduction in the intelligence score as we the gifted children was probably a little pass from occupations such as engineering more favourable than that of the rank and down to unskilled labour. A larger number file of students, but there was little in their
of researches have been carried out upon the homes and nothing in their school expeintelligence of children as related to paren- rience which would account for the out-
tal occupation. In general the scores show standing ability of these children. Their much the same gradation as those of the ability was manifested in pre-school years
occupations followed by the parents. Duff and persisted in a later period when and Thompson, in a survey of the intelli- a follow-up study was carried out, thus begence of I5,4I9 schoolchildren in Northum- having very much like a characteristic due berland in relation to the occupations of to internal factors and probably a result of their parents, find a gradation from an in- heredity. This conclusion is strengthened telligence quotient of II2.2 for children of by a study of these children's fathers who parents in the professional class down to an were found, as a rule, to follow occupations
intelligence quotient of 96 for the children requiring a superior degree of intelligence. of parents following low-grade and unskilled The largest proportion of them belonged occupations. Jones and Carr-Saunders to the professional classes, or what would report much the same relation between correspond with Group I of the Registrarparental occupation and the intelligence of General's classification. Those who fit into orphan children. In a study of 2,782 chil- Group II contributed the next largest prodren in Wisconsin it was found that there portion. A smaller number came from was a range of scores from i i5 for children the homes of skilled artisans, while unof the professional class, to 89 for those of skilled labour contributed the lowest prounskilled labourers, and the intelligence portion of all, namely 0.2 per cent. quotients showed a high correlation (o.74 to Of course, it may be objected that all this 0.79) with the intelligence quotients of the discussion of occupation mortality and infathers' occupations as indicated by the army telligence is futile because the gradation tests. of intelligence found in these occupations
It would be possible to adduce the results simplv reflects the influence of environment of several other researches in this field, but and opportunity. But this objection enas they show a substantial agreement, these counters a serious difficulty in the fact, illustrations must suffice. Intelligence quo- which is becoming more clearly established tients, whatever they may mean, are cer- as the results of investigation accumulate, tainly characteristic of various occupational that the intelligence quotient is a very congroups. If we study the proportion in stant attribute of human beings, and when which these groups furnish children who fairly estimated is normally capable of little become distinguished for intellectual modification. One cannot make good ability achievement, as indicated by taking impar- out of inborn dullness. Families show tially chosen lists of great men, we find a differences in ability far greater than those similar gradation. One of the most signifi- which training or cultural advantages are cant studies bearing on our problem is capable of producing. In the light of what Terman's inquiry into the parentage of is known of the distribution of test scores i,ooo very exceptional children in the Cali- in occupational groups, one can only confornia schools. Only those children were clude that human beings are segregated to a chosen whose intelligence quotient was over large extent on the basis of inherited levels

I4 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of intelligence. Of course, all grades of tality rates and levels of intelligence, quite

ability may be found even in the lowest regardless of social or occupational groups,

occupations, and sometimes very mediocre it would be a much more satisfactory pro-

ability may get into the higher ones. We cedure. The eugenist has no concern with

are dealing with conditions which apply to social groups per se. The data on intelli-

groups and to which there are many indi- gence quotients in occupational classes afford

vidual exceptions.

him about the only available material on

If the results of psychological tests are of an extensive scale bearing upon the relation

any value whatever in gauging relative between intelligence and selective elimina-

differences in ability, we are forced to con- tion. If he would gain an insight into the

clude that the distribution of mortality in workings of natural selection he must per-

occupational groups affords at least a rough force use this material for what it is worth.

index of the action of natural selection in The complex economic system under

eliminating inferior intelligence. Inas- which we live exposes people to very

much as the members of any occupational diverse conditions, which make very great

group vary greatly in mental qualities, differences in their average expectations of

there are probably marked variations in life. In a mainly pastoral or agricultural

mortality, correlated with intelligence levels period of development, when people followed

within each group. Dr. H. T. Ashby (In- very similar pursuits and lived in much the

fant Mortality, p. 42), in speaking of in- same way, the incidence of mortality was

vestigations carried on in New York, doubtless much more uniform. Under such

remarks:

circumstances a high-grade moron with

" The unanimous opinion of the doc-

sufficient intelligence to follow the ordinary pursuits of his tribe would probably have

tors who made the observations, was that nearly as good a chance as his neighbour,

neither the surroundings of the infant, nor the exact character. of the milk ob-
tained, were as important factors in the health of the infant as the intelligent care of the mother." And the same writer further states that, " Competent and
good mothers are to be found living side
by side in the same street with ignorant and careless ones. The husbands of each are earning very likely the same wages,
yet the home of the one will be probably
always clean, the children will also be clean and attend school regularly, while next door everything is dirt and squalor, and only two or three out of probably a large family have been successfully reared. The essential difference will be the amount of intelligence and care be-

who might be a mute, inglorious Milton. The present economic order is much more
deadly to people with dull minds.t It is not improbable that at present the intelligence quotient is on an average the most important single factor in survival. In proportion as we have developed a highly industrialized civilization, the main incidence of selection has been shifted from physical characteristics to mental traits. To a degree unparalleled in previous ages expectation of long life has come to depend upon better endowments of brains. The
ministrations of natural selection therefore, in the restricted sense in which I have been
employing the term, are working steadily to promote the evolution of intelligence.

stowed upon infant life."*

THE DIFFERENTIAL BIRTH RATE

It is unfortunate that in studying our prob- From the standpoint of eugenics, this is lem we are unable to get away from the dis- a highly satisfactory condition and one upcussion of social classes. If we could in- on which we might be inclined to congratuvestigate directly the relation between mor- late ourselves, were it not for the fact that

* See also Poverty, Nutrition, and Growth, a t See the Report of the Mental Deficiency Com-

Report of the Medical Research Council, 1927.

mittee. Part IV, page 95.

NATURAL SELECTION IN MAN

the effect of natural selection is probably much less than is commonly imagined.

more than counteracted by the dysgenic in- Strive as we may to save our weaker fellow

fluence of the differential birth rate. After creatures from the consequences of their

all, as was pointed out before, it is the net many and often obscure hereditary defects,

survival rate, or the surplus of births over we shall never have the knowledge, if we

deaths, that determines the direction of had the power, to substitute completely

evolution. But we may at least hope that other factors for the operation of natural

the future will bring a substantial reduction selection. The grim reaper will always aid

of the evils of differential fecundity. There us, as he has done in countless past ages,

is indeed some evidence that in certain large by his kindly ministrations. We need to

urban communities much progress toward have a better knowledge of his ways, for

this goal has already been made. If it is they are often mysterious, but it is to be

permissible for a eugenist to indulge now hoped not past all finding out. What is

and then in a bit of optimism, he might especially needed is an abundance of full

picture an era, possibly far off, to be sure, and accurate family records in different

when the fertility of subnormal humanity hereditary classes, with precise information

will be reduced below that of the bearers of as to the cause of death in each member.

superior heredity. When this happy con- The essential thing to know is how people

dition arrives, the race will find itself once who die early differ from those who die late.

more on the highway toward real biological And this knowledge should cover not only

improvement. Unless the present operation physical conditions, but also mental capa-

of the differential death rate comes to be city. We should have therefore more accu-

very profoundly modified, natural selection rate diagnosis of the causes of death and

would then be working toward the promo- more adequate measures of real intelli-

tion of eugenic progress. We cannot, of gence.

course, expect that natural selection will The principal reason why our knowledge

always continue to act as strongly as at pre- of natural selection has made so little pro-

sent in the elimination of inferior types of gress is because we really know so little

mental heredity. The reduction of the about ourselves. I cannot see how our in-

death rate will probably occur in the future sight into the problem can be very greatly

by saving more lives, especially in in- enhanced until we accumulate and record

fancy, among the lower occupational more facts about individual persons and the

groups, but as our present industrial civi- reasons why they die. This knowledge

lization may be regarded for all practical may be difficult to obtain and may come

purposes as a permanent condition, it will slowly, but it is essential for the real scien-

be a very long time before the differential tific treatment of our problem.

death rate on the basis of levels of intelli-

gence will be reduced to a factor of minor importance.

CONCLUSION

In the present lecture, I have attempted

THE RESEARCH NEEDED

to bring together some scraps of information which have been gathered upon our

Whatever advances our race may make in topic and to point out some features of selec-

the promotion of eugenic improvement, it tive elimination which have not received so

will never be able to eliminate the relatively much attention. But I can report only

high death rate of inferior hereditary types. very modest achievements in this field.

The reduction of mortality has probably We have scarcely progressed beyond the

occurred largely through the removal of stage of learning what kinds of facts we

non-selective, or mildly selective, causes of need to know in order to find out how natu-

death, so that we have really succeeded in ral selection works. We know that it still

reducing the action of natural selection works towards the elimination of undesir-

i6 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

able types of humanity and that its workings have been greatly modified by social progress. In some respects it has doubtless
been reduced in effectiveness; but I am convinced, even though no one else agrees with me, that in other ways it may be

working more vigorously than ever. A fac-
tor of great biological importance it will always remain, do what we may, and however bungling our efforts at eugenic reform may prove to be, it will always aid in the development of a better adjusted race.

THE ETHICS OF STERILIZATION

Two Letters Provoked by Recent Opinions

From the Reverend Father M'Nabb, O.P. lization by an appeal to ethical principles

would be valuable, I feel I have no right to

SIR,-As you do me the honour to reply ask your hospitality for such a favour. Yet

to my quotation from St. Thomas I should be glad to point out that your

Aquinas by giving another quotation appeal to St. Thomas in support of steri-

from St. Thomas, perhaps you would do me lization is not valid.

the favour to add a further word to the 3. You will notice that St. Thomas does

discussion.

not once mention the word " sterilization,"

i. My quotation was eminently relevant, but the word " mutilation." The reason for

"No one should unjustly hurt another in his silence is that there is a wide difference

order to further the common good."* Al- between the two words. St. Thomas takes

though this principle was appealed to in the mutilation to mean the " removal of a mem-

matter of injustice through false accusation, ber of the human body." Sterilization is

yet it was a broad principle of justice which the " removal of a procreative member or

would be a fortiori applicable to the matter element of the human in order to prevent

of ' sterilization.'

procreation. "

2. I must express my gratitude that you St. Thomas wrote the article in order to

have printed verbatim the whole article of prove what some denied, that it was lawful

St. Thomas. Discussion tends to be more to save life by cutting off a limb. The very

prolonged than profitable when the autho- first objection is directed against those-

rities are merely referred to or are given Christian scientists before our day !-who

in fragments. Moreover, it is all to the argued that all mutilation or, as we should

good that the most fundamental matter of say, all amputation was against nature and

social justice should be discussed, as therefore against morality.

Aquinas always discusses such matters, in But it is quite clear that, though ampu-

the calm atmosphere of ethical principles. tation is not in itself morally evil, ampu-

But though a scholarly discussion on steri- tation done under certain circumstances,

and especially under the circumstance

of aim or purpose, may be morally evil.

* Summa Theologica, Part II, IIae, Q. lviii, Art. 3. Thus amputation against the will of the am-

In the same spirit St. Thomas, the Doctor Veritatis putated would be morally evil. Or again,

(Doctor of Truth), says: " It is not lawful to tell a lie in order to deliver another from any danger what-
ever " [Ibid., Q.IIo. Art. 3].

if a Catholic surgeon removed the editor's eyes in order to damage the EUGENICS

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXII, No. 1.

