THE STUDY OF HEREDITY.
PREFACE.
THE number of persons who, though not experts in scientific matters, are interesting themselves in eugenics is steadily increasing, and many of them desire to obtain a sound but general knowledge of the scientific basis of our creed. The elementary books which have been written on heredity have generally been designed for the use of those who wish to pursue the subject but little further, or for those who already possess some educational foundation in biology. The would-be eugenist therefore, often finds himself in difficulties when consulting more advanced works, and it has been felt that his path would be made much easier by the study of a work especially designed to meet his needs. The Council therefore approached Professor MacBride on this subject, and he has most kindly undertaken to write four introductory Lectures, which, after first appearing in the Journal, will then be obtainable as a separate pamphlet. Professor MacBride's high reputation as a Zoologist, and as a writer on evolution generally, which need not here be emphasized, fully guarantees the soundness of the views here expressed. Of course, in such a brief space it has only been possible to paint with a fairly broad brush the generally accepted scientific truths concerning heredity, and not to make any attempt to break new ground, which, indeed, was not wanted in the circumstances. A good many new technical words will have to be faced by the non-scientific reader, which will, no doubt, tax the memory of the beginner rather severely. But the more familiar the enquirer becomes with the meaning of these terms, the easier will he find it to pursue the subject in other works, and these lectures may usefully be retained by such readers as a storehouse of valuable information on first principles to be consulted anew in case of doubt or difficulty.
LEONARD DARWIN, President.

THE STUDY OF HEREDITY.
By E. W. MACBRIDE.
PART II.
HAVING in Part I. come to the conclusion that father and mother are equally potent in transmitting their qualities to their offspring, despite the fact that the father's contribution to the zygote consists only of the minute fragment of nuclear matter contained in the head of the spermatozoon, we should naturally suppose that the offspring would always be exactly intermediate in character between the two parents in all qualities not directly or indirectly related to sex. Again, however, common experience-the foundation of all science-teaches us that this is not so, but that on the contrary between members of the same family considerable differences may manifest themselves, and that no two members of the same litter of mammals, or of the same brood of nestling birds, are exactly alike. These differences between the children of the same parents constitute what is known as variation. Now everyone knows that in both animal and vegetable kingdoms there is an amazing number of kinds of animals and of plants respectively, each capable of reproducing its like. These kinds exhibit all degrees of likeness with each other; but each kind-so far as our knowledge goes-is kept distinct from neighbouring and similar kinds by the circumstance that when members of one kind unite with those of
another in sexual union either no offspring at all are produced, or if offspring are produced these are comparatively sterile. A familar instance of such sterile offspring, produced by a cross between two distinct kinds of animal, is the mule.
The question then arises as to whether all kinds of organism have existed since the beginning of life on the earth, or, if not, how they have come into existence. Now the evidence of fossils teaches us most clearly that many kinds of animals and plants which formerly existed have died out, and although negative evidence in such matters is of minor value, yet the gradual and progressive manner in which the higher types of life make their appearance-as we pass from older to newer rocks-make us morally certain that most of the types of organism now living did not exist from the beginning of life, but made their appearance successively as time went on.

THE STUDY OF HEREDITY.

139

Only two hypotheses as to the manner of the appearance of new forms have ever been put forward; these are (i) the hypothesis of creation, and (2) the hypothesis of evolution. The hypothesis of creation assumes that the Infinite Author of all
things, from time to time, by a direct and extraordinary exercise
of supernatural power, established a new kind of organism, either by creating it out of nothing, or, perhaps, by compelling certain pre-existing particles of dead matter to come together and mould themselves into an organic form. The great
objection to this theory is that since it is only possible to judge of the probable action of the Supreme Being in the past, by observing His action in the present, we are driven to the con-
clusion that such special direct interference did not occur, but
that God's action in the past, as in the present, has manifested
itself through those regular and calculable activities which we denominate natural laws.
The hypothesis of evolution assumes that, in some way,
the newer kinds of animals and plants were developed out of the older kinds. The difficulty arises when we attempt to define
in what way the change took place. At the end of the eighteenth
and at the beginning of the nineteenth century some thinkers
had put forward forms of evolutionary hypothesis, but the objec.-
tion raised by scientific naturalists to all these hypotheses was
that they contradicted common experience as to what was
happening now in the world of living things around us, and
were consequently unscientific.
In I859, however, Charles Darwin, in a book termed the "Origin of Species," put forward a modification of the evolutionary theory which overcame the difficulties experienced by the naturalists of the day, and which in the succeeding twentyfive years won its way to almost universal acceptance. No book ever made so profound a change in the ways of thinking of educated people and their outlook on the world, as did this one. For this reason, as well as for its own intrinsic excellence, the " Origin of Species " will always remain an imperishable
classic in our literature, and every one interested in hereditary science should study it carefully, especially in these days, when
a knowledge of this book is too often taken for granted, and when, moreover, Darwin's theory of evolution is often confused

140 EUGENICS REVIEW.
in the popular mind with other theories of evolution, as, for instance, that of the late Herbert Spencer.
Spencer's theory of evolution was a philosophical doctrine, which sought to comprehend under one formula all the activities of the universe, from the formation of planets to that of men. With the validity or non-validity of Spencer's ideas we, as biologists, have nothing to do; that is an affair for the metaphysicians. Darwin's theory, on the other hand, is a strictly biological hypothesis which, taking for granted only those powers and qualities of living beings which we can now observe, attempts to show that under certain circumstances, given a sufficient lapse of time, these qualities would lead to the production of new kinds of animals and plants. If we give a very brief and necessarily imperfect sketch of this theory, this must not in any way be taken as a substitute for the necessity of the study of the " Origin of Species " itself.
The different kinds of animal and plant, separated from one another by the barrier of comparative sterility when crossed, are what are termed species. These species are united into groups termed genera, the members of which show special likeness to one another. Similarly the genera are united into families, the families into tribes, the tribes into orders, the orders into classes, and the classes into phyla. The number of grades in these higher groupings which we choose to employ is a matter of taste, depending on the extent to which we wish to express the various degrees of likeness to one another which different species exhibit. Frequently intermediate grades, such as sub-class and sub-order, have to be introduced; but all are agreed that the differences between various genera, families, etc., are merely further degrees of the distinctions which separate one allied species from another; and it is, therefore, evident that if we could find how these distinctions originated the problem of the evolution of the animal and vegetable kingdoms would be
solved-at least, in principle. It is for this reason that Darwin termed his book " The Origin of Species."
Of course, it must be remembered that the experiment of crossing different species with one another has only been tried

THE STUDY OF HEREDITY.

141

in a minority of cases, so that the vast majority of specific determinations, both in the animal and in the vegetable kingdom, rest on provisional hypotheses, but these hypotheses, viz., that the forms in question are separated by barriers of
sterility, are being continually confirmed by fresh experiments so that our confidence in them grows continually. Some few so-called species when crossed will produce fertile offspring, but in the overwhelming preponderance of cases there is absolute, or nearly absolute, sterility when such experiments are made.
The position of affairs when Darwin's book was written was that naturalists believed that each species of plants and animals had originated from a single pair, which had come into existence by a special act of creation at one particular place.
But the same naturalists recognised the existence of subdivisions of species, which they termed " varieties." These were distinguished from one another by slighter differences than those which separated species, and varieties of the same species were fertile with one another. These varieties were then believed to have developed in some way out of the parent species; they were not supposed to have been specially created. Now Darwin begins by showing that the greatest experts differed on the subject of what were species and what were varieties; that it was
abundantly clear that (in the absence of breeding experiments)
no sharp line could be drawn between varieties and species, and that it was absurd to admit that varietal differences were due to natural causes, but to call in special Divine agency to account for specific differences. Then he goes on to point out that the various breeds of domestic animals, especially pigeons, are separated by differences of structure much wider than those which divide natural species, or even genera, and that though pigeon fanciers regard these breeds as derived from distinct wild species, there can be no doubt that all domestic pigeons are derived from the wild rock-pigeon, Columba livia. In the case of dogs where there is some evidence to show that different wild species have given rise to different breeds of dogs in different parts of the world, yet the distinctions between these wild species give no clue to the origin of such extraordinary aberrations of structure as are found in such breeds as the dachshund

I142 EUGENICS REVIEW.
and the bulldog. From a study of the methods pursued by the breeders of domestic animals, Darwin arrives at the conclusion that the striking features of these aberrant breeds have been built up, step by step, through the selection by the breeder, for mating and propagation, of those members of the litters which' showed the most indication of the desired qualities. The breeder lays hold of variations amongst the offspring, often inappreciable to the untrained eye, which point in the direction of the aberrancies of structure which he wishes to emphasise. Then Darwin goes on to point out that every species of animal and plant tends to produce offspring at such a rate, that in a very short time it would overrun the globe and crush out all other forms of life unless it were checked by the premature death
of by far the greater number of the offspring; that those which
finally survive long enough to reach maturity and propagate their kind, will be those whose organisation best fits them to withstand the adverse influences surrounding them and to obtain their food. The result of this " struggle for existence," as Darwin calls it, is that there is a survival of the fittest. It is as if an all-wise breeder were to select the few best of the enormous stock produced by every wild species for purposes of propagation. In order to emphasise the parallelism between the action of Nature and the action of the breeder, Darwin coined the phrase " natural selection."
So long as a species remains under constant conditions the effect of natural selection would merely be to keep up the standard of " fitness," but if a species were to spread over a wide extent of territory in different parts of the globe, in which different demands were made on the organisms by the environment, then the species would become broken up into two divergent races, owing to the different standards of fitness prevailing in the two regions.
Amongst the higher animals there are many cases where a contest takes place between males for the possession of the females; and, in some cases, the most vigorous and well-armed male succeeds and alone gives rise to offspring; but, in other cases, the female selects her mate and the males indulge in contest before her of song, or of display of colour, or of both, and

THE STUDY OF HEREDITY.

I43

in this case the most attractive male is chosen. To the outcome of these two kinds of contest Darwin applied the name of sexual selection. According to his view the result of the first
kind of contest was the development of great horns, antlers and tusks in male animals, whilst the outcome of the second kind was to be looked for in the song of birds and in the colours of
their plumage. The difficulty of explaining how the barrier of sterility,
which now usually divides species arose, was only partially overcome by Darwin. But he showed that much the same kind of sterility can exist between members of the same species, as, for instance, between the pin and thrum varieties of the wild primrose; and he argued that if such sterility could arise within the limits of a species, it was surely possible to conceive how sterility might arise between different species as a sort of by-product of increasing divergence of organisation.
There were some difficulties urged against Darwin's theory at the time of its first publication, to which he thought fit to devote a great deal of attention, which now are hardly regarded as difficulties any longer. We may note the two most important of these. They are (X) that organs which now exhibit the most beautiful refinement of mechanism, such as the eye, were supposed by Darwin to have been developed from insignificant rudiments, which could have been of no use to their possessors and could not have determined their survival.
(2) That if species had originated as Darwin postulated, the rocks should be full of the remains of intermediate forms connecting species with species, whereas fossil forms appear abruptly and separated from one another by wide gaps.
Now as regards the first of the difficulties, fifty years of research have taught us that complex organs do not arise from insignificant rudiments, but from simpler organs which serve the same purposes, though in humbler degree, as the more complicated organs to which they give rise. The simpler organs, in turn, have arisen from the general sensitiveness of living matter, of which they are only local intensifications.
As to the lack of links between fossils, further exploration has brought to light several cases where the gradual passage

I44 EUGENICS REVIEW.
from one form to another has been effected by as numerous and small steps as the most ardent evolutionist could desire. It is clear that the reasons why such links have not been found oftener are first, as Darwin pointed out, the extreme imperfection of the geological record and the chances against any particular animal being preserved and being found by the geologist, and, secondly, that when a species underwent modification, this occurred in a definite locality, from which it overran the world when a certain level of efficiency had been attained. Unless the actual locality where the change took place is found evidence of gradual evolution is bound to be missing. In the case of-both the horse and the elephant these localities have been discovered, and in these two cases a complete chain of ancestors has been discovered.
On reviewing this famous theory we find as its foundation stone a certain tacit assumption, which is no where clearly enunciated by Darwin. The struggle for existence, the survival of the fittest, and natural selection are self-evident when once they have been clearly stated. But if natural selection is to effect any change, then, when one of a family survives because in some point it is a little better equipped than its brothers and sisters, it is tacitly assumed that some of the descendants of this survivor well exhibit this point in still stronger measure than did their progenitor. If this were not the case then all that natural selection could do would be to weed out the weaklings, it could effect no progressive improvement. Darwin believed that this assumption was justified in regard to natural species, because he found that breeders acted on it when endeavouring to improve domestic breeds, and that their confidence was on the whole justified by the event. But he did not go as far as did his contemporary Wallace, who asserted that members of the same brood differed from one another in every feature, and that selection in respect to any one of them was bound to lead to its exaggeration or diminution according to the wish of the breeder, who chose for his stock those individuals which exhibited it in a greater or less degree. Darwin contented himself with saying that differences between members of the same family were always present and were sometimes inherited.

THE STUDY OF HEREDITY.

145

If these individual differences had the tremendous significance which Darwin and Wallace attributed to them, it was clearly of the first importance that they should be measured; and this step was taken by Sir Francis Galton, Darwin's cousin, who devised a scheme for the measurement of the inheritance of individual peculiarities among the human population. A short account of how this scheme was applied to the question of the inheritance of stature will exemplify its character. Galton offered a considerable sum of money as prizes for good family records of stature, and in this way he secured a large supply of data. When he came to analyse these he found that on the average adult women were shorter than adult men, and that the ratio of the average male stature to the average female stature was as I3 to 12. For this reason he felt justified in multiplying all his figures for female stature by ixo8, thereby implying that each woman if she had been a man would have been taller in that proportion. In this way he got rid, in this respect, of the disturbing factor of sex. He next sorted his records into groups, in which no individual differed from another in height by more than half an inch. Then a distance (abscissa) was measured from one fixed point along a horizontal line, proportional to the mean stature of each of these groups, these ranging from 62 to 76 inches. At the end of each line on the point corresponding to the stature of each group, a perpendicular (ordinate) was erected, proportional in length to the number of individuals comprised in that group, and through the summits of these upright lines a curve was then drawn. The more numerous the measurements upon which the curve was based the smoother it became, and as the number of measurements was increased the curve continually approached a geometrical form well known to mathematicians, called the curve of error. If x represent the length of the abscissa, and y the length of the corresponding ordinate, then the relation between these two is defined by the equation y=ke --h2 x2 where h and k are constants which define the slope of the curve, and e is the logarithmic base.
To those unversed in mathematics it may be explained that the shape of the curve is that of a summit having a slope of the same steepness on both sides, the inclination of which diminishes

146 EUGENICS REVIEW. as it approaches the horizontal axis with which it tends to coincide, but never quite succeeds in reaching. Translated into ordinary language this curve indicates that in a sufficiently large sample of the population taken at random, a considerable proportion may be described as being of medium stature (this is generally indicated by the height of the ordinate at the summit of the curve), that the number of those who are taller and of those who are shorter than the mean stature by a given amount is approximately equal, and that the number of giants and of dwarfs is extremely
-
5, s^ 53 54 53 56 S7 58 59 b0 61 6263 b4 65 66 6 b68697TO rf (23475r6 r
FIG. I. Diagram to show the distribution of stature amongst 20,000 recruits of the American
army. The figures on the base line indicate height in inches. The figures at the side indicate numbers of recruits in thousands. The dotted line indicates
the continuous curve to which the records appToximate.
small. Galton termed the value of the abscissa, which corresponds to the ordinate indicating the number of the population having statures not sensibly different from the mean, the median, and indicated it bv the symbol M. The difference between the median and the mean value of the statures of any

THE STUDY OF HEREDITY.

I 47

class is known as the deviation of that class. If we now select two individuals from the population one of whom is taller than one quarter of the population and shorter than the remaining three-quarters, and the other of whom is taller than threequarters of the population and shorter than one quarter, then the deviations of the statures of these individuals from the mean are known as Lhe quartiles, and are designated by the symbols
Q, and Q1. If the curve were perfectly symmetrical Q would be
equal to Ql, but in practice the smoothness and perfect proportions of the ideal curve of error are never attained, and so
Galton used the mean of the quartiles Q +20 as a measure of 2
the variability. For mathematical reasons modern workers on heredity,
who use Galton's methods, generally employ another measure of the variability. This measure used to rejoice in the extremely unfortunate name of probable error-a name against which Galton emphatically protests-but is now called the
standard deviation. It is arrived at in this way. We take the
deviation of each group, square it and multiply it by the number of individuals in the group. We add together all the values so obtained, divide the sum by the total number of
~ nindividuals measured, and take the square root of the whole.

Suppose the letters e,, e2, etc., represent the values of the deviations corresponding to the different groups, and n,, n2,
etc., the numbers of individuals in those groups, and n the

total number of individuals measured, then the formula for the

probable error " is

/ n1e2 + n2e22 + n3e32

Having discovered a method of expressing at the same time the value and frequency of a variation, the next step was to investigate how far it was inherited. By adding together the statures of the father and of the mother (reduced to the male standard) and dividing the sum by two a value is arrived at which Galton denominates the stature of the mid-parent. First we take the statures of the children of the group of mid-parents having the same stature and determine their mean. Then the statures of each parental group are plotted out along a horizontal

148 EUGENICS REVIEW.
line, and the means of the statures of the children are indicated by ordinates erected at the corresponding points. If the average stature of the child corresponded exactly to the stature of the mid-parental group, from which it is descended, a series of points would be defined which would be on the diagonal of a square, the side of which was equal to the differences between the two extreme statures measured. As a matter of fact these points do lie in a straight line which is not the diagonal of the square,

64 72 7o

A
66 68

UX
To 7.

J *s

fZ

68

f66

I ,L

I

64

YY

B

FIG. 2.
Diagram illustrating the c.orrelation of the height of children, with their mid-parents. The figures along the upper horizontal line indic.atd the heights of various midparental gToups in inches, those along the vertical line the mean heights of the corresponding groups of children. A B is a linle drawn through the point indicating the height of mid-parental groun of medium stature. X V is the line on which the points indicating the heights of the children would lie if t-hey corresponded exactly to those of the parents. U V is the line on which the values indicating the statures
of the children actually do lie.
but cuts that diagonal in its centre, since parents of medium
stature have children of medium stature, and cuts the upper side
of the square in a point some distance from its end. The relation
of the distance between the mid-point of the upper side of the
square, which corresponds to the mean stature of both parents and
children, and the point where this line cuts it, and of the distance
from the mid-point to the end of the side of the square, is what

THE STUDY OF HEREDITY.

149

Galton called the coefficient of regression of filial stature on midparental stature. It is more commonly called the coefficient of correlation, and its value in this instance is about two-thirds.
As we see in Fig. 2 it is equivalent to the tangent of the angle A M U, i.e., the angle between the ordinate corresponding to the mean parental stature and the line representing the mean statures of the filial groups, since AX=AM. Translated into ordinary language it means this, that people of average stature have children also of average stature, that tall people have on the whole tall children, but not so tall as the stature of the parents would lead one to expect, and similarly that the children of short people are not proportionately as short as their parents.
The mnethods of Galton were applied by Weldon to the measurement of the variations of animals, but few cases
present such simple conditions as those of human stature. We may take for instance the common shore-crab, Carcinus moenas. This little green crustacean familiar to all visitors to our seacoast occurs between tidemarks, hiding in pools and under seaweed left bare by the receding tide. It varies considerably in shape, some specimens being comparativly broad and others rather slim waisted. But if we wish to determine the curve of error for this variation, it is of no use plotting out absolute measurements of the breadth of carapace along our abscissa line, for the crabs vary so much in size that a given value might correspond to the breadth of the carapace of a small broad crab or that of a larger slim one. If, however, we divide each absolute value of the breadth of the carapace by its length, then we obtain a fraction which indicates the broadness or slimness of the crab, and which is independent of its size. This is the procedure which was adopted by Professor Weldon in dealing, with this case, and the fractional values which he obtained by measuring the carapaces of 500 crabs when plotted out constituted a curve of error as perfect as that yielded by the records of human stature. It is not a practicable thing to rear shore-crabs in the laboratory under experimental conditions, so that Weldon could not directly determine how far variations in the breadth of carapace were inherited, but he

I50 EUGENICS REVIEW.
was able to show that variations in the size of other organs, such as that of the great claw were correlated with the breadth of the carapace just as is the stature of children with that of their parents; there is a correspondence between changes in sizes of the two organs, but it is not a complete correspondence. But Professor Weldon was able to discover many other interesting things by measuring the carapaces of crabs of different ages. If the " curve of error " for the carapaces of young crabs be compared with the similar curve for older crabs, then it will be seen that the former curve has a more gentle slope than the latter. It is thus seen that there are much more marked deviations from the mean among younger than among older crabs;
FIG. 3. The common shore-crab, Carcinus moenas. The dotted lines indicate the dimensions
which were measured.
and the most probable explanation of this is that the more extreme types become weeded out by natural selection. In confirmation of this idea Professor Weldon tried the experiment of mixing the water in which the crabs lived with fine china clav. A great many died, but when the carapaces of all were measured it was found that those which survived had narrower carapaces than those which died; that the cause of death was the covering of the gills with silt, and that a broader carapace was associated with a broader ingress into the gill-chamber, and consequently a greater degree of clogging of the gills with silt. It may be explained that in a crab the gills are contained in two chambers roofed over by the lateral parts of the carapace, and the entrances into these chambers are slits between the inturned edges of the carapace on either side and the bases of the legs.

THE STUDY OF HEREDITY.

I5I

Professor Davenport, who carried on work on the lines begun by Weldon, was able to show how the statistical methods outlined above enable us to find out when a given population consists of two races. For when he measured various dimensions in certain small North American mammals, such as the mole, he found that the resulting curve of error had two summits, showing that *.here were two values about which the other values tended to group themselves-in a word, that the samples examined consisted of two races having different median values for the character measured.
The general conclusion to be drawn from Galton's and Weldon's researches is that the differences between members of the same family are inherited, but that there is regression towards mediocrity, that is, the divergence of the child from the mean is on the average less than that of the parent. This regression would check the gradual modification of a character by natural selection, but would not entirely prevent it, because the number of progeny that survive is only such a small proportion of those that are born, that some few children of an exceptional parent-if only enough children are produced-are sure to be more exceptional than the parent himself, even though the average of the children is less exceptional than the parent; if these few alone are preserved by natural selection and become the progenitors of the next generation the race will be modified. In a word the mean value of the character in the survivors exhibits a greater deviation from the average than the value of the character in the parent, although the mean value of the character in all the children deviates less.
The unsatisfying feature about all these researches is that the offspring of a whole group of parents are lumped together, and if there should be a difference in inheritability between differences in the size and shape of organs due to accidents of nutrition and differences due to different qualities in the germcells, then the methods described afford no means of making these distinctions clear. We can approach a great deal more closely to this object by what are termed pure line investigations. By a pure line is meant a group of children which are the offspring of a single parent. The t.hree cases in which a pure

f52 EUGENICS REVIEW.
line can be produced are as follows. (I) The vast majority of the higher plants and a certain number of animals belonging to different classes are hermaphrodite, i.e., the same individual produces both kinds of germ-cells, and in most cases self-fertilization is possible, so that from one parent a large population can be produced. (2) A certain number of animals exhibit parthenogenesis-i.e., produce ova which will develop without fertilization, and in these cases also a single parent can become the sole
progenitor of a large family. (3) The simple organisms termed
Protista reproduce by fission. and one specimen by repeated divisions can give rise to an enormous progeny.
The first to study the inheritability of variations within a pure line was the Swedish investigator Johannsen.
Johannsen worked with the common bean-plant (Phaseolus). He found that ordinary beans differ from one another in weight, beans of medium weight being the most numerous, whilst unduly light and heavy specimens were comparatively rare. If the heavier beans were sown and plants raised from them, when these plants produced beans the average weight of these was greater than the average weight of the beans produced by the plants raised from the beans of lighter weight, whilst beans of medium weight gave rise to plants bearing beans of medium weight. Nevertheless the same " regression to mediocrity," which was noted in the case of human stature, can also be observed here. The average weight of beans produced by sowing the heavier beans, though greater than the average of the beans produced from sowing the beans of medium weight, was not proportionately greater, and the same was true, mutatis mutandis, for the beans produced by sowing the beans of lighter weight. But when the beans produced by self-fertilizing the flowers of a single plant were separated, and heavier, lighter and medium beans selected from the crop thus produced, and separate " pure lines " produced from single samples of such beans and the resulting progenies weighed, then a totally different result was obtained. It then appeared that curves of error calculated from the weights of the offspring of a heavy bean, and of a light bean respectively, had the same median values, provided that heavy and light beans were sisters

THE STUDY OF HEREDITY.

153

descended from the same plant. In a word it appeared that differences in weight between sister beans were not inherited; that such differences which Johannsen termed fluctuations were due to differences in nutrition, and did not affect the hereditary mechanism, which was the same for all.
Agar took up for examination the parthenogenetic waterflea, Simocephalus. This little crustacean is about - inch long, and is an inhabitant of our ponds and ditches. The hinder part

r- - - -1

FIG. 4.
Side-view of Daphizia a crustacean closely allied to Simocephalus. B. The broodpouch. The upper dotted line shows the dimension which was measured.
if its body is enveloped by two flaps of skin stiffened by horny matter, which constitute a bivalve shell or carapace. Its head projects in front bearing a single compound eye and two great forked feelers, or antenna, by strokes of which it swims. The two flaps of the carapace are united in the middle line above the back of the animal. The legs behind the mQuth are thin, leaf-like,
and flexible, for which reason ,Simocephalus is classed with the
Phyllopoda or Leaf-footed Crustacea. The animal usually swims lying on its back, and the space between the back and the united valves of the carapace forms a convenient pocket into which the eggs pass as soon as they are laid. In this pocket, or " brood-pouch " as it is termed, they develop until they are ready
to hatch and take up a free life. They feed from the beginning, as did their parents, on minute plants found swimming in the

1 s4 EUGENICS REVIEW.
water; they moult four times, growing considerably at each mnoult, and their attainment of the adult condition is marked by their giving birth to living young.
In the autumn some of the eggs develop into males, and these males then fertilize the eggs which the females have produced. These fertilized eggs surround themselves with thick egg-shells, and lie dormant during the winter. The skin lining the brood-pouch of the mother becomes thickened by a stiff deposit of horny matter. This deposit is eventually moulted and falls to the bottom, enclosing the fertilized eggs in the brood-pouch. Such a structure is called an ephippium. In the spring these eggs develop and hatch out as young Simocephalus, but these young Simocephalus, so long as the temperature is mild and food abundant, produce eggs which develop into females d'irectly without any fertilization at all, this being the parthenogenesis.
Agar began by collecting ephippia fronm a stream near Glasgow University. These were allowed to hatch out in the laboratory, and every young Simocephalus was isolated by itself in a corked tube, three-quarters filled with water, containing an abundant supply of microscopic plants. IIere it lived, grew, and produced young, two females of which were selected to continue the line and removed to separate tubes. Males were not produced under the conditions of the experiment. The character, whose variation Agar measured, was the length from the anterior apex of the. head to the hinder end of the united line of the carapace valves. By selecting those specimens to continue the race, which were the largest and smallest respectively of the brood produced by each parent without fertilization, Agar was able to determine whether such differences were or were not inherited. He arrived at the conclusion that they were not inherited. The offspring of the smaller specimens were at birth actually rather larger on the average than the offspring of the larger specimens, whilst when they had attained the adult condition they were just about the same size. It must be mentioned that these crustaceans are extremely susceptible to changes in temperature, and in the quality of the water which may favour or arrest their growth, and Agar had not only to

THE STUDY OF HEREDITY.

I55

strive to keep the conditions constant, but to make corrections for alterations due to the altering environment.
Finally, we must mention the experiments of Jennings. This observer chose as the subject of his experiments the Protist Paramecium, well known to all students of elementary biology as the Slipper-Animalcule. This little creature is shaped somewhat like a bedroom slipper without a heel. The part corresponding to the toe is thick, the rest of the animal is like a thin scoop. It is covered all over with short vibratile hairs termed cilia, by means of which it propels itself about. It reproduces

FIG. 5.
Showing three "pure lines" of Paramecium. The sign (+) marks the median value in each line.
by dividing itself into two by a line of fission at right angles to its long diameter. At considerable intervals it undergoes a process known as conjugation. In this process two specimens approach one another and adhere together. Then an interchange of nuclear matter takes place between the two and they then separate, being now known as ex-conjugates. This process has been compared with the sexual process amongst higher animals. Jennings selected from a culture six conjugating pairs

i-6 EUGENICS REVIEW.
and two ex-conjugates-fourteen specimens in all. Each of these was isolated in a separate culture-dish and allowed to reproduce itself by fission. The quality, the variation of which Jennings measured, was the length. He found that the offspring of his fourteen selected specimens included six different strains of Paramecium differing from one another in length, for if the offspring of each of them were measured, so as to give rise to a separate curve of error, it was found that no less than six different median values were to be found. It is true that a giant might be selected from a strain of low median value, which was bigger than a dwarf belonging to a strain of high median value, but the offspring of such a giant were no longer on the average than those of a dwarf belonging to the same strain, and were decidedly shorter than those of a dwarf belonging to a strain which had a higher median value. It follows that in the case of Paramecium, as in those of Simocephalus and the bean, variations appearing within the pure line are not inheritable. It is to be noted that Jennings, like Agar, had to introduce numerous corrections, for the length attained by a given specimen of Paramecium is not only determined by the strain to which it belongs but also depends on temperature, crowding, and the chemical nature of the solution in which it is situated.
The concordant results obtained in three sets of experiments in different types of pure line may well give us food for serious reflection. The obvious inference seems to be that in each natural population there exist a large number of strains, each with its fixed unalterable quality of heredity, and that the apparent uniformity in character of the species is due to the constant intercrossing of these strains. The appearance of the possibility of modifying the species by selection would, on this hypothesis, be due to the fact that certain strains would be graduallv eliminated, and the population " purified " by being gradually reduced until it consisted solely of individuals belonging to one desired strain. It is obvious that an explanation of this kind is, at first sight, extremely unsatisfying.
We started out in the hope of being able to find an explanation of the multiplicity and diversity of species, and we

THE STUDY OF HEREDITY.

157

seem to be driven to admit a totally unexplained multiplicity of strains. As to how these strains originated two views have been put forward-one, that new strains arise by the combination of pre-existing strains, and the other that new strains appear suddenly as a consequence of what can only be termed internal accidents, possibly excited by external causes. In the next article we shall examine in turn the evidence which has been brought forward in support of each of these hypotheses.

