PREVENTIVE MEDICINE

And the role of Genetics in its Future Development

By C. P. BLACKER, M.A., M.D., M.R.C.P.

Address to Section J of the Centenary Meeting (I93I) of the British Association.

IN order to determine the possible role precept that all men have equal rights, even

of genetics within the limited sphere of when it is not confused with the belief that

the future of preventive medicine, it is they have equal abilities and aptitudes,

first necessary that we should form an idea have often been repelled by the idea of

of its applicability to human beings in eugenics. It is an unfortunate fact that,

their widest possible context. The question through the emphasis laid by some writers

is a particularly difficult one by reason of upon the relation between heredity and

the formidable prejudices which it excites. social position, eugenics has appeared to

Whereas everyone ' believes in heredity ' many as a system of camouflaged class-

where the breeding of animals and plants prejudice masquerading in the guise of a

is concerned, many apparently think that pseudo-science.

this process has little bearing on man. The Thus to the Tory ' diehard ' the belief

question of how necessary it may be to comes easily that slums are made by low-

resort to genetic methods for improving the grade human beings; but to the Labour

human strain immediately raises the fur- reformer it is far more credible that the

ther question of how far the same end is low-grade human beings are made by the

attainable by improving human environ- slums, the truth being an inevitable reaction

ment.

between these two sets of forces. In the

Our belief in the relative powers of past, it was thought that kings were born

heredity and environment to modify human to be kings by Divine Right, and many

type is subject to a number of sentimental to-day think that the ruling classes govern

preconceptions of which we should strive to by a sort of hereditary right over those who

purge our minds if we truly desire to attain are unfit for anything else than to be

an objective outlook. I will briefly refer benevolently ruled. Others believe that

to three such preconceptions, which may be there are no intrinsic differences between

denoted as familial, political, and philo- human beings and that all the visible dif-

sophical.

ferences are the products of education and

I-FAMILIAL. In the case of certain cultural upbringing. In these contrasting

persons born in successful and able fami- standpoints are clearly reflected political

lies, belief in the potency of heredity may prejudices.

be the expression of a sort of family pride. 3-PHILOSOPHICAL. Lastly, philosophical

When your ancestors and relatives have preconceptions, less easily detected, also

distinguished themselves in a variety of shape our attitude towards the role of

socially useful ways, it is agreeable to think hereditv. The two possible points of view

that the superior endowments which have find, I think, their clearest expression in

raised them above the general average also the antithesis between the beliefs in pre-

inhere in yourself and load the dice in your destination and free-will. The determinist

favour. Considerations of this sort may feels himself to be a puppet at the mercy of

have influenced the thoughts of certain psychological forces of fluctuating magni-

eugenic enthusiasts.

tudes with which he is endowed at birth and

2-POLI1TICAL. Those who adhere to the which he is powerless to alter. The forces

319

32

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

which are the most powerful at each by reason of the very strong temptation to

moment win the day and successively deter- make selective omissions of events which

mine his various actions.

are commonly regarded as discreditable.

The libertarian, on the other hand, feels No one much likes putting down in black

that he can voluntarily regulate and adjust and white, for the information of descend-

the dynamic forces of his affective life; and ants, those dark secrets which exist in every

it is natural for him to think that what he family and which all the constituent mem-

can do for himself, can also be done for bers are at pains to suppress. Nobody likes

humanity as a whole. The libertarian will dispassionately to rattle the bones of the

especially believe in the cultural value of skeleton that lies concealed in every family

precept and example, and he may well cupboard. For obvious reasons, the pious

regard these as our chief instruments of precept de mortuis nil nisi bonum will

racial improvement. This seems to be the not be lightly violated, even in the interests

general position taken up by the Roman of science, when the dead person in question

Catholic Church.

happens to be an ancestor or a near relative.

I have had a good opportunity of observ- For such reasons of discretion, most of

ing the importance of these and other pre- the family pedigrees which one reads have

conceived notions in relation to the Bill to a sanctimonious air. They appear flat and

legalize eugenic sterilization which Major soulless. They depict shadowy and anaemic

Church recently introduced under the ten- figures whose very virtues are pale. They

minutes rule on behalf of the Eugenics represent only one side of the medal and

Society (which I am representing to-day). tell only one aspect of the story. They have

I learned how deep-rooted is thle conviction the atmosphere of epitaphs on tombstones.

held by many that human genetic processes In the records the compilation of which we

should not be tampered with by man and are now advocating, every effort should be

that the evils for which some would advo- made to achieve the kind of detachment to

cate genetic remedies are really only curable which an interested and unrelated biog-

by quite other means.

rapher, writing some fifty or hundred years

How can the prejudices which give rise hence, would aspire. How many of us

to these conflicting views be overcome? It to-day have records of this kind of our ante-

is the purpose of my paper to suggest two cedents and collateral relatives for four

possible courses which must be pursued generations back? And how grateful we

simultaneously, namely the education of the would most of us be to have such informa-

general public and of the medical pro- tion !

fession.

THE SOCIETY'S 'FAMILY SCHEDULE'

EDUCATING THE GENERAL PUBLIC

In order to facilitate the keeping of such

First in regard to the general public: family records, the Eugenics Society has

Sir Francis Galton urged that every intelli- just completed a schedule which can be

gent person should study his family pedi- obtained by anyone on application. All its

gree. This study should be embarked upon, parts are detachable, and can be added to

not with the object of tracing descent from indefinitely at will. The separate sheets of

William the Conqueror, nor of establishing which it is composed are reinforced at the

kinship with some distinguished or well- attached margins, so that they will not tear

born personage, nor even of making out a out (the tearing out of sheets being one of

glowing record for one's family. It should the major shortcomings of many such

be undertaken with the sole aim of drawing schedules) and are made of paper guaran-

up an impartial and objective record of the teed to last at least one hundred years. They

physical and psychological traits of the contain full instructions, and a specimen

various persons included in the pedigree. pedigree and family record. Their

This is by no means an easy thing to do apparently high cost of Ios. is accounted for

GENETICS AND PREVENTIVE MEDICINE

32I

by the large amount of hand labour involved quito. Most of this knowledge has but a

in their preparation.

distant bearing on ordinary clinical medi-

If such pedigrees are filled in by our con- cine, and is largely forgotten soon after it

temporaries as fully as existing information is learnt. I would like respectfully to sug-

will allow, and if they are kept up to date gest to those medical schools which, in the

from generation to generation, there will be future, may have occasion to revise the

made available information that will be of schedules of their biological preliminary

the deepest interest not only to our descend- examinations, that an elementary know-

ants, but to the doctor, the schoolmaster, ledge of the principles of human genetics

the genealogist, the anthropologist, and to may well prove to have a considerably

many other inquirers of the future. It is greater usefulness than much that is now

never too late to begin the recording of a taught.

pedigree. . Information that is common The medical man of the next generation

knowledge to us is often lost at our death may frequently be called upon to scrutinize

and is irrecoverable by our children. This pedigrees with a view to giving a eugenic

fact will be quickly realized by anyone who prognosis. It will therefore be useful to

tries to write a record of his parental and him to have a sufficient acquaintance with

grand-parental sibships.

Mendelian principles to enable him to

I now return to the medical profession. recognize those hereditary factors that

It is certain that in the future, medical men are dominant, recessive, and sex-linked.

will be increasingly consulted upon ques- Equipped with such knowledge, he will be

tions of eugenic prognosis, and that sympathetically disposed towards all who

knowledge of the elementary principles of consult him as to how to fill in the medical

genetics in their application to man will details of their own or their relatives' family

play an increasingly important part in the records. In this way, he will play a vital

medical man's equipment. The interest at part, not only directly in advising as to

present taken in such matters by the parenthood, but indirectly in helping to

majority of doctors is small, and the accumulate the data on which alone such

knowledge possessed by them' is in most advice can properly be based.

cases insufficient to enable them to form an adequate opinion upon the majority of BOOK ON EUGENIC PROGNOSIS

genetic problems about which they are con- Under the guidance of an advisory medi-

sulted. This is in no sense surprising when cal committee, I am now editing a book

it is remembered how recent is the growth intended primarily for the general practi-

of accurate knowledge about heredity, and tioner, which will consist of some sixteen

how fragmentary, even to-day, is its appli- sections written by a corresponding number

cation to the bulk of commoner human of medical specialists in the different cate-

diseases.

gories of diseases and defects which have

EDUCATING THE MEDICAL STUDENT

definitely been recognized as hereditary. In this book, space will be allocated to diseases

In the preliminary biological training by taking into consideration not so much

given at several medical schools, the teach- what is known about their inheritance, as

ing of genetics plays a small part. The the frequency with which the general prac-

medical student is expected to have a titioner is likely to be consulted about them.

knowledge of the morphology and embry- It so happens that most of the diseases

ology of certain representative animal types, about the transmission of which we have

together with a rather more special most accurate knowledge are rare diseases

knowledge of those forms which enter into which the general practitioner might never

the province of medicine, such as the liver- come across in a lifetime, and which, if he

fluke, the tape-worm, the plasmodium of did encounter, he would probably not be

malaria, and the mouth parts of the mos- able to diagnose. This holds, for instance,

322 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of many of the diseases and defects of the Glasgow. Of such a procedure, if it is ever

special senses, especially of the eye.

adopted, the compilation of a family pedi-

A SCHEDULE FOR THE PRACTITIONER

gree along lines roughly similar to those I have described, will form an absolutely

At an early stage of the preparation of essential part. It is impossible to advise a

this book, I was asked by one of the con- person that he is fit for marriage unless

tributors if I could supply him with a that person's pedigree has first been

simple schedule for the recording of patho- scrutinized.

logical pedigrees which would save him the I will make one further tentative sugges-

trouble of explaining to his patients the tion for interesting the medical profession in

details of how they should make the the problems of human heredity. This is

necessary records so as best to bring into that a section of the Royal Society of

relief the pathological heredity about which Medicine might usefully be formed whose

they were consulting him.

subject would be human genetics. By such

The Eugenics Society has prepared such a course, the enormous influence of this

a schedule which a doctor can give to a powerful society could be applied in a direc-

patient who asks for advice as to the advisa- tion the utility of which surely few would

bility of parenthood, at the same time tell- deny.

ing the patient to follow the instructions

provided and to send back to him his pedi- POSSIBLE FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS

gree entered as fully as possible on the If then a genuine interest can be aroused

blank chart provided with the schedule. The in these problems throughout the medical

symbolism which the patient is instructed profession and the general public, it is

to employ in preparing his pedigree is a probable that, in two or three generations,

modification of that recommended for adop- we shall have at our disposal, a body of

tion at the Conference of the International knowledge which would enable us to answer

Federation of Eugenic Organizations held with a considerable measure of precision

in Paris in I928. These schedules can be the question of how far we can prevent

filled in by anyone of average intelligence human disease, defect, and disability by

and educational attainments. They would genetic means. We may perhaps allow our-

be of little use for mentally defective per- selves to envisage a time when accurate

sons or for members of the assemblage records will be available of the heredities

christened " The Social Problem Group " of all permanent residents in the United

by the recent Mental Deficiency Committee. Kingdom; when advisory centres analogous

In order to trace the pedigrees of such as to the German "Marriage Advice Bureaux"

these, it is necessary to enlist the help of a will exist throughout the country under the

trained social worker.

jurisdiction of local authorities, at which a

The aim of the schedule last described is well-grounded genetic opinion will be

purely medical, and is therefore much more obtainable, either free or at a small charge,

restricted than that of the schedule alluded by all applicants; when the inculcation of

to earlier, which is designed to enable the a eugenic conscience will form part of a

layman to record his family pedigree for the system of State education; and when there

benefit of his descendants. Both these will exist a eugenics department of the

schedules will have many points of useful- Ministry of Health, or else a Central

ness of which I will now only mention one. Institute of Human Genetics, with a staff of

There is in this country a movement in medical men, geneticists, and statisticians

favour of requiring the production of com- and a liberal equipment of social workers

pulsory statements as to health before trained in the making of genetic investiga-

marriage. In July a strong plea for this tions.

was made by Dr. Stella Churchill at a When such a time is reached, it will be

meeting of the Royal Sanitary Institute in possible for private societies such as the

GENETICS AND PREVENTIVE MEDICINE

323

Eugenics Society voluntarily to dissolve rational of all ways-namely that of pre-

themselves, their task achieved. Not before venting the birth of all who have not a good

then will the principles of preventive medi- chance of possessing normal healthy bodies

cine be applied in the most intelligent and and healthy minds.

%

Science Outruns the Maker of Books

IIPHYSIOLOGICAL ZOOLOGY11
a quarterly devoted to recording current researches

Physiological Zoology was established by the Department of Zoology at the University of Chicago in 1928 to fill the need of biologists for authentic, current data of zoological investigation. The journal has by this time become firmly established as an indispensable part of laboratory and library equipment for zoologists in American and foreign colleges; to laymen interested in the progress of the
science it has become no less a valuable periodical.
Yearly rate, including postage: 35s. 2d.

Published by THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS

English Agents: CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS

Fetter Lane

London, E.C.4

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIII, No. 4.

