AMENTIAA IN THE EAST AFRICANl
By H. L. GORDON, M.D.(EDIN.)

THE inquiry I have the privilege of express gratitude for the support this

reporting aimed at estimating how far proposal received from all schools of thought

amentia in East African natives might in the colony, from the Press, and in particu-

be a factor to be reckoned with in the problem lar from our Governor, Sir Edward Grigg.

of " backwardness."t It was soon found to in- Encouragement came, too, from Sir Herbert

volve the task of obtainig some knowledge of Bond, who affirmed the advantage to be

the normal mind and brain of the native, and gained for all humanity from organised

from this part of the imquiry emerged the research-carried out before the entry of

few results I desire to bring before you. civilization complicated the situation-into

Many of the obstacles to the ascertain- the normal and abnormal brain and mind of

ment of amentia in Kenya are due to the a simple race. Finally, in I928, Professor

youth of the colonv. For example, we have Berry republished his biologically based

no registration of native births and deaths; method for the diagnosis of amentia in the

family, personal and medical histories, as European, and this seemed suitable for

well as actual ages, are almost never obtain- application under the conditions encountered

able; and science has not yet given us in East Africa.*

any anthropological or anthropometric East The first step, made possible by official

African standards. You may nevertheless courtesy, was the examination of 219 male

envy our scientific liberty in having no legal juveniles in the Nairobi Reformatory.f The

and educational definitions of amentia to offences of these inmates included theft,

contend with.

burglary, sex offences, manslaughter, and

The problem of native amentia forced murder. Berry's method was used with

itself upon me early in the process of my own necessary variation in the mental tests em-

self-adjustment to the native environment in ployed. The results of this method, taken as

Kenya. An adult houseboy, despite instruc- a whole, are held to be indicative of the state

tions, placed my hot bottle, night after night, of development of the cerebrum, and are

not in my bed but on the floor under it. compared with percentile tables showing the

Exasperation dissolved in the question: approximate nornal and abnormal for the

When is a native an ament ? Four years individual's age and sex in the attributes

followed of fruitless effort to solve the ques- examined. The percentile system happily

tion as one had learned to solve the corre- requires no explanation here, for we owe it

sponding question in England. In that period to the great founder of this Society, Sir

I made bold to draw public attention in Francis Galton.

Kenya to the social needfor scientific research The Refornatory survey found 86 per cent.

into native " mentality"; and I wish to of those examined to be aments. The I4 per

cent. of normals could not be fitted into

A paper read before the Eugeics Sociy on November 7th, 1933.
t I use the word "amtia" to mean mental deficiency and the word " ament" to mean a mentally deficient peron, wrhether idiot, imbecile, or feebleminded. Amentia has hitherto not been looked for in
East Africa, and concerning the normal mind of the

European ideas of normality without creation of two low classes-a low-grade normal and, lower still, a border-line normal. It was clear that a considerable proportion of this alarming result came from the use of Euro-

East African native we are no less ignorant; uncertainty and controversy on these subjects darken understanding

pean standards on another race. East African

and hinder native progrs.

: H. L. Gordon: Note on diagnosis of Amentia in * R. J. A. Berry: Brain and Mind. 1928. Africans. East Africa Medical Journal, November t H. L. Gordon: A Survey of th6 inmates of Kabete
I1930. Reformaory. 1930.

223

224 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

standards for the diagnosis of East African assistant. When the total number placed on

amentia were necessary. The survey sug- recordhad reached 3,444, unforeseen personal

gested also that the searet of some racial cir stances made this the final number of

differences between European and East the series. Actual ages being rarely obtain-

African might, indeed, be largely in the grey able, each individual was given his estimated

matter or cortex of the East African brain. year and the results were grouped. The few

The next step was therefore twofold: (i) under 9 were not included. All those of 20

To seek opportunity for the task of establish- and over were classed as adults. In oUJ

ing East African percentile standards. (2) judgment, and great care was exercised ii

To seek expert co-operation for inquiry into this age estimation, very few were over the

the quantitative and qualitative values of age of 30.

the East African brain by the methods

initiated by Mott, Watson, Shaw Bolton,

Fig. I. RACE DISTRIBUTION

Von Economo, and other distinguished

pioneers. For the inquiry on the living I had AgeGroup -10-I 1 2-13 14-15 16-17 IS-i9 Adult Totw

the assistance of a capable youth of mixed
blood from the Coast. The brain inquiry was
carried out by my able colleague Dr. F. W. Vint, pathologist to the Kenya Government. We arranged together beforehand the lines

Bantu .
Niote .
J Hamite.
Hamite
Mixed .

97
7 0 0
0

195 29I 632 657 1119 2991

I 8 50 109 8i I56 421

I 20
000

7I

6 I6
56

0 I 0 5 4 10

for Dr. Vint's research; otherwise our paral-

104 214 344 741 751 1290 3444

lel inquiries were carried out independently

until each of us had reached and prepared This table follows the racial clification

his results.* We desire to emphasize at once of Professor Seligman.* We have some forty

that in our opion we have only touched the tribes, but none are true Negroes. Each of

fringe of a big unknown territory.

these racial classes of the tribes shows more

For the inquiry on the living an unselected or less mixture with what is said to be blood

series of males of all available ages was of the remote Hamites who invaded East

examined at the Native Labour Registration Africa from the north and were an early

Office, Nairobi, by leave of the Chief Native offshoot of the Cautcasoid stem. It should be

Commissioner. It was estimated that about observed that the Eastem Bantu were pre.

half of these were " raw" natives, the other dominant in the series; 2,049 of the 2,99I

half having some education or previous con- were of the Kikuyu tribe, whose beautiful

tact with civilization. The term " educated " reserve is in the highlands near Nairobi. Of

cannot yet be applied to an East African in the Nilotes, 400 were Jaluo from the neigh-

more than a spirit of encouragement. We had bourhood of Lake Victoria, twenty-one were

only one objector. An" educated " Kikuyu Suese foreigners. Only two of the Half-

protested that the examination must be a Hamites were from the leading tribe, the

preliminary to a new kind of taxation.

Masai. The few Hamites were Nubians, also

The immediate object was to obtain data foreigners. The Mixed were from the Coast

for tables of percentiles in all the attributes near Mombasa, telling the tale of different

examined by Berry's method, namely cubic foreign imvasions by sea. Local opinion

capacity of brain estimated by head measure- credits all the four latter cl of the table

ments; bodily weight, and standing and with physical and mental superiority over

sitting height; right and left grips; and our Eastern Bantu.

vital capacity. The question of mental tests will be referred to later.

The smallness of the numbers for all except the Bantu made separate racial computations

The first 200 natives were used to train my and comparisons unprofitable. Consequently

the percentile tables obtained from the 3,444

* Dr. Vint's preliminary report was published in the East African Medical Journal for May 1932.

* C. G. Seligman: Races of Africa. 1930.

AMENTIA IN THE EAST AFRICAN

225

of anl these races for all the attributes the stanrd deviation in the same way as

alreadY named were adopted as preov l
standards for general use pending a more

Professor Berry, I obtained from the tables the same result for the East African. Ob-

comprehensive inquiry.*

serve further that the mean or average

brain capacity of the I,29o East Afican male

Fig. 2. PERCENTILES OF BRAN CAPACrrY adults was I,3I6 cubic centimetres, or I65

3,444 MALE OF AL RACES

cubic centimetres less the capacity given

(Unseected sees)

by authority for the European. I may say

that Dr. Vint has found the average weight

Group Years Years Years Years Years Adult Of 389 adult male East African brains to be

Age 9-IO11 12-13 14-15 16-17 I8-I9
Percentile c.c. C. c.c. c.c. C.C. c.c.

1,276 grammes, or 152 grammes less than the weight given by authority for the European.

O 1.087 1,053 1,115 ,o89 I,IOI 1,o64

10 1,154 1.170 I,I89 1,203 1,212 1,219 Fig. 3. AVERAGE BRAIN CAPACITY OF ADULTS

20 1,167 1,193 1,214 1,227 1,241 1,250

30 1,187 1,212 1,233 1,250 1,26I 1,274

Race Number

Average in c.c.

40 1,122 1,236 1,251 1,267 1,280 1,297 Bantu:

50 1,222 1,249 1,265 1,286 1,298 I,3I6
60 1,236 1,266 i,279 1,303 1,317 1,334

KkYU Other

..

740\
379J

1,J9

I.331133\11321

70 1,255 1.283 1,300 1.323 1,335 1,356

Nilote:

80 1,271 1,298 1,319 1,348 1,363 1,381 90 1,311 1,313 1,353 1,388 1,398 1,419 0oo 1,365 1,444 X,462 1,513 1,591 1,670

5udaswe ... 14 156

3414 1.-345

i Hamite ...

T316

6 1.312

This table is the one for cubic capacity of brain. It shows the range of cubic capacity for Hamite each age-group. Taldng the adult group, the

5 1,415

lowest capacity in our series of I,29o adults was i,o64cubic centimetres, the highest x,670. The 50 percentile represents the mean cubic

Mixed

~~~4 1,376i

Average brain capacity of adult Europeans (Berry) 1.,481

capacity for each age-group; and the gradual Here, for what they are worth, are the

rise of the mean from the lowest to the highest raIa differences in brain capacity amongst

age-group helps to lessen doubt present in the same 1,29o adults. The average separ-

all African inquiiies in which age estimation ately obtained for the Bantu is 'just 4 cubic

is a factor. The same gradual rise is seen in centimnetreslessthantheaverageof I,3l6cubic

the tables for all the other attributes ex- centimetres obtained for all races, not a signi

amined. A further point here is that Professor ficant difference by any means. Such figures,

Berry overcomes the difficulty-met in of course, are not advanced as accurate pre-

statistical as in other sciencest-of differenti- dictions, for reasons well known to you.

ating the normal from the abnormal with Berry's method, as used by the inquiry,

precision enough for.practical guidance, by employs Lee's formula for the calculation of

using the standard deviation as approximate brain capacity from the head measuremnents.

guide. By this means he found the range of This formula deducts zz mlietres from

normality to be from about the 20 to about each measurement to allow for the thcns

the 8o percentile. Any individual with a of the scalp and skull. Vint and I have found

cubic capacity about or below the 20, or by Post-mortem observations that iT milli-

about or above the 8o percentile, may be metres is too small a deduction in the East

suspected as potentlly abnormal. Using African, not because the East African skull

is thicker than the European-as popularly

* It is not ble to show all the results in one short believed-but because there seems to be

paper, but all the percentile tables and many more of

the results will, it is hoped, be published later.

t and

MVuitmafloCradpacaintdy."Y'ouBnsgo*

"PChY,siVCoall.

Meurements XV.

greater thickness of the soft tissues. Here agi,then, the method used by the inquiry
over-estimates rather thnunder-estimates

226 THE EUGENICS REVI

the actual brain capacity in the average Kenya native.

Fig. 4. AVERAGE WEIGHT OF THE NATVE
BRAN fN AGE GROUPS
(Post-mortm Records)

Age Group
9.15
1-20
21-25
26-30
31-35 36-40 4I ...

No. of Cas
29
74
87
69
24
13 28

Average Weight
1,301 gramS.
1,279 to 1,270
1,264
1,262
I,256 1,230

from about the age of 14 makesa strikingco.
trast to the flat native curve. The curvn show that between ages Io and 2o the Euro. pean average yearly govwth of brain is 17. Fig. 5. CURVES OF " AcTuAL " CAPAcIT
AND PERCENTAGE VOLUME INCREASE
II
..a
- "I . I

It is common belief that the native begins

to decay early and ends in the yeas called in

ourselves middle age. I have examined some

thousands with this in mind and have had

reason to think the belief well founded. In

my expenence the lean pantaloon is rare,

second childishness does not exist. Dr. Vint

and I have leamt to expect senility any year

I..

after 35, and in 2,000 postmortem exanimma-

tions have never estimated an age as over 6o. on,cieniers th aieyeryaea

This table seems to support the belief in early decay. It suggests that the native brain weight reaches its maximum before the age

is only85cbccnie
YEARS Or ACE

of i8 and decreases gradually afterwards.

We come now to the results of submitting

to statistical scrutiny the percentile tables

for all the attributes examined in the series

Of 3,444 of all races. The scrutiny was made

with the invaluable expert guidance of Mr.

A. Walter, Statistician to the Conference

of East African Govemors.

Here I would draw attention first to com-

parison of the native and European curves of
actual" brain capacity as obtained by Berry for the European and by this inquiry for the East African, from the corresponding racial percentile tables.* Unfortunately the inquiry is unable to say anything as yet about
natives under the age of io. The comparison
therefore begins at that age and is at once striking. The European curve of " actual" capacity begins, at the age of IO, almost where the native curve ends at the age of 20. Again, the steep ascent of the European curve

Turning now to the cunrves of percentage
volwne increase we see tht at the age of IcO
the brain of the native is already 92-8 per
cent. of its tota volume, while at the same age the European brain is only 87 *7 per cente of its total volume. Once more we see how
dfeetin character are these two curves.
Here we have the native and European curves of brain capacity broulght together to s;how how the difference is largely in the steep ascent of the European curve after
puberty-indicating, we thn, rapid cerebral

* The word " actual" is not to be taken literally. development as compared with the poor

AMENTIA IN THE EAST AFRICAN

227

developmenlt shown by the flat curve of the pulberty; but in all these attributes the

ati;e.e This touches upon a matter of curves so contrasted show that the native So

Fig. 6. RELATONSHIP OF CURVES

ually excels the European boy consi-
tently up to puberty. This juvenile native

superiorty is, to my mind, an encouraging

fact for the future. I am open to correction

~. 14

by authority, but these facts as they stand
seem to suggest that by asetaning why the

native does not develop after puberty as the

European develops-if science can ascertain

that: and why not ?-we halbe a definite

0.)

step nearer to discovering the causes of racial "backwardness."

Our next coderation is of such applica-

tions of our provisional East African stan-

dards as time and circumstances allowed, and

z refers to four series of adult males examined

by Berry's method and the new standards.

The series made up as follows: (x) 51 " edu-

cated" natives; (2) 46 who were mentally

120 _ disordered; (3) 46 who were mentally

deficient; and (4) 22 crminals. The numbers

YEARS OF ACE.

in these series are small, nevertheless, as the curves prepared from them show, the results

importance socially. There is agreement offer interesting features. Taking again as

amongst all classes of Europeans in East example the curves of brain capacity, the

Africa that the native lad or toto, up to the chief point of interest must be in their rela-

age of puberty, is a bright, maleable, nice tion to the average curve for the normal

little fellow, often-as one says--quick in native. Considering the matter beforehand

the uptake; but that after puberty he it seemed that if Berry's method was as

almost invanably falls away from promise, valuable an indication of cerebral develop-

and disappoints our hopes by lack of develop- ment as it appeared to be there was only one

ment in the very period when the aveage relative arrangement of the curves of the

European adolescent generally justifies hopes four special series possible. Takdng the curve

by rapid development. The same social for the 1,290 adults as representing the

observation is recorded, I believe of other so- average normal, the curve forthe "educated"

called" backward " races, and this difference series should run clear above it; the curve

seems to be predicted by the difference for the mentally disordered should run close

between these curves (Figures 7 and 8), in to it and probably in and out of it; that for

which is shown such a marked contrast the criminals should hover below it; and

between the native and the European after that for the aments should be definitely and

puberty.

constantly below this average normal curve.

Now, bearing in our minds the different Moreover, the curve for the European

characters of these two curves of brain average normal should run well above all

capacity, let us glance at the corresponding these native curves.

curves for all the other attributes examined The statistical plotting of these curves was

by Berry's method. You will agree that the awaited with some anxiety.

family likeness in each curve is remarkable; This chart shows how the anticipated plac-

and also you will observe a new feature. As ings occurred. I should add that the same

before, the native curve is flat throughout, placings-with, of course, individual varia-

and the European curve runs steeply up after tions-are seen in the charts for all the other

228 THE EUGENICS REVIEW
Figs. 7 and 8. RELAnONsHP OF CUtVEs
Ia
Kc
IA

IIA

iT S..

YEARS OF ACE.

VEARS OF ACE

m1
K:

YEARS or Ace.
t
a St
8 -a
Uo

YEARS OF ACE

YEARS or ACE

-a
YEARS O ACE

AXENTIA IN THE EAST AFRICAN

220

aa~tag~toirositdjbcdUasaIyg;uiadIel,vheMonrt.uuWraePlrttoeofre,asafofnridrBmeIrhtrahydamtqiugmihtyte

say we baced a crtainty. How may the onstant

relative

poiion

of thepick of Kenya natives. They hadbeen selected for education and special employment by a careful filtering p s tugh Mission Schools, District Commoners, and
employers. This points to inherent ceebral

Fig. 9. COMPATVE CURVES

~~~oo_o ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~

z

PE RCE NT L E S.

of these curves be explained ? I suggest that superiority snding the test of supenor

our knowledge of the human brain allows us environment as the average native might not.

to believe that the constant inferiority of the Secondly, this table (Fig. io) seems to be

ament curve is based upon inherent cerebral instructive.

deficiency. It is consistent with know- We see that the racial distribution of the

ledge and with this explation that the aments corresponds to that of the I,290

curves for the mentally disordered and for adults from whom the average native curve

the criminals are as we found them, and was obtained, i.e. the majority of them were

that the curve for the " educated" series is Bantu; over 8o per cent. The distribution in

constantly superior to the native average. the " educated" series is very different;

The question anses-why in the charts for all 57 per cent. were from tribes commonly

the attributes is the curve for the " educated " credited with inborn superiority to the

East African constantly and markedly in- Eastern Bantu and of these 48 per cent. were

ferior to the average European curve ?

very superior Sudanese foreigners.

A plausible answer is that even the best At this stage, then, we may fairly say that

of the natives are on a lower biological level the constant relative positions of the curves

than the average European. There may be suggest inherent differences of cerebral

much to support that_view, but the answer development, but that more knowledge is

may be too glib, because it does not allow for required. We shall see presently what Dr.

the importance of environmental influences. Vint's research has to say on this vital

There are some environmental facts about question. Meanwhile let us avoid the error of

this " educated" series which may help us. thinking that the " educated " series proved

Firstly, the individuls of the series were out superior in all attributes, including the size

B

230 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Fig. 10. 5T EDUCATED and 46 AMNTs

(51 EDUCATED) MAZE ADULTS OF ALL RACES

Race Number

Men Brain

capacity in c.c.

Batu
Kikuyu I } 22

10402 I,417

46 AMENS (MALE ADULTS OF ALL RACES)

Race Number

Men Brin

capacity in c.c.

Batu
Kikuyu 3} 38 1},23 1l270

Nilote
aluo

13 } 27

daneset114

jHamite Mai

X

Hamite

Mixed

I

37}1 398
1,41940
1,426
-

140

z.567J

Nilote
Jaluo
Hamite
Nanidi
Hamite Somali
Mixed

3
I 3

1,288
1,228 I,27j
1,296 1.328

Mean Brain capacity for Male Adults
of all Races inunelected series 1,3x6.

of their brains and height of their bodies, just tainment of frequency distributions. Fig. ii

because they had been through some Euro- shows the marked abscissa shift from x,275

pean scholastic education. Environmental cubic centimetres for the aments to I,425

influences are of vast importance; but we cubic centimetres for the " educated "-a

must not imperil the future of the native difference of 150 cubic centimetres in brain

by a too easy solution of the difficulties his capacity. The value of 1,275 cubic centi.

condition presents us with. We should metres was possessed by 32 * 5 per cent. of the

all rejoice if we could raise the native men- aments, the value of 1,425 cubic centimetres

tally and physically, as we all wish to raise by 29 - 4 per cent. of the " educated."

him, simply by liberal doses of Kings and Here we have a statistical concentration of

Queens of England and quadratic equations. the facts about these two series. Examined

If the problem is more complicated our task with the percentile tables for East Africans

is more imspmng.

the means here for all attributes support the

A further statistical effort was the ascer- principles laid down by the distinguished

Fig. iI. FRESQUENCY DISTRIBUTON
FREOUENCY DISTRIBUrION
BY BRAIN CAPACITY

z

1100 1200 1500 140, 1510000
BRAIN CAPACITY IN C.C.

AMENTIA IN THE EAST AFRICAN

231

fDoeuincdieerncoyf.*theBrSietfolkye,

Park School the means of

in Mental the "edu-

anthropologists as a measuremet of the height of the cerebrUm.. The facts I have

cated " senes in all attibutes fall well above given suggested that height of head so

the average nrmal mean; one in the 6o per- measured might be by itself some clue to

centiles for normal adults, two in the 70 per- cerebral development, always excluding the

Fig. 12. STANDARD DEVIATONS

factor of disease: i.e. height of head might be a less untrustworthy guide than size of

SI EDUCATED MTeraune

P.E.

Standard Deviation

P.E.

head to what is inside. The matter seemed
worth inquiring into by means of correlations

BrainCaPacitY I,4IO c.cm. + 8-66 9170 + 6-zI

Standingheight I,704Dm. + 67S4 7XI40 i 4.77

Sittingheight 844 mm. ± 3-41 36- I0 ± 2-41

Weight

59- Icgm. ± o*64 6-75 4 0°45

Right grip 37-9 kgm. + 0-57 6o05 0i40

Leftgr p

35.1 k + 0°-S57 6o02 i 0-40

VitalcapacitY 3.354C.Cm. ±51'30 542-80 ±36'20

and ratios. These proved significant, and the significance was inreased by these curves for each measurement of the I,290 average normal natives, the 51 " educated," and the 46 aments (Fig. 13).
In breadth the three curves run closely

46BrAaMinJ"caTpSacitY 1.275 C.cm. 7'78 Standzngheight x,6x9 mm. j 9-o4

75*20 5*50 87-40 1 6.40

together; in length there is a little separation; but in height there is really significant

Sittingheight Weight Right grip Left grip

802mm. 4o00 49 3 k1gm. 4i o-83 26 * 7 kgm. ± o059 24.3 kgm. ± 0o72

38.70 : 2-83 8*to 0° 59 5*70 4 o*42 70oo ± 0-51

separation of the ament curve from the others. It should be added that Dr. Vint-without, as I have said, any knowledge of what I was

VitalCaPaCItY 2,392 c.cm. 463* 7o 615o00 +45'09 doing in the matter-cane to a similar con-

centiles, and four in the 8o percentiles. The
means for the amnents tell another story. Two fall in the 30 percentiles, therefore in the
lowest grade of the normal range, two in the
IO percentiles, and three below the io per-
centiles: i.e. five out of seven fall well within the regions of abnormality, judged by the provisional standards for the East African obtained by this inquiry.

clusion from his observations on the brain, but, of course, for other reasons. In his forthcoming paper he says: " The reduction i size of the native brain seems to be accounted for mainly by a failure in development of height." I do not regard our observations as the last word on this point, but if they are confirmed a scientific halo may yet adorn the so-called " highbrow."

The last statistical point to which I would THE BRAIN

draw attention is something of a sideline, but seems to be of interest. Throughout the inquiry the obvious difference of head size between native and European appeared due to inferiority of the native head in height rather than to inferiority in length and
breadth. In lateral view the native head (unlike the European's) showed a flattened rather than a convex outline, and a smaller

Dr. Vint's report on bis naked-eye and
microscopic examintion of one hundred
brains of normal male adults is to be published shortly in the Journal of Anatomy; but in order that we may have a little more light on the question of whether the East African cerebrum is, on the average, on a lower biological level than the European cerebrum, I may mention these facts:

and receding forehead. These features are seen also in a number of unselected skulls I brought from Kenya to Sir Arthur Keith; and again in the brain itself, which has a flattened superior outline and a deficient frontal region.
Now, the auricular measurement of head height used in this inquiry is regarded by

In the areas of the cortex examined, Dr. Vint found a total inferinrity in quantity, as compared with the European, of 14-8 per cent. His naked-eye examination revealed a significant simplicity of convolutional pattern and many features generally called primitive; e.g. the lunate sulcus, described by Professor Elliot Smith, was present in

* Meal Deficiency, Stoke Park Studies. First Series. * E. P. Stibbe: Ixtroduction to Physical A *hropology.
1933- 1930.

232 THE EUGENICS REVIEW Fig. 13. CURVES OF HEAD MEASURMENTS

40 < its*S a
KO"CENTUS

s 0 a S osf
PUCENTILS

Z 14

Hv
29 30 10 so to Tos
PERCMES

s

seventy of the one hundred brains. The material for investigation before civilization

microscopic examination showed the impor- increases the difficulties.

tant supragranular layer of the cortex to

be deficient in all the six areas that Von "STIGMATA "

Economo examined, and the cells of these Amongst our tribes the so-called stigmata

areas to be deficient very markedly in size, of amentia abound, and I am not satisfied

arrangement and in differentiation.

that they are confined to the ament types.

These, I think, are enough of Dr. Vint's In particular, those associated in Europe

new facts to make us feel that the deficiencies with the type called Mongolian by that great

found in examination of the living are indeed contributor to knowledge of amentia, Dr.

associated with suggestive deficiency in the Langdon-Down-such anomalies as the short

native cerebrum; that we are in fact con- incurved little finger and the wide space

fronted in the East African with a brain on a between the first and second toes-are so

lower biological level. This, I submit, is a common that I regard them at present as

matter requing investigation by the highest racial characteristics. I will not detain you

expert skill into the question of heredity or with this subject, much in need of precise

environment or both.

observation; but I may mention that I have

I would again stress the importance of found gynecomastia (female breasts in the

examining possible physical and environ- male) to be common, and also a marked

mental influences. There is, for example, the general feninoid tendency in the males of

well-known hypothesis of Sir Arthur Keith our tribes. A curious condition which I found

connecting incretion with racial differentia- first amongst aments and then in apparently

tion. There is the influence of malaria; and normal men is what appears to be a bilateral

of calcium and other deficiencies in diet. hyperplasia of the parotids giving a pernan-

There is the possible influence throughout ent appearance of mumps. So far I have

the ages of the high incidence of syphilis and found this condition only amongst the Jaluo

yaws in Kenya. East Africa offers a welter of tribe.

AMENTIA IN THE EAST AFRICAN

233

"INTd LLIGENCE" TS

seen. The European figures are also in the

Inteligence, I understand, is a quality of mun requg a multitude of definitions out of every nation; the number having been
increased since I left England nine years ago.
In these cusces I need hardly ask pardon for my ignorance, or for preferrng to
call "ifntellince tests," with Professor Berry, tests of " mental retion," and to think of them, with Professor Hogben, as "objective descriptions of how human beings react to certain situations."*
Efforts over some years to devise tests suitable to the East African, " raw " and " educated " led me to the conclusion that the task awaits the expert. I found the Binet type of test, as you may imagine, quite unsuitable. The Porteous maze test I found
both suitable and to native liking.t Except in
experiment I applied it to only forty of the "educated" series of male adults; they
answered with a mean age-score of 10.5 years. My experiments ended with half-
heated choice of three perfornance tests from Pinter and Paterson's Scale. I applied these as you see here (Fig. 14). Here, again,

expected place, but are added here with a caution. I find, on coming out of the darkness and confusion f Africa into the clear
and tranquil air of European psycholgical
thought and practice, that menta tests and
menal ages by themselves are largely de-
pended upon for the diagnosis of amenia Iventureto say onlythis: In my experience
of many thousands of natives, itelligence in Its ordinary connotation is present amongst
them often to an enviable degree; neverthe-
iess, I believe we may do the native injustice and even injury if we are content to estimate his "intelligence" only in terms of his
apparent ability to cope with the exactions
of European scholastic education. Moreover, in the present state of psychological knowledge it seems to me that any use of mental
tests as a means of comparison between
European and African-races of widely different physical and social heritage and
environment-carries the risk of misleading
African education and legislative policy. The field for research by the trained psychologist
of broad outlook is enormous in East Africa; his presence would be welcome.

Fig. i4. PERFORMANCES OF MALE ADULTS THE SOCIAL CRITERION

Five Figure Triangle Cubes I should like to consider for a moment the

Board question of the social criterion of amentia.

Viewed from the equator through past ex-

Time Time

perience and modem text-books, European

in
Sem.

Errors Sainc.

Errors Score

thought-if I may say so-appearsto be overinfluenced by the old dictum of Professor

70 Karl Pearson that social inefficiency is the

Unselected Ave. I62 10 130 14 3 big problem. No doubt it is, but social

4' Educated
27

8

7 86

6

S

inefficiency is only a symptom; the social criterion may be a tardy contribution to pre-

Amenta

,. D.N.C. D.N.C. D.N.C. D.N.C.

European

norma] aage

14 (P. & P.) tj 59 3 39 6

2
8

vention of anti-social behaviour. In Kenya the goal for science and society stands outdetermination of the causes of amentia and

of how to prevent it. The problem of racial

D.N.C. -Did not complete.

" backwardness" awaits investigation. The

the numbers are too small for definite con- relative contributions to " backwardness " of

clusions, but the relative results are such as nature and nurture must be ascertained as

were to be expected from the curves already far as science can asertain them, if we are to

do our best for the native. A primary part

* L. Hogben: Geic Prixcipls in Msdicine and Socl Science. 1931. PeotpSl.. D.193P3o.rteu: The Psychology of a Primitive

of the problem of " backwardness" is the problem of endogenous amentia.
In Kenya we have three main races:

234 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Europeans (20,000), Asii (5o,ooo), Afi- said to be regarded by some tribes as abnor-

cans (3,ooo,ooo), with three main dards malities to be put away at once.

of social behaviour and efficiency. The rela- The case with the high-grade ament (or

tivity of the social crteron is therefore feeble-minded) is diffet. His state is not

another of our perplexities. A native socially manifest to the tribe. He escapes scrutiny

efficient in his own simple environment may and lives a life of little socal strain, wholly

without change in him-prove inefficient devoid, be it remembered, of economic

and even dangerous in the complex environ- pressure and competition. He has not to

ment of a higher social organisation. Judged ear a living and the right to marry, as we

thus he may be considered normal at home, insist on doing. The commune sees to all

abnornal abroad.

that. The picture of him and his women goes

Dr. Tredgold's term,* " social adaptive- into a quatrain:

ness," and Adler's words, " the capacity for
developing a social feeling is absent only in the feeble-minded "t-these words suggest
biological variations, but the social criterion
everywhere seems to pay little attention to
biology. The gropings of this inquiry led me to this far-reaching question: ShaU the mem-

Here with a bowl of maize beneath the bough
A gourd of beer and thou and thou and
thou Working to keep me in the rich Reserve, And rich Reserve's environment enow."

bers of an " uncivilized " race be judged by That the picture is canging in many

the standards of the civilization into which districts is not our present interest. What of

they are invited, or by standards of their own the past ? I fear mathematical symbolism

race found for it by the civilization? The does not help us there, but a little courage

question is not to be left unanswered where stimulates imagination. No doubt lethal

" civilized" and " uncivilized " must live side diseases eliminated indiriminately; not so

by side in close association. The question the constant tribal warfare; not so the

seems a challenge to our ignorance of the constant conflict with lion, leopard and

genetic basis of racial differences and of social buffalo; those took the best, the brainy, in

behaviour.

those days the leaders-not unimportant if

it is true that a race advances less because of

A SPECULATION

its average an because of its exceptional

Finally, the inquiry has impressed me with men. Then there was never elimination of

the existence of a large class of natives, not the weak-minded through economic stress

feeble-minded as Europe conceives the condi- and competitive strain. Crude as it may

tion, to whom the term " naturals" might seem it is not an unreasonable hypothesis to

be applied provisionally in a sense less dis- the mere clinician, little versed in questions

paraging than the old sense. Allow me a of heredity, that the geneal tendency was

light speculation. Amongst our tribes the towards propagation of a type from which

idiot and the lowest types of imbecile are the feeble-minded and natural of to-day are

rarely seen. The reason appears to be that common derivatives.

the social criterion of family or clan supported by witchcraft, decided against the

CONCLUSION

survival of these well-marked types because Dr. Vint and I have only cleared a little

their manifest disabilities would make them a bush, picked up a few samples, and brought

burden to the commune. The " right to live " them for the opinion of authority. Through

is not a content of native ethics.+ Infanticide the bush we thought we spied a possible path

is widely recorded in Africa; even twins are to the greatest of all objects in Africa-to

a determination of the major causes of the

* A. F. Tredgold: Metl Deficiency. 1929.

present low biological level of the native

t A. Adler: Character and Personality. Vol. I, No. ,
June I933.
IL. T. Hobhouse: Morals in Evolution. 1915.

commonly called " backwardness," and to a discovery of remedies for those causes. We

AMENTIA IN THE EAST AFRICAN

235

submit that the only cocusion from our not now beyond the range of practical

itures that wide collaborative team- politics. With great rpect I urge that

research by many c is a

scientific assistance to colonial esmanship

neesty.

might well become incorporated amongst

Cerebral deficiency affecting a population the noble national ideals which distinguish

under British tutelage and not restricted to British trusteeship for weaker peoples.*

the types known in Europe as amentia-such

deficiency hasmedical, legal, educational, and social aspects of Imperial importance.
A conception of scientific colontion is

a

* Towards the expenses grant was receiv from

of the inquyn the living
the British AModcac

tion ad gratefully acknowledged.

THE WISTAR INSTITUTE BIBLIOGRAPHIC SERVICE

AUTHORS' ABSTRACTS

Insure

, advance inormatlon, and a ing of

Serv i g, aotribtor to the jo inale

Ue and cost Si e the beginn ci The Wistar Institut i vie has suppled an tract ohis own m ucr

Bb

summary is printed and mailed witbout receive advance hInirmatice from thos

tbeesdteqauyalniclhedatroygitvo

te
It.

publiAsing

cop te ie Sucribers to the a

e

th

ADVANCE ABSTRACT SHEETS b tn or mor abstracts without bo pic

, are sent for the preset to members of the Ameican Aocitio of

Anatomnists, to membes of the American ty of ZoO ts ad to Members cd the American Institute of Nutrition, without cost,

and ld to other at $3o r annum for all abstract shets id.s is a convenient means of seleting such article as may be

derd in reprint form

of reprints ae given on eac Advance Abstract Shet

BIBLIOGRAPHIC SERVICE CARDS

beaing authors' abstracts with omplete b rp

ce for all articles appeaing in The Wistar Institute journal and thes

c ating, $5.oo per yer.

Abstact cards may be obtaind from the bednnin of the aeim, June x, 1g9>.

Each abstract cadi isued to subscilbers before th complete pae appe in a journal.

ABSTRACTS IN BOOK FORK Abstrcts with author' and anlytia

subject indim are brought together periodically in book form

Volumes

to 6 covering the

bsrcts isued from JuDO x, 1917, to Dember 31, xg39, $5.oo each.

diount to subsrbers to the Bibg hic Sevice

Cards

The Witar Institute Biblaphic Service covers the pubtio listed below:

Jl0a d

Aud_ _ 1

bs

VWsohund of Il ci Anatomyd

no A

ese=

Jtmdd;i- Z°ao

T Jo ld di

d

kp" I

d _ls
Folio |g

at

EARLY SERIES

In

additon

to the above, bibophic ene cards, without abstracts, may be secured for articls which

n lIof eJounal of Comparativ

(88) to JUDO
Neu from vol. z

, 1927
(x8g9)

..............................................p;380
to June I, 191 ........................ 430

have appeaed titls

in

the

The Ameica1JornaJuAm, v9to

I ....................................9.344

Th toicl Re , v

Je 9 ................................................... 4

Expi of JounaThle

(o904) toJ

423,9 .................................

Tbe A ican t

AM..........................................................................

9

These cards, otning full l phic references, enable a subscriber to have a complete record of authos and titles with tbeir

subject he in for a rl whh ha

arin the above Journals froe their beginning to curret isues.

The price for these Bibliograhic Refeence Cards is two cents for the irst card of each title. Additional cards for each title may be had at one-half cet per card when ordered at the sam tim
THE WISTAR INSTITUT OF ANATOMY AND BIOLOGY* Phildeiphii% Fe., U.S.A.

Euges Revw, VOL 1V Nao. 4.

