THE GEOGRAPHICAL ASPECT OF EUGENICS.*
BY VAUGHAN CORNISH, D. SC.
The object of the Eugenics movement, as stated by its originator the late Sir Francis Galton, is so to order matters that the most useful part of the community shall contribute more than its proportion to the next generation. My business this evening is to explain briefly the Geographical aspect of Eugenics. The method of the Geographer is to study all mankind in relation to the Regions of ihe World, and he therefore enquires which Nations are now the most useful part of the Human Community. The answer is not open to reasonable doubt, for, during the last three hundred years, additions to knowledge and increase of efficiency have come almost entirely from the people of Europe and their descendants oversea, the Occidental peoples, who comprise almost the whole of what is known as the White Race.
Latterly the White people, as I shall call the Occidentals, have multiplied much more rapidly than the Coloured peoples, but the latter still outnumber them in the proportion of more than two to one, there being eleven hundred and fifty million Coloured to five hundred million White. According to the best calcuation available, no Region will have room for colonists when the population of the world reaches three times its present figure, or a little more, which at the present rate of percentage increase would be in about two centuries, that is to say in about six generations. As the percentage rate of increase is lkely to slow off towards the end, the period may be somewhat longer, but will nevertheless be quite short in comparison with the past centuries of written history. As the proportion of Races is at the end of the colonising period so it must be expected to remain with little change for a very long time, unless there be much greater differences of survival potency among the principal races than has yet been proved. The next two centuries or so are therefore critical in the racial history of mankind, and an effort to increase, or at the least maintain, the present proportion of White people in the world is not to be regarded as merely excusable, as an attempt at self preservation on their part, for it is really a *eugenic movement tending to the well-being of the world.
When we examine the geography of the White Race we find that there are several Nations in Western Europe, and Nations descended from them oversea, which have shown high efficiency throughout modern times. Of these the most numerous are the people of the American Republic, German Empire, British Empire, French Republic and the Kingdom of Italy.
Union between stocks so nearly akin is free from the extreme risk
* One ofthe Addresses delivered at a Special Meeting ofthe Eugenics Education
Society of London held in Toronto, August 14th, 1924.

268 EUGENICS REVIEW.
of chaotic personality which so often results from Colour mixture, but which inherent qualities will be useful in a particular Country is iiot merely a biological question, for a Nation is a political community, and so its well-being demands that the political personality of the Nationals shall be stable, and not unnecessarily complicated by differences of temperament which cause people to range themselves in opposite camps at times of crisis and excitement. Thus in a Dominion with British institutions and mainlypeopledwithBritish stock, it is an essential part of the eugenic movement to promote emigration from Great Britain in preference to that from other countries of equal industrial efficiency, since the British stock is of much greater political use than that of other nations in a country whose institutions have been evolved to suit the British temperament. The maintenance of a fairly homogeneous population is, moreover, especially important in the British oversea Dominions because it is only by similarity of temperament in each and every country of the British Nation that a common policy be secured without the Empire, and without such common policy even Canada and Australia would be to-day not great Dominions in a powerful Confederacy but small Nations occupying countries which lie in positions strategically disadvantageous.
At present the population of Great Britain (for I leave Ireland out of the account) outnumbers that of all the oversea Dominions in the proportion of about two-and-a-half to one, and the excess of births over deaths in Great Britain is very large. Hence the Mother Countrv is still the chief reservoir of British population for the peopling of the Empire. But the population of Continental Europe together with that of the United States outnumbers the people of Great Britan more than ten times, so that a strong effort to increase the flow of British emigrants to Canada is needed to preserve the predominantly British character of the Dominion, both in the biological and political sense. There are, however, persons in the Home Country who oppose extensive emigration upon what they believe to be eugenic grounds. One argument is that emigration will produce a disgenic effect in the Home Country by drawing away the best of the youth; but this contention is answered by the fact that the conditions in densely and sparsely peopled countries are so different that it is quite practicable to give the Dominions the young people whom they want while retaining those well suited to the needs of the Home Country. It is also contended on the other hand by persons in the Home Country that emigrants from our slums will deteriorate the stock of the Dominions. Now it is a fact that men have come to Toronto from Great Britain suffering from tubercular trouble acquired in bad town conditions, but I learn from persons of Educational and Medical Authority here that not only has the health of these exceptional emigrants improved, but that their children have grown up in your healthy city entirely free from the disabilities which the parents had acquired in bad urban conditions.
The view that the present extent of unemployment in Great Britain indicates that the population of the country has passed its proper maximum I ascribe to an imperfect realisation of the enduring commercial advantages of its geographical position. It is so extraordinarily well placed for serving other countries that the further

THE GEOGRAPHICAL ASPECT OF EUGENICS. 269
development of the rest of the world will provide more employment in our Island.
This increase, however, will not keep pace with;the present natural
increase of the people, so that a large surplus will remain for emigration with the birth-rate as it is now. The progressive fall in the birth-rate during recent years has not much affected the sturplus owing to an accompanying diminution of the death-rate, but the margin of the birth-rate which makes increase possible, even under the best hygenic conditions, is becoming narrow, and the time has come when it is mperative in the interest of the British Nation both in the Home Country and the Dominions that the younger generation should be told precisely what is the limiting figure. In Great Britain the round number is that of three children born two reach the marrying age, so that if every woman in the country bore three children the population would be just maintained. But it is not possible for every married woman to bear three children owing to the deaths occurring in the first three years of married life and from other compelling causes. It follows therefore that as soon as the size of the family is universally limited by choice and not by chance (a condition which is rapidly approaching) it will be necessary for the mere maintenance of present numbers, apart from increase, that those who enter matrimony should do so with the desire and hope of a family of at leastfour children. It cannot be too strongly impressed that the ideal of a family limited to three is inconsistent with that trusteeship of our Race and Nation which is vested in the younger generation now married or about to marry.
Let me point out in conclusion that the resolve to people our own lands with British Stock and to maintain the present proportion of our numbers in the world is essential to the achievement of our highest ethical ideas, for only by maintaining the British as a great and populous people can we ensure that our conception of righteousness shall receive its normal development in our lands, and continue to command the respectful attention of the rest of Mankind.

