PRACTICAL FAMILY ENDOWMENT

With Especial Consideration of the Independent Worker

By C. WICKSTEED ARMSTRONG
(The prize-winning essay in the competition, announced in our October number, for the most practicable suggestion for introducing a eugenic scheme of family endowment in England, " particular attention to be paid to the difficulty of providing for the large body of valuable ' free-lance,' unattached workers whose earnings range from £4 a week
to several thousand pounds a year.")

B EFORE discussing a scheme for the whereas in France it is the workers who are

endowment of families, which shall given this advantage, in Britain it is almost

make for race betterment and shall, exclusively such persons as have ceased to

at the same time, be practicable under be self-supporting, and are maintained at

present conditions in Great Britain, we the expense of the rest of the community.

must first note that an ideal scheme, based These consist very largely-though, of

on eugenic principles unadulterated by course, not entirely-of individuals who,

opportunist considerations, would be quite through their own hereditary faults or

outside practical politics to-day; and the defects, have come down in the world, or

most we can hope to carry out, by dint of who, having been born near the bottom

far-reaching and untiring propaganda, is rung of the ladder, have never risen.

some plan which may at least convert the Indeed, it is only too true that quite a large

principle of endowment from a highly proportion of those whose multiplication we

dysgenic agency, as it is at present, to one thus subsidize belong to the " social prob-

that will make for betterment..

lem group," and include feeble-minded and

Ideally, of course, family endowment insane persons, habitual slum-dwellers, con-

should be strictly proportioned to the firmed criminals and incorrigible paupers,

valuable hereditary qualities of the parents. as well as all sorts of other social ineffi-

Tests should be applied to verify such cients, not to mention those unfortunates

qualities, wherever possible, whether who, suffering from epilepsy, phthisis, and

physical, intellectual, or moral; and it is other grave hereditary diseases, neverthe-

not improbable that some day this will be less bring up large families of sickly

done, if not in Britain, in some more en- children at the public expense.

lightened community of the future. But No eugenist-nor indeed anybody with

probably the nearest we can get to this here even the most elementary notion of the

and now is to make endowment proportional science of heredity - needs to have

to the parents' earnings. The working man pointed out to him the likely results of

is apt to resent the suggestion that those these two opposite policies-the French and

socially above him are his superiors; but the British. Evidently, the one tends in

that eugenic value is roughly and generally the direction of race construction and the

speaking correlated to social status, and other in that of destruction; and if this con-

this to a man's earnings and abilities has tinues, the British nation must eventually

been so often demonstrated by writers on become inferior to the French in every way.

eugenics, that we must ask to be allowed Are we, as a people, indifferent to this?

here to take it for granted.

It will be as well, since the French

At the present time, in both Britain and scheme has been found to work admirably

France, there are family allowances; but and is popular with the working classes, to

107

io8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

consider that system at once, and perhaps for the unmarried worker an excess of

adopt it as the basis for that which could income over his needs, it was then that the

most easily be introduced on this side of custom of pooling all increases above a

the Channel; though naturally it will need certain level, and distributing this excess

modification, with a view both to adapting amongst those whose family needs were

it to home conditions and to extending its greatest, became general, and was felt to be

scope, while making it also more definitely so essentially just that nobody had any-

eugenic in its effects.

thing to say against it. Evidently the best

The French system is not one imposed by time, perhaps the only occasion, when such

law, but is of gradual growth and entirely a system can be made more or less uni-

voluntary; yet so advantageous has it been versal, without legislation and without pro-

found that very few employers of large test from the unmarried, is when wages are

numbers of workers have failed to adopt it, rising to exceptionally high levels; for at

and all public bodies employing labour use any other time it involves considerable

it as a matter of course. The system had sacrifice on the part of those who have no

its origin in the simple common sense and families.

love of justice that characterize the French During the War, therefore, the Caisses

working classes-and in that term should de Compensation were established, and the

be included both employers and employed- system has since rapidly developed. In

for it is evident that the same wage as will I920 there were still only six such caisses;

allow a single man or a childless couple to in I928 there were 2I8, to which 20,000

provide for all their needs is likely to be employers subscribed. Nearly four million

insufficient for the man who has to maintain workers were by then included in the

a family, and the children may suffer in scheme, which, in I927, distributed

consequence. To give both, therefore, the I,476,000,000 francs among the workers'

same wage, according to a fixed scale, families. Though later figures, at the time

besides being unjust, is a direct and severe of writing, do not seem to have been pub-

discouragement to the worker to have and lished, it is common knowledge that the

to bring up fittingly a number of children scheme continues to extend its scope and

-although, without this inestimable ser- the number of workers involved continues

vice, the State would soon cease to exist. to grow.

The feeling in France, therefore, which In the caisses or special banks are the

is pre-eminently a sound and logical judg- funds subscribed by a number of employers,

ment, is that family allowances must be who club together for the purpose, since it

considered, especially in the case of healthy is manifest that under any system not

and intelligent parents, as a just reward universal, if a single employer were obliged

for services rendered to the community. to endow the families of his own work.

There it is the community of workers that people, he would be tempted to employ only

shoulders this duty towards its own mem- single men. By clubbing together they are

bers. This idea is eugenically sound, and, enabled to choose their workmen without

as we shall shortly suggest, it might well reference to the number of children they

be extended to the body of taxpayers.

may have, since they subscribe not accord-

Already before the War, a number of ing to those numbers, but to the total num-

public bodies and private businesses had ber of workpeople, married or single, that

begun to make special allowances in the they mav have in their employ. A fixed

case of workers who had children to sup- annual, quarterly or monthly premium is

port. But it was during the War that the quoted by the caisse, calculated generally

great rise in the cost of living made con- at so much per cent. of total wages, but

ditions more and more impossible for large sometimes at so much per day or per hour

families; and as, at the same time, there of work done in the factory or workshop.

was a great rise in wage levels, which meant There are also other ways of calculating in

PRACTICAL FAMILY ENDOWMENT

I09

special instances-as, for example, agricul- France. But, in the last resort, courage

tural labourers by the hectare-but these is a thing we have the right to expect from

we need not here examine. As these sub- any Government worthy of the name-once

scriptions have to be paid in advance, an we succeed in demonstrating beyond dis-

estimate is made at the beginning of the pute the expediency and urgency of the

period, and the amount paid in excess is reform. Fear never was a good counsellor.

returned or the amount short made good, Successive Governments lived in mortal fear

at the end. Frequently, however, these of the " dole vote " so much so that they

differences, which are generally calculated shamefully betrayed what they knew to be

so as to be excessive rather than deficient, the national interest in their desire to

are allowed to make up a reserve fund, propitiate it. Yet this proved in the end

which bears interest, to the credit of the to be a bogy after all !

employer.

Secondly, we must take into considera-

tion the higher standard of living in this

HOW TO APPLY IT TO ENGLAND

country, and the fact that paupers have

In sketching out a system, based on the often drawn as much as four shillings a above, which may be suitable to our own head for their children, weekly, which

country, we shall have to remember, in the first place, that as wages are not now

would make the modest French family allowance of twenty or thirty francs a

rising, it would be hopeless, at the present month appear ridiculous. It would be vain

time, to try to make it voluntary. It will to imagine that our present standard of

either have to wait such time as it may living can be indefinitely maintained, since take for a considerable rise in wage levels it has involved us in mortgaging the future

to come as the result of a boom in trade- to such an extent that the most clear-

and that may be a very long time indeed- sighted among the ministers, even of our

so as to be initiated just as in France, or late spendthrift Socialist Government, had

it will have to be a State scheme, on a com- to call a halt; but we may perhaps hope

pulsory basis. As industry cannot at present bear this as an extra burden, on the

to keep it higher than that of the French working classes, and for that reason we

top of compulsory insurance, it will either might aim at allowances of about double the

have to replace the latter-would that were possible !-or the workers alone will have

amount caisses.

of those given by the French These have varied from five to

to contribute to the fund from their wages, fifty francs a month, but average at the

when much trade union opposition may be present time about twenty-five francs for

confidently expected.

one and seventy-five for four children.

This is, nevertheless, the ideal arrange- A third matter to be considered is the

ment; but in Britain, under trade union family endowment of free-lance or un-

dictation and the extravagant legislative attached workers, and the inclusion of

Ischemes of idealists who ignored biological other valuable sections of the population,

and psychological facts, the working classes working with hand or brain, who are left have been encouraged to rely upon spoon- entirely out of the French scheme. With

feeding to such an extent that it is doubtful us this is the more necessary since we have

whether or not it will be possible at the gone further than any other nation in subpresent time to get them to look favourably sidizing the procreation of our poorest

upon any scheme that does not involve stock, and this policy has, together with

State aid.

indiscriminate charity and other dysgenic

Possibly, however, much could be done influences, already spread the rot far and

in this direction by well-organized propa- wide-as Dr. Tredgold has declared,

ganda, more especially by making the " mental defect is but one manifestation of

British workman know and understand the a disease which is slowly but surely eating

good results which have been obtained in its way into the heart of the nation."

iio THE EUGENICS REVIEW

In these circumstances, the wider the incomes. In that case, to avoid giving

scope of a eugenic system of family endow- other people the benefit of the remaining

ment, likely effectively to combat the un- fifty per cent., it could be utilized as herein-

satisfactory differential birth rate now after suggested. Those with more than

known to exist, the better will be our chance £2,000 a year, if of independent spirit,

of saving our sound stock, still unaffected would probably resent aid in any form, even

by sinister influences, and regenerating our though contributed solely by others of their

race, naturally unsurpassed in valuable own class-and in any case public opinion

hereditary qualities by any other in the would reject it, because such incomes are

world.

ample for the needs of any family. So they

should be left outside the scheme.

THE SCHEME PROPOSED

Taking all these matters into considera- SECTION 1.-WAGE EARNERS

tion, and also the fact that, to be eugenic A special bank having been established

in its effects, it is essential the scheme by legislation, all employers of labour

should provide that the amount allowed for would be obliged, from a certain date

each child be strictly proportioned to the onward, to furnish it with complete lists of

father's earnings, we shall do best to divide their workers or those they expected to

it into two sections: that of employed employ, say, during the coming half-year,

manual workers and that of unattached and of the number of children dependent

workers and taxpayers. Furthermore, in upon each. No distinction should be matde

each of these, we shall have to establish between " legitimate " and " illegitimate "

several grades, according to the income children, so long as one of the parents was

earned. It goes without saying that the bringing them up; but, of course, in no

allowances made to non-workers, whether case could allowances be claimed by both

through the machinery of " insurance bene- parents in respect of the same child. As

fit " or that of public assistance, must never regards adopted children, it would probably

exceed nor even equal those which can be be expedient to include these, too, in the

obtained through the lowest class of manual scheme, even though they could not, of

labour. It would be better to replace them course, inherit the qualities of their adop-

by payment in kind, failing relief work; and tive parents. The French scheme includes

this might be extended to the families of also ascendants when dependent upon the

those earning less than thirty shillings, worker, and these too might be included in

when necessary.

the present scheme as a matter of expe-

Section I should include wage earners diency though of no eugenic significance.

receiving from 30S. to 50S. a week. Those The amount of allowance in such cases

with less than this not only could ill spare should not exceed that distributed for the

any part of their meagre earnings for the younger children.

endowment of others, but, also, the children These lists would be accompanied by

of their class would be so unlikely to signed declarations from the workers them-

improve our average racial qualities that it selves. Possibly the local post offices might

would not be good policy to encourage their be utilized as branches of the central bank,

multiplication.

so as to avoid the necessity of establishing

Section II should include all with earned local caisses all over the country. After

incomes of from £I30 to £2,ooo a year. As receiving and verifying the lists, the bank

to unearned incomes, they could either be would notify each employer what amount

excluded altogether from the scheme, or, he must deposit for the half-year. In the

being included, they could be subject to case of small businesses, living from hand

full contributions while having the right to mouth, quarterly or monthly deposits

only to draw family allowances of half the might be allowed. Each trade or industry

amounts allowed in the case of earned would have its own fund. The amount of

PRACTICAL FAMILY ENDOWMENT

III

the deposit would be calculated, not on the number of children, but on the number of workpeople and the wages to be received by them. In paying wages, whether daily, weekly or monthly, the employer would then deduct from every worker io per cent., and it would be the total amount of these deductions that would constitute his deposit in the endowment funds.
Each week the bank would then distribute among the workers with families a certain amount for each of the first three children under fourteen years of age, proportionate to the man's earnings, and a slightly lesser amount for every subsequent child. Although, of course, the expense of two children is not quite double that of one only, nor that of three treble that of one, it would be a good thing to offer this small extra encouragement to families of three, as being the minimum number needed to replace the present generation, after allowing for those who, for one reason or another, might fail to leave descendants. Where husband and wife both work, both should contribute, though only one should draw in respect of their children. This would tend to discourage the custom of wives leaving their homes and their children to go out to work, which is an evil to be combated if children are to receive proper attention at home.
THE WORKING OF THE SCHEME
For the sake of illustration, let us suppose that an employer has three orders of workpeople. Class A consists of ioo men
at present receiving 30s. a week; Class B of 50, receiving 40s.; and Class C of 25, receiving 5os. He will probably have also
some more highly paid workers, but these will come under Section II. Their names will be given in with the others and handed on to the income-tax assessors to deal with under that part of the endowment scheme, if not for the collection of taxes.
Class A, then, earns 30s. x I00=3,000S.
Having deducted io per cent. for the fund, the employer will pay to each of these men 27s., and to all 2,700s., and will pay into
the fund IC5 in respect of each week, or
£390 for the half-year.

Class B earns 40s. x 50 = 2,000S. Deducting io per cent., he pays to each of these 36s. and to all I,8oos., while paying to the fund bio per week, or £260 for the half-
year. Class C earns 50s. x 25= I,250S. Deduct-
ing io per cent. he pays to each 45S., to all
I,I25s., and to the fund £6 5s. a week or
£162 iOs. for the half-year. Altogether,
then, he pays into the funds £8i2 Ios., in respect of the half-year.
In the Endowment Bank there will be ten or twenty classes, not three only, for each industry, each class embracing, say, wages
of from 30s. to 32s., 32s. to 34S., and so
forth; but here we give only three for the sake of simplicity.
The married men among the employees
will get back from the endowment fund the amounts deducted, or more or less than
those amounts, according to the number of children, the total amount subscribed by each class of workers throughout the industry being divided among the children of that same class.
Supposing the average number of children under fourteen years of age, in those families where there are any, to be three;
and supposing 50 per cent. of the workpeople to have children, after deducting the number of women whose husbands are entitled to draw, then Class A will have, for
each child, a sum equivalent to 300s. divided by I50, that is to say an average
of 2S. per child. This will probably enable the bank to distribute 2s. id. for each of the first three children in a family and is. 6d. for each of the others. This is about double the average allowance in France (at par), and though, from the eugenic point of view, it may still be considered insufficient-especially as only those with at least two children will get back an amount equal tg or greater than that deducted from their wages-it is probably the best we could do
at the present time. Later on, at a time
when wage levels are rising, it might be
increased.
Class B will have, for each child, an amount equivalent to 200S. divided by 75,
it being remembered that the larger divi-

112 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

dend, corresponding to the whole class when racial value at the expense of those with

all workshops are taken into consideration, more.

will mean a correspondingly larger divisor, No deductions will be made for earned

so that the quotient will be approximately income, personal allowance, or children

the same, for any large numbers. This will except on assessing income-tax proper,

allow about 2s. gd. for each of the first three because in respect of the endowment-tax,

children and 2s. each for the others.

the difference between earned and unearned

Class C will have about 3s. 6d. for each income will be considered, as above sug-

of the first three and 2s. 6d. for the gested, in the rate of endowment, as also,

remainder.

of course, the number of children. More-

over, as no such deductions are allowed in

SECTION 2.-UNATTACHED WORKERS

Section i, they could not logically be per-

In Section 2 we have unattached workers mitted in Section 2.

and all those with incomes of more than £I3o a year and less than £,2,000. Unattached workers earning less than £I30 can

As, however, the income-tax payer is already heavily burdened, and the load would become wellnigh intolerable for the

well be left out of the scheme for the same lower middle classes if endowment-tax and

reason as wage earners receiving less than income-tax were both exacted-especially in

30s. a week. If unearned incomes are to be included at all, they should not entitle a man to draw more than fifty per cent. of what others draw, and an income partly unearned should be divided up accordingly

the case of married people until they had at least two children-it would be well to take the opportunity, when legislating for family endowments, to relieve all those with less than £400 a year, or £500 if married,

before arriving at the figure required for of every other burden beyond the io per

endowment purposes. But the workers in
Section 2 should not get more generous treatment than those in Section i, except in so far as their higher subscriptions entitle them to higher endowment; wherefore the 50 per cent. withheld from those unearned incomes should not go to the workers of that class but to the foundation and maintenance of orphanages for children of the same class, or other such purpose, as might be eventually decided. When the " unearned " income is the result of many years' work and final retirement it should be considered as earned.
A IO per cent. levy should be made in
Section 2, as in Section i. That is to say, a special levy of two shillings in the pound, to constitute the endowment fund, should be charged through the income-tax machinery on all incomes falling between the limits just mentioned. There must, however, be

cent. levy, and compensate the Treasury for the loss by increasing the surtax, more especially on unearned incomes, and even by making it payable, in such cases, on incomes of £I,200 a year upwards. It is fitting that the idle rich should bear whatever extra burden may become necessary.
If the increase of income-tax under this scheme appears intolerable, even with these provisos, it should be remembered that none would be asked to make sacrifices likely to cause them privation, because those with children or ascendants to support would get back nearly all, or more than all they gave. The worst that can be said of such increased taxation is that it would tend to discourage energy and initiative in the case of the earned incomes of men without families. This disadvantage might be mitigated by increasing the deductions for earned income and personal allow-

grades just as with the wage earners, for ance in the assessment of income-tax proper.

the ideal is that in each social class the In Section 2, as in Section i, allowances

childless members contribute to the main- will be distributed among the children of

tenance of families of their own class; each class according to the funds available

because only in this way can we avoid for that particular class. The amount will

encouraging procreation among those of less be arrived at by dividing the total collected

PRACTICAL FAMILY ENDOWMENT

by the number of children, and in Section to about £I,400,000 per annum. If we

2 will be paid in monthly instalments.
Each of the first three children will receive something slightly over the mean amount and each subsequent child something less, according to what may be available. As the upper classes have, at present, smaller families than the lower, it would be easy to include in Section 2 children up to sixteen

estimate the number of children as we did in Section i, this amount will be divided
among i5o,ooo children, which means that
each will get, on the average, £69 6s. 8d. a
year, or about I5s. 6d. a month. Xi might
therefore receive 32s. a month for his two, which would make his yearly income
£136 4s., instead of £;I30.
X2 earns £640 a year and has five chil-

years of age, thus facilitating secondary dren. He is subject to income-tax. Let

education.
Class A might be those with incomes ranging from £I30 to £150, Class B those
from £i50 to £200, Class C from £200 to £250, and so on, up to incomes of £4oo, when they might include wider ranges.
Thus class G would include incomes from

us suppose he is allowed to deduct one-
quarter for earned income and £250 foO
personal allowance. Then he will pay £23 income-tax proper and £64 to the endowment fund. If there are 5o,ooo people in his class with 75,000 children, he will claim
£45 in respect of each of his three elder
children and £35 for each of the others.

£400 to £5oo and Class H from £500 to His final income, therefore, after paying

£6oo. Class M, again, could take in a still taxes, will be, roughly, £758.

wider range, say from £i,ooo to £I,200, and

so on, up to £2,000.

By means of a table accompanying the THE MAIN ADVANTAGES

income-tax form, the amounts to be claimed in respect of each child for different incomes
might be indicated to the taxpayer, while a note would explain that the amount allowed would be more or less than the claim, according to the total number of persons in the class and the total number of children.

In conclusion, let us very briefly recapitulate the main advantages of the scheme:
It converts the present dysgenic system of family allowances into one that will make
for race betterment. It is based upon a scheme actually working, in France, which has there increased the birth rate among

certain valuable sections of the population,

SOME SAMPLE CASES

is popular, and works smoothly. It

Taking a few examples, at random, to embraces every social class which can be

show how this would affect different indi- considered racially valuable, except perhaps

viduals, we have, for instance, the follow- some of the very rich who cannot well be

ing: offered this sort of advantage; though there

X is a man earning £13o a year. He has no children or dependants, so he pays £I3
a year to the endowment fund, and receives
nothing back. He pays, however, no income-tax proper, and his case would be

must always be individual cases among both poor and rich which will be exceptions to the rule. It treats all equally, since it offers to every family an endowment proportioned to contributions made, and yet it

the same if his income was unearned. encourages procreation more or less in pro-

Xi earns £I30 but has two children. He portion to real eugenic value. Even the

pays £I3 to the fund, but claims an amount better elements among the unemployed will

for each of his children slightly above that to be arrived at by dividing the total amount paid by his class by the number of children in. it. If there were ioo,ooo individuals in class A (this may be an over- or an underestimate, but this is irrelevant, for the divisor will vary with the dividend and so the quotient will remain essentially the

be included when Government decides to
adopt the system of rewarding each workman according to the economic value of his work, instead of according to trade union dictation-for in this way alone can relief work be made economic and practicable. It imposes extra burdens on none but the idle,

same), then the A class fund will amount the childless, and the very rich, while it

c

II4 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

benefits all others. Lastly, it need cost the cism. To avoid the fate of the recent

Exchequer very little. Even the cost of Sterilization Bill, it should not be presented

administration could probably be met by until there are reasonable prospects of

using, to defray it, the interest on moneys success.

deposited.

But we may need first to destroy the

To prepare the way for the introduction fiction, so widely believed to-day, that

of the scheme in Parliament, it should first already too many children are born, and

be published and widely circulated, together that we should try to reduce, not to increase,

with the arguments which support it. Every the number; the truth being, of course, that

effort should be made to air it in the general we have too many of the wrong sort and

Press and reply convincingly to every criti- too few of the right sort.

W

= SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW!-

JOURNAL OF THE INSTITUTE OF SOCIOLOGY

Acting Editor: ALEXANDER FARQUHARSON

Vol. XXIV.

JANUARY, 1932

No. 1

CONTENTS

of the First Part of the 24th Volume, January, 1932

Tendencies in Recent German Sociology: I.

F. Oppenheimer

The Regional Social Unit

A. H. Macmurdo

= Tributes to the Memory of Victor Branford: III.

Sociology Considered as Moral Philosophy

Gladys Bryson

Rural Sociology in the United States

Richard Kaysenbrecht

Francis Galton on Hereditary Genius: I.

G. Spillor

Social Amenities in the Western Islands of Scotland

W. S. Gibson

Book Reviews

Le Play House Notes and News

Books and Periodicals Received

Supplement: A Survey of Boys' Organisations in Southampton

Annual Subscription £1 Is. Od., post free. 5/- per copy.
- be XLe Vp[ag bouSe Press,
65 BELGRAVE ROAD, WESTMINSTER, S.W.1

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIV, No. 2.

