POPULATION PROBLEMS IN THE LIGHT OF DIFFERENTIAL FERTILITY*
By J. A. FRASER ROBERTS,.M.D., D.Sc., M.R.C.P., F.R.S.E.

W E are greatly in the debt of the which will be big enough absolutely, but,

eminent investigators of popula- relative to those of other nations, may prove

tion trends, not only for their to be very great indeed. Some might go studies and estimates, but for explaining further and hold that there was something

their findings in such a clear fashion, easily almost decadent in the cheerful acceptance of

understandable by the layman. The net a declining population.

reproduction rate, so convenient scienti- In the second place there is the disastrous

fically, seems to be universally accepted as change in age-composition in a sharply de-

an appropriate measure. The fact that for a clining population-the greatly increased

time total numbers may rise while a real number of old people who will have to be

decline is taking place, to show itself inevit- supported by the greatly diminished num-

ably later, seems to mislead no one. The bers of young people. Again we are in-

facts have been presented squarely to the debted to the experts on population problenis

public and whatever differences of opinion for the clarity with which this consequence

there may be as to their significance, and as. has been explained to the public.

to causes and remedies, seldom can public There is, however, a third reason which

discussion of a complex subject have started should appeal to this Society as one of par-

with less confusion or a clearer appreciation ticular importance. And while the first two

of the issues involved.

are constantly quoted and were stressed re-

Interest has grown rapidly and is now wide- peatedly in the House of Commons debate,

spread, as was shown, for example, by the this third reason was not mentioned on that

recent debates in Parliament, and the cor- occasion by any speaker. It is this: As things

respondence in The Times which followed a are at present, and as they are likely to

particularly clear letter from Prof. A. V. Hill. remain in any future which can be foreseen,

There are, of course, two views in regard to a decline in total numbers is, quite inevit-

a declining, a sharply declining, population. ably I think, bound to be associated with a

The first view is that it is a thoroughly bad disastrous fall in quality also.

thing; the second, that it does not matter
much, or may even be beneficial. It seems Intelligence and Fertility

clear, as was demonstrated by the debate in the House of Commons, that the first view is that of the great majority. Doubtless both views are represented in our Soiety, though here, too, I imagine that the majority regard
the present trend with alarm. I am going to select three reasons which
seem to indicate strongly that the present trend is to be deplored. In the first place there is the feeling that our people have a
contribution to make and that we cannot regard with equanimity a decline in numbers

If it were to prove possible to increase the
reproduction rate substantially, I do not believe that that could be done without
automatically improving the trend of differential fertility at the same time. I would almost go so far as to say that the effectiveness of measures taken to increase the reproductive rate as a whole will be found to be
not very far from proportional to their
effectiveness in reversing the present trends in differential fertility. This will be particularly so if we consider not differentials as

* An address to the Eugenics Society on Decembet
14th, 19431.

between social classes, a useful indicator because easily available, but the far more

9

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

important differential as between the intefli- find its place as before. The unwisdom of

gent and the unintelligent, quite apart from parenthood in particular instances, steriliza-

social class. The measure of success in regard tion as an aid in coping with certain problems

to both aims, that is, increasing total num- -such things will have their importance.

bers and lessening the differential trend, will But the total effect of all these individual

not be reflected so much in the demonstra- negative measures is small compared with

tion that the reproductive rate of, say, the the possibilities of encouraging changes in

professional classes has been brought nearer relative reproduction rates amongst large

to that of labourers, but, what is far more sections of the population-this is the vital

important, that the reproductive rate of the problem and in regard to it we may take a

most intelligent labourers has been raised positive or a negative view. Which we take

towards that of the least intelligent labourers. depends upon whether we consider that the

What are the facts of differential fertility present reproductive rate should if possible

in regard to intelligence, the most important be substantially increased or whether it is

differential we know anything about ? They better that it should remain where it is, or

can be briefly summarized. The study which even diminish. If we take the positive view

I presented to you five years ago (I938) we shall lay very little, if any, stress upon the

indicated that the least intelligent have large families characteristic of certain sec-

perhaps three times as many children as the tions of the community or of types of indi-

most intelligent, fertility declining quite vidual. We shall direct our attention to the

evenly from one extreme to the other. The possibilities of increasing fertility, knowing

figures indicated a fall of rather more than that if this effort is successful it will tend to

4i points of Binet I.Q. in the average inteli- raise particularly the fertility of the more

gence of the population in a single generation. desirable stocks. And we shall be advocating

When, however, allowance is made for the popular measures to a public very ready to

incompleteness of some of the families in- consider them. Of course, we have no wish to

vestigated, it is seen that the fall must, in advocate measures because they will prove

fact, be considerably greater. Other studies, popular, but how much greater the chance

for example that of Cattell (1936, I937), and of achieving our aims should they indeed

those mentioned by Osborn (I940) in his prove to be so. We have the opportunity of

recent book, yield similar estimates.

marching in the ranks of the big battalions,

A continued decline at this rate could because, perhaps for the first time, circum-

only be describedas catastrophic. To consider stances dictate that we and the big battalions

one particular consequence, the four most should think alike.

intelligent people in every I00, those with I feel sorry for those, whom I imagine to

an I.Q. above I30, wil (without alowing for be in the minority, who for weighty and

the total decline) be reduced to three in a arguable, though I think insufficient reasons,

single generation. The least intelligent four, take the opposite view. They must equally

with an I.Q. below 70, will be replaced by deplore the present trend of differential

five persons of similar intelligence. That is, fertility but are bound to hope for equaliza-

a ratio of equality between the very bright tion owing to changes which must involve

and the very dull will be changed in the lowering the fertility of large sections of the

course of only thirty years to a ratio of community. But what chance is there of

5 to 3 in favour of the very dull.

securing the acceptance of any such measures,

unpopular in themselves, when the great

Timeliness of Positive Eugenics

majority of the public are convinced that

It seems certain that questions of popula- more babies are urgently needed ?

tion will occupy an important place in plans If, on the other hand, our Society accepts

for post-war reconstruction. Public interest the positive view, it has every opportunity

is aroused. What is to be the attitude of our of seeing some at least, and perhaps the most

Society? Negative eugenics will no doubt important, of its aims and objects translated

POPULATION PROBLEMS IN LIGHT OF DIFFERENTIAL FERTILITY ii

into achievement. It will be able to guide or a single remedy. When such sentiments

public opinion along lines likely to secure the are expressed they are obviously not axio-

most effective action in achieving the linked matic-the great majority of reasonable

aims of a population improved both in minds would not immediately accept them

numbers and quality.

as self-evident. The suggestions are often

I should like to consider the contribution mutually contradictory and seem to be

which our Society can make under three generally recognized for what they are:

headings. The first is to stress the great expressions of faith, unsupported by ade-

complexity of the problem. of population quate evidence. Even on the simplified view,

trends, to emphasize how much remains to therefore, it is far from clear what factors,

be discovered, to point out that the total intellectual, emotional, economic, have in-

trend can only be studied in the light of the duced many persons to limit their families,

differences in reproductive rates revealed and to a varying extent in different sections

when the population is divided in various of the community. Even if this simple view

ways. The second follows; this is to stress is accepted, there still remains much to

the necessity for investigation. The third discover and remedies can only be advanced

cannot be evaded: to attempt to estimate tentatively and in an experimental spirit.

in the light of the knowledge available at present what plans for immediate practical Variations in Natural Fertility

action are likely to prove most successful.

It seems to me, however, that there are

many important indications pointing to the

Complexity of Population Problem

conclusion that the simple view outlined of

Many people if asked to sum up popula- decline and of differential fertility is inade-

tion trends would probably say that from quate. At best it explains some of the facts

about I870 the Western European birth-rate only. The real situation is far more complex.

started to decline seriously. They would say, An important source of complication arises

further, that this corresponded in all prob- from the great variations which exist in

ability to a wide diffusion of knowledge of natural human fertility. On such facts as

contraception, at least among the better are known to us, on the distribution of

educated. They would also say that the family sizes, particularly perhaps on the

decline affected different sections of the analogy of the domesticated animals, we

population very differently, that the more have to conclude that man is a relatively

prosperous limited their families to a far infertile animal, that differences in level of

greater extent than did the less prosperous. fertility are very great, and that they must

Or, alternatively, the more intelligent in all be, in part, inherited. Professor R. A. Fisher's

social classes tended to use the new know- well-known hypothesis depends upon this,

ledge and their children therefore rapidly and if so much is admitted his conclusions

decreased in number. Thus arose the marked become inevitable.

differences in fertility as between different At all times, whether the population is

sections of ther community, as between those declining or increasing, for, of course, even

of different levels of intelligence, and similarly if human beings are relatively infertile they

in respect of other groupings.

are quite fertile enough to increase in numbers

It is to be noted that even if this simplified given favourable circumstances, at all times

view were true, the problem is still complex. then, some individuals, some stocks, are not

It is striking with what proper diffidence reproducing themselves, while others are in-

almost everyone expresses an opinion, and creasing. If fertility itself is not associated

how readily it is admitted that the cause or with other qualities, good or bad, this

remedy suggested is advanced tentatively hardly matters. It will not affect the quality

only, or is thought likely to be only one of of the population generally. Stocks exhibit-

many factors concerned. There are few to- ing different characteristics will be equally

day who confidently advance a single cause fertile on the average. When, however,

I2 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

certain qualities are regarded as desirable during the period I660-I760. He makes it

and their possessors are chosen for social clear that at that time inequality between

promotion, all these characters tend to be- town and country, and between rich and

come concentrated in the same individuals poor, was generally recognized. In an

owing to intermarriage among their pos- editorial note, Fisher remarks: " On another

sessors. Now, there is no doubt at all that point a perusal of the older writings may

at the present time it is an economic advan- correct a modem misapprehension. The

tage in every walk of life to belong to a small great part played by contraceptive devices

family. Above all else this enables parents in increasing the inequality of births between

to give their children opportunities superior different social classes has led many writers

to those they themselves have enjoyed. to assume, or assert, that this inequality is

Thus good looks, physical strength, mental of quite modem origin. That the same differ-

ability particularly, and infertility, tend to ences as are now most striking, between the

become concentrated in the same people. cities and the country, and between the rich

After a time the more intelligent inevitably and the poor, were asserted by observers

become less fertile. In my opinion the reality early in the eighteenth century should make

of the Fisher effect can hardly be denied. one pause before accepting this assumption,

What is in doubt is how important it is. Is and may suggest that contraception is

it an important effect or a relatively minor merely a means whereby the effects of a

one ? It seems to me that it is likely to be more deep-rooted tendency have become

of considerable importance, to say the least. accentuated."

One reason for this will be given in a moment. Jaffe (1940), in a notable paper, has

It is quite possible that there is in addi- analyzed figures relating to the eastern part

tion a real biological association between of the United States during the years I800-40.

intelligence and infertility. It may be that Using a number of criteria, for example,

the higher the level of general intelligence, amount of personal property or, in the

the more numerous are the objects of interest southern States, number of slaves owned,

in life with a consequent weakening some- he is able to demonstrate that the differentials

times of sex and parental instincts. It may with which we are so familiar to-day were

be, also, that there are influences in the lives already well established at the beginning of

of the more prosperous directly inimical to the nineteenth century.

fertility. All this is speculative but worthy of

investigation.

Age at Marriage

Thus the simple view of the population I should like to add another piece of trend since i87o must probably be modified evidence pointing to the complexity of the

to this extent: that the small families problem. On currently accepted views it is

characteristic of certain sections of the com- often assumed that relatively late age at

munity may be less a matter of voluntary marriage is a potent factor in decreasing the determination than has been so widely fertility of certain stocks. In the paper

assumed.

which I read to you five years ago I described

differences between the reproductive history

Differential Fertility before Decline in Birth- of the mothers of the most intelligent 4 per

rate cent and least intelligent 4 per cent of

But there is another doubt. Is it a fact children respectively in a sample of school

that differential fertility first became im- children. It was perfectly true that the

portant when the birth-rate started to average age of the mother at the time of the

decline? Is it after all so exclusively a birth of the first child (a fair indication of

matter of voluntary choice and of a wide- age at marriage) was 27*4 years in the former

spread knowledge of contraceptive methods ? group and 23 9 in the latter. This was, of

Kuczynski (1935) published a paper on course, responsible for a loss of children born

British demographers' opinions on fertility to the mothers of the cleverest children, but

POPULATION PROBLEMS IN LIGHT OF DIFFERENTIAL FERTILITY 13

it was notable that even more children were quirement has been thoroughly stressed by

lost to the mothers of this group because Prof. Carr Saunders and the Population In-

they ceased their reproductive life earlier vestigation Committee. This is additional

than the mothers of the dullest children. census data. Only when this is available shall

Two months ago we heard a very interest- we know the structure of the population in

ing paper by Dr. Paterson.* He laid great terms of individual families. This is the first

stress on age at marriage, but in view of the and essential step in order to discover what

results just described it seems doubtful is happening and to trace the effect of chang-

whether this factor is as important as is ing economic circumstances and of measures

sometimes claimed, or whether a lowering designed to affect the reproductive rate.

would effect as great a change as he hopes. Much more detailed investigation on

Perhaps many people do marry late for samples is also required, however. It is

economic reasons; but perhaps even more necessary to find out as much as we can

do so for inborn psychological reasons. about the reasons why families are of the

size that they are. These researches, by the

Infertility, Voluntary and Involuntary

way, should not be only physiological, patho-

Of course no one would deny that differ- logical and sociological. The psychologist ences in the degree to which families are should be added to the team. Doubtless from

voluntarily limited must be responsible for a practical point of view it is a very difficult

an important part of the present observed field of research and doubtless psychology facts of differential fertility. But, as we have has not yet advanced to the stage when all

seen, by no means all. Similarly, if we think the problems involved could be easily tackled.

of the total reproductive rate in our popula- Nevertheless, it is highly necessary to investi-

tion. It is perfectly true to say that if we gate direct, as far as is possible, the motives could go back to I870 we should hiave all the underlying these aspects of human behaviour. births we required. A lessening of family The psychologist could not perhaps solve

limitation could undoubtedly restore an all his problems, and certainly not at once, expanding population. But the contribution but any contribution would be very valuable. would still be very uneven. There would be Research on involuntary sterility and low many large families, but there would still fertility should be encouraged. One suspects,

be many small ones, and also many childless marriages. It has been shown (Kiser, I939) in a study in New York City that three-
quarters of childless marriages were involuntarily so. We should aim at something better than a return to I870: the discovery of causes of infertility and low fertility, and
their correction when this proves possible.
It is obviously desirable to help those wh6 would like to have children or have more

however, that the problem is likely to prove relatively intractable. Low fertility may often be an inherited characteristic and
correspondingly elusive. There has been some reference lately to the possibility that the
practice of contraception may lead to subsequent infertility. This is, of course, an important subject for research, but it does seem that up to the present little convincing evidence has been forthcoming in support of

children and it seems clear that this would this view. be a contribution to improved quality also. Here I feel that I should say a word on
how desirable it is that in the post-war.

Problems for Investigation
We must surely conclude that the whole problem of population trends and of differential fertility is highly complicated. Investigation is called for along many lines, and by experts in many specialisms. The first re-

world people should be ready, through their scientific representatives, to conduct obser-
vations on themselves. It is so easy to raise
the cry of bureaucratic interference, of prying into the privacy of the home. It is to be hoped that it will be increasingly realized that many of the most important questions

* EUGENICS REVIEW, I943-44; 35, 57.

affecting human well-being cannot be

I4 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

answered by general discussion and that has only to pass a Measure prohibiting the

progress will not be achieved unless facilities sale of contraceptives, and it is settled at

are provided for scientific study. Let us once.'" It would be difficult to compress

hope that the time may come when people more nonsense into a single sentence. The

who happen to fall into a sample chosen for knowledge exists, and apart from the

investigation will feel that it is a privilege futility of trying to suppress it, it is surely

to assist in a project which will tend to right that parents should be able to choose

human betterment and that they will readily freely. The poorest possible way of attempt-

answer intimate questions put by persons- ing to increase the birth-rate would be to try

their own scientific representatives-in whose to secure the birth of children the parents

skill, discretion and integrity they have full did not want, to trick them into parenthood.

confidence.

It is infinitely preferable, and likely to be far

I cannot help recalling what happened more effective, to help, as far as is possible,

when Mr. Herbert Tout was conducting his those of low natural fertility to have the

admirable social survey of Bristol. I speak children they want and to discover and

from memory, as I have not got my files remove economic and other obstacles to the

available. His grant from a local authority family of large or moderate size.

was withdrawn and angry speeches were

made about the inquiries. " Let them come Economic and Social Incentives

to me and my friends," said one speaker. It seems to me that if we adopt what I

"We will tell them all they need to know have called the majority view, the view that

about poverty." I need hardly mention that the total reproductive rate should, if pos-

Mr. Tout's survey was one of those principally sible, be substantially raised, there can be no

considered when the Beveridge report was question as to what is of first and immediate

drawn up.

importance, a question, moreover, which is

One has to envy the United States in this due for Parliamentary decision in the near

matter. American investigators seem to future. This is family allowances. The name

enjoy a freedom which we do not. And it is perhaps unfortunate, because it suggests a

may be that the division into States will gift-even the word bribe has been men-

bring them one special advantage. Even tioned. In slight measure the principle was

without conscious planning the different accepted in income-tax allowances for de-

schemes put into operation in different States pendent children. It is now in the forefront

will from time to time present the observer of debate in connection with the Beveridge

with a ready-made experiment. We have plan. It seems to me that the Beveridge

seen an instance of this in sterilization and proposal should be welcomed, though with

it may be destined to become a potent factor certain qualifications. It does at least bring

in social experimentation.

the principle into prominence and once in

Control of Contraception

operation the idea can be modified and developed.

While we may lay the first stress on what But it must be remembered that the

we do not know and the need for experi- purpose of the family allowances recom-

ment, we have also to consider what attitude mended was to relieve want. It was no

we should take to the proposals of the present part of Sir William Beveridge's task to

moment and the immediate future.

consider the effect on population. Now

But before doing so I might perhaps for two reasons the principle which should

mention one thing that I am sure we shall be advocated by the Society is that mat-

not advocate. One of the speakers in the ters should be so equalized that parents

recent House of Commons debate stated: should not be penalized economically for

" A distinguished health expert, when I told having children. The first reason is that only

him this Debate was approaching, said, 'If in this way can the Fisher effect be eliminated.

you want to solve this problem Parliament It should cease to be an advantage to be

POPULATION PROBLEMS IN LIGHT OF DIFFERENTIAL FERTILITY I5

born into a small family. The second reason idge payments together with tax rebates

is that in general, and to the extent that parents would not be worse off than those

family limitation is under voluntary control, with fewer children or with no children at all.

it seems likely that the motives for preferring As much as possible should be given in the

a small family have, on the whole, been good form of direct services to the child. Money

and have tended to appeal to the most valu- would then be applied most efficiently and

able elements in the population, and this at the subsequent adjustments to be made

all social levels. To the extent that differ- would be less.

ential fertility as we see it to-day is the result An extension of services to the mother

of deliberate choice, and to the extent that should not be overlooked. Dr. Summerskill

that choice is based on economic factors, we has made a plea for a scheme by which

are bound to hold that equalization would helpers would be available to take charge of

improve the quality of the population. And, children periodically, giving the mother the

as it seems likely that even if there are big chance of rest and leisure. This principle

differences in innate fertility, the greatest might be amplified. There are many women

reservoir of additional babies exists amongst who find their true vocation in looking after

those who have limited their families in this children, and an extension of the system

way, the effect should be reflected in an might be possible by which the mother could

increased total reproductive rate.

be helped not only in regard to leisure, but

The Beveridge plan, however effectively it work also. Money alone will not bring

deals with the large family as a cause of freedom or equalization for the mother, and

poverty, is almost certain, I think, to be thought should be given as to how this, too,

relatively ineffective as regards population. could be achieved.

It may not be actually dysgenic, if we think But I must end on the note of the neces-

of intelligence and not of poverty. It may sity for continued investigation. There lies

perhaps raise the fertility of some of those the main hope. And with that spirit of

who are gifted though poorly paid; but inquiry should go the experimental attitude

from the population point of view it is un- in regard to economic and social measures.

likely to bring in much return for a-large They should be devised as carefully as pos-

expenditure unless it is made part of a sible in the light of existing knowledge and

wider scheme.

then applied in an open-minded and experi-

Starting with the Beveridge allowances as mental spirit. If they fail they must be

a beginning, the scheme could be extended reviewed. If they are effective further ex-

to the whole population, and redistribution periments should be tried to make them yet

effected, either by compulsory insurance more effective. It seems to me that in these

(voluntary schemes would surely be too matters a great opportunity lies ahead of

partial, too slow and maybe too uneven), or our Society.

through taxation. Taxatioriseems to be the

simpler. Due allowance can be made for the Summary

Beveridge payments and the experts could It is well understood that the reproductive

readily devise a scheme which would secure rate of the population has fallen to such a low

equalization at all income levels for numbers level that a serious decline in numbers is

of dependent children. The rebate of income inevitable. Some, who are undoubtedly in a

tax would be proportional to income, though minority, do not consider this a bad thing

not necessarily of course directly proportional. and even hold that it might be beneficial.

As part of a whole scheme it would then The general view, however, is that the decline

be seen clearly that family allowances were is greatly to be deplored, and that efforts

not a dole or a bribe but simply a method for should be made to discover the underlying

redistributing incomes in relation to number causes and to search for measures that will

of children. There would still be equal pay increase the number of children born. Two

for equal work, but by means of the Bever- reasons are often advanced in-support of this

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

view. In the first place our people have a promoted socially both for intelligence and

contribution to make and we should not be for infertility these qualities tend to become

satisfied to see our numbers declining associated.

relatively to those of other nations. In the It is often assumed that differences in

second place, it is inevitable that a declining fertility became marked when the birth-

population will mean a far larger proportion rate commenced to decline, about I870. Dr.

of old people who will have to be maintained Jaffe has shown, however, that these differ-

by far fewer young ones.

ences were well established in the United

There is a third important argument which States by i8oo. There has been plenty of is probably far less generally appreciated. time for the Fisher effect to operate, and it is

The trend of population is not only towards likely that the more intelligent are on the

smaller numbers; a rapid decline in quality average less potentially fertile than the less

is taking place also. This may be masked for intelligent.

a time by providing better opportunities so The first requirement is research along

that human abilities are used to fuller varied lines. We need to know far more.

advantage; nevertheless, native inborn Ampler census information and special in-

ability is being reduced. The four most vestigations are both required.

intelligent people in every IOO will be In the meantime steps are likely to be

replaced by three only in the next genera- taken which are certain to affect population

tion, while the four dullest will be replaced trends. The principle of family allowances

by five. This is the inevitable result of a has been incorporated in the Beveridge

state of affairs in which the most intelligent Report as -part of the plan for dealing with

members of the community have only one- poverty. If, however, there is to be a sub-

third of the number of children born to the stantial effect on population the Beveridge

least intelligent.

scheme must be incorporated in something

It seems highly probable that a total wider. In the light of our present knowledge,

decline at the present -rate will perpetuate the most effective plan would probably be to

this undesirable state of affairs, whereas a ensure that at all levels of income the

substantial raising of the reproductive rate standard of life is equalized whatever the

would inevitably tend to improve quality number of dependent children. This could

also. The margin for increase is greatest probably be carried out most easily through

amongst the most intelligent (quite apart income-tax adjustment. Rebates for children

from social class). It is the more intelligent would, after allowing for the Beveridge

who are primarily responsible for the payments, be proportional to income.

decline in total numbers and it is only they A complete scheme of this kind would

who can remedy it. Thus success in raising abolish the Fisher effect, and to the extent

the reproductive rate of the population as a that fertility is under voluntary control and

whole will mean a corresponding improve- dependent on economic factors should secure

ment in quality also.

an improvement both in quantity and quality

Many indications point to the fact that of population. We should regard any scheme

the causes underlying these population as experimental, however. We should simul-

trends are very complex. To select one taneously carry out research projects and be

example, it is far from certain that voluntary ready to learn by experience.

limitation of families is the only mechanism
at work. Prof. R. A. Fisher has brought forward strong arguments in favour of the view that much is to be attributed to natural
differences in fertility. In every walk of life it is at present an advantage economically to belong to a small family; the chances of social promotion are -greater. If people are

References: Cattell, R. B. (I936). EUG. REV., 28, i8i.
-~(I937). EUG. REV., 29, ITT.
Jaffe, A. J. (1940).. J. Hered., 31, 407. Kiser, C. V. (I939). Milibank Mem. Fund Quart.,
17, 50. Kuczynski, R. R. (I935). Ann. Eug., 6, I39. Osborn, F. (1940). Preface to Eugenics. Roberts, J. A. F. (i939). EUG. REV., 30, 237.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXXVI No. 1

