AN AMERICAN EUGENIST SPEAKS
By C. P. BLACKER, M.C., M.A., M.D., F.R.C.P.

M R. OSBORN'S name is well known Mr. Osborn's Preface to Eugenics* is not an

to students of eugenics and popula- entirely easy book to read. It is not a book

tion. His book, The Dynamics of for the person who likes an easy digest, and Population, written jointly with Dr. Lorimer, wants sensational figures or entertaining has been widely read and universally appreci- polemics. It is entirely devoid of irony,

ated. Dr. Gladys Schwesinger's Heredity and Environment, produced under his guidance and editorship, is a standard work in our library. At various European conferencesfor Mr. Osborn has been a frequent visitor to this continent-his tall figure has been as

pungency or wit. Yet it is a book which
every serious student should carefully study. It is a book which, if I were now active in my secretaryship of the Society, I should ask every member of the Council to examine critically and to write to me about.

conspicuous as his lucid contributions to the The book is not easy to read because of

subjects under discussion. His gentle yet Mr. Osborn's cautiousness and his predilec-

firm demeanour as chairman of a sectional tion for conclusions founded on carefully

meeting has been as welcome as his pacifying conducted investigations. As often as not,

and constructive proposals when the atmo- these conclusions are presented in the form

sphere was becoming stormy and tempers of a Table or a Figure showing curves or

were rising. At the Population Conference polygons. These require careful study, and

held in Paris in I937, when I last saw him, the consecutiveness of one's reading is

he led the American delegation. Rarely can interrupted. Indeed, Mr. Osborn's exposition

a distinguished body of scientific men have reminds me of my experiences at Members'

been better captained. It was a polyglot Meetings of our Society. In the last ten years,

conference that held strongly divergent the Society has promoted and subsidized

views. Upon one point, however, English- much research. I used to make a practice of

men, Frenchmen and Germans agreed-that using the occasions presented by our Members'

the Americans were lucky to have such a Meetings to enable the workers conducting

capable, tactful and influential leader.

researches for the Society to explain these

Mr. Osborn has made the American researches and to answer such questions as

Eugenics Society what it is. At a time when they might provoke in the minds of our the movement was being subjected to Fellows and Members. Not all research

increasing criticism from without, and was workers have the gift of explaining the unbeing internally weakened by dissensions avoidable complexities and pitfalls of any

within, he came to its rescue. His sensitive piece of well-planned research in such a way and balanced mind, his erudition, his critical that members of the non-scientific public can yet far-seeing judgment, his courteous and distinguish the wood from the trees. Not all

gentle manners compelled respect. The investigators have the lucidity and the

movement towards fragmentation was " common touch " possessed by such men as

arrested, American eugenists fell in behind Mr. Caradog Jones or Dr. Fraser Roberts.

him, and have since acquired a unity which From my vantage-point on the elevated they never had before. The relations between platform of the Rooms of the Royal or our Society and his have been of the closest Linnean Societies, where I used to sit on the and friendliest. For ove-r two years, the Chairman's left, I not infrequently saw American Eugenics Society took about 400 puzzled and mystified looks on the faces

copies of our REVIEW for distribution to its members.

* Osborn, Frederick. Preface to Eugenics. New York
1940. Harper and Brothers. Pp. 312. Price $2.75.

I9

20 THE EUGENICS REVIEW
below me. The audiences, which consisted ters deals non-technically with the physical mostly of lay men and women, were losing basis of heredity-the chromosome and the touch with the speaker's argument. They gene. The fact is stressed that the identificafailed to understand his terms or to follow tion of human genes has occurred almost the meaning of his technical expressions. entirely in the field of diseases and defects. They could not quite make out what he was There is no single gene which produces trying to establish; or they could not see its health, intelligence, a good physique, a bearing on eugenics. Sometimes they were balanced personality or a socially valuable mystified by the tentativeness of " expert " citizen. These, in so far as they have a speakers, or by their inability to make genetic basis, are the product of many genes confident genetic predictions. To most of our which have not yet been separately identified. lay members, it was clear enough that like But there are single genes which produce tended to breed like, and that we wanted to certain specific diseases, mostly rare; and breed from our good rather than our bad genetic hypotheses have been put forward genetic stocks. Yet by, say, the psychiatrist (with varying degrees of plausibility) to describing his inquiries into the inheritance account for the heredity of commoner mental of mental disorder, these obvious processes diseases and defects. The conclusion is were not made entirely clear, either as to the reached that hereditary abnormalities, manner or the certainty of their operation. belonging to the sphere of negative eugenics, The speaker used formidable and incom- are a problem of Public Health. Up-to-date prehensible words, and hedged himself about results of sterilization in the U.S.A. are given, with every kind of reservation before ventur- and a partial solution of the problem of the ing on a prediction. The eugenist who carrier is discerned in the extension of the use ardently wished to see the Society espouse of birth control. Valuable results, it is held, bold social policies was mystified and vaguely can be achieved by these means. " Even irritated. He felt himself lost in the with our present knowledge," writes Mr. labyrinths of " science." Our meetings were Osborn, " . . . it should be possible to reduce
sometimes criticized for being too " scientific." the number of feeble-minded by I5o,ooo With these reactions of the layman's mind, a generation for several generations, and
Mr. Osborn is familiar. The layman, like the the nuniber of schizophrenics and manicanimal breeder, takes it for granted that like depressives by possibly a like amount." produces like; he has observed that mem- (This estimate applies to the U.S.A. and not bers of a family resemble one another, and to Great Britain.) New responsibilities for that certain traits run in families. He hardly the medical profession are visualized in this feels it necessary to inquire how much direction. hereditary and environmental factors separ- The second chapter-the most difficult in ately contribute to the differences between the book-deals with psychological studies people. But Mr. Osborn feels it to be very of heredity and environment. Investigations necessary. The subject has been carefully are ably summarized in which heredity is investigated in studies, many of them recent, held constant and the environment varied of twins and of foster-children. These (studies of identical twins, which have the studies are summarized and their results are same heredity, who were reared apart); presented by Mr. Osbom in tabular or and in which the environment is held constant graphic form. One of the most valuable and heredity varied (studies in the resemfeatures of his book is that it teaches the lay- blances of foster children to their foster man to criticize and evaluate basic assump- parents and to their true parents). The tions which may seem to him self-evident. studies of Burks, Leahy, Freeman and Skeels
The book contains eight longish chapters, are reported, and the thorny question of the in which the reader is gradually led up to distribution of intelligence in different racial, certain important conclusions on population regional and occupational groups is further and eugenic policy. The first of these chap- critically discussed. The difficulties of reach-

AN AMERICAN EUGENIST SPEAKS

2I

ing definite conclusions are brought out, the these separate classes. The social policy here

chief one being that " actual evidence on the implied is clearly free from the charge,

influence of heredity can be found only when frequently heard from critics of eugenics,

the environment is approximately the same that it reflects class prejudice.

for two different groups." Some evidence on The third chapter deals with numerous

this problem exists and is discussed by Mr. problems included in the comprehensive

Osborn. It is found in cases in which children title, " Births and Deaths: The Background

from different occupational groups are of Eugenics." The growth of world popula-

brought up together in similar environments, tion, the balance of births and deaths in

such as is provided for illegitimate children primitive society, and the same balance in the

of known parentage by a foster home. The modem world are discussed; and it is brought

results of these and other investigations lead out that the nations of western Europe, and'

Mr. Osbom to an important conclusion as to the United States, are on the threshold of a

eugenic policy. A figure (No. 6) is given period of natural decrease. Indices of popu-

showing the hypothetical distribution of lation growth are described, and the reader

intelligence for three groups, in the form of is introduced to the net reproduction rate.

superimposed curves. The curve for the The following generalisation has been pain-

entire population shows a mean intelligence fully verified by the tragic events of to-day.

quotient of IOO; that for a low occupa- " World population trends are at present a

tional group has a mean of 96 *7; that for a continuous threat to the orderly advance of

high occupational group has a mean of humanity. High birth rates are making for

I04'4. But the curves overlap one another continuous over-population in large portions

in a way which the reader of these words can of the world, with a consequent demand for

easily visualize. On each side of the mean more territory . . . The eugenic programme,

(I.Q.ioo) for the entire population are found if it is to be ultimately effective, should

an equal number of people. There are an contribute to the ideal of a balanced dis-

equal number above and below the average. tribution of births throughout the world."

Among the people in the upper occupational There follows an analysis of population

group, there are more people above this mean growth in the United States, which includes

in intelligence than below it; among people a discussion of racial, regional and socio-

in the lower occupational group, there are economic groups. Rural populations have

more people below the same mean than higher reproduction rates than urban;

above it. But there nevertheless remain, in persons in low income-groups and of low

the lower occupational group, a very substantial number of people (about 40 per cent)

educational attainments have higher rates than those more favourably placed. Women

above this mean. Mr. Osborn contends that with incomes of $3,ooo and over have one

it wQuld be eugenically more desirable, as third the number of children of women on

well as socially more practicable, to aim at relief. The encouraging fact-encouraging

raising the fertility of the people in all groups because it points to an increase in voluntary

who, in intelligence, are above the mean for parenthood when conditions are favourable-

the entire population than to try to raise is noted that people in the highest economic

the collective fertility of upper (and on the whole more intelligent) groups at the expense'

levels have appreciably more children than those in the level immediately below them.

of those lower and less intelligent.

The same difference is found between the

In other words, the discrimination should " most successful " and the " least success-

be between people within each group, rather ful" graduates of Harvard, Princeton and

than between groups as a whole. The fact Yale. The former have more " planned"

is stressed that the average differences in and wanted children than the latter. " Sound

intelligence quotients between classes taken population policy calls for an equalization of

as a whole are small compared to the differ- births among the different occupational and

ences between individuals within each of socio-economic groups . . . so that each

22 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

may have the responsibility for beanrng and appointed in May I935, were largely trans-

training its share, but not more than its lated into law during the session held in I937

share, of the next- generation." Trends which came to be called the " Mothers' and

of fertility according to intelligence are Children's Parliament." In general the

examined, and the results of three studies measures enacted by this Parliament

(Lentz, Fraser Roberts and a study of favoured the supply of goods and services

Chicago children) are shown to agree in find- directly to children rather than the payment

ing that the largest families are those which of allowances or cash premiums to parents.

comprise dull and backward children. Dull The spread of contraception was favoured;

and backward families, it is estimated, make taxation was revised so as to provide larger

a contribution to the next generation so exemptions for parents; mothers' and

large as would produce an appreciable lower- infants' health centres were established

ing of the average intelligence in a single (access is available without charge to all

generation. A lowering by i -6 points of social classes) and dental services were

I.Q. per generation is suggested by Dr. organized; free attendance at delivery was

Fraser Roberts' figures for Bath. In happier provided; free school meals of approved

times, members of the Society have had the vitamin-containing foods were made avail-

privilege of hearing Dr. Roberts describe his able; and state subsidies for low-rent houses

findings. Mr. Osborn sees an explanation for were planned for families containing three or

these eugenically unfavourable rates in the more children. The commission also made

fact that the use of birth control has spread recommendations relating to education,

to some but not to all members of the com- nursery schools, and recreational facilities,

munity. But the use of birth control is but these have not yet been enacted into law.

increasing and, as has been seen, Mr. Osborn The chapter ends with a review of child-care

favours its further spread by private and agencies of the Federal Government of the

public health agencies.

U.S.A. Mr. Osbom sees in the activities of

This argument is developed in the fourth the Federal security agency, established in

chapter, entitled " Towards a National I939, the potential elements of an eventual

Population Policy." The policy here en- population policy. These are growing up

visaged, briefly, consists in abolishing, by under other names, and without relation to means of the spread of birth control, the any definite eugenic policy. Many of these

unwanted child, and at the same time in activities-those of housing, nursery services, stimulating, by State services in aid of education and recreation-correspond to the parenthood, the birth of wanted children. items on which recommendations were made The second of these aims can be more accur- by the Swedish Commission. But in the ately described as that of- releasing the U.S.A., the bearings of these measures on

parental instinct, which flows strongly in the eugenic and population problems are not yet

type of people we would like to see as parents, appreciated. It is the task of the eugenist, as from the economic and psychological im- seen by Mr. Osbom, to mould and orientate

pediments which to-day frustrate its fullest them.

expression. The effectiveness of birth control The fifth chapter, under the novel title

is examined in the light of the late Professor "Eugenic Selection under the Influence of a

Pearl's comprehensive and detailed study. Favourable Environment," sets forth what

The growth of state aid to children is next I take to be the essence of Mr. Osborn's

considered. The family allowance system in argument. A eugenically sound type of

France, the German population programme, human being should be one which is bio-

and the population policies adopted in logically well adapted to his environment.

Sweden are in turn described. Of these Human environments can, from the material

measures, the Swedish most appeal to the and social point of view, be good, indifferent

author. The recommendations of an im- and bad. A type of human being which we

portant Swedish population commission, would like to see fully replacing itself is one

AN AMERICAN EUGENIST SPEAKS

23

which would be ready to have children if instincts of people we would like to see

these could be assured of an environment having their full quota of children-of people

wherein they would develop to their best and who would prefer not to have children if the

fullest, but which would be deterred from environment promised badly for them. It is

having children if the environment into which because Mr. Osborn holds these views that

they would be born held poor promise. The he has organized a series of conferences on

type here visualized is one which has strong eugenics for members of socially active pro-

parental instincts but is also sensitive to the fessions, such as teachers, recreationists,

future well-being of its children. It wants nurses, doctors and social workers. These

children, but it also wants them, after they conferences, together with some other

are born, to have of the best. "Under such activities of the American Eugenics Society,

a process," writes Mr. Osborn, "the environ- have brought upon Mr. Osborn the criticism

ment would be the selective agency . . . It that his activities have seemingly been more

is not a ' scientific ' policy, but it is a concerned with improving the environment

scientifically acceptable policy, under which than the inborn qualities with which

great progress could be made without having eugenists are primarily concerned. But the

to wait a long time, perhaps for science to careful perusal of this chapter will, I think,

learn how to locate and define the human convince the reader that, despite superficial

carriers of superior and inferior genes." appearances to the contrary, Mr. Osborn is

There are three essential steps in the develop- really just as concerned with inborn or

ment of such a policy. (i) A general im- genetic factors as any eugenist could wish.

provement of the environment. A voluntary The chapter ends with an interesting disS

system of eugenics cannot operate under cussion of the distribution of families of

conditions of extreme poverty, irl-health, different size. Owing to biological infertility

ignorance and isolation. (2) No more un- or to the unremitting practice of birth

wanted children; complete freedom of control, or in some cases to the fact that the

parenthood; an extension of birth control survey is made before the couple has had

throughout the whole community. (3) time to have children, every community will

Eugenic education such as will encourage contain a proportion of childless families.

births among parents most responsive to the In the U.S.A., in I929-3I, 23-I per cent of

advantages of a good environment for their families were childless, I2 I per cent had

children. t

three children, 7 - 7 per cent had four-

This argument is, I think, not entirely children, and I7 7 per cent had five or more

familiar to members of our Eugetnics Society. children. The total adds up to 249 * 8 children

We have heard it argued by Dr. Julian per IOO married women. This is regarded as

Huxley in a recent Galton lecture* that the hardly sufficient for adequate replacement.

eugenist should welcome the creation of a For this a figure of 262 children is deemed

better and a more uniform environment necessary.

because it is only in a fairly uniform environ- The question arises of what can be regarded

ment that inborn or genetically determined as the best distribution of families of different

differences in the members of a community sizes. The Swedish Population Commission

can properly reveal themselves. The en- would have liked to see 33 per cent of families

vronment should be equalized and improved consist of three children, 27 per cent of four

because we could then make a better genetic children, and only 5 per cent of five children.

diagnosis. Mr. Osborn's argument is differ- Mr. Osborn gives reasons for regarding a

ent. As is implied in the title of the chapter, different distribution as more practicable

he sees in the creation of a favourable and of equal eugenic value. He would like

environment a means of bringing out a to see, in an environment favourable to the

favourable eugenic selection. Such an environ- rearing of children, as many as I5 per cent

ment will activate and liberate -the parental of families producing five children or more;

*EUGUIMICS REVIEW. Vol. XXVIII. No. i.

and he suggests lower percentages (i8 and 19,

24 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

respectively) for families of three and four welfare-worker, the clergyman and the

children. His desired proportions differ from doctor-is outlined. All these influences

those now prevailing in the U.S.A. mainly in should help to ensure that children " who

this: that they would require that some show the highest ability, who are character-

15 per cent of couples now having large ized by greatest capacity for adjustment to

families mainly through ignorance and isola- the demands of our society, who are posses-

tion should have smaller families, and that sors of fine stable personalities, who are

an equal proportion of families with socially healthy and who come from healthy parents

valuable qualities should have families of should be influenced towards early marriage

five or more children. Such a variation would and should aim to rear large families." The

permit of enough selection and differential " psychological influences " described in this

survival to produce eugenically valuable chapter are all concerned with what, in our

results.

Society's statement of " Aims and Objects,"

The sixth is a long chapter which deals we describe as " eugenic education."

with what the author calls ".Psychological The last chapter but one, the seventh, deals

Aspects of a Eugenic Environment." A with the " Eugenic Reorientation of Various

fondness for children he believes to be largely Social Policies." The argument is that there

the product of a happy childhood and of a are now visible in operation in Western

warm yet balanced relation between the countries a number of social trends which

parent and the child. People brought up in have other than eugenic objects. All of thert

such an atmosphere are, he thinks, more aim at improving the human lot. These can

likely to want children than those who have be picked up and, without introducing any

been reared in an indifferent, unloving or essential change in their character, can be

hostile atmosphere. An interesting example applied to a eugenic ideal. The subject of

is given of these contrasting child-worlds nutrition has received attention in the U.S.A.

from neighbouring tribes in New Guinea. and the prevalence of malnutrition and of

The professed ideals of Western civilization, under-nutrition among children in large

which is Christian in outlook, conform to the families has been noted. Reforms in housing

requirements of parenthood. This outlook is are needed, especially if we expect as many

favourable to the family, and it inculcates as I5 per cent of couples to have five or more

ideals (gentleness, love of children, etc.) children. Costs of medical care must be

which produce a happy early environment reduced. So must the costs of having a baby.

for children. Sections are devoted to the The organization of recreational facilities is

influence of home and parents on the somewhat an innovation in American life.

development of character. Cultural influ- They greatly affect -the cost and convenience

ences should be directed to consolidating and of rearing children, and may therefore have

harmonizing the family. The difficulties of an appreciable effect on reproductive trends.

" loosening " the child's dependency on its The subject is rather fully dealt with by Mr.

parents, of avoiding cloying fixations and of Osborn. So is the desirability of further re-

teaching self-dependency are described in the search, especially into problems of population

light of the recently acquired knowledge of and of human genetics.

child psychology. The experiences of the The eighth and concluding chapter, a short

parents before marriage, the inter-parental one, is a sort of summing up. Eugenics is no

relationship, the role of the grandparents all panacea for human ills. It can only be put

contribute. The part played by the school, effectively into practice when other and more

as it is and as it might be, is examined. The immediate human needs are cared for. The

importance of sex education, of the teaching ideals of eugenics are regarded as more

of biology in schools and of education for compatible with democratic than with

marriage are described in well-written pass- authoritarian forms of Government. Eu-

ages. And the influence for good of people genics recognizes the value of the indi-

engaged in public services-the nurse, the vidual and inculcates respect for his unique-

AN AMERICAN EUGENIST SPEAKS

ness. It recognizes and encourages human couples establish good homes and bring up

variations, and does not aspire (as does the their children efficiently and sensibly. They

German conception of race hygiene) to are aware of the responsibilities of parent-

breeding men of a given type for the service hood and of how hereditary and economic

of the state. Democracy is a necessary safe- factors contribute to their children's welfare.

guard to eugenics as contrasted with the Their children are wanted, and the preg-

dictator's conception of race hygiene. " But nancies are " planned," after due considera-

on the other hand, it is doubtful whether tion has been given to these factors. The

democracy can long continue in any society healthiness of the couple and their heredity

except one so set up that the more competent are taken into account by them in this

people in every social and occupational group planning. Their sense of social responsibility,

are favoured for survival." A society with a their adaptability to their environment and

declining sense of the uniqueness and value their intelligence all have a bearing upon

of the individual, with a falling standard of their decision to have children, upon the

intelligence and of responsible citizenship, is success of their marriage and consequently

heading for the servile state and for sub- upon the success they make of their home

mission to some power-loving demagogue or and of the job of rearing their children well.

Leader.

These are the people whom Mr. Osborn

Such is the thesis of Mr. Osborn's book.
At the request of Dr. Newfield, I have written
a long review, and have considered the arguments chapter by chapter. Is it possible to sum up briefly what is characteristic of
Mr. Osborn's approach to Eugenics? I think so. By what criterion, I can imagine Mr. Osborn asking, can we most usefully and jractically define the characteristics to which he attach eugenic value ? What sort of man do we visualize the eugenically favoured
citizen to be? He should be healthy, long-
lived, intelligent, and adaptable to his environment; he should have a stable and

regards as eugenically valuable, and whom he
wants to encourage by social and cultural agencies to have large and planned families. At all stages, this task should be made as
easy and attractive as possible. The tasks confronting the demographer and social reformer who want to promote a " positive population policy" have been described as presenting themselves in three groups or
stages: the approach to marriage, the process of child-bearing and the problems of child-rearing. Mr. Osborn would like to see the country's public services doing their best to help at all these three stages. The

balanced personality, with a strong sense of social responsibility; and he should have a good heredity. He should come of a stock which exhibits the same qualities as himself.
But all these various characteristics are
difficult to evaluate and measure on any

approach to marriage could be facilitated if it were made economically easier for young couples to marry early; the process of childbearing could be smoothed over by efficient and cheap maternity services; and the task of child-rearing (the most important and

accurate or quantitative scale. The only one which can be so measured is intelligence.
Very little, moreover, is known as to how these qualities are inherited, and their incidence among the offspring of two known
parents cannot be at all accurately predicted. They are not the product of single genes. A very long time may elapse before their genetic basis is properly understood.
But many of them (and from the social

complex of the three) could be eased in the many diverse ways which he has considered. By establishing conditions which are socially, economically and culturally favourable to the production of large and wanted families in every class of society, a " favourable environment" (see the title of his fifth chapter) would be created in which the process of eugenic selection could operate. But
all this must be coupled with the maximum

standpoint the most important) express possible dissemination of knowledge of birth

themselves confluently in an easily observ- control throughout all social and occupational

able social adaptation. Eugenically favoured classes. And this must be coupled with the

26 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

establishment of advice centres (part of the There is another important feature of Mr.

public services) where guidance could be Osbom's general argument. He sees, in all

obtained on all the problems of marriage and civilized countries, the growth of a variety of

parenthood, including the genetic problems. social services which reflect a preoccupation

I can imagine this programme being with the citizen's general welfare. These

criticized. It might be argued that to poor have at present no orientation at all towards

couples in the economically lowest groups eugenics. Yet they all have in them the

it would provide a greater inducement to makings of eugenically valuable policies.

have children than to couples in higher social The eugenist should, therefore, at this early

and economic levels. To this criticism, I stage, make contact with the leading per-

imagine Mr. Osborn would reply that no class sonalities in these developing services. These

has a monopoly of eugenically valuable "leaders " should be educated to the growing

traits. They exist in all classes, though some importance of population changes and of

people thinrk, with quite adequate reasons, eugenic values. The eugenist is better advised

that they are more widely distributed in some to make use of the forces of developing public

classes and groups than in others. If properly opinion and conviction which are now in

organised, this programme should provide an process of growth, and which, with but little

equal inducement to people in all classes. modification, can be directed into eugenic

The critic would be referred to his third channels, than he would be to try to create

chapter, where it was argued that the a national eugenic conscience so to speak in

eugenic discrimination should be between vacuo. Expositions of the subject in terms of

people within each group, rather than between Mendelism and of class differences strike few

groups as a whole.

chords in the public mind. The terminology

Give to people in every group, however is largely incomprehensible, and the outlook

ignorant, economically depressed or isolated they may be, the knowledge of birth control,

sober." I have seen something during my army life of the last two years of how closely related is the problem

and their pregnancies will cease to be hap- of venereal diseases with that of drunkenness. The

hazard and unplanned. Very few couples indeed want to have children for whom they

relation is as close as that of inebriety to motor accidents, or to crimes of violence. I am certain that it has an equally close relation to the problem of the un-

cannot provide a happy home and a good wanted pregnancy among people of the economically

start in life. The people in each group (with a few unavoidable exceptions, of course) who

lowest classes. The problem is only partly soluble by providing the woman with a knowledge of methods of birth control which she (and not her husband) cap

will produce large, planned families will on the whole be the most eugenically desirable.*

use. The woman may be addicted to drink as well as her husband. This happens often enough, when her life is monotonous, her interests and intelligence

limited, and when spirits- are cheap, to constitute a
* There is one feature of the reproduction of very considerable social and eugenic problem. Even when

feckless and improvident people which Mr. Osborn has Mr. Osborn's hope is realized that knowledge of

not mentioned. It is one which is impressed more adequate methods of birth control has spread through-

strongly on the doctor or social worker than on anyone out the community from the top to the very bottom,

else. I refer to the influence of drink on the occurrence this problem will still remain.

of unwanted conceptions. In the words of Dr. R. L. There is probably no completely satisfactory solution.

Dickinson, coitus interruptus " is probably the most In a eugenically well-educated community, voluntary

primitive method of birth control, and the one that is sterilization after several unwanted pregnancies would

most extensively employed all over the world." be of some value. Another measure which I cannot help

Compared to other methods, it is known to be very thinking would be of substantial help would be to make

unreliable. And a large factor in its unreliability is that facilities for termination of pregnancy available for

introduced by the husband's state of sobriety. Among such women. The facts (that the pregnancy was un-

women of the London working classes, of whom I have wanted, and occurred when one or both partners were

first-hand knowledge, coitus interruptus is not often under the influence of drink) can be fairly easily

regarded as a method of birth control. If a woman elicited by the social worker or by the doctor at the

whose husband uses coitus interruptus is asked if she maternity centre. It would be a help if such a pregnancy

practises any form of birth control, she will answer, could be terminated on the double recommendation of

more often than not, that none is practised. If she is a doctor and a social worker. It is for these reasons

then ,asked if her husband is " careful," she answers that I have always held that temperance reform has a

yes. To this affirmative reply, she will sometimes add ,bearing on eugenics. The question of voluntary

three words from which a picture can be imagined of termination of pregnancy is not touched upon by Mr. how her children are conceived. They are, " When he's Osborn in this book.

NOTES AND MEMORANDA

27

can be regarded (often unjustly) as pre- present time. If it is, it should be carefully

judiced.

read by all Fellows and Members of 'the

I do not know if Mr. Osborn's book is Society, and especially by those who are

easily obtainable in this country at the prepared to lecture or speak on eugenics.

NOTES AND MEMORANDA

Obituary
WE much regret to record the death on February 28th, I942, of the Rt. Hon. Lord Salvesen, LL.D., at the age of 85.
Lord Salvesen was called to the Scottish Bar in i88o; he was a Judge of the Court of Session, Scotland, from I905 to I922 and on

appointments and was active in the promotion of many measures for the advancement of public health.
The Very Rev. Sir George Adam Smith, who died in March I942, at the age of 85, became a member of the Consultative Council of the Society in I926.

his retirement from the Bench was appointed
to the Privy Council. Lord Salvesen became Institute for the Scientific Treatment of

a Fellow of the Eugenics Society in I923, and Delinquency

served on the Council and as Vice-President. He came of a very interesting Norwegian
family, intimately connected with shipping, branches of which are to be found in all
countries bordering on the Baltic. Two such branches have long been settled in Scotland,
at Leith and Grangemouth. A man of very fresh mind, after his retiral from the Scottish Bench he became keenly interested in the intricacies of Indian Wills coming before the

A SERIES of four fortnightly lectures on Vocational Guidance by Miss M. B. Stott, B.A., will begin on Friday, June T2th, I942,
at 7 p.m. Ten lectures on The Development of the Mind, by C. A. Mace, M.A., D.Litt.,
will begin at 2 p.m. on Saturday, June 6th, I942. Further particulars may be obtained from the General Secretary, I7 Manchester Street, W.i. (Welbeck 6037.)

Judicial Committee of the Privy Council on which he sat until lately. He was President of the Scottish Zoological Society and a

Mothers' Clinics for Constructive Birth Control

generous benefactor of their beautiful gardens THE Headquarters and Branches of the

at Corstorphine.

Mothers' Clinics (all open daily from io to 6)

Mr. W. P. Pycraft died on May ist at the have all carried on their work, and, particu-

age of 74. He was for many years Assistant larly in London and in Cardiff, are more busy

Keeper of the Osteological Collections at the than ever.

British Museum (Natural History) and his The London Headquarters three times

zoological studies are well known. Mr. during the main blitz suffered severe

Pycraft became a Fellow of the Society in damage by enemy action, each time

I924 and served on the Council from I925 to after just having been patched up and some-

1935. what restored. With the assistance of the Dr. C. E. Goddard, O.B.E., who died on gallant nursing staff, however, they carried

January 3ISt, i942, aged 82, was a Fellow of on so that all visiting received the personal

the Society from I93I to I938; he was for help they came for.

many years medical officer of health of- Always since I921 when the Mothers'

Wembley, where he held a number of public Clinic was founded, the pro-baby work of

