R. HARRIS,
B.Sc., M.D.
Infectious Diseases, the ABO Blood Groups and Human Evolution

SINCE IT IS important to direct in the best organs derived from the embryonic foregut.

possible way the future evolution of man Evidence, overwhelming in some cases and

it is obviously useful to understand how strong in others has accumulated for associations

human evolution has occurred in the past. between the ABO blood groups and duodenal

Although man does not differ from other living ulcer, gastric ulcer, gastric carcinoma and

forms in being subject to the interaction of pernicious anaemia. These associations and

heredity and environment, his long generation others less certain or certainly negative are

time tends to obscure the reality of the processes reviewed by Clarke (1961).

of selection. In addition many human character-

istics such as stature, form and vigour though of Potential sources of selection

great evolutionary significance are influenced by Since most of the diseases which have been

hereditary processes which involve the activity associated with the ABO blood group system

of many genes. Such multifactorial inheritance exert their morbidity and mortality compara-

while it is undoubtedly of great importance is tively late in life, it has been suggested that the

difficult to study; consequently a few "simple" principal selecting mechanisms acting on the

polymorphic systems have received an undue ABO polymorphism occur in foetal or in neo-

degree of attention. Nevertheless it is in these natal life. The protective effect first suggested

simple polymorphic systems that a great deal of by Levine (1943) of ABO incompatibility

recentwork has confirmed the classical statements (between mother and foetus) on babies liable to

Fisher (1930) and Ford (1942). Fisher stressed rhesus erythroblastosis foetalis is just such a

the rarity of genes of neutral selective value mechanism. However, in terms of the major

while Ford suggested that the blood groups causes of premature death in human populations

were balanced polymorphic systems probably and therefore of the great potential sources of

associated with resistance to disease. Investi- evolutionary selection, famine and pestilence

gation into the truth of this hypothesis can may be considered pre-eminent even to-day.

hardly fail to illuminate to some extent, the These factors have been reviewed by Motulsky

process of human evolution by selection.

(1960) and as an example the effects of malaria

on human evolution may be quoted. There

The ABO Blood Groups

can be little doubt that malignant tertian

The last few years have seen a tantalizing malaria is operating at the present time as

extension of our knowledge of the evolutionary a selecting agent maintaining at least two

significance of the human blood groups. Since genetic traits, sickle cell and glucose 6 phos-

1953 several research teams, particularly those phate dehydrogenase deficiency, in high fre-

led by Aird and by Clarke have firmly established quency in many areas of the world where this

the association of the ABO polymorphism with form of malaria is common. Other infectious

liability to diseases involving the function of diseases which are or have been associated with

201
THE EUGENICS REVIEW, January 1963, 54, 4.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

a high mortality, particularly amongst the young Methods and Controls

and fertile must have been similarly potent fac- These studies of rheumatic fever and viral

tors selecting for survival individuals carrying respiratory infections are, like the earlier work,

genes which protected against death from such dependent on comparing the ABO phenotype

diseases. For the reasons which were discussed frequencies in a disease group with those in con-

earlier, it was inevitable that the blood groups trols. Quite complicated statistical manoeuvres

should be investigated in relation to infectious are necessary to avoid the gross errors potenti-

diseases, and statistically significant associations ally inherent in such a comparison. The most

between the ABO groups and rheumatic heart obvious of these is ensuring that the disease

disease and with virus respiratory disease have and the control groups are derived from the

been reported.

same parent population which itself is of homo-

geneous blood group proportions. Penrose

Rheumatic Heart Disease

(1959) pointed out again that patients with some

Streptococcal throat infections are followed by damage to the heart only in a few cases and the majority of infections are not followed by this complication. Glynn et al. (1956) postulated. that host variation was an important factor in determining the occurrence of such rheumatic carditis. Clarke etal. (1960) and Buckwalter et a. (1962) have been able to demonstrate that
amongst these host factors were included the
ABO blood groups. Amongst proven cases of rheumatic heart
disease there is a significant reduction in the incidence of individuals of group 0. This may be interpreted as an increased liability of patients who are non-0 to develop heart disease following infection with streptococci and there is general agreement that as Glynn et al. (1956) had suggested this tendency also occurs in individuals who are non-secretors of ABO (H) blood group substances.

diseases might be of an inbreeding strain with high susceptibility to the disease and with different blood group frequencies from the rest of the population (incomplete miscegenation or stratification). Use of suitable statistical methods (e.g. that of Woolf, 1955) largely avoids this error. However, such methods are not infallible and cannot compensate for bias (Buckwalter et al. 1962). Nevertheless the great care which has been associated with much of this work has made it virtually certain that the comparable results which have been obtained from different centres in fact represent a genuine relationship between the blood groups and some diseases.
The meaning of the associations is quite unknown. It is not clear for example whether the physical presence of blood group substance determines differential susceptibility or whether the various phenotypic expressions of the ABO polymorphism are merely indicative of a more profound metabolic variability governing sus-

ceptibility to disease. The resolution of this prob-

Respiratory Viruses

lem is essential to our conception of the role

McDonald and Zuckerman (1962) reported played by the blood groups in the heritable

the blood group frequencies in a group of 1,685 component of acquired disease.

R.A.F. personnel who had been treated for respiratory illness associated with identified Widespread occurrence of ABO (H) substances

virus infection. In their series there was a highly In this connection it is interesting to note the

significant excess of group 0 patients and a widespread occurrence of ABO (H) blood group

corresponding deficiency of group A in the substances in animals and plants (Mourant 1956)

influenza A2 infections compared with 47,108 and in micro-organisms in particular (Springer

R.A.F. recruits used as controls. A reverse trend 1961). Since some of these micro-organisms may

but of lesser degree was noted with the adeno- be pathogenic to man it is inevitable that those

virus group. It was concluded that in the condi- interested in evolution will be intrigued by such

tions prevailing persons of blood group A had an occurrence of antigens common both to host

been at an advantage. The secretor status of and parasite and will speculate upon its signi-

their patients was not quoted.

ficance. It has occasionally been implied that the

102

INFECTIOUS DISEASES, THE ABO BLOOD GROUPS AND HUMAN EVOLUTION

coincidence is fortuitous and has no significance. and AB lacking anti-A would be more sus-

This argument is onlylikely to influence genetic- ceptible to the A-containing smallpox virus.

ists convinced of the existence of genes neutral Where both diseases were common a relative

in selective value and several attempts have been preponderance of group B individuals would

made to demonstrate a mechanism by which the eventually occur. Just such a preponderance, it

occurrence of ABO (H) substances in pathogens was pointed out, exists in the uniquely high

could be a factor in the individual variation of frequency of blood group B in Asia where both

human resistance to infection.

plague and smallpox have caused frequent and

severe epidemics.

Plague and Smallpox

In support of their hypothesis Pettenkofer

Notable amongst these has been the work of and his colleagues claim to have demonstrated Pettenkofer and hiscolleagues (1960, 1961, 1962). that in India and Pakistan individuals of groups

These workers were convinced that the global O and B infected with smallpox may have a variations in frequency of the ABO blood group slightly more mild attack than those of group A

types (ABO polytypism) could depend on differ- and AB.

ential response to infection with potentially lethal This work of Pettenkofer and his colleagues

diseases, especially those that occurred previously has been subjected to much criticism. Harris

in major pandemics of very high mortality. They et al. (1962), although confirming the ability of

studied two organisms of potential, and previ- vaccinia preparations to induce anti-A antibody

ously actual, pandemic lethality, Pasturella formation in rabbits, demonstrated the presence

pestis and variola-the agents of plague and of a similar property in uninfected egg mem-

smallpox respectively. They claimed to have branes. In addition they were able to show that

detected material indistinguishable from human vaccinia virus grown on rabbit dermis and

blood group H substance in P. pestis and A sub- uncontaminated with chick egg material did not

stance in the strain of vaccinia (closely related to induce anti-A antibody formation, results which

variola) which they studied. The methods used appeared to remove the experimental basis for

included the inoculation of suitable rabbits with the presence of blood group A substance in

material prepared from cultures of the appro- vaccinia virus and probably variola. In addition

priate organisms, P. pestis on blood-group- Harris and his colleagues failed to neutralize vac-

substance-free agar medium and vaccinia on cinia virus with potent rabbit anti-A and a

chick chorio-allantois. The serum obtained after further attempt to substantiate the relationship

inoculation with P. pestis material contained between vaccinia virus and blood group A sub-

antibody which agglutinated human O' cells stance by growing the virus in the presence of A

(containing H substance) and was removed or B blood group substances also failed. There

(absorbed) by "H" substance and by suspensions was no difference between A and B substances in

of P. pestis. Similarly anti-A induced in rabbits the degree of potentiation which occurred. Since

inoculated with vaccinia material agglutinated vaccinia virus probably does not contain blood

human blood group A cells and was absorbed group A substance, is not neutralized by anti-A

by A substance and by preparations of vaccinia. serum and its growth is not selectivly enhanced

It was suggested that Anti-H "reacts" with P. by blood group A substance, there is at present

pestis and naturally occurring anti-A with no explanation for the results claimed by Petten-

variola to produce a result favourable to the kofer and his colleagues (1962), that susceptibil-

host. ity to smallpox and response to vaccination are

The inferences drawn from these findings statistically greater in humans of blood group A

were that individuals of group 0 since they pos- and AB than of blood groups B and 0. The

sessed the "H" antigen would be unable to possibility remains that individuals of different

develop anti-H in response to infection with the blood groups may have greater or lesser resist-

H-containing plague organism and would be ance to smallpox not because of any particular

more likely to succumb than contacts of other attribute of their blood group but because they

ABO groups. Similarly individuals of groups A have been derived from different stock. Thus the

263

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

apparent susceptibility of group A and AB There is little doubt that the controversial

individuals may be due to an influx of A genes nature of this subject will provoke many future

into India from an area of low smallpox endem- "alarums and excursions". It is therefore

ity. If, however, it is firmly established from a important to remember that the study of the

number of different centres, that individuals of blood group systems in relation to diseases,

group A and AB are more susceptible to small- infectious and non-infectious, is merely an

pox (and vaccination) than are 0 and B then this imperfect tool with which we may hope to gain

observation will be analogous to those relating some insight into the processes of human

to rheumatic carditis and respiratory virus development and evolution.

infections, where the causative organisms have

not been shown to contain ABO (H) substances.

REFERENCES

The presence of H substance in the epidemic strains of plague bacilli has been questioned by Springer and Wiener (1962) and since most individuals irrespective of group are likely to have some H-antigen these authors were un-

Buckwalter, J. A., Naifeh, G. S., Aver. J. E. and Edwards J. H. 1962. Brit. med. J., 2, 1023.
Clarke, C. A. 1961. In Progress in Medical Genetics. Grune and Stratton. Pp. 81-119. - McConnell, R. B. and Sheppard, P. M. 1960. Brit. med. J., 1, 21.

convinced that group 0 individuals were less likely to develop anti-H following infection with plague.

Fisher, R. A. 1930. The Genetic Theory of Natural Selection. Oxford.
Ford, E. B. 1942. Geneticsfor Medical Students. Methuen.
Glynn, A. A., Glynn, L. E. and Holborow, E. J. 1956.

Lancet, 2, 759.

Prospects

Harris, R., Harrison, G. A. and Rondle, C. J. M. (in

Thus the attractively simple immunological

preparation). Levine, P. 1943. J. Hered., 34, 71.

relationship involving human blood group McDonald, J. C. and Zuckerman, A. J. 1962. Brit. med.

antibodies and micro-organisms containing J., 2, 89.

blood group antigens has not been either proved or disproved, although the weight of evidence seems against it in smallpox and plague. On the

Motulsky, A. G. 1960. Hum. Biol. 32, 28. Mourant, A. E. 1956. The Distribution of the Human
Blood Groups. Blackwell. Penrose, L. S. 1959. Outline of Human Genetics. Heine-

other hand Muschel and Osawa (1959) have man.

shown that anti-B sera exerts a bactericidal effect against Escherichia coli 086, a bacillus containing high group B activity. They conclude ". . . Cross-

Pettenkofer, H. J., 1961. Eighth Int. Cong. Soc. Blood Transfusion, 154. S. Karger. and Bickerich, R. 1960. Zbl. Bakt. Parasitol., I Orig. 179,433.

reactivity between blood group substance B and E. coli 086 affords a model for the possible influence of blood groups in resistance to infection against those microbial agents which may possess blood group antigens."

, Stoss, B., Helmbold, W. and Vogel, F. 1962. Nature, Lond. 193,445. Springer, G. F., Williamson, P. and Brandes, W. C. 1961. J. exp. Med., 113, 1077. -, and Wiener, A. S. 1962. Nature, Lond. 193, 444.
Woolf, B. 1955. Ann. hum. Genet. 19, 251.

204

