MEMORANDUM ON THE CONSIDERATION OF HEREDITY AT THE MINISTRY OF
HEALTH.(')
BY MAJOR LEONARD DARWIN, Sc.D., President, Eugenics Education Society.

GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS.
IN a memorandum by the Chief Medical Officer of the Ministry of Health, "Eugenics and the principles of sound breeding" are placed first in order amongst the principal elements of a National policy of Preventive Medicine. No such recognition of this subject has ever before been given by a public body, and for the first time there seems to be a chance that racial questions will receive adequate attention at the hands of the Government.

Certain peculiar difficulties have to be faced in connection with the practical application of Eugenic principles, which must be clearly recognised in order, as far as possible, to obviate them. M6re than two thousand years ago Plato declared that "God proclaims as a first principle to the rulers, and above all else, that there is nothing which they should so anxiously guard, or of which they are to be such good guardians, as of the purity of the race": and the reason why this philosopher, who perhaps influenced thought more than any other human being, failed almost entirely to impress this truth on mankind. can best be ascertained by a study of the stumbling blocks which have impeded racial progress during all these centuries. These may be divided under the three following headings:-

A FALSE APPLICATION (1.) Plato failed to perceive that mono-

OF EUGENIC PRINCI- gamy and family life may be defended, not

PLES LEADING TO only on religious grounds, but also by pointing

PROPOSALS RUNNING to the evil social, material and racial effects of

COUNTER TO GENER- polygamy and promiscuity; and he was

ALLY ACCEPTED

consequently led to advocate reforms which

MORAL CODES.

would have been harmful both as regards

immediate and racial consequences. The

moral aspects of Eugenic reforms must always take the leading place

when they are under discussion.

(1) In forwarding this Memorandum to the Ministry of Health it was stated that it was written by Major Darwin, but that it had received the general approval of the council, though on a few points-birth limitation, for example-opinions were not quite unanimous.

I06 EUGENICS REVIEW.

THE PREJUDICES AROUSED AGAINST THIS SUBJECT BY THE ADVOCACY OF UNWISE MEASURES BY CRANKS.

(2.) Any new method of reform is sure to attract the attention of cranks, and for psychological reasons this is especially likely to be the case with subjects in any way connected with sex.

THE DIFFICULTY OF

(3.) This is the main and most enduring

ATTRACTING ATTEN- obstacle to racial progress, and to it especial

TION TO MATTERS attention must be given.

ONLY AFFECTING

The factors which affect human beings

THE WELFARE OF may be divided into (1) those which are

POSTERITY.

alterable during the life-time of each indivi-

dual, and (2) those which are unalterable; and

this is, in fact, the division between environment and heredity. Persons

endowed with a bad constitution may be greatly benefited by a good

environment; but that good environment cannot alter the constitution

with which they were originally endowed at birth. Moreover, the

improvements to human qualities due to improved environment, in the

opinion of practically every English scientific expert, either are not at

all passed on to posterity so as to affect the individual at birth, or affect

the inborn qualities of future generations so slowly that their results

only become manifest after many generations, and may therefore be

neglected by the politician from the racial aspect. To utilise the agency

of heredity is, therefore, the only practical means of beneficially affect-

ing posterity in regard to their inborn qualities; whilst in this way it is

impossible to produce any direct beneficial effect on any living human

being. The desire to do immediate good is of course highly commend-

able; but it is a desire which experience proves is apt to make the

social worker neglect racial reforms and drift away to other fields in

which more rapid results are attainable, and which are, therefore, more

interesting. Education alone can mitigate this difficulty.

Medical men are in some respects especially likely to be tempted

to push heredity on one side. A study of Eugenics does but reinforce

the common sense view that there are limits beyond which it is

impossible to go in affecting the mental and physical well-being of the

individual. The medical man should, however, not pay too much

attention to these limitations; or, at all events, it is better that he

should imagine that a cure is possible when really it is impossible, than

that he should make a mistake in the opposite direction. He should in

many respects act as if the unalterable heredity factor did not stand in

his way, and he is thus often tempted to neglect that factor altogether.

Moreover, psychology teaches us that the mind is so constituted that

there is a tendency to exaggerate the relative importance of those

subjects to which the attention is most often devoted. The medical

man is constantly devoting his most earnest attention to curative and

preventive treatment, and thus a natural tendency is produced to

exaggerate the importance of these immediately alterable factors in

comparison with the immediately unalterable factor of heredity.

CONSIDERATION OF HEREDITY AT MINISTRY OF HEALTH. 107
This same psychological influence which tends to result in a neglect of the factors only affecting posterity, will also be felt by all social workers who are nobly throwing their whole endeavours into the struggle against immediate suffering. Their desire to neglect heredity is indeed frequently visible, except in those who have had a sound biological education. But of all classes, politicians are least likely to be drawn to the study of eugenics; for posterity, including all those who might be affected by racial reforms, have now no votes. Politicians, medical men and social workers are probably the types which will be most influential at the Ministry of Health, and the influences likely to tempt them to pay too little attention to eugenics should be held in view.
RESEARCH.
As it has been wisely enacted that the initiation of research shall be one of the primary duties of the Minister of Health, and as it now appears that questions connected with heredity are to be included within his purview, the following observations are submitted for consideration.

BIRTH AND

In all investigations connected with birth and

DEATH RATES. death rates it is especially necessary that heredity

should be kept in view, or false conclusions will be

drawn. Care must be taken to state the problems accurately. For

example, to ask to what extent the death rate is affected by heredity is

to pose an almost meaningless question, or at all events one not easily

interpreted. What would have been the death rate of the existing

population if it had been placed in a perfect environment is at all

events a question to which a meaning can be attached, even though it

may be impossible to answer it with accuracy.

Investigations such as those undertaken by the Galton Laboratory, which aim at ascertaining the associations between different social conditions and the birth and death rates, are of the highest importance, and should be encouraged in every way. Whilst the greatest mass of informa. tion will probably be obtainable in the future from the Registrar. General's Department, independent investigation at Universities and other institutions are likely to remain the most fruitful source of scientific discovery.

DISEASE.

In considering the hereditary effects of disease, the now

disputed questions concerning racial poisons (or the per.

manent effects of certain substances on the germ plasm) and the

inheritance of acquired characters (or the influence on the germ plasm

of physical changes in parents due to the environments to which they

have been exposed) must be considered; though it now seems that

other hereditary problems are of greater importance from the Eugenic

point of view. The effects of the transmission from parent to offspring

108 EUGENICS REVIEW.
of poisonous substances (such as alcohol), or of living germs (such as those of syphilis) form entirely distinct subjects of enquiry, which, according to some Eugenists, do not, however important, come within the scope of Eugenics proper. To ascertain the true hereditary correlations of innate tendencies to disease, as distinguished from parental correlations resulting from similarity of environment, form the most important lines of enquiry in regard to racial progress or deterioration.

INDUSTRIAL

In the study of these diseases, the distinction

DIS}ASES.

between ailments which could have been increased by

bad conditions and the defects which are either due to

unalterable constitutional causes, or could only be slightly affected by

local conditions, should be noted as clearly as possible. This would

assist in ascertaining to what extent the incidence of diseases in certain

industries is due to persons with inferior constitutions being driven to

adopt the less attractive callings.

INSURANCE

By means of such statistics some attempt should

STATISTICS. be made to ascertain the amount by which the cost of

insurance could conceivably be diminished by improved

environment, or, on the other hand, by improved hereditary con-

stitutions.

SYPHILIS.

This disease requires especial attention in regard

to the above-mentioned enquiries concerning so-called

racial poisons. Efforts should be made to ascertain whether the

children of congenitally syphilitic parents themselves show symptoms

of congenital syphilis more often than might be accounted for by fresh

infections in the parents; also whether the congenitally diseased infant

is ever quite free from the presence of the spirochleta Pallida.

INSANITY.

Systematic enquiries under the control of experts,

and aided by " field workers," into the heredity of

insanity of different types might be made to add greatly to our existing

knowledge of this subject. Comparisons between the children of

syphilitic and non-syphilitic parents would be useful in connection with

the problems mentioned above in connection with disease, especially in

indicating what types of insanity are promoted by parental syphilis.

MENTAAL

In all reforms in regard to mental defect, but especially

DEFECTS. in regard to feeble-mindedness, the prevention or dis-

couragement of parenthood should be a primary aim. In

this connection similar investigation to those above-mentioned in regard

to insanity should be vigorously pursued. Especial endeavours should

be made to ascertain to what extent bad environments are truly

causative agents of mental defect, and to what extent they are merely

selective agents of inferior types.

CONSIDERATION OF HEREDITY AT MINISTRY OF HEALTH. lO9

ALCOHOL.

Hereditary tendencies to drunkenness should be

studied with care. Further experiments on animals are

desirable, especially in order to ascertain whether the "hereditary"

effects alleged to be produced by alcoholic poisoning are affected

by differences in the amount of alcohol administered, and also whether

the transmission of the defects in subsequent generations does, or does

not, follow the ordinary laws of heredity.

MARRIAGE

An enquiry should be instituted to ascertain the

CERTIFICAT'ES. practicability of, and the advantages to be obtained by,

the production of health certificates before marriage

being made compulsory, with or without penalties for false statements.

REFORMS NEEDED.

The lines of research above-mentioned all point to reform in various directions in the more or less distant future. In certain directions reforms should be immediately adopted.

BIRTH RATE.

A number of reforms are now under consideration

which would affect the birth rate. It is the duty of the

Government to consider to what extent such reforms would affect the

birth rate differentially as regards different types of human beings.

BIRTH

In the interests of posterity it is most desirable

I.IMITATION. that parents should now limit the size of their families

by any means held by them to be right (provided such

means are not injurious to health, nor, like abortion, an offence against

public morals) to such an extent that the children could be brought up

as efficient citizens and without deterioration in the standards of their

civilization; and that parents should not limit the size of the family for

any other reasons except on account of definite hereditary defects, or to

secure an adequate interval between births. The anticipated economic

effects of such a policy are obvious. As to the racial effects, if in future

those incapable of earning good wages, and consequently badly paid,

were to have smaller families than at present, whilst the more capable

and consequently better paid workers were to leave more descendants

behind them, some tendency would thus be produced to promote the

appearance in the coming generations of all those natural qualities

which would render the winning of a given wage, or the production of

a given output, less arduous to the worker than at present. These are

mainly moral reforms outside the scope of the Ministry of Health; but

questions connected with birth intervals and the physical effects of

birth limitation do involve medical considerations; whilst the research

encouraged by the Ministry might greatly facilitate decisions in regard

to hereditary tendencies.

MEDICAl,

It is desirable that a more thorough study of

CURRICULUM. heredity should be included in the biological course of

every medical curriculum, together with some general

instruction as regards its application to human beings.

I IO EUGENICS REVIEW.

PRISONS AND

Careful enquiries should always be made by

WORKHOUSES. medical experts as to the mental qualities of young

persons accused of crime and of all immates of prisons

and workhouses; and in selected cases investigations should also be

made into the heredity of criminals and others on the lines initiated by

the late Dr. Goring. The Ministry of Health might help to promote

much needed reforms in the direction of lengthening the detention of

habitual criminals and tramps, punishment not being the object to be

held in view.

MENTAL

Further accommodation for mental defectives is

DEFECTIVES. urgently needed, especially for the adult feeble in

mind, if the matter be regarded from the Eugenic

point of view.

SURVEY OIF

A national survey of the people, which is believed

THE NATION. to be in contemplation, should be quickly instituted.

The aim should be to keep such a record of the mea-

surements of the physical and mental qualities of the people as to make

comparison with similar surveys made at wide intervals of time as

reliable an indication as possible of racial progress or deterioration.

INSPECTION The exclusion and expulsion of undesirable aliens or ALIENS. should be more strictly enforced, and the greatest
attention should be paid to constitution defects and to
such diseases as have been proved to be favoured by such hereditary defects.

GENERAL

A large number of separate registers of the

REGISTRATION. population for various purposes are now in existence,

and it is desirable that they should be co-ordinated

as far as possible under the Ministry of Health. From the racial point

of view the ideal to be gradually aimed at should be that each individual

should at birth be allotted a registered number (or letters); that a corres-

ponding series of index cards should be kept; and that in many ways

it should be made advantageous to the individual to be able to quote his

register number and therefore to remember it. On each card should be

recorded the register number of both parents, so that ultimately pedi-

grees would thus be traceable. On the cards should also be recorded

the date of the marriage of the individual, the register number of wife

births of children, crimes and imprisonment, admissions to lunatic

asylums and other institutions, and, if possible, diseases. The public

should be able to obtain, on payment of a small fee, certain information

-the more the better from the racial point of view-and special facili-

ties for enquiry might be given in view of a contemplated marriage of

the individual in question.

CONSIDERATION OF HEREDITY AT MINISTRY OF HEALTIH. III
ORGANISATION.
The foregoing suggestions concerning reform and research indicate that every department under the Minister of Health ought to take questions of heredity into consideration. It was seen also that these questions are especially likely to receive inadequate attention. It follows, therefore, that if racial problems do not receive separate consideration in framing the organisation of the Ministry of Health, many reforms which would greatly benefit future generations will be neglected. The following suggestions are made in some detail as the simplest way of indicating points which seem to require consideration.
As every department under the Minister of Health should take problems of heredity into account, it would probably not be desirable to entrust this subject to the care of a separate section of the Ministry. In the Act establishing this Ministry, it is enacted that Consultative Councils for giving advice and assistance to the Minister may be established, and the formation of such a Council to deal with heredity would seem best to meet the needs of the situation.
The composition of such a Council of Heredity would need careful consideration. The political element and all the different departments of the Ministry should obviously be represented; and the Board of Control and the Registrar-General's Department should be in especially close touch with it. As to members appointed from outside the Ministry, these should include some leading expert or experts in biological science, possibly nominated by the Royal Society for a limited term of years; also one or more medical men from outside the Ministry, who had given the problems of heredity special consideration; and perhaps someone who would keep the moral aspects of racial questions especially in view. If the outside members were to receive salaries under Civil Service conditions, that is ensuring retirement at a given age, it would be advantageous; because learned Societies and other nominating bodies would be apt to nominate persons who have ceased to be in possession of their original powers of initiative, but who are still considered to be capable of attending at Council meetings.
If some such body were appointed, which would always be in close touch with modern scientific thought and with political possibilities; if no other duties whatever besides the consideration of hereditary problems were assigned to it; if it were to meet at regular stated intervals; and if it were to become the custom of the Ministry of Health to give this body an opportunity of commenting on all projects of reform before being submitted to Parliament or brought into operation, its establishment might prove to be the greatest practical step in advance yet made in regard to racial questions.
The policy of laissez faire has been as a fact largely abandoned in nearly every field. To let racial questions take care of themselves is certainly a disastrous survival of the old policy.

