DISCUSSION
" HEREDlTY AND THE JEW"
To the Editor of the EUGENICS REVIEW
SIR, My attention has only just been drawn to a criticism
by Dr. Herbert in the EUGENICS REVIEW of my paper "Heredity and the Jew."
It is always difficult to answer a critic whose first weapon is abuse; I am therefore led rather to take the last words of Dr. Herbert as my text, than dwell on the first, which can only engender bad feeling.
Dr. Herbert states: "Apart from this, as I have said, the Jewish face is too indefinite and complex a feature to serve as a biological unit in the study of Mendelian inheritance." Here in one stroke Dr. Herbert demonstrates that he neither understands me nor the spirit of modern research on heredity. For who is there so bold as to predict what is or what is not a Mendelian factor ? Who is there who can say that this is too complex or that is too simple ? Experiment alone can prove. What more simple than the hairiness of the stock-leaf ? Yet Miss Saunders found after years of patient research that it was a complex character. What is more cornplex looking and diverse than the spangling of a bird's plumage ? Yet it is controlled by a unit character. Is anv fact more striking than the diversity of colour, shape and pattern in the varied female forms of certain butterflies and moths ? Yet it can be shown that one segregating unit character determines the difference between one form and another.
The Jewish face is doubtless controlled by a highly complex group of factors, but so also is the Mongolian and every other human face. The point of the whole matter is, that the difference between the Jewish, the Gentile and any other may be a question of unit characters only. It is more than possible that thousands on thousands of unit characters go to build a human face, but one human face may well differ from another by a single one of those units.
If Dr. Herbert will refer to my Genetic Journal article he will see that I there attempted to define Jewishness as a rounding of all the features; and to me it is perfectly clear that such a rounding factor may very well be a unit one.

92 DISCUSSION
It is urged that there are two errors which I have not been careful enough to avoid in collecting my data. I will deal with them directly, but let me point out that Dr. Herbert gives away the whole of his case when he states "that a single case (of Jewish instead of Gentile dominance) upsets his thesis."
Everyone who has worked practically and is conversant with current work knows that dominance is by no means the essential feature of Mendelian heredity.
In some classes of animals it has been shown that dominance may be modified at will, whilst occasionally one finds in a first cross a blended inheritance, although a unilateral dominance may be the rule.
By far the most important evidence which I adduced and which Dr. Herbert has not as yet impugned is the result of mating of " Hybrid by Jew " and " Hybrid by Gentile." Those results are striking evidence of the general correctness of my views, for they are direct proof of the segregation of a unit character, and that is, after all, Mendelism.
I am warned that I have not protected myself against two particular errors:
I. That as the individual grows older the Jewish expression becomes more marked.
To answer I have only to direct Dr. Herbert to the Journal of Genetics, Vol. I., page 232, where he will find that statement
made categorically and examples given. 2. That a Gentile wife may adopt a Jewish appearance. Let me assure Dr. Herbert that it has not altogether escaped
my attention, nor have the kindred facts that a groom frequently resembles his horses, and a cowman his cow; but I no more expect a Gentile mother to produce a Jewish-looking child, merely because she herself may have acquired certain conventional traits and habits in the atmosphere in which she has lived, than I do a groom to father a foal.
In conclusion I may say that if Dr. Herbert has collected twelve cases of intermarriage, I at the time of publication had collected I36 first crosses and eighteen second, and since publication I have received information of a great many more, the results of which coincide with those published in the Journal of Genetics. The facts were not collected by myself alone, but more than half by people of the most diverse opinions. Notwithstanding, the results were remarkably uniform, and had I thought it necessary I could have published them in detail.
Dr. Herbert, in a preliminary condemnation of my work, makes one of the most extraordinary remarks that I have ever met, he states that: " No wonder that Jews are greatly surprised at the results obtained by Dr. Salaman, for these are contrary to all that experience would teach us."
What then is the teaching of experience ? What then has

DISCUSSION

93

been the teaching of history ever since Jew and history met ? One uniform result, and one result only. Wherever the Jews have intermarried, whether it be in Alexandria, in Greece, in Rome, or in Spain, thev have been lost, that is to say, they can no longer be recognised as Jews.
What does experience teach us with regard to such outlying communities as the Falashas, the Beni-Israel, and the Cochin Jews ? In each of these the Jewish type has gone completely under. This is what " experience would teach us "-if we listened
to her. If my arguments rested on nothing better than "what
experience would teach us " they would be worthy of a more careful consideration than they have received at the hands of Dr. Herbert.
I am, Sir,
Yours obediently,
REDCLIFFE N. SALAMAN. P.S.-The italics are mine.

"THE INFLUENCE OF PARENTAL AGE ON OFFSPRING."
DEAR SIR,
Dr. Ewart's paper in the October REVIEW, calls to mind a piece of research work I did in I905.
Dr. Hrdlicka found for the city of New York a steady curve of child-birth with a well-defined minimum in February, April, May and June, and an equally decided maximum in August. This interested me so much that I went over the births for Boston and found that the same held true.
Later, I went over 3,000 cases of feeble-minded and found a widely different state of curve, with pronounced minima in January and in June and an equally pronounced maxima in May and December. I eliminated later all conditions making for mental defections after birth, only considering congenital cases, and my curve shows accentuation in all its prominent features.
The above touches on an unsettled problem. We know that in the majority of animals, reproduction is more prevalent at certain seasons of the year. The question arises, has man liberated himself from all influences which affect reproduction in the lower animals, as the congenital feeble-minded come from nervously unstable parents. Has the condition of these made any marked impression upon whatever may be the state of fluctuation in the birth-rate at the different months in the general population ?
Very truly, BERTHA C. DOWNING, M.A., M.D.
Worcester, Mass., U.S.A.

