3I6 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

lection of excerpts which E. B. Reuter and Jessie R. Runner have brought together and entitled The Family: Source Materials for
the Study of Family and Personality. Dr. Reuter is a sociologist with a bias against eugenics, and has allowed this bias to interfere with his fairness in this case. Aside from a casual kick eii passant once in a while, the only discussion of eugenics is a few pages borrowed from W. S. Thompson,

another hostile sociologist, who naturallv makes it out to be a poor and mean thing indeed. In a compendium of this sort, it would seem that room might have been found for a fair statement of the case from
someone who knew something about the
subject. The book is also criticized as showing a bias against the family in general, radical and pessimistic writers having been given free rein.

THE INSUFFICIENCY OF EDUCATION

A summary of the paper by C. Wicksteed Armstrong in Section L of the Centenary
Meeting (I93I) of the British Association.

T would be a mistake to expect very great in demonstrating, to a very large extent,

practical results in the betterment of the that the differential birth rate is not due to

race from educational efforts alone, not, any sinister and mysterious natural law,

at least, if we take the word education in but is, rather, simply a result of our man-

its narrow sense-since we have not only made laws and conventions, and more espe-

first to convince the educational world that cially of our false economic theories and

eugenics is a fit and necessary subject in practice, which involve the progressive

which to instruct the rising generation, but, penalizing of procreation among the more

even if knowledge could be immediately and energetic and useful sections of the popula-

universally imparted, we should still, to a tion, for the benefit of parasites.

certain extent, have to change human nature Now, the most important results to be

itself before we could expect the instructed noticed at the Jardins Ungemach are to be

people to act in the interests of posterity, found in the birth rate and in the health and

instead of, as heretofore, in those of self or beauty of the children there being raised,

of class.

results which, as years go by, must become

But if we can educate public opinion by more and more pronounced. The incidence

means of concrete example, rather than by of disease was nil, and the anthropometric

precept alone, in the meaning of far-sighted statistics among the school children were in-

charity (which is eugenics), we may perhaps comparably superior to those of any other

attain our ultimate goal more rapidly.

school in Strasbourg, or even, I believe, in

Such an attempt at education by practice France.

I have just visited at Strasbourg, where, last That Distress tends to press upon Relief

week, I saw the Jardins Ungemach, whose I believe to be an economic and psychological

founder and administrator, Monsieur Alfred law as regards the present, and a biological

Dachert, showed me, with justifiable pride, law as regards the future. Its firm founda-

his Garden City.* He has there succeeded tion in truth and its very grave significance

to Humanity I have been at pains to demon-

* See Monsieur Dachert's article in the REviEw of
last April and the further figures which here appear in " Notes and Memoranda."

strate in my book The Survival of the Unfittest; and once this law is recognized

THE INSUFFICIENCY OF EDUCATION

3I7

we shall see that, with our present methods, practically all our philanthropic endeavour
is destined to defeat its own ends. Education
in eugenics must eventually cause us to realize this. But can we wait so long, if, meanwhile, racial decay proceeds apace?
The pioneer work of the New Charity has been left to a Frenchman to do, and, moreover, France has stolen a march on us in her really eugenic system of family allowances, and in refusing to demoralize her people with doles; while we, some of us, still cry out against the bogey of ' stockyard methods '

and others say solemnly that nothing positive or practical can be done yet toward the eugenic ideal, because, forsooth, the science of genetics (like all other sciences) has still very much to learn. Let me conclude my remarks by quoting some words of Major Leonard Darwin:
" Woe betide the nation which sees other nations advancing in racial qualities, whilst allowing itself to become so degenerate as to be unable to defend itself when the pinch does come."

SOCIOJLOGICLAL REVIErW
JOURNAL OF THE INSTITUTE OF SOCIOLOGY

Acting Editor: ALEXANDER FARQUHARSON

Assistant Editor: K. E. BARLOW

Vol XXIII.

OCTOBER, 1931

No. 3

CONTENTS of the Third Part of the 23rd Volume, October, 1931

Sociology and Mathematies : II.

The Processes of Regional Balance

An Educational Synthesis

Modern Geography and its Relation to Sociology

Tributes to the Memory of Victor Branford : II.

Communication

Book Reviews

Arthur F. Bentley R. Mukerjee
W. S. Brown
Books and Periodicals Received

Annual Subseriptios £1 Is. Od., post free. 5/- per copy.
Ibe Meplap bouse Vresg,
65 BELGRAVE ROAD, WESTMINSTER, S.W.1

