THE PRIMROSE PATH*
Some Aspects of the Population Problem
By A. S. PARKES, M.A., Sc.D., F.R.S.
National Institute for Medical Research, Mill Hill, London, N.W.7

T HE Galton Lecture commemorates
one of our great men of science. It
has been given annually, apart from
wartime interruptions, since I9I4. The list of Galton lecturers includes some of the outstanding personalities of their day, not least of all our President. I need say no more to indicate my appreciation of the honour of being invited to give this lecture.
Galton, himself a notable example of hereditary genius, was deeply interested in human quality. The Eugenics Society was founded, with Galton's active help, to foster knowledge of, and promote interest in, all factors concerned in the improvement of the race. I need not apologize, therefore, for having chosen as my subject certain rather general aspects of the population problem which have of late been much in the public eye. I speak as a biologist, but ethical, moral and humanitarian considerations are

The Commission's Report is the result of
some years of work and thought by a -most able group of people, but so far it has evoked no reaction from the Government, and it does not seem likely that its recommendations will be implemented in the near future. As Galton pointed out years ago, official action in this field can move but little ahead of informed public opinion, and it is to be hoped, therefore, that the Report will have a very wide circulation. Only by a wide appreciation of the problems can changes
be brought about, and time is not on our side. We are dallying with the three Furies of retribution, and the path is becoming
stony. The first Fury is the growth of world
population in relation to food supply, the
second the ageing of the population, and the third the hidden process of unnatural selection which is at present going on.

inseparable from the problems discussed. I have no coherent thesis, and nothing very Size of Population

new to say. I shall raise numerous questions More than a hundred years ago Malthus

without being able to answer any of them. called attention to the danger of the world

My object is to convey to a rather different becoming over-populated in relation to

circle than is normally interested in such resources, and thereby earned an undeserved

matters a sense of the urgency and serious- reputation as a false prophet of disaster.

ness of these questions.

It is well known that population increased

Six years ago the Government of the day enormously in almost every country in the

appointed a Royal Commission to examine world during the nineteenth century. Ac-

the trends of population in this country and curate figures are necessarily not available,

to make recommendations. The Commission but Carr-Saunders estimates the population

was supported by three expert committees, of the world as 728 million in the year I750

on one of which I had the privilege to serve. and i,6o8 million in the year I900. It is

The Report of the Commission was issued thought to be well above 2,000 million at

last year; the papers of the Commission are the present time. The trend in Great

only just beginning to come out, and any- Britain is naturally of particular interest to

thing I say now is said without knowledge us. Estimates suggest a population of about

of what may appear in most of them.

4I milion at the time of the Domesday

* The Galton Lecture delivered before the Eugenics Society on February I7th, I950.

survey twenty years after the Norman conquest, of 24 miion in the fourteenth century,

8

THE PRIMROSE PATH

9

six million in the seventeenth century, and in i8oi, when the first decennial census was
made, the population was a little over ten million. By i86i it had more than
doubled, and by I94I it had more than
doubled again.
In the course of this rapid growth the population greatly exceeded the indigenous food supply and came to rely to an ominous degree on imported foodstuffs. This purchase of food from abroad was, of course, made possible by thefact that Great Britain had a flying start in the industrialization
of the world and could exchange its surplus manufactured goods for food. Industrialization of the country meant the concentra-
tion of much of the population into large
towns, and to the masses of townsfolk thus created, food was something which was bought in a shop, and price was the most
important thing about it. There could be
little realization of the fact that the existence of mankind depended entirely on the production of vegetable matter by the interaction of plant life with soil, sun and water. Even modern man has not yet succeeded in doing much damage to the sun (though he may have altered its effects considerably), but he has reduced his water supplies by the destruction of cover, and in the newly settled countries he has committed wholesale robbery of the accumulated fertility of the ages. In North America, particu-
larly, agriculture in the nineteenth century consisted of mining rather than of farming, one piece of land being worked out and left derelict as the tidal wave of exploitation passed over. And so was provided the food for the rapidly growing industrial
populations. In Great Britain, to sustain
our growing population, we imported the richness of virgin land and flushed it down our sewers into the sea. This kind of thing can only happen once, and in the greater part of the new countries, as in the old ones, above a low basic level, no more can now
be got out of the soil than is put into it. Even among the remarkable achievements of modem science there is as yet no indication that this principle is likely to be upset in the near future. Advances in technology

will, no doubt, increase output per acre, but the process of development is bound to be slow, especially the reclamation of manmade deserts.
In the meantime, world population continues to increase. The following quotation is taken from the Report on the State of
Food and Agriculture, issued in I948 by F.A.O.U.N. under the dynamic inspiration of
Lord Boyd Orr. " There can be no misunderstanding or belittling of the dimensions of the production problem. Population is expand-
ing at the rate of i to 2 per cent according to continent. Agricultural output has expanded in one country, under exceptionally favourable circumstances, at 3 per cent per
annum over a decade, but in many others the increase has been negligible or non-exis-
tent." In other words, on the whole, food supplies are increasing barely as fast as population, so that unless great efforts are made present standards of living will not be maintained, let alone improved. We in this country who for so long have depended on food from abroad may well find that it is no longer available, even if there are no economic difficulties. Thus, we might have to consider the theory, so emphatically advocated by William Vogt in the Road to Survival, that the size of populations should be geared to the capacity of their land to carry them. At least, as pointed out by Dr. G. C. L. Bertram, we should arrive at a clear idea of optimal size of population in relation to resources and circumstances.
It is in the light of considerations such as these that the trends of population in this country, examined in great detail by the Commission, are of prime importance. According to present tendencies, the population of Great Britain will continue to increase in
numbers for about another twenty-five years. Estimates of what will happen after that depend on several factors, which can only be guessed at. Any violent changes in numbers, however, would involve marked alterations in present tendencies, of which there is as yet no sign. The most extreme projection ventured upon by the Commission is that if family size falls to 8o per cent of that for couples married I927-I938, even though mor-
B

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

tality continues to decline, the population will children. The report on Family Limitation,

fall below 30 million by 2047. The trends of in dealing with reasons for using or not using

world population are not easy to estimate, birth control, is most illuminating on this

but short of some major upheaval it seems subject. The analysis is too detailed to

likely that the human race will continue to summarize here; but it may be noted that

increase in total numbers.

among reasons for using birth control

the ties and loss of freedom occasioned by

Factors Affecting Size of Population

having children, and the difficulties of obtain-

Changes in size of a population are deter- ing domestic assistance, occupied an insignifi-

mined by three very obvious factors, birth- cant place. The most frequently given rea-

rate, death-rate and migration. It is with sons varied with age and social class. The

the first and second of these that I want to most frequent reason for not using birth

deal. I need say little about birth-rate, which control was that the woman wanted a

has been discussed at great length in the family and did not mind how many or how

last few years, and of which the salient quickly they came. The reasons why people

facts are well known. Whether in terms of want a family would make a fascinating

births per I,000, which means very little, study. Very few, I imagine, could honestly

or in terms of augmenting or replacing the say that they do so because they are sure that

population, it fell continuously from I870 their offspring will be glad to have been

to I938, except for a temporary rise after born. What the children think about it all

the first war. In the I930S it was definitely is not usually considered very carefully.

below replacement level. During the recent Modern parents may be more objective in

war it rose markedly, probably above re- this matter than their predecessors; cer-

placement level, to reach a peak in I947. tainly they are apt to regard as fair comment

At the present time it is probably hovering the retort " I didn't ask to be born," which

round replacement level. Tendencies in the so infuriated Victorian parents. But, for

immediate future will be most interesting the most part, parents consider themselves

and most important. The Commission was mainly in wanting a family; they have an

able to obtain little evidence of any signifi- urge to satisfy-an urge derived from

cant fall in reproductive capacity; the con- parental instinct or the pressure of tradition;

tinuous decline in the birth-rate over sixty they may have a name or a family tree which

years or more was clearly due to an increasing they are proud to perpetuate; they may

disinclination to have large families, coupled want the slight social prestige which goes

with an increasing knowledge of how to avoid with a family, or, less frequently than in

them. The Family Limitation Survey the past, they may regard a family as a

carried out by the Royal College of Obstetri- long-term economic asset. The strength of

cians and Gynecologists, and published as the urge to have children may be judged

Paper No. i of the Commission, found that from the length to which infertile couples

women using birth control increased from will go to have a child, from endless minor

i8 per cent of those married in I9oo-i9o9 to manipulations to artificial insemination. We

66 per cent of those married in I935-I939. come thus to the curious paradox that

It would appear, therefore, that a consider- parents may make great efforts and pro-

able fall in the birth-rate took place before longed sacrifices for children produced for

the use of birth control became at all general. essentially egotistical motives.

Whatever the explanation of this may be, it Most people, then, clearly need no urging

is clear that increasing knowledge of con- to have some children. The best form of

traceptives, together with their increasing encouragement that can be offered to them

effectiveness, and increasing conditioning is to remove the economic and social dis-

to their use, will decrease the number of advantages of doing so. It is good to know

unwanted children. It is important, there- that the Commission devoted much time and

fore, to know why people do or do not want thought to this problem. And here I can

THE PRIMROSE PATH

II

interject an idea which I find interesting, nation contemplating atomic war, which
and draw attention to the comparative might lead to male sterility on a large scale. backwardness of biological science in certain This work, in which I happen to be actively directions. Man can fly round the world in engaged, provides yet another example three days, can raise the most complicated of the scientist happily pursuing a fascinat-
economic systems and can take atoms ing line of research without worrying very apart, but to propagate himself he must much as to the ultimate desirability of his still make love and have babies in the old- discoveries. fashioned way, just like any other mammal. We must turn now to the other side of the
And, according to present knowledge, if picture and examine wastage of population.
he doesn't the race will peter out, no matter In the past, deaths from disease, famine and
how many atoms he splits. I say " according violence proved a very effective check on
to present knowledge." Some twenty years the growth of population. The Commission,
ago a popular novelist made a reckless excur- for example, point out that in earlier times, sion into biological fiction and painted an in Great Britain, the birth-rate wasprobably extravagant picture of " ectogenesis ", pro- high but usually exceeded the death-rate
pagation outside the body. Fiction is the only in good years. As a result, population
right word. To the best of my belief, pro- grew but slowly. All this has changed in longed experiments have so far failed to effect the last century. Between I84I and I938 fertilisation of the mammalian egg outside the expectation of life at birth rose from
the body. Eggs removed from rabbits after 40 years to 6o years, and the huge growth of fertilization have been cultured satisfactorily population over this period was due at
for a few days. Probably the same could be least in part to increasing longevity. To a done for human material if it were available. varied extent the same thing was happening At the other end of the scale, premature all over the world. The administrator has
babies weighing about 2ilb. after five months' done much to stop people killing each other
gestation have been successfully reared in casually, and the medical scientist pursues incubators. There is thus a huge gap to his avocation of preventing and curing bridge, over some of the most complex disease, with almost complete disregard processes known to biology, before " ecto- of what will happen to the people, and the genesis" turns from a dream into a night- children of the people, whose lives he has mare, and there is no sign whatever that the saved. Vogt's question " Is there any kindgap will be bridged in the visible future. ness in keeping people from dying of malaria Most of us hope that it will never be bridged. so that they can die more slowly of starvaThere are already enough sad examples of tion? " is unduly devastating, and is what happens when technology outruns certainly not one that I should wish to press intelligence. There is, however, one slightly while we are the guests of the Royal Society gruesome possibility much nearer at hand. of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene. There Artificial insemination is now a common and can, however, be no doubt that the medical very useful technique with certain animals. scientist has incurred a tremendous reIt is also known to be effective in man. sponsibility by the decisive contributions Researches arising out of the artificial insemi- he has made, and is likely to make in the near nation work suggest that it may soon be future, to the growth of world population. possible to store spermatozoa in such a way In the more highly developed countries the that they will survive in a functional state process is well advanced; in backward ones for years, and that it will be possible to it is only beginning. If the process goes as arrange for an animal to beget offspring long far among the coloured peoples of the world after its death. Little imagination is needed as it has already gone among the whites there to visualize the complications which would will be some spectacular happenings in the follow the application of such a discovery to next IOO years. To those who believe that man or the use to which it could be put by a pressure of population is ultimately the chief

I2 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

cause of war, the activities of the administra- numbers can show. Who can say to what

tor and the medical scientist must at best extent we have suffered by the loss in World

seem rather double-edged. Certainly, the War I, of the flower of the generation now

idea of large numbers of scientists working between fifty and sixty-five years old ?

to advance the means of saving life, while

large numbers of other scientists are feverish- Composition of Population

ly employed in perfecting methods of mass I have now rambled over some aspects of killing, to deal with the effects of the work total population and the factors that inof the first group, is enough to make one fluence it. I turn now to composition of the

despair of human reason. The high priests of population, which is usually considered in atomic weapons and bacterial warfare may relation to age and sex. I need say little

well improve the efficiency of methods of about the latter. More males are born than

killing people beyond all recognition, but females, but in the past differential mortality

up to date the tendency has been the other more than abolished the excess during child-

way. The military technician has latterly hood, and there was an excess of females of

made killing so inefficient in relation to effort, marriageable age. This excess of females was,

-and so expensive in relation to resources, of course, increased by war, notably World

as to be almost prohibitive. The number of War I. Under these conditions the social

man-hours required and the average cost of system, taken at its face value, condemned

killing a combatant by military means in the a substantial proportion of young women to

last war must have been quite fantastic. The childlessness or even to celibacy. Men being

comparative inefficiency of war in reducing what they are, it is difficult to believe that

directly the size of populations is emphasised this state of affairs achieved any very

in a most interesting paper by Dr. Richard- useful form of selection, and it is most satis-

son.* Richardson seriates what he calls fatal factory to know that the steady decline in

quarrels in the world between i82o and I945 child mortality between the wars, by de-

according to the number of deaths caused creasing the relative wastage of males, has

by each incident. He uses the term " fatal abolished the excess of females of marriage-

quarrels " to cover everything from murders able age. In I89I, according to the Commis-

to world wars-(in passing I may say that I sion's Report, there was an excess of 403,000

regard this as a notable example of the broad females at ages 20 to 34. For some years after

flexible outlook). The remarkable thing World War I the excess was much greater.

about the results is that murders ranked In I947, however, in spite of World War II,

next to world wars in their contribution the excess of females at these ages was down

to total deaths by violence. Small wars to 27,000. The process continues, and may

contributed much less to the total. Richard- have some interesting consequences. Thirty

son calculated that deaths from violence years ago males had a slight scarcity value

over the period considered made up only and with it a theoretical range of choice;

i .6 per cent of the total death-rate. If we the time is coming when the female will be

assume that deaths from uncomplicated able to exercise the choice-in theory as

senility are not very numerous, the relative well as in fact. It will be interesting to see

contribution of disease and of violence to what she does with it.

the death-rate is rather remarkable. It must, The most important change, however,

however, be remembered that war removes in the composition of the population in the.

selectively young male adults, and, under a last half-century is in age distribution.

voluntary system, selectively virile young The increase in the expectation of life in the

males. The ultimate effect on the population last I00 years, together with the decrease

may thus be far greater than is indicated in the birth-rate, has had some remarkable

by the contribution of war casualties to the effects. This topic has now become rather

death-rate, far greater, in fact, than any hackneyed, but it is of fundamental im-

* See p. 25.

portance to society and is specially relevant

THE PRIMROSE PATH

to any discussion of reducing total popula- seventy years ago there must have been a

tion by discouraging propagation. In times considerable tendency for people to be swept

of steady birth-rate and steady death-rate off in their prime by diseases, and so on,

there will be a decreasing number of people which can now be overcome. On the other

at each successive age group. Where the hand, we are developing much more rational

rates are both high the decrease will be ideas about what constitutes ageing, and we

fairly sharp and most of the population realise that the age at which anyone becomes

will be youngish people; this was the too old for a job depends partly on the person

position in Great Britain in I89I. Where and partly on the job. A fighter pilot, for

both the birth-rate and the death-rate are instance, may be too old for the job at 25,

low, the centre of gravity of the age distribu- while at the other end of the scale the artist

tion will be much higher and there will be and author, for example, can ply their trade

many more old people in relation to the at their own speed until they become

younger ones. During a change-over from completely senile, or even after.

the first state to the second the situation This raises the question of how to find out

will be complicated by survival into the days when anyone is too old for a job. This is

of low birth-rate of a lot of old people born primarily a matter of working out standards

in the days of high birth-rate. This is the of necessary performance, and is clearly

present position, and it will continue to not an easy problem. It should, however,

develop along similar lines for another be tackled with vigour, because no one wants

twenty years or more. According to the to see oldish people retaining jobs long after

Commission's Report, people over 65 formed they have ceased to be adequate for them.

4.8 per cent of the population in I89I, The problem then is to retrain them for a job

IO.4 per cent in I947, and will be i6 per more suited to their current mental and

cent in I977. Thereafter the situation will physical condition. As regards retraining,

stabilise somewhat unless the birth-rate or it is usually said that only the young can

the death-rate falls appreciably. Some of learn easily-you can't teach an old dog

the economic consequences of this change new tricks. But it would be much more

can be indicated very easily. It is estimated accurate to say that you can't teach an old

that in I946 there were I5 pensioners per dog by the same methods as you teach a

I00 contributors but that in I970 there will young dog. It is satisfactory to know that

be 32 pensioners per ioo contributors.

this subject is receiving increasing attention

Such an increase, other things being from experimental and industrial psycholo-

equal, must reduce the standard of lving gists, and I understand that the old dog is

either of the contributors or of the pensioners. proving to be an interesting creature.

Is there a way out of this economic dilemma ?

Short of some fantastic happening, the age Quality of Population

distribution of adults in the next twenty- I have now mentioned quantity and

five years is already settled within narrow composition of the population. The third

margins and cannot be altered; the ratio of problem concerns quality, and in talking

adult consumers to producers is therefore about this I must restrict myself to basic

bound to rise. Can production per man-hour considerations. The first of these is that man

be increased correspondingly ? This is an- is biological material, and, as such, is in-

qther question which I cannot answer.

herently variable and mutable. All men are

Conversely, is it reasonable to expect not born equal and never will be. (Whether

people to work beyond the present retiring or not they should be born to equality of

age ? Here several interesting points arise. opportunity is quite a different matter, and

If the expectation of life has risen by twenty one with which I do not want to get entangled

years, is a man or woman aged 65 as mentally in this lecture.) The second implication of

and physically fit as one aged 45 was in the biological nature of man is that inborn

i870? The answer is probably no, because characteristics tend to be passed on to the

14 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

next generation, though the strength and ment. And so difficulties arise immediately

the exact nature of the tendency varies in obtaining and interpreting the necessary

with the characteristic in question. This data and in making use of the results. As

is true of mental characteristics as well as of an example of the difficulty of interpreting

physical ones, as Galton showed in his studies data we may recall the experience of Sir

on Hereditary Genius. Man, therefore, like Godfrey Thomson with his two Mental

other animals, has the two requisites for Surveys, which consisted in doing I.T.s

modifying the type under the influence of on the 70,000 to 8o,ooo II-year-old children

selection, and in the long run the nature of the in Scotland. Both in I932 and in I947, when

selection will influence the nature of the the survey was repeated, there was a strong

modification. Natural selection has ceased negative correlation between size of family

to operate except in a very crude form in and score in the I.T. Therefore, intelligence,

civilised society. What is to replace it ? thus measured, should have declined in the

And here, at the risk of wearying those of you interval. But it had, in fact, increased

who are members of the Eugenics Society, I slightly. Does this paradoxical result mean

want to quote from the last two paragraphs that the whole phenomenon is environmental

of Galton's Memories of My Life.

or that the post-war children have had a

I conceive it to fall well within man's province to replace Natural Selection by other processes that are more merciful
and not less effective. This is precisely the aim of Eugenics.
Its first object is to check the birth-rate of the Unfit, instead of allowing them to come into being, though doomed in large
numbers to perish prematurely. The second object is the improvement of the race by furthering the productivity of the Fit by early marriages and healthful rearing of their children. Natural Selection rests upon excessive production and wholesale destruction; Eugenics on bringing no more individuals into the world than can be properly cared for, and those
only of the best stock.

lot of practice in tests of this kind, or is there
some other explanation ? It is impossible to
say. None the less, certain tendencies at present in operation seem to be most unbiological and to constitute a form of highly unnatural selection. Thomson, in his Galton Lecture in I946, in talking of the selection of intelligent children for higher education
said, " The children chosen at II or I2 to enter on a longer and more difficult course
of education are likely, on the average, to marry later (if at all) and to have fewer
children (if any) than those who are not chosen. This is still more the case with those chosen later to enter colleges and universities. The men will marry later than they otherwise
would have done, and a large proportion of
the women will not marry at all. In short, the educational system of the country acts

This simple statement expresses a simple as a sieve to sift out the more intelligent

idea. Is it possible to elaborate ? The words and destroy their posterity. It is a selection

" fit " and " unfit " remind one of the man which ensures that their like shall not

who spent a lot of time " keeping fit " endure." Thomson points out, obviously

but who was unable to answer the question rightly, that the solution for this problem

" Fit for what ? " In relation to a social is not to stop educating the intelligent but

animal like man, Galton presumably used to remove the inhibition of propagation

the words to mean socially desirable and occasioned thereby.

socially undesirable. Extreme cases of both Consider another example. We are rightly

of these categories are quite obvious, but proud of the increasing success in the treat-

what of the rest ? Galton himself realised ment of sub-fertility, and of the satisfaction

clearly that most people are neither fit nor given to many individuals by the appearance

unfit, but just somewhere in between. It is of a long awaited child. Looked at in a

also evident that the development of inborn broader way it is arguable that we are

characters is much influenced by environ- spending time and money in propagating

THE PRIMROSE PATH

15

relatively infertile stocks and that from a is now ultimately responsible, from the cradle

national point of view it would be much to the grave, for everyone born, and must

better to devote the resources thus used to therefore, it seems to me, begin to acquire

encouraging really fertile couples to produce some control over who are born. But this

larger families. This seems to me to be a is a serious difficulty to me. Freedom of

case where the certain interests of the propagation is a pillar of individual liberty

individual must come before the hypothetical in a world from which individual liberty is

interests of the race.

fast disappearing. How then can those of us

But, assuming that we knew a great deal who are individualists reconcile ourselves

more than we do about inheritance in man, to the logic of the eugenic situation? That

and how it was affected by environmental is another question that I cannot answer,

conditions, what use could we make of the except in relation to extreme cases. There

information to promote the improvement of seems, however, little prospect of any

the rice in relation to its environment? extensive form of planned selection, even if it

We should have to decide upon a clear were scientifically possible and morally

definition of social desirability and on a permissible. I think, therefore, that every

method of measuring it objectively-not a effort should be made to spread the idea of

task I should like to undertake. This would voluntary selection. The Eugenics Society,

then have to be combined with our knowledge originally known as the Eugenic Education

of human heredity to evolve a eugenic Society, has been striving to this end since

policy and with economic vision to produce its formation, and should continue to do so

a general population policy. What a task! with all its might. Such an idea will not,

Who is going to do it, and when will it of course, make any impression on the lower

be done? Probably never in a comprehen- levels of the unfit, and in time society for its

sive way. Eugenic and population policy own protection will have to deal with them

will emerge gradually under the pressure for the same reason as it now deals with

of events. And how is any such policy to lunatics and criminals.

be implemented? Years ago most of the This concludes what I have to say on

people who had heard of the eugenic idea quality of population, and with it my talk on

thought it implied the use of farmyard some aspects of the population problem.

methods on man, and it has been much I am sure you will agree that " some aspects'"

attacked in the light of this assumption. is about the right description, but I hope I

In its logical development a vigorous eugenic have interested just a few more people in these

policy would no doubt involve considerable urgent problems. While I've been talking to

powers of negative control-positive control you, the population of the world has in-

would be much more difficult-but such creased by nearly 3,000, the average age

powers are not yet in sight. Nevertheless, has got higher, and inborn quality may well

I do not see how some mild form of negative have declined. We tread the primrose path

control-sterilisation of the totally unfit- with the Furies, and who knows where the

for instance, can be long delayed. The State path will end ?

igou Review, VoL hTIL No 1

