EUGENICS AND RELIGION

Summary of a Debate arranBed by the Eugenics Society
(April 25th, I933)

C APTAIN G. H. Pitt-Rivers said that Thus, much Christian teaching could be

three views were possible-first that interpreted as incompatible with eugenic

the Christian religion was com- ideals. It might even justify Tolstoy's

patible with eugenic ideals, secondly that contention that " marriage is an unchris-

it was incompatible, as expounded by tian institution." But the Pauline New

Roman Catholic spokesmen, who had stigma- Testament writings were even more fiercely

tized eugenics as "pagan principles and inconsistent with any eugenic ideal of

immoral proposals"; and thirdly, the view morality, for St. Paul's insistent references

he defended, that while there was no neces- to marriage were summed up in the words,

sary connection between religion and " And I wish all men were even as I am

eugenics, Christianity might be increas- -unmarried."

ingly converted by eugenics, though "In those savage countries where magic

eugenic ideals could not be changed by is as thoroughly institutionalized as our

Christianity.

Christian religion is with us, magic is

Logical argument seldom made converts. only resorted to where rational control is

Yet equivocal attempts to conciliate all impossible." What the savage by labour,

views, or timorous avoidance of subjects by prevision, by knowledge gained through

likely to provoke opposition, were invari- daily experience and tradition, could easily

ably rewarded with the contempt that control, or the dangers against which he

moral cowardice always deserved.

could guard, he seldom distorted by

Eugenics might be defined as ethics magical ideas. He was a realist about the

based on biological study. There was no things he clearly recognized and controlled.

necessary connection between religion and Having taken every precaution to ensure a

ethics, and still less between religion and good crop of yams by planting at the right

eugenics. When the conception of sin was time, by protecting his garden as best he

translated into moral and ethical terms, could from the ravages of wild beasts or

almost endless varieties of conduct could be thieving men, he knew he had still to

defended or condemned. Christian thought reckon with inclement weather. This he

had produced less agreement, but far more could not control, so he resorted to magic.

persecution, than the magical conceptions of It was doubtful whether, even in the

the heathen.

practices and beliefs of Christianity, a clear

Marriage had not been made by religion. distinction could always be drawn between

Religions had imposed on that age-long religion and magic, or even whether it was

human habit religious or magical ideas that religion or magic which had had the greater

marked especially the celebration or ter- share in controlling our economic welfare

mination of human mating.

or disasters.

The New Testament story depicted Peter The processes of life and death, the prob-

as rather an ignorant fellow who, having lems of generation and fertilization, the

followed his Master's prescription, deserted development of the individual, of embry-

his family and all natural obligations in ology and ontogeny, were very mysterious

order to join a troop of idle beggars for to us all, even when we studied them as

the personal reward of a specially reserved scientists, and concerned ourselves only

throne with the other Apostles, where they with the known and the discoverable. There

would judge the Twelve Tribes of Israel. was no necessary connection, and there-

lox

I02

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

fore no necessary antagonism, between indifference to the biological quality of men

religion and science, so long as religion and women.

concerned herself only with the unknown, When eugenists insisted that it was the

and with the other world which is beyond duty of healthy couples to have not less

the range of science; but this meant that than three or four children, they only

religion must retire and cede her territory insisted on something which was inherent

step by step as science, very slowly and in the Christian conception of marriage.

gradually, conquered fresh territory in the As Christians we believed that to refuse

concrete world of the surely known. Even- the ordained results of marriage was

tually, as science extended her control of wrong; and he wished that the Church

observable phenomena, religion must retire might avow its unwillingness to celebrate

to the impregnable citadel of eschatology, the marriages of any couples who for selfish

the world of death and the unknown here- reasons proposed to refuse parentage.

after, which was surely hers. Religion in None the less, he held it equally clear

the end would hold sway where she had her from the Christian point of view that it was origin, in the minds and imaginations of men definitely wrong to bring children into the

who thought of death and tried anxiously
to peer across the veil. But for the fact of death, and the thought of death, and the dread of death, born in men's hearts, religion would never have been. There only could religion, or its special study, theology, survive in the minds of men of science, for if it challenged science in the world which science had conquered, it must
die.

world for whom no adequate provision could be made. At the very centre of Christian ethics stood a reverent regard for the rights of children. To guard them, serve them, and love them wisely was a primary Christian duty. And therefore to
bring children into this world who from the cradle must be condemned to insufficient nourishment, impaired health, and poor
education was in the highest degree un-

Christian. Eugenists could not possibly

THE OPPOSING VIEW

insist on this point more firmly than Christians ought to do.

Dr. Herbert Gray said that in the first Till lately it might have been said that

place, he had nothing to say about the sug- religious institutions were on the whole

gestion that religion and eugenics had no averse to the method of family limitation,

relation whatever to each other, inasmuch of which most eugenists heartily approve,

as religion was concerned with the whole of namely conception control. But that was

life. no longer the case. The Lambeth bishops

As to the compatibility of the aims of spoke definitely on this point, and the

religion and eugenics, everything depended position they adopted was that occupied to

upon the definition of the aims of eugenics. a very large extent by the Free Churches.

When they were defined as the promotion For his part, he wished to say that he

of the fertility of naturally well-endowed definitely did not desire the cessation of

stocks, and the restriction of the fertility the intimate marriage relationship when

of inferior stocks, there was nothing in husbands and wives were still in the early

them with which religion need quarrel. thirties, by which time they would In speaking of religion, he was concerned probably have had the three or four chil-

only with that conception of religion which dren whom they were able to bring up. He

comes to us from Jesus Christ. Jesus believed that such a cessation was bad both

regarded marriage as a sacred institution, physically and morally.

held the rights of children to be divine Speaking on the subject of sterilization,

rights, and lived with the avowed aim of Dr. Gray said that he regarded it as by far

helping mankind to abundance of life. He the best and most useful way of attaining

could not therefore be associated with any an end which society in its own interest

EUGENICS AND RELIGION

I03

must attain, namely the prevention of parentage among the feeble-minded. He
would go farther than merely making voluntary sterilization of the feeble-minded legal; he would make it compulsory, in the
name of mercy. Dr. Gray had a good deal to say about
the subject of unsuccessful marriages which, alike from the point of view of the
eugenist and from that of the Christian, were disastrous. Admitting that some reform of the divorce law was long overdue, it had to be realized that divorce was only a partial solution of a very sad situation, and that the all-important thing in the interests of society was that marriages which were likely to end in failure should not be entered into. To that end a good
deal might be done if a kind of education

were offered to the young which was now very seldom offered them. They ought to be told on what basis a wise selection could be made, and be helped to understand that mere physical attraction is not enough. And they ought further to be offered clear knowledge of all that is known about the technique of married life. When marriages failed because there was no love in them, the case was sad. When they failed in spite of much true love, and only because one or both of the two concerned remained ignorant of the plain biological and psychological facts, the case was sadder still. But such ignorance was preventable, and it was one of the happiest signs of the times that the churches were slowly but definitely awakening to the dutv of providing such education for marriage.

-PHYSIOLOGICAL ZOOLOGYY
For the purpose of this quarterly journal devoted to the recording of current researches, physiological zoology is regarded as comprising:
The physiology of embryonic and reconstitutional development The physiology of environmental relationships The physiology of the cell and protoplasm The physiology of the nervous system and behaviour Hormones and other features of chemical correlation Sex in its physiological aspects The physiological phases of genetics and cytology.
Physiological Zoology is an indispensable part of the literature in the field. It is edited by Charles Manning Child and Warder C. Allee of the University of Chicago and published by the University of Chicago Press. The yearly rate is 35s. 2d.
English Agents
Cambridge University Press
Eugenics Review, Vol. XXV, No. 2.

