INTELLIGENCE AND FERTILITY

A PLEA FOR RESEARCH

By RAYMOND B. CATTELL, M.A., D.Sc.
(Psychology Department, Duke University, Durham, N.C., U.S.A.)

SO great a contrast in optimism as exists
between the neighbouring articles of
Mr. Richard Titmuss* and Dr. Fraser Robertst in recent issues of the REVIEW provokes the comment either that these eugenists have quite different concepts of "goodness " of a population or else that our scientific methods of estimating trends must be miserably inaccurate.
Mr. Titmuss deserves gratitude for relieving our gloom with a momentary dose of that intoxicating perspective of rapid social progress, the fumes of which keep our less critical journalists in a permanently happy stupor. He also does well to stress those great environmental improvements which every eugenist should allow for before calculating any consequences of genetic change.
Yet the fact remains that the relation of the differential birth-rate to intelligence, which Dr. Roberts and I, independently, found in England, and which Lentz and Maller found in the U.S.A., has now stood as unchallenged evidence for six or seven years.
When it comes to a question of what is happening genetically, I am compelled to agree entirely with the sombre picture which Dr. Fraser Roberts paints. A rapid improvement in education, i.e. in the right kind of " conditioning," is, at the moment, more than compensating for a slow decline in average mental capacity. But in some respects, namely, where " adaptability to new situations" is involved, no amount of education can compensate for deficient capacity; and I have attempted to show elsewheret how serious are the consequences
* R. M. Titmuss: " The Social Environment and Eugenics," EUGENICS REVIEW, 1944, 36, 53.
t J. A. Fraser Roberts: " Population Problems in the Light of Differential Fertility," EUGENICS REVIEW,
I944, 86, 9.
$ " Some Changes in a Community with a Falling
Intelligence Quotient," Brit. J. Psychol., I938, 28, 4.

that can necessarily be expected to follow in quite a variety of fields of social life.
Compared to the tempo of environmental change the decline seems slow; but compared to the natural selection rates which
probably operate in the animal world it is
galloping. Faced with this disconcerting conclusion, I have long sought for some loophole of escape within the logical structure of the evidence. The calculation is not a simple one, and it involves quite a number
of assumptions to cover certain blank spots
in our data: e.g., about the rate of barren
marriages; celibacy; the length of genera-
tions; the differential death-rate; incomplete families; the consideration of illegitimate as " only " children; assortative mating and the accompanying modified rate of regression to the mean; degree of " epistasis " through Mendelian effects. Nevertheless, with two exceptions, these are small and productive of mutually com-
pensating distortions. The exceptions, concerning the true role
of which some of us have often conjectured, are the celibacy rate and the barren marriage rate. About the social status distribution of celibates and completely childless marriages
there is, of course, accurate knowledgeindicating, incidentally, that these factors would merely augment the trend deduced from differences in family size-but it is the
essence of the evidence here discussed that it does not proceed from any correlation of
intelligence with social status, but investj-
gates directly the relation of fertility to measured intelligence. If there were a tendency for celibates and childless parents to be less intelligent than others, it might be that the average level of intelligence is today actually being maintained, in spite of the differential connected with size of family. So far as I know there is absolutely

126

INTELLIGENCE AND FERTILITY

no evidence, in any way fit to be ranged alongside the large and carefully sampled
population measurements in the I936-I938 researches, available on this point. The present article is a plea for information on this extremely important issue.
The researches described do not, of course, point to a universally gloomy conclusion.
They prove only that mental capacity is
declining: other desirable characteristics may be on the upgrade. Nevertheless, I confess that I have been continually amazed since the above-mentioned data were published, first, by the fact that no so-called
statesman has brought any practical wisdom to bear on this fatal social disease; secondly, by the failure of research workers to supplement the original researches at those points
where some doubt might exist. Here in America, where some thousands of Ph.D. and
M.A. theses were turned out in sociology and
kindred subjects between the publication of the above research findings and the inter-
ruption by the war, not one was aimed at a final, definitive answer on this vitally important question, using the methodological improvements suggested by the earlier researches. Avalanches of typescript have delivered wisdom on such topics as whether the Peewee Indians distinguish between uncles and great uncles, or whether people who collect stamps in Omaha have a higher or lower I.Q. than those with the same
hobby (" avocation ") in Yonkers; and have

expatiated, under the sounding title of the Frustration-Aggression Hypothesis, on the novel and remarkable observation that men
who are crossed get angry. One begins to wonder whether the decline in intelligence has not already affected the politicians and
the social scientists, as an experience if not
as a spectacle. There are three main ways in which the
prediction of the trend in intelligence could
be made more reliable. (i) By testing a true cross-section of the adult population, at the end of the reproductive period, and relating the results to reproduction measures-this would automatically include celibates and the entirely childless married couples. (2) By re-testing, after the lapse of at least a decade, the continuation of the populations tested by the original researchers, to see if the calculated decline has actually occurred.
In the city cross-sectioned by the present
writer comparatively little migration occurs, so that, using the same non-verbal test and the same standardization, a significant
answer could be obtained. (3) By supplementing the original researches with data
on the specific influences-celibacy and childless marriages-which could not then be assayed. This last is the most practicable and the least costly. It is greatly to be hoped that research enterprise will shortly set our minds at rest-for better or worse-by the required supplementaiy data on this vitally
important issue.

