A NOTE ON JEWISH-CHRISTIAN INTERMARRIAGE

By ELIOT SLATER, M.D., F.R.C.P.

Introduction

At the present time numerous examples of

C LASS hatreds have played a promi-
nent part in human history, and
probably have a very primitive instinctive basis. -Their rudiments can be seen in the behaviour of social animals, and are then commonly accepted as evidence of a " herd instinct." They have probably played a useful part in the development- and preservation of human societies, and have aided in the evolution of man from the anthropoids. Most people would, however, agree that they have now outlived their usefulness and
represent the greatest of all dangers to world unity and peace: Differences between peoples in respect of colour and anthropometric characters, in temperament, in language and culture, are important sources of the lack of understanding which is the basis of hostility.

class hatreds can be found in any Western
culture. It will be instructive to list a few
which are commonly observed in a middleclass English milieu. They could be classified
as,: i. Geographical, e.g. biases against the
Welsh, the Irish, the Scotch; 2. Linguistic, e.g. against the " Cockney" or the "Oxford" accent, 3. Religious, e.g. against Roman Catholics; 4. Economic, e.g. against " capitalists "; 5. Cultural, e.g. against "Bohemians" or " highbrows"; 6. Social, e.g. against " the old school tie"; 7. Racial, e.g. against "niggers"; 8. Political, e.g. against Communists; 9. Biological, e.g. against homosexuals.
Characteristic qualities of class hatreds are that they depend on real differences, that

While it is obvious that in human societies these differepces are irrelevant to any

class hatreds are fostered by social traditions, rational estimate of the value of the man or

it is important to recognize that they also the'class, that irrational, emotionally deter-

arise spontaneously. Children, especially mined values are neverthless involved, and

those approaching adolescence, are more that the individual is confused with his class

susceptible than adults to hostilities of this and allowed to possess only those faults and

kind; and everyone will remember from merits which are attributed to the class to

school years instances of children persecuting which he belongs. As a matter of practice,

unfortunate individuals who have failed to class -hatreds are expressed by a majority

conform to some arbitrary standard. Among against a minority, and not vice versa;

adults, it is probably true to say that the within the minority, however, a reciprocal

emotional is more susceptible than the hostility obtains, but as a rule only finds

rational thinker; and that the tendency, expression within a circle of other members

generally, is associated with emotional im- of the same group.

maturity. If this is a fair presentation, one It is a reasonable hypothesis that psycho-

would expect that the more highly developed logical causes of the same type are to be

the state of a society the more class tolerance found for anti-Semitism as for class hatreds in

would be found, and that in a civilized general. But there are peculiar features about

society the reappearance of an old class anti-Semitism which havepreventedanyclose

hatred would be a symptom of a tendency to examination of this hypothesis. Some of

relapse into barbarism. One might expect these are its ancient history, its international

also, however, that class hatreds would distribution, and its immense political sig-

continue to reappear among all conditions of nificance. Most authors who have come to

men from time to time.

the subject have approached it ex barte. On

'7

i8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the one side there have been those who have
been inclined to believe that there must be some cause in the Jew to bring about this hostility in peoples of all kinds. On the other side there have been those who have rejected this hypothesis and have preferred to it the no more convincing one that this hostility is the result of Christian education, of political propaganda, etc., in short that it is a cultural
artefact.
Anti-Semitism, however, has features of its
own which are quite sufficient to explain anomalies in its epidemiology, without any
need for far-fetched hypotheses of the two
kinds just cited. If we compare it with the
middle-class biases listed above, we see that it contains elements of more than one of them. Many Jews in this country have either
immigrated themselves or have come of immigrant parents. They are distinguished from non-Jews not only by religion, but by foreign-sounding names, different cultural
backgrounds, family affiliations, dietetic
habits, holiday observances, etc. They have
a strange tongue peculiar to themselves, and may speak English with a foreign accent. Their economic grouping is not that of the
country at large. Not infrequently they have physical traits, such as shape of nose, which allow an easy guess at their race. AntiSemitism becomes a common field where people susceptible' to antipathies of very
many different kinds can find themselves in
agreement; and every difference between Jews and non-Jews may easily become a focus around which the feeling of herd hostility for the stranger can crystallize.
Circumstances as they affect the Jews are admittedly different in this country from what they are in other parts of the world. But in countries, such as Poland, where Jews have lived for generations, the ground has been if anything even more favourable for the development of anti-Semitism. The spirit of the ghetto, surviving beyond its time, for long confined Jews, for the most part, to small communities of their own, and prevented any free mixing with the general population.
Circumstances were very different in Germany before the war. But it is clear that

the official anti-Semitism which was fostered during the years of theNazir6gimewasnotthe spontaneous anti-Semitism of an untutored
people. Before the Nazi persecution of the
Jews began, there had been perhaps the
largest measure of intermarriage between
Jews and non-Jews yet seen in any European
country. While this certainly did not save
the German Jew from persecution, it can hardly have acted as a stimulus to the anti-
Semitic movement and it made many administrative and other difficulties for the persecutors. When the attempt was made to prosecute similar measures in Italy, even greater difficulties were encountered and the
attempt was relatively a failure. There is extremely little natural anti-Semitism among
Italians, a fact which may perhaps be
brought into relation with their greater similarity to Jews in temperament and physical
characters. With due allowance made for such artificial
movements, the ancient history and inter-
national spread of anti-Semitism need no
better explanation than the long history of Jewish wanderings. There are Jews in almost every country of the world, and in every country they are in a minority. It is not surprising that anti-Semitism can, therefore, spread across national frontiers in a way in which, for instance, British prejudice against the Irish cannot. But the international distribution of Jews and of hostility to Jews has given to " the Jewish problem " a very large part of its historical and political significance. The very persecution to which the Jew has been subjected has tended to keep in being a vicious circle. It has encouraged emigration from one country to another, and in each
new land the Jew has appeared as a stranger. While numbers are extremely small, feelings of hostility are so localized that no general attitude on the part of the public is possible. It seems to be only when the proportion of persons who are felt to be strangers has reached a given threshold, and their existence creates a general impression, that hostility spreads and may take an epidemic form. It is customary in this country to feel superior t-o the United States in our freedom from the colour bar; matters might be very different

A NOTE ON JEWISH-CHRISTIAN INTERMARRIAGE

if we had as high a proportion of coloured between various races to occur. It is, of

people.

course, true that much further knowledge

It finally must not be forgotten that the is required on the results of mixed breeding

difference of the Jew from the countrymen of before any final judgment can be made.

the land in which he lives has been actively Nevertheless, if racial intermarriage never

maintained by the Jews themselves. Religi- occurred at all, the races of mankind would

ous conversion of the Gentile to Judaism and inevitably evolve in the course of time into

the intermarriage of Jew anid non-Jew have separate species with interspecific sterility,

not been encouraged.

and the foundations be laid of a more

Can we expect, then, that anti-Semitism disastrous disunity of' mankind even than

will always be with us? If we provisionally that which obtains to-day.

accept the hypothesis stated earlier, the

answer is not necessarily yes. If antiSemitism depends for its life on the existence

The Enquiry

of real, though irrelevant, differences between Fifty Jews serving as soldiers in the British

Jew. and non-Jew, anti-Semitism will cease Army were asked for details of their families.

to exist when and if these differences The men were all patients admitted to the

disappear. The only difference between neiurosis wards of Sutton Emergency Hospital

Jews and non-Jews which it would seem during the years I944-5. They were, there-

worth while to seek to maintain is the fore, a restricted and a biased selection of

religious difference. This by itself would British Jews; but there is no reason to

cause but little hostility in an age of religious think that, for instance, neurotic tendencies

tolerance which almost amounts to religious among these men would have any relation

apathy. A large factor in dissipating differ- with the facts into which enquiry was made,

ences of other kinds would be the complete or that in respect of these particulars they

cessation of any sort of persecution or dis- would be unrepresentative of British Jews as

crimination against the Jew. If Jewish a whole. While percentage figures cannot be

families remained rooted in one land for given, most of them were not themselves

generations, living and mixing freely with immigrants, but came of fathers or grand-

their countrymen, many differences of a fathers who had immigrated into this country

cultural kind, such as those of language, from Europe one or two generations ago.

would disappear rapidly. Other differences,

also cultural, but with a religious sanction, would be longer maintained. They would, however, be subject to the liberal and modernist tendencies now flourishing in the Jewish Church. Differences of a more important kind are involved in the physical and psychological traits which have a
hereditary basis. The principal means by which they would be dissipated would be by intermarriage. It is therefore a matter of
some interest to obtain data on the frequency of Jewish-Christian intermarriage in this country, and on the extent to which Jews are tending at the present time to shed those

Surnames
The surnames of these fifty men were: Allen, Balcombe, Barnett, Bartick, Berizanski, Brookner, Cohen (4), Denistein, Donn, Egerton, Ehrlich, Falber, Friedman, Frost, Glen, Gochin, Henderson, Isbitski, Kluman, Kolitz, Krish, Ksienski, Kushner, Landsman, Liberman, Linden, Lubin,
Margolis, Mehlman, Milich, Morris, Myers, Newman, Packer, Rich, Rosengarten, Rosenthal, Saunders, Selcow, Shokett, Sunderland, Tartarsky, Vorzanger, Weiss, Werth, Wohl,
Woolf.

outward characteristics which single them It may be noted that sixteen, more or less,

out from their-compatriots.

of these names are English ones, and not

Perhaps one further comment should be immediately recognizable as Jewish patro-

made. It is sometimes debated whether it nymics. Those with a foreign ring mostly

is, or is not, desirable for intermarriage suggest a German or Polish origin.

20 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Fist Names

at all closely to popular conceptions of the

The first names of propositi and sibs were typical Jewish appearance. For the last

not recorded at the beginning of the enquiry. twenty-four patients seen, relevant observa-

Those elicited in its later stages were: tions were made. The popular picture of a

Alexander, Alfred, Allan, Ann (3), Barney, Jew is a man of swarthy complexion, with

Ben (2), Boris, Coleman, Daphne, David, dark brown eyes, black wavy hair, and a

Denis, Doris, Esther, Fanny, Frances, Goldy, Jewish nose. The following particulars were

Harold, Harry (4), Howard, Ian, Irene, observed:

Izzy (sic), Jack (2), Jean, Jeannette, John (3), Skin: often quite fair; 2 of the 24 were

Joseph, Judah, Kitty, Leah, Lewis, Lilian, subject to sunburn in summer.

Lily, Lottie, Louis, Mark, Maureen, Max, Eyes: blue 5, hazel 3, grey 9, light brown

Morris, Murrie, Nathan, Nathaniel, Olive, 3, dark brown 4.

Pearl, Philip (2), Poly, Priscilla, Ralph, Nose: retroussd 3, straight 7, Jewish ? 2,

Raymond, Rita, Roxana, Sadie (2), Sam (2), Jewish 8, Roman i, unclassifiable but non-

Samuel, Sarah, Sidney, Stanley, Theodore. Jewish 3.

It is surprising how very few of these names Hair: straight 4, wavy I4, curly 6; light

would strike the average Englishman as brown 5, chestnut i, dark brown i6, black 2.

specifically Jewish, and how some familiar On this very small sample, British Jews

Jewish names have failed to appear.

would seem to have on the whole rather

darker eyes than non-Jews. A parallel

Upbrnging

series of selected patients in the military

At the beginning of the enquiry, questions
were asked about the religious upbringing of the patients' parents, of himself and hig sibs, and of the next generation. As, however, they occasionally caused an atmosphere
of awkwardness, they were abandoned in the latter third of the enquiry. Dealing in families rather than in persons, we have the following numbers:
Generation of

neurotic wards of Sutton Hospital showed the
following incidence of eye-colours : blue I62, hazel iii, grey iII, light brown 58, dark brown i8. But taking the Jews as a whole, they show a considerable proportion of men who would not be recognizable as Jews on
anthropometric characteristics alone. It
seems probable that this sample included men of mixed blood, and that British Jews, in general, would be found to have a sizable

Religious Upbringing Parents Patient Children proportion of non-Jewish ancestors, if the

Verystrict

... 24

4

3 matter were capable of investigation.

Strict .. ... 22 I4 i6

Moderate or liberal I7 29 20 Intermarriage

Lax..

... -

Non-Jewish or non-

religious ... I

3 -

I2 The following numbers were obtained of

i8

the marriages in the parental and the filial generations:

Totals 64 50 69
Classification of type of upbringing was made by the subjects themselves. We have to make allowance for the fact that information" about the upbringing of the parents was hearsay. But even when this is done, the

Consorts of
Fathers ... Mothers ... Patients ... Brothers ... Sisters ...

Jewish
... 49 ... 50 ... 28 ... 52 ... 52

Non-Jewish
I
4 I2 I2

secular change in the direction of increasing liberalism is very noticeable.

Totals ... 23I

29

Intermarriage with non-Jews was rare in

Physical Characters

the parental generation. Of the four Christian

As the enquiry progressed it was noticed wives whom the patients had married, two

that the patients as a group did not conform came from the Church of England, one was a

A NOTE ON JEWISH-CHRISTIAN INTERMARRIAGE

2I

Roman Catholic, and one was a Primitive Comparative material is not easy to come

Methodist. The patients could not, as a rule, by. It is, however, worth noting that

give the denomination of Christian consorts Burgess and Wallin in a study of 941

of the brothers and sisters. Of the i6 engaged couples in the U.S.A., had among

marriages with non-Jews made by the their engaged pairs I77 Jews and I85

patients and their brothers iI had produced Jewesses, but only I7 per cent. of these men

children, and in 9 of these the children were and women had betrothed themselves to co-

not being brought up in the Jewish faith. Of religionists. A corresponding rate of inter-

the patients' sisters 63 had married, one of marriage would lead to the practical dis-

them twice. Children were born to Io of the appearance of the Jews as an endogamous

mixed marriages, and were being brought up group within two generations.

as Christians in 6 families, as Jews in 4.
Of the I6o marriages in the present generation, therefore, 28 were to non-Jews, an
incidence of approximately I7 per cent. The
marriages with Christians were, however, not evenly distributed. Of the 46 families where
a marriage had occurred in this generation,
30 showed no marriage outside the faith, I2
one such marriage, 2 two, i three, and I no fewer than nine. This last family were clearly in the process of becoming a non-Jewish one.
If it were omitted from the general total, the incidence of Christian marriage would be I9 in I50 or approximately one in every eight marriages. Even this is a high rate of exogamy, and certainly a higher one than has obtained in earlier generations. If it is a general phenomenon, and not one confined to the very restricted sample reported here, it would lead to a rapid mixing of the Christian and Jewish populations.
It is interesting to record that 23 of the
propositi stated that they would have no

Conclusions
The sample of British Jews reported on here is a very small one and possibly not
representative. Any conclusion, therefore, must be tentative in the extreme. Neverthe-
less the suggestion arises that the social and
psychological forces which are tending to undermine belief in religious dogma are having this effect on Jewish as well as Christian adherents. Social differences between Jews and non-Jews are also being dropped. Furthermore, it seems likely that the frequency of marriage with non-Jews has increased among Jews in recent years, and is now of the order of one in eight marriages. Such a rate of intermarriage would, if maintained for a number of generations, assimilate the Jewish and non-Jewish populations. As this point was approached, the differences between Jews and non-Jews which, it is suggested, provide the potentiality for anti-Semitism would disappear.

objection on religious principle to marrying a Gentile, I0 said they would have some but
not an insuperable objection, and I7 said

REFERENCE BURGESS, E. W., and WALLIN, P. (I943) Homogamy in Social Characteristics," Am. J. Sociol., 49,

they would have the strongest objections. lO9.

13ugenis Review, Vol. XX , No. 1

