HUMAN HYBRIDS

Racial Crosses in Various Parts of the World By RACHEL M. FLEMING

P OLITICAL issues involving the right SUPERIOR HALF-CASTES of so-called ' superior ' races to pre- E. Rodenwaldt has therefore rendered a serve privileges denied to other races great service to the study of human heredity
on account of their so-called ' inferiority ' by seizing the opportunity of examining the are tending to darken counsel in the study results of an experiment in human crossing of racial biology. Another form of political which has been worked out in Kisar, an
effort is a desire to demonstrate separate- island in the East Indies I27035'E. long., ness of physical type, so that a subject race 8°5'S. lat. His results are published in Die may claim autonomy. It is only with Mestizen auf Kisar * (in German) in two
painful slowness that man is learning to volumes, one of which gives detailed meastudy himself scientifically and dispassion- surements and photographs of the Mestizos ately, and to apply biological and genetical (half-castes) whom he observed. It contains laws) to his own case. Humanity to-day is a remarkable family tree showing the very the result of long racial crossing; it is diffi- complicated inter-marriages between the cult to apply the term " pure " to any descendants of Mestizo families, and also, physical type. All human races are capable by an ingenious device, indicating their of fertile crossing one with another, and skin, eye, and hair colour heredity. No man's tendency to wander both over land student of human heredity can afford to omit and sea, frequently unaccompanied by the the study of these volumes. The Mestizos women of his own type, has led to marked of Kisar are ideal material for such a study. heterogeneity of inheritance everywhere. The Dutch East Company had a station The story of the " Sons of God " and the here in the seventeenth and eighteenth "daughters of men " is world wide and centuries, and soldiers of Dutch, French, possibly as old as the oldest prehistoric German, and British nationality became the find. And yet in a book published in I928 ancestors of the Mestizos. From I8I9 onwe read, " Only a pure race is a strong wards the island was no longer a station for

race "; while the facile statement that the troops, and the half-caste families formed

coloured half-caste inherits the worst of both a group which felt itself superior to the

sides, as if the laws of heredity bowed to our natives and tended to inter-marry. Thus

colour prejudice, is commonly quoted and we have available for research a sort of

believed.

natural experiment in human breeding

There is need for scientific study into human heredity, and it is much to be hoped that such studies may be increasingly carried out in fields where political prejudice does not intrude. The difficulties are obvious-the limitations of our life span,

which has gone on for about two centuries.
Rodenwaldt points out, however, that there
are many difficulties even in this exceptionally favourable situation. To begin with, the Europeans themselves were of varied origin, as their family names, still used by

the impossibility of experiment, and the complications of environmental conditions.

* Rodenwaldt, Ernst. Die Mestizen auf Kisar.
Batavia (van G. Kolff) and The Hague (Nijhoff). Vol.
i, pp. 483; Vol. 2, Tables. Undated and unpriced.

257

258 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the Mestizos, indicate. They may have heredity is best traced. It is at present

belonged to any one of the physical types fashionable to present to readers a formula

commonly classed as European to-day, but with a correlation coefficient, which is, after

differing in stature, build, colouring, and all, but a mathematical ghost corresponding

other physical characters. Again, the to those psychological ghosts, ' the man in

natives themselves were by no means homo- the street,' ' the average man,' or ' the

geneous, and fell into at least three dis- economic man.' Rodenwaldt presents these

tinctive groups. Thus it would be impos- mathematical abstractions to his readers and

sible to differentiate many skeletal measure- solemnly records them over and over again

ments. But certain differences exist between for individual factors, in a case where he

Europeans as a whole and the natives of has 4 men and 2 women. Thus, on p. 2I6,

Kisar; skin colour decidedly, hair-type and " No. of Women 2. Actual Index 4I,49.

colour and eye-colour to a less extent. Average 45. Coefficient of variation

Again, the shape of the nose, the ear, and ±2.829." Obviously the 45±2.829 in the

lips, and the proportions of the limbs seem case of these 2 women represents an ab-

distinctive.

straction that does not exist, and can only

Measurements were taken on I94 Mestizos be misleading. We confidently expect to

and on 46 apparently full-blooded natives, find a statement in the work of some future

while observations on colouring and weight author. " Breadth-depth index of the nose

were taken on a further 49 natives. The for Marna women 45±2.829 (Rodenwaldt,

Mestizos are classified according to the pro- Die Mestizen auf Kisar)." The presentation

portion of European blood which it seemed of abstractions and the basing of statements

probable that they had inherited, the evi- as to racial biology upon them is seen in an

dence being partly documentary and partly extreme form in The American Negro, by

oral. M. J. Herskovits*-e.g., p. 6i, " Thus,

Group One. io boys, 5 girls, and 3 chil- for example, the average nostril of the well-

dren. Of their 64 ancestors, the proportion to-do Harlemites (male) is 37.5 mm., while

was 27 to. 37 European and 37 to 27 native. that of the general population is 4I.3; the

Group Two. 35 boys, 27 girls, and 23 average lip thickness of the former is ig.8

children. i8.o to 26.4 European and 46.o mm., that of the latter 20.8." No statement

to 37.6 native.

is given about (i) the numbers measured;

Group Three. 2i boys, I7 girls, 30 chil- we feel that it is extremely improbable that

dren. 9.6 to 17.5 European and 54.4 to " the general population " presented itself

46.5 native.

for measurement, and it is clear from a

Group Four. I4 boys, 5 girls, and 4 chil- phrase on the same page that the whole of

dren. S and less European and 56 and more the " well-to-do " was not measured; nor

native.

(2) about the maximum and minimum

The numbers are not large, but this is widths recorded; nor (3) the criterion for

more than compensated for by the greater well-to-do."

amount of certainty with regard to ancestry The importance of knowing numbers on

and with regard to definite inheritance which statements are based appears on p.

which it was possible to get.

23 of the same work (see top of next page).

It is a great advantage for other Now it should be noted that the numbers

workers in this field that the details of of subjects on which the author bases his

every actual measurement are given, as also theory with regard to the variability of the

are photographs showing family likenesses; mixed American negro are greatest in the

the inheritance of separate physical charac- cases of 2, 3, and 4, and that it is precisely

ters is treated individually, family by in these three cases where the averages most

family. We feel strongly that it is along

these detailed and individual lines that definite information as to the working of

* Herskovits, Melville J, The American Negro: A
Study in Racial Crossing. New York, 1928. Knopf.
Pp. 92.

HUMAN HYBRIDS

259

TABLE-RACE VARIABILITY

As regards skin colour, we have noted in

Types.

Variability. half-caste children in our seaport towns a

I) 30 Kajiji ... ...

(2) 96,239 White American

troops ... ...

(3) 539 Pure Sioux Indians
(4) 897 Mixed American

negroes ... ...

(5) I9 Ekoi

...

...

(6) 37 Kagoro ... ...

3.94
3.5I 3.50
3-45
3.07
3.00

tendency for different intensity of darkness
in sliecial parts of the body, e.g. the fore-
head, the back of the neck (even though covered by hair), the legs. Rodenwaldt does not report on variations of skin colour in the
same person. He does, however, discuss disharmony in other inheritances, notably in the ratio of arm-length and leg-length.
Our own observations of disharmony have

closely approach one another. Variability been most marked in the case of the jaws.

averages based on such widely differing Where a European woman with a small

numbers are certainly not strictly compara- V-shaped palate has been crossed with an

ble mathematically. His suggestion, that African with widely arched jaws, the result-

dark-skinned men select lighter skinned ing disharmony in one or two cases was so

women because they thus gain social stand- great as to interfere with speech. We note

ing nearer to the dominant white race, and in photograph No. I22 an appearance of

that this is tending towards lighter colour- disharmony between the maxilla and the

ing in the American negro, is interesting. mandible, while in No. 66 there is a very

Is there evidence of a large population of marked pre-normal occlusion indicating dis-

childless, dark-skinned women?

harmony of this inheritance in Mestizos of

MENDELIAN HEREDITY IN MAN

Kisar. He finds that women are more variable in type than men. This may be a

His remarks on p. 78 that " most of the sex character; we have found in studies of

traits in man for which thev [the eugenists] growth taken on British children that the

claim Mendelian heredity are of a patho- girls vary much more in type of growth

logical nature," and his further remarks on than do the boys.

p. 79 need to be modified in view, not only Apart from physical traits, Rodenwaldt

of Rodenwaldt's study, but of many other notes other traits influenced by the admix-

studies now available. Rodenwaldt, from ture of white blood. Mestizo women, in

p. 312 onwards, carefully discusses, family spite of the difficult water supply, preserve

by family, the evidence for and against a the tradition of Dutch cleanliness, and their

Mendelian type of human heredity and persons and clothing are notably cleaner

proves, we think conclusively, that Mendel's and neater than those of the natives.

laws do apply to human beings. A striking Whether this is the effect of tradition or of

example, which the photographs clearly psychological heredity or of a combination

bring out, is the dominance of the Euro- of both, it is difficult to say. Whatever we

pean type of nose. He also gives further may call it, the trait is evidently derivable

evidence of the recessive character of the from European admixture. Again, the per-

blue eye, noted by C. C. Hurst, Inherit- centage of people living at a high cultural

ance of Eye Colour in Man (Proc. Roy. Soc., level is much greater in Group I, which has

Ser. B., Vol. lxxx, I908, p. 85). Obser- the largest percentage of European ances-

vations on children of white women and try. Is it right to infer the desirability of

negro men, and white women and Chinese back crossing with Europeans?

men in our seaport towns gave the same

result. (Fleming, Anthropological Studies ANGLO-NEGRO AND ANGLO-CHINESE

of Children. EUGENICS REVIEW, Jan., Recently the writer visited Cape Town

I927.) The disappearance of the light eye and had many conversations with workers

appears to be progressive from generation among the ' coloured ' (half-caste) colony

to generation among the Mestizos.

there. One worker of long experience had

260 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

observed the same rule of a higher cultural on p. 98 to the danger of mathematical

level and a general demand for better living abstractions noted above. The authors have

conditions among those with a large admix- preferred to retain a separate seriation of

ture of white blood. He suggested that en- measurements by sex and age. They point

couragement of intermixture between the out that the changes obtained by applying

best of the coloured people and the whites corrections for age and sex are probably

would tend to raise the standard of life in wholly fictitious; " the resulting amplified

Cape Town. Some 'coloured ' people with distribution appears larger than the stan-

a large admixture of white blood showed dard; its probable error is lowered by the

such small traces of native inheritance that larger number of individuals in it, although

they had " passed over " into the white the number of original observations remains

section and were making good there. Need- the same. "

less to say, this solution is most unpalatable to advocates of ' race purity,' and there

MULTIPLE SOUTH SEA HYBRIDS

may be sound objections to it. On the Observations were taken on pure Hawai-

other hand, it may ultimately be less harm- ians, on Chinese in the island, on

ful than the present cruel system of stigma- Hawaiian-White hybrids, Havl aiian-Chinese

tizing the half-caste socially, and so creating hybrids, and on trn-racial and multiple

a moral and social environment for him hybrids. The effect of back-crossing with

which adds undesirables to the community. Hawaiian, White, and Chinese was also

For some time past the writer has been in noted. The authors conclude that physi-

close contact with girls of Anglo-Chinese cal traits are inherited separately, so

and Anglo-Negro origin who are unable to that the offspring of mixed crosses may

find employment because social stigma present a mosaic of various hereditary

refuses to allow them to mix in our factors. This seems to be the general con-

society in the ordinary way. They clusion of workers in this field. We have

are British citizens, and they are the ourselves seen a child with blue eyes, flaxen

weakest of our citizens, and as such ulotrichous hair, and an almost black skin.

need protection. Whatever action may be Interestingly enough, no reference is made

taken to prevent such intermixture in the to heterochronia in tabulating eye colour.

future, if it can be proved to be undesir- Our own researches reveal a fairly high per-

able, it certainly seems a bad policy of centage of this among British children and

citizenship to penalize half-castes for a fault a lower percentage among half-caste chil-

of birth for which they are in no way dren. In British children the condition is

responsible. Liverpool, always to the fore sometimes a temporary phase of growth.

in attempts towards civic betterment, has The appendix giving full tables for each

formed an " Association for the Welfare of individual case, with references to family

Half-Caste Children" (Hon. Sec., Mr. relationships, is useful and scientific. We

G. E. Haynes, B.Sc., University Settle- feel, however, that the treatment of indi-

ment, Nile Street, Liverpool), and a whole- vidual families in Rodenwaldt's way, by

time research worker has been appointed. giving photographs, family trees, and a de-

We hope that other seaport towns may soon tailed account, family by family, of the

follow this example of scientific research heredity of each factor considered would

into a serious problem.

have greatly increased the scientific value

An Anthropometric Study of Hawaiians of the monograph. We hope that the Pea-

of Pure and Mixed Blood,* by Leslie C. body Museum of American Archxology and

Dunn and Alfred M. Tozzer, calls attention Ethnology, under whose auspices the book

* Dunn, Leslie C, and Tozzer, Alfred M., An
Anthropometric Study of Hawaiians of Pure and Mixed Blood. Papers of the Peabody Museum, Har-

is published, will arrange for a further publication in this form. Both in the Mestizos of Kisar and in Hawaiian-European crosses,

vard University., Vol. XI, No. 3, i928. Pp. 2xi. the body weight resembles that of the

HUMAN HYBRIDS

26I

natives, which is greater than in the case deadly enemy." Again, why are oranges

of Europeans. It may be that here we have and limes less abundant, and has this a

a case of Mendelian dominance, but, as each prejudicial effect on health and physique?

author points out, there is also the possi- The same passion for undigested detail

bility of dietetic factors and of habits de- seems evident in the measurements taken-

pending on environment being responsible 20 minutes were devoted to getting 63 physi-

for the greater weight. It is an interesting cal measurements, 20 minutes to general

point upon which further research could observations, build, pilosity, drawing of

shed light.

hand and foot, examination of teeth, taking

of hair sample, and finger and palm prints,

BLACK, BROWN, AND WHITE

testing by dynamometer, and 30 minutes were given to sociological and psychological

Race Crossing in Jamaica,* by C. B. tests and to having a photograph taken.

Davenport and M. Steggerda, is remarkable Thus 70 minutes were spent on each indi-

for the number and variety of detailed vidual. The taking of 63 measurements in

observations taken. The number of subjects 20 minutes is a remarkable feat.

was 54 Blacks, 93 Browns, and 50 Whites. The queries for social data strike some

As these studies included tests for intelli- curious chords. " Do you hate anyone?"

gence, and as comparisons between negro Is a truthful answer expected? The answer

and half-caste and white are given on the which occurs to the reviewer is that I'd hate

results, we feel it is unfortunate that to be asked such an impertinent question.

prisoners are included in the coloured groups Again, " Are you very nervous?" How

and not in the white group. Prisoners are does a subject judge this ? We are told

certainly people who have demonstrated a that if an individual was " real bright "

lack of social intelligence, and for purposes (whatever this may imply) he was asked all

of cultural comparison we feel that either kinds of questions, and that if he was " dull

they should have been omitted from all and ignorant " he was asked, " Do you like

groups or included in the same proportion to teach, preach, and make public

in all groups. Especially in the case of speeches ?"

women do we feel that the cultural scale is A great lack in the tabulating of the

heavily weighted against the coloured and results of anthropometric observations is

for the white in intelligence tests. The in- that each character is treated separately, so

troductory pages, notably pp. i6 and I7, that we cannot get any picture of the indi-

strike us as scrappy and disjointed. They vidual man measured. Tables showing dis-

also contain many vague statements, e.g., tributions, absolute and percentile, means

" Marriage occurs at an early age," " The and standard deviations, mean and probable

effects of inbreeding are not markedly in- error, standard deviation and probable error,

jurious, though some cases of feeble-minded- coefficient of variation, are given for all

ness and insanity occur." It may be of sorts of characters; but when we remember

importance to this study that there is an that the numbers on which they are based

ice-cream parlour in the island of Grand are so small as 52, 9I, and 5o (e.g., for

Cayman and also that there are very few pinna breadth, male), 30, 5I, and 42 (for

clothes lines, but to read such disjointed nasal height, female), we feel that the

information, without being given any indi- authors are justified in stating on p. 463

cation of its value in the inquiry, is disap- that " The conclusion of the whole discus-

pointing. The space devoted to this might sion in this section (the evidence for domin-

well have been given to an expansion of the ance) is that dominance can not properly be

suggestion that mosquitoes are " an almost studied by noting the relation of the mean

* Davenport, C. B., and Steggerda, Morris, Race Crossing in Jamaica. New York, 1929. Dept. of

of the mixed population to one or the other allelomorphic trait, but only by family

Genetics, Carnegie Institution. Pp. Sz6.

studies." And when the size of the samples

262 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

taken to form the means for Jamaica is con- RACIAL MEGALOMANIA

sidered in the light of the general population at the last census-White 14,476, Coloured I57,223, Black 660,420, they lose all significance. On the other hand, if the
data for each person had been tabulated and family evidence for inheritance of specific
characters given, on the method adopted by Rodenwaldt, definite data on human heredity would have been available.
In the final chapter some family studies are given, but a most curious procedure is adopted. The female absolute measurements are given, which is of great value, but they are " reduced to male equivalents " for purposes of study of heredity. The writer has measured some thousands of men
and women in an attempt to find out differences of secondary characters due to sex and has found that racial type profoundly affects
type in women. Moreover, many adults seem not to be completely sex-differentiated. Of what racial type was Mrs. P. on p. 44I, and what specific sex differences could one be sure would apply in her case? And was the correction applied for the same racial type as that of her husband? We note that her " reduced " stature is I2I mm. greater than her real stature. Do children inherit from their mother a stature " reduced " to male proportions ? Again, it is stated that " in stature each of the children exceeds either parent," the children being 4 girls,
aged respectively 27, 25, i8, and I5. The
father's height is 1738 (unreduced to female proportions), the mother's (unreduced) I564, and the actual stature of the children respectively I628, I634, I639, I665. Three factors need to be inquired into here-was
there evidence that the mother probably
carried genes for taller stature? Was there any specific cause which arrested growth in

This study of Jamaica was undertaken "with specific reference to its significance
for the future of any country containing a
mixed population." Now all countries contain a mixed population, and the implication here is obviously " mixed as regards skin colour." No reference is made to Lord Olivier's summary of the social value of the mixed races in Jamaica (see White Capital and Coloured Labour, I929). The white races have suffered recently from an outbreak of publications extolling their virtues, written by themselves. In the individual an outburst of self-glorification too often precedes megalomania and general paralysis. We cannot be sure that the same rule applies to societies, but it is worth considering the possibility. Efforts have been made to prove that the ' black ' is somatologically different from the ' white.' He is. But is this somatological difference really greater than that between the tall, blue-eyed, fair-skinned, yellow-haired white, and the short, browneyed, sallow, brown-haired white? No doubt the Romans, had their fancy run that way, could have proved " somatological " reasons for the permanent inferiority of the Ancient Britons and other savage North European tribes. Does intelligence necessarily depend on skin colour? The " golden, sun-kissed "
Egyptians had a blossoming of artistic-
civilization as great as that of any whiteskinned race. Buddha and Confucius have given the world two great systems of philosophy. Our ' white ' standards of beauty are not the only standards-" I am black, but comely, 0 ye daughters of Jerusalem." Recently the writer chanced on a conversation with a negro in which the subject was the beauty of an ode of Horace, and within

the mother? We have found that illness or five minutes was told, " Those educated

malnutrition during childhood affect growth. negroes are the worst type, with their airs

Again, was the environmental condition of of superiority." How would the white race

the children conducive to better growth than fare in a socio-psychological test for " airs

that of the mother? It is stated that the of superiority "?

family belongs to the " Brown " group, i.e. a mixed group raciallv. Is it therefore pos-
sible to apply to all the children one uniform
" reduction to male coefficient "?

The fact is that it is difficult to avoid pre-
judice if we are going to test ' black,' 'white,' and ' coloured ' for superiority or inferiority. Could we not approach studies

HUMAN HYBRIDS

263

of mixed populations from the angle of Nordic nose and the common sense of the study of what is best in them, frankly re- half-caste's father, and the dark skin, cognizing that each of us has bundles of musical ability, and lesser tendency to endopossibilities in our inheritance intrinsically crine and nervous disorder of the coloured good, and that a mixture of these bundles mother. Studies of half-caste children in may benefit all humanity; that, as Profes- our seaport towns show that a child inheritsor Fleure has said, we need not think of ing this desirable combination would be at a races as all climbing the same ladder. Negro great disadvantage because of its social en-
and white have differing capacities; accord- vironment. We know little as yet of here-
ing to Davenport and Steggerda, the former dity in such matters; we know a great deal excel in music, the latter in common sense. of the effect of environment. The environAccording to Pearl (Human Biology, Vol. ment can be altered if we will, the heredity I, No. 2, May, I929) they have differing im- is an established and unalterable fact. Even munities from disease. All students of if laws preventing intermixture of white and
racial intermixture agree that almost every coloured races could be enforced in the
factor of heredity is separate and may be future, the millions of half-caste and their inherited from either side. It is not incon- offspring must still be with us. Biological ceivable that hereditary bundles might sort studies designed to help them to make the themselves out into such combinations as the best use of their heredity are a crying need.

THE GALTON DINNER
will be held at
THE REMBRANDT HOTEL
SOUTH KENSINGTON
on Monday, February 17th, at 7.15 p.m. for 7.30
The Galton Lecture NATURAL SELECTION IN MAN
will be given by
PROFESSOR S. J. HOLMES
(Professor of Zoology, University of California)
Fellows and Members are requested to get their tickets (10/6) from the Secretary as early as possible
Eugenics Review, Vol. XXI, No. 4.

