THE SIZE OF FAMILY OF THE BUSINESS, PROFESSIONAL AND TITLED CLASSES
By A. SPENCER PATERSON, M.A., M.D., F.R.C.P.(Ed.)

N OW that the country is awakening
to the seriousness of the falling birth
rate, many theories have been pro-
pounded to explain how such a situation has come about. Professor Carr-Saunders, however, has said that before any population policy can be framed, a search must be made for more facts. It is with the object of making a modest contribution to such knowledge that I have ventured to present this paper, which is based on an analysis of over 4,500 biographies taken from Who's Who, I940, the volume which gives conditions in the last year of peace.
The psychiatrist is interested in that aspect of eugenic-s which is concerned with the limiting of unhealthy stocks, and I had the privilege of addressing the Society on this subject eleven years ago, the lecture being based on some thousands of mental patients in London hospitals. When, however, the psychiatrist turns in some dismay from the prolific pedigrees of stocks burdened with
severe mental or nervous diseases, he is confronted with healthy young professional men in his private practice who tell him that in their occupation marriage has become an affair almost of middle life-that they are encouraged to live a monastic existence till the age of 33, or even much later. In some occupations young men are even asked to sign a declaration that they will not marry for some years. There seemed to be something radically wrong in discouraging men from living an emotional life appropriate to their years, and in urging them to prolong indefinitely the uncomfortable emotional life of adolescence. No one, however, seemed to know what the actual facts of family life were in the upper classes, and so it occurred to me that one might analyse a large number of biographies from Who's Who. By further
* An Address to the Eugenics Society on October 26th, 1943.

utilising such volumes as Crockford's Clerical Directory, the Law List, the Medical Directory, Who's Who in the Theatre, the Directory of Directors and Whitaker's Almanack, one
was able to obtain a fairly large sample from the various occupations. I have been fortunate enough to interest some students
and others sufficiently to secure their
coIlaboration in this study, and to them I
am very grateful.
-A study of " successful " men is of interest
because they include those whose example
and precept help to form public opinion. Contrary to the view that "he travels the furthest who travels alone," men who are " successful " enough to appear in Who's Who probably have an average size of family larger than their less successful colleagues. It is hoped to substantiate this by a com-
parison of the present sample with their " less successful " colleagues and contem-
poraries as far as the general census material
allows such a comparison. In the U.S.A. the
graduates of Harvard and Princeton (see Osborn, I940), who were considered to have been the most successful had about twice
as many children as the " least successful." It is, therefore, likely that those men included in the present series had more children than their less successful colleagues. It may be noticed that the number of children is that of surviving children only. In this connection a study of Cattell is of interest, which shows that only 2 per cent of professional men's children fail to reach
maturity (see Rumney, J., I936). With regard to the reliability of the
entries, the editors send out questionnaires every year for alterations and additions. It is very unlikely that many omissions of children occurred, especially as other details, such as the wife's name, are given in nearly every case. It is also unlikely that those whose life work was spent abroad failed to

57

58 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

keep up to date, as nearly all these had

returned home and were in retirement. In

most studies of this nature, the writer deals

only with completed generations, and I might

therefore have dealt only with cases from

Who Was Who, in which volume all the

individuals who are mentioned are deceased.

However, I desired to deal with the genera-

tion just preceding the war. Nearly all these

men were over 50, but I included those under

50 who had been married twelve or more

years. The number of children omitted must

therefore be very small. If any error of

sampling was present, this would not matter

much because the same criteria were used

between the various groups. In any case, it

will be seen from Table I that the mean age in I940 of each group was between 6o and 70.

TABLE I

Mean Mean Mean Per No. of

Group

Sub-Group

Age Age Size cent Cases

in on of of in

I94o Mar- FamilyBa.ch- Group

riage elors

Peerage

... ... ... ... 62'9 304 2-43 8-I 615

Dukes, Marqs. & Earls - - 2-62 6-6 229

Viscounts &Barons ... - - 2*32 9*1 386

Industrialists ... ... ... First Generation

65o0... 29-5 2-66
... 68-6 29-0 2-6I

43-.77

365 x88

Later Generation ... 6I*3 29*8 2*7I 5.7 277

...Forces ... ...

...

...

63.6 32-9 2.49 13-8 443

Army ... ... 63-6 33.7 1-42 1229 233

Navy ... ... LArned Professions (ex I.C.S.)

63-6 32.0 1.59 14.8 220 ... 6x*7 32*5 174 23*7 2,203

Bar ... ... 6o02 31*8 I*goo0*8 344

Teaching.. Head Masters

... ...

56*1
50*4

30*9 x*83
29-1 2*15

17*6
I6-o

289 13I

Professors. ... 6o*7 32-7 1-56 i8.4 258

Medicine ... 62-6 33-2 ix62 I2-8 925

Home ... 59.4 32'0 1292 9-0 477

Services & Abroad... 66*I 34.4 1I29 I6-9 438

Civil Service ... Home ... ...

... 55*77.39

32-0
32.0

1.8o
I-80

14o0
I5.0

200
I00

Abroad (I.C.S.) ... 56*6 32-0 I-80 13-0 200

Church 65*4... ... 33-10 1*79 20 0 454
Home ... ... 67-2 32-9 I296 13.5 327

Abroad ... ... 6x6 33-2 146 35-0 237

Artists.

... ... 625 33.5 IxI6 17.3 197

Actors ... M.P.s ...

...

...

...

* 58*2 30*9 1*09 13*0 54
- *82 - 439

F.R.S. ...

Conservative. Labour ...

-

-

I**9484

-

... ... ... ... - 300 I275 -

306 233 208

F. Brit. Acad. ... ... ...

- 32X6 I*69 9 *o09

i. The first problem was to find out

whether the type of occupation influenced

the size of the family for the different groups

examined.

2. There was also the question of whether

those whose work took them abroad had

fewer children.

3. Age on marriage. The question arose

whether those who marry early have more

children on the average than those who marry

late, or similarly whether those with 4 and 5 children marry on the average at an earlier

age than those with o, i or 2 children.

4. Tests were made to see whether those who had had a relatively expensive education, that is, at a public school or Oxford or Cambridge, had a larger size of family than those who had been educated elsewhere. In other words, is the man with the old school tie more of a family man than the others. A
special investigation was also made at a leading public school to ascertain whether its
pupils came from families which were smaller than others in the same social group.
5. Next, one examined data concerning the wife, whether access of income from her side added to the number of children. In
most cases the name of the wife's father was given, and those men whose father-in-law's occupation or distinguished address indicated
wealth were separated out from those whose fathers-in-law were not mentioned other
than by name.
The size of family of men who married university graduates was also examined, while another study was of peers who married
commoners.
6. One then tried to discover if degrees of success hindered or favoured the production of children. We have already seen that
those who were successful enough to appear in Who's Who possibly had larger families than the professions as a whole, but a further in-
vestigation was made of those who were the most successful in their profession, Admirals versus Commanders in the Navy and Generals
versus Colonels in the Army. In civilian life a knighthood in Medicine or the Civil Service, Bishops, Royal Academicians, Fellows of the
Royal Society and Fellows of the British Academy, were also separated out and
compared to their less successful colleagues. 7. Another problem was whether religious
belief influenced size of family. Those of the Roman Catholic and Jewish faiths were therefore examined.
8. Again, a special study was made of Conservative and Labour Members of Parliament. If they were family men themselves, they would possibly be more sympathetic to legislation designed to help parents.
It should be noted that each of these tests was carried out independently from the others, and it is, of course, possible that any

THE SIZE OF FAMILY

59

one of the comparisons is biased by the and the average age on marriage. It will be

others. Thus those who worked abroad may noticed that on the whole those groups which

have had fewer children because on the whole marry later have smaller families. It will

they were poorer. Whilst such bias may also be noticed that on the whole those with

upset the result of any particular test, due larger incomes have larger families.

consideration was given to it when inter- Those with the smallest families are charac-

preting statistical results. It is hoped to terized by financial insecurity, unsettled

investigate certain possibilities of bias in a abode, or residence abroad. Long training

more detailed statistical investigation.

seems to make for late marriage, although

industrialists of the second or later genera-

1. Size of Family in relation to Occupation tion were nearly all at the university.

Table I shows the mean size of family of It will be noticed that actors marry early

each of the groups examined. It will be but have few children. Their conditions of

noticed that the mean size of family varies pay and livelihood are notoriously bad. The

considerably, being highest in the case of Editor of Who's Who in the Theatre appends

aristocrats and industrialists and diminishing pedigrees of talented stage families, but these

through the learned professions and the are almost all dying out.

Forces to artists and actors.

It should be possible to draw a horizontal

Figure i. Here are shown the main groups line in Figure I somewhere between 2Xo

which have been separated out. For each and 3 .o to indicate that if a group appears

group the average size of family is given, above that line, it is probably surviving as a

Yi;9fl?..1
I

A31 I

I

1*

To show regression of mean number of surviving children in each group (bachelors being counted as childless parents) on age on marriage. On the whole the later the marriage, the smaller the family. The Industrialists and the Peerage are the only groups which are possibly surviving (see text).

Key: IND I, Industrialists Head Masters ; ACT, Actors ; PROFS., University professors;

of the first generation; IND II, ditto of the second or later generation; ART, Artists ; C.S., Civil Service (Home and Indian) ; R.N., Royal MED., Medicine.

H.M.s,
Navy;

6o
MP.
a'-I t-I IfrlIu

THE EUGENICS REVIEW
LFPRI Er

30

00

.-30 20 I0

0 2 3 4 i+

01

2. 3 4 5+

&7. f- Ckilbnl

The histograms show the percentage in each group which has o, I, 2, 3, 4 and 5 or more children. The figures above each panel give the percentage of thy whole group, which has that size of family. Note that in the Forces, those with 5 or more children make up only 3 * 2 per cent, but in the industrialists I4 * 8.'

THE SIZE OF FAMILY

6i

group. It is, however, debatable where this significantly smaller families than those in

line should come. Glass stated in 1932 that civilian life at the i per cent level.

there should be 2 *37 children for every Figure 2 shows the distribution of cases

woman in the country. Titmuss (I942) says according to size of family. The figures on

that every married woman would have to the top of each panel show percentages.

bear at least three children in order exactly Thus out of every I00 Army and Navy

to replace present numbers. It was found, officers only 3s2 have 5 or more children

however, that in the industrialists, the group compared to I4-8 industrialists. It will be

with the highest number of children, the noticed that in every group the most likely

married men had a mean size of family of size of family that the young man embarking

only 2.77 children. This figure is not strictly on the occupation is likely to have (the mode)

comparable with Titmuss's estimate, how- is none at all, although in the case of the

ever, as deceased children are not included. In industrialists the number with no children

this connection, Cattell's finding that only is the same as those with 2 or 3 children,

one child in fifty of professional men fails to namely 20 per cent.

survive to maturity is of interest. In the One hears a good deal nowadays about the

present series, however, children who were increase in the number of only children, but

killed in the last war or died in adult life are in fact not more than 8 out of 243 children

omitted. It is doubtful, however, if the of business men are only children, and only

inclusion of these would have brought even I3 out of I73 children of professional men

our most fertile group muich above the have no brothers or sisters.

survival line.

If you see a child coming out of school

Differences in the average size of family in and its father is a professional man, it will

the various professional groups are apparent most probably come from a 3-child family;

from Table I. These differences were tested next, a 2-child; a 4-child; a 5-child, and

for significance by the x2 test (see Fisher, only lastly from a i-child family.

I94I). In the first place, groups were compared as a whole by classifying all families

TABLE II NUMBER OF CHILDREN BORN TO DIFFzREziT GROUPS (Bachelors excluded)

into those with 3 children or more, as opposed

ANSELL, i874

to those with o, I or 2, and noting the comparative frequencies of the two classes of families in each group. Certain professional

CLleegraglyPPmreofnessi.on

Nat. ...

Life

Ass....So*

Figures ... ...

.5 x8

...

:...i5'25

Medical General

Profession (Aristocracy,

... ... Merchants,

...
Bankers,

M..a.nufac.t..urers,...etc.)

...
...

4-82 S.39

groups were then compared in separate x2 .Table II is given to contrast the average

tables in which the respective frequencies of size of such families in I874 (see Drysdale,

families with o, I, 2, 3, 4 and 5 children were I9I3). It will be seen that the average size

entered. The following results were'obtained*: of family was then nearly double those at

There are some significant differences in present, although it should be remembered

size of family between the peerage, the indus- that we are comparing births with surviving

trialists, the learned professions, the Forces children.

and the artists and actors. When the same Figure 3 shows percentages without

method was applied to. the different pro- bachelors, so that one can compare them to

fessions it was found that teachers (head what Osborn (1940) considers the ideal

masters and professors) had significantly distribution of family sizes in order to keep

larger families than artists and actors at the the population stationary. For a hundred

I per cent level. Another fact that emerged families to produce 262 children, the accom-

was that the head masters' size of fantily was panying distribution is possible. It will be

greater than that of professors, but at the seen, that professional men do not reach

5 per cent level. Men in the Forces had even that standard. I doubt, however, if

* These suggest that the Registrar-General's Census Osborn's suggestion is of much practical

figures would be more valuable if a finer subdivision of classes were made than is given at present. All our groups are, I think, included by him in only one class.

value, for it has been found, in fact, that where a population is about stationary

62
30 I0
to

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

I0

V of.P C1Lilclrevt

710. of C-hilc7un

The histograms show the percentage of men in the learned professions, the Forces, and Industry who have 0, I, 2, 3, 4 and 5 or more children, bachelors being excluded so as to compare them with Osborn's hypothetical distribution, which would produce an average family of 2 *62 children.

THE SIZE OF FAMILY

63

the number of those with 5 or more children if size of family depended on length of married

is about 2o per cent, and we are more likely life, and not on natural or artificial sterility,

to avoid depopulation by encouraging families the- curves would run downward and to the

of 5 and more, than by aiming at 3.

right. There did indeed appear to be such a

tendency. There was, however, an unex-

2. Residence Abroad

pected feature noticeable, particularly in the

In the professions of the Church, Medicine Navy, the industrialists and the peerage. It

and the Civil Service, those who lived abroad was that there was a small group who married

were separated out. By " abroad " was in the late thirties but had large families. It

meant India, the Tropics or outlying districts, would seem that these men throw themselves

but not Canada, Australia-, New Zealand or unreservedly into their work and only marry

South Africa'. Thus in Medicine those whose after they have a considerable income. It

work was in Great Britain h-ad an average would seem that hitherto conditions have

family of I*92, but those abroad I * 29, while been so arranged in various professions as to

for the Church the figures were i6 and encourage men to marry late. These figures

o -66. Both these differences are significant. seemed to show that a few of those marrying

There is a marked contrast, however, when late succeeded in having large families. This

we compare the Home Civil and Indian Civil late-marrying fertile section had the effect of

Service, for they have the same figures, i - 8o giving a higher median age on marriage for

children per family. Men in the Indian Civil those with 5 children than those with 4

Service often earn about [i,ooo a year after children in the case of the professions, the

five years' service, that is, about the age of 28. Forces and industrialists. The undesirability

In the Home Civil Service, however, those of this encouragement of late marriage,

in the same grade would only earn about 450 however, will be discussed later.

at the same age (Sir H. Morgan, Careers for Figures 4 and 5 can be viewed from two

Boys and Girls, pp. I77 and 249). It would standpoints. Firstly, on the whole those who

appear then that the greater rate of pay of married late, especially those who married

the Indian civil servant, even taking into after 40, had fewer children than those who

consideration his additional expenses, coun- married in the twenties. Late marriage is

teracts the disadvantage of living abroad. therefore itself responsible for many unborn

Officers in the Navy and Army live out of casualties. Secondly, for those who did

the country for at least some part of their marry early, their period of married life was

career, and, as we have seen, have signi- long enough to allow of many more children

ficantly fewer chiklren than civilians. The than were actually produced. There was,

Navy marry about two years earlier than the therefore, artificial limitation of size of

Army in this sample, 3I * 95 as against 33 * 7I, family. There was evidence that this de-

and have I.59 as against I '42 children. It pended on financial considerations, e.g. ex-

would seem to be impolitic for a first-class penses of education, since those occupations

power like Britain to be so indifferent as to where there was a relatively large income at

whether its fighting men reproduce them- an early age (industry, the peerage, head

selves.

masters-who are often appointed young-

and the Indian Civil Service) showed rela3. Relation of Age on Marriage to Size of tively large families.

Family

We-have already seen in Figure i that on 4. Education and the Birth Rate

the whole men in occupations where marriage The first question to be answered was

tended to be late, had fewer children. In whether boys at an expensive public school

order to examine this further, we arranged came from families which were more sterile

men in one occupation into groups according than others in the same social group. For

to 4-yearly intervals at which they married this purpose a master at one of the expensive

(Figures 4 and 5). It will be seen here that public schools sent to me figures showing the

64 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

No. of 4GE ON ARERIRqE AND Si-ZE oF iIy

I__ _ _ f_ - ----I ---I-II1

-1 -1 11

- -11III1

III~-~ 7I -

1111i IIIII

____r __ __ _l II l1 -[T[ . 11--1I1l7
_ -0- E| Is11 I XZZ 0

'

z _1 _ _h _ __ __ __ Z l l W r -11 .| || |1 __ _Tr

_ 1 _ __ _ _ _ z> >
i si 7 E<'1N1'. IT I1 TIA

l |X Xr 1

1sK 1 11 _s1 11 1 _

Ij >z1111IN_MII___F-

.Th__iss_,hw th mea nube of chde bo to men maryn at increasin4g.yealy intervl s Althugh

ontwhhle ths wh mr r eal h-av--m-or cIhldrenthr 3a_ha_v__nrdelatively lag families, best seen in inusr an

ar a sml nube
the FoIr1-ces.

in eac

gru

wh

m|aXr

late

111-

size of family of I77 boys at his school. Table III shows the distribution of size of family in

TABLE III

To show the percentage of boys at an expensive public school who came from families of 5 or more, 4, 3, 2 and I, compared with similar figures
for the Professions and Industry m this series.

Size of Family 5+
4
3 2 x

Professions
i6-3
23-1
27-6 25-2 7-8

Industry 33.5
25.8 22 5 15-1 3-0

At Public School
4-0
21x4 31.5 36.4
6-5

Nofa.-The percentage of public school boys from biggest families Is relatively small, and from the small families relatively large.

this group of I77 public school boys and their brothers and sisters compared with the distribution of size of family in the professions and also in industry. It was found that only 4 0 per cent of them came from families of 5 or more children, yet in my series of successful business men who had surviving children, 33* 5 per cent of their children came from families of 5 or more, that is, eight times as many as the public school

THE SIZE OF FAMILY

65

group. The corresponding figure for the There is, therefore, some evidence that boys

professional class was i6- 3 per cent or four at public schools come from the more sterile

times as many. Again, the percentages of sections of their particular social group.

the relatively sterile 2-child and i-child The next task was to take the Bar, the

families at the expensive school were 36.4 Church, Medicine, the Teaching profession

per cent and 6 5 per cent, which was con- and the Army, and to separate those who

siderably in excess of I5-I per cent and 3-0 had had an expensive education from those

per cent for the business class, while the who had not had that advantage. The first

2_. _ IAI1L Figure5

.Sam asFigure, bu soi the le_r_e__p_r_of__e_s_si_o_ns_. Note I t n

o chl

depends

_ 17 i 33L 31 41 1 4nNII5 11

surprisingly little on the length of married life. This shows either that men purpo쬮ly limit their families, or else that large families are a bar to the distinction of appearing in Who's Who.

figures for the professional class were 25 2 per cent and 7*8 per cent. Table IV com-
TABLE IV To compare mean size of family of boys from an expensive public school
with those of successful professional and business men. Public school boys ... ... ... ... ... ... 2-42 Professional men (childless excluded) ... ... ... 2-7I Business men (childless excluded) ... ... ... 3*33 The mean size of family of the parents of boys at this school is just significantly smaller than that of the professions (tested by Poisson distribution), which (see Figure I) is well below replacement.
pares the mean size of family of this group of boys with the mean size of family of the industrialists and professional men who had any children. The parents of the public school boys have significantly smaller families and are very much below replacement.

group comprised those who had been it a
public school or Oxford or Cambridge. A " public school" was defined as a school which was mainly a boarding school and whose head master attended the Head Masters' Conference. Certain schools, however, where the day boys predominate, such
as Dulwich, Tonbridge, Westminster, Clifton, Bedford and Cheltenham, were included. It was found that those- with an expensive
education had significantly larger families
than those who were educated elsewhere. This applied to the Bar and to Medicine and to the professions as a whole. The Church and the Army taken alone, however, did not

66 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

show a significant difference between the Reference is sometimes made to the

two groups.

destroying influence of heiress's blood.

It would appear, therefore, that although Wagner-Manslau's article in the EUGENICS

boys who go to public schools come from REVIEW (I932) regarding the Prussian

relatively sterile families, yet within the aristocracy having fewer children if they

professions they do have more children than married commoners supported the theory.

those educated elsewhere, although still not In the present series it was found that 245

replacing themselves.

aristocrats who married aristocrats had

It may be mentioned again here that head significantly larger families than 320 of them

masters of I34 leading scho6ls in the country who married commoners, at the 5 per cent

have the highest birth rate of any professional level. As the latter are, however, likely to be

class, and it is therefore likely that they will younger than the former, this difference may

be sympathetic to an alteration of conditions be due to the geuieral decline in family size.

designed to preserve these families.

It was found that twenty-six members of

Another fact that emerged was that the the aristocracy who married American girls

public schools appeared to train boys more had an average family of 2 * 8i children,

for some professions than for others. Thus which compares with an average of 2-54 for

36 per cent of Barristers wear the old school the rest, a result which is not significant.

tie as against 20 per cent of Fellows of the Fourteen medical men married university

Royal Society and 23 per cent of Fellows of graduates and the mean size of their family

the British Academy which comprises the was 2 42, but the number was too small for

leading scholars in the country.

comparison.

5. The Successful Man's Wife
In the present study it was not possible to elicit the age of the wife on marriage. It is
known, however, that foy the nation as a
whole the wife is, on the average, about one year younger than her husband and it is
unlikely, except where the man marries late, that there is very much more difference than this in the present series. An attempt was made to separate those who had married into families where the occupation or distinguished address of the father-in-law
suggested that there was considerable unearned income which might help to increase the size of the young family. A careful study was made of this in the medical profession, but there was no significant difference in the number of children between those who
married into such families and those who did not. This applied to all the sub-groups, which were separated out to avoid the results being biased by other factors, public school men, non-public school men, those marrying before 30 or after. 30, those at home and those in the medical services. The findings, however, are vitiated by the difficulty of distinguishing between those who really were rich and those who were not.

6. Success and Size of Family
As already stated, it would appear probable that in the professions, those who are successful enough to appear in Who's Who have an average size of family which is larger than those who do not appear.

TABLE V

SUCCESS AND SIZE OF FAMILY

Av. Av.

No. No. Standard

No. No. Standard

I Rank of of Devia- Rank of of Devia-

Salaried

Cases Chil- tion

Cases Chil- tion

dren dren

Navy* Admirals

Capts.

and Vice

and

Admirals 69 1-8i 켹-i62 Comrs. 94 I-I6 켖uZII

Army F.M.s to

Cols.

Major-

and

Gens. 47 172 0.Igx Majors 138 I132 0*098

C.ofE. Bishops civil

87 2-I6 켹-i58 Rest 230 I85 0켹9ogo

Service Knights 45 176 켹xIg8 Rest 55 I*84 0ox83

II

Private

Practice

MedicineKnights Bar Judges

2II 49

1-65 켹-o88 Rest I-98 0-20o K.C.s

704 97

I-62 켖-048 I-86 0-097

(HighCt.)

Note.-In the Navy, the more successful have significantly larger families (at the I per cent level*). In the Army and Church the differences are barely significant.

Table V shows the average size of family of Generals in the Army, Admirals, Bishops, Royal Academicians, medical knights and knights in the Civil Service. I have compared each group separately by attaching standard deviations to the average number

THE SIZE OF FAMILY

67

of children, assuming that the number of children follow a Poisson distribution, and found that the Admirals have significantly larger families than Captains and Commanders. The differences in the Army between those above the rank of Brigadier and those below are barely significant, as also in the Church the difference between Bishops and the rest.
This correlation between success and larger size of family may to some extent be due to the money factor. Thus high ranking officers in the Navy were earning larger incomes at an early age than the less successful. Again, both in the Navy and elsewhere, a large unearned income might be an aid to professional success as well as an aid to having a large family.
With regard to the aristocracy of intellect, neither Science as represented by the Royal Society nor Scholarship as represented by the British Academy are keeping up their numbers. Two hundred and eight of the former had only I175 children apiece, and
the latter a mere i69.
7. Religious Belief
Twenty aristocrats educated at Roman Catholic schools had the largest families of any group, averaging 3*I apiece, compared with 2 3 for the other aristocrats. This result, however, was not significant judged by the x2 test. There was no apparent difference between Jews and the others from the small numbers examined.
The Legislature
It seemed likely that men who had goodsized families themselves would be more sympathetic to legislation which would encourage the youth of the nation to found families also. We have already seen that the peerage have an average size of family
of 2.43. 'They are the most fertile section
next to the industrialists. The House of Lords has already debated the issue in the most statesmanlike manner, as recently reported in the EUGENICS REVIEW (July I943).
A study was also made of 306 Conservative Members of Parliament. These were found
to have an average family of i *98 children,

while 133 Labour Members of Parliament had an average family of I44 children. As a number of these, however, gave very little information about themselves, they may have omitted to mention their children. One of them had I3 children, the largest number recorded.
DISCUSSION
I. The Problem of Quantity
The results of the present study amply support the conclusions of Dr. G. F. MacCleary (I937), who writes: "By the use of Kuczynski's methods it has been demonstrated that if fertility and mortality in this country remain at their present level, or change as recent experience suggests that they are likely to change, we are doomed to extinction." Or to quote the Official Historian to the Home Office of the Social Services in war-time, Mr. R. M. Titmuss (1942): "Assuming the continuance of present trends, our population will ultimately diminish by one quarter in each generation. The war may make this position even more serious because if a fall similar to that of I9I4-I8 occurs and there is no change in the attitude to parenthood, then we shall be on our way to halving our population every generation:"
Intellectual background of the falling birth rate. It is a remarkable fact that in the upper classes marriage as an institution for keeping up the population has signally failed. It is therefore worth while to inquire what the intellectual outlook was of the generation which allowed this to come about.
We have already seen that in I874 matters were satisfactory, the average size of family being about 5, but despite the fact that a high birth rate was necessary for our prosperity and even for our survival, some sociologists repeatedly attacked the large family. John Stuart Mill had already written, " Little is to be expected in morality until the producing of large families is regarded with the same feelings as drunkenness or any other physical excess" (see Carr-Saunders, I922). Cotter Morison wrote of " the devastating torrent of children." Havelock Ellis stated that the falling birth

68 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

rate was not a national danger and that the
day of the large family was over.
Drysdale (19I3), in his book The Small Family System, rightly spQke of the need to
limit unhealthy stocks, but he used argu-
ments in favour of the small family which
are still heard, but which have been proved
to be wholly fallacious. He thought that a fall in the birth rate would lessen the chances
of war, yet the German Press before the war
repeatedly used our falling birth rate as an
argument that we were degenerate and
unable to defend ourselves. Drysdale also stated in his book that the
falling birth rate would be counteracted by the falling death rate, a thesis which we now
know to be totally wrong. He even wrote as
follows: "It is difficult to find words
adequate to deal with the attempt of the medical profession to stem the tide of the
declining birth rate." In I9I3 the falling birth rate in the pro-
fessional classes could be viewed with relative calm because there was always a surplus from the artisan and other classes to take the place of the unborn casualties. Now, however, the campaign against children has been so successful that their place can only be taken by immigrants from other countries.
The two deliberate methods of limitationLate Marriage and the Misuse of Contracep-
tion i. Late Marriage. It should be clearly
understood that in a society where artificial contraception is not used and where there is an average family of 5, any stock which is seen to die out is either doing so because of physical disease or else because social conditions, such as famine or slavery, prevent reproduction. In such cases demographers speak of infecundity and of infertility. This seems to imply that the causes are physical, or at least beyond the control of society. In present-day. Britain, however, the fall in the birth rate is the result of deliberate choice. It has been brought about by the setting up of two institutions, namely, late marriage and artificial contraception.
It is, therefore, misleading to refer to sterile stocks. It is preferable to speak of the shunning or fear of children as tecnophobia.

It is convenient to describe persons or tendencies which do not favour an abundance
of healthy children as tecnophobic, the
opposite terms being tecnophilic and tecno-
philia. These words imply correctly that the problem is essentially psychological.
At present the average age on marriage is
33 and for more than half professional men it is an affair of practically middle life-33
and over, yet according to various authorities
(see Ellis, I933) it ought to be 25 for a man
and 24 for a woman. Nature intends man and woman to marry about that age. Early marriage means a smaller maternal and infantile mortality. If late marriage becomes an institution, it entails many social evils, as Carr-Saunders (I922) has pointed out: prostitution, irregular sexual unions, and an
increase of venereal disease. It is a dis-
astrous policy to tell the average professional man that he must lead a monastic life from i8 to 33. It is a fundamental tenet of mental
health that, as already stated, a man should live an emotional life appropriate to his years,* and there is no doubt that by 25 he ought to be the head of a family. Early marriage would mean that by 55 the man would already have several grandchildren, but at
present the professional man at the age of 6o has only one or two unmarried children in the twenties. It is not usually realized that the difference between these two results is the difference between a social group which has a potentially vigorous future and one which is dying out.
I would recommend as the first step to remedy late marriage that each profession sets up a body of men to discuss how conditions may be altered so as to favour earlier marriage.
2. The Misuse of Contraception. Probably the most commonly accepted view among eugenists in the past regarding contraception has been that married people should be entirely free to choose whether they will have children or not, and therefore contraceptives should be available to every one. It is said that where these articles are prohibited the unfit outbreed the fit and that such evils as venereal disease and artificial abortion increase. In democratic countries, it is held,

THE SIZE OF FAMILY

69

people must be free to decide these matters advancement of an ambitious boy, neverthe-

for themselves.

less he in his turn is not sterile because of his

Now apart from the medical fact that no success. On the contrary, in most groups

woman should have a baby much more success is correlated with fertility.

frequently than once in two years, I confess In conclusion, I would make a plea for

that I have the deepest mistrust of family greater facilities being given to research into

planning as at present conceived. The whole this problem which, as I have said, is the

idea is to my mind a result of the institution most vital which confronts the nation at the

of late marriage. Young men should marry present time next to winning the war. If it

at 25, and the begetting of their first four is solved, then this country will not only

babies should be an act of faith. At present, look back on a great past, but will also look

for parents in the thirties, abstention from forward with confidence to a vigorous future.

parenthood is considered an act of prudence.

The maternal instinct is slow to develop

SUMMARY

and is only at its strongest after the mother i. Over 4,500 biographies from Who's Who

has borne and suckled two or three babies. I940 were examined with the aid of various

Osborn quotes facts, which I can bear out professional directories, and the number of

from clinical experience, that planning of surviving children was correlated with type

babies at irregular intervals interferes with of occupation; whether work was at home

the natural urge to maternity.

or abroad; age on marriage; type of educa-

I would suggest, however, the advisability tion; wealth in wife's family; success in

of a number of clinics where members of all occupation; and with religious faith.

classes could seek advice on all marriage 2. The industrialists and the peerage were

questions. Each individual case could be the only classes that were possibly keeping

dealt with on its merits. The individual up their numbers. The size of family pro-

citizen would obtain advice on all matters gressively diminished through the learned

relating to building up a family in the professions to the Forces and artists and

twenties. Further, it is only from such actors. There were significant differences

clinics that the State could collect the between the size of families of different

information which is so urgently needed for groups. In every group except business

dealing witJl the problem. It could then men the most likely number of children which

distinguish between those objections to the recruit would eventually have (i.e. the

parenthood such as chronic ill-health for mode) was none at all. For the business men

which there is no remedy, and those objec- there was an equal chance of having o, 2 or

tions to parenthood such as the excessive 3 children.

expense of a confinement (at present possibly 3. Those medical and clerical men who

4-7o for the white-collar class), or the lived in outlying dominions other than

excessive expense of education, objections Canada, Australia, New Zealand and South

for which it is vital that the State find a Africa, had significantly smaller families

remedy.

than the stay-at-homes. The Indian Civil

H. The Problem of Quality

Service, however, had the same size of family as the Home Civil Service, the disadvantage

Professor Fisher's theory (I930) that boys of living abroad probably being neutralized

who rise in the social scale come from the by their having much larger pay five years

more sterile sections of the community after joining the Service. The Army and

would seem to be supported by the results Navy had significantly smaller families than

of my investigation at an expensive public civilians.

school, if these are further substantiated.

4. On the whole, the earlier the marriage,

It is certainly satisfactory, however, to the greater the number of children. There

find in the present study that, although was, however, in most groups, particularly

relative sterility in the parents led to the the Navy, the industrialists and the peerage,

70 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

a number of men who married in the late thirties and had relatively large families.
5. Education and Size of Family. A group of I77 boys at an expensive public school was
examined. It was found that of these boys and their brothers and sisters only 4 o per
cent came from families of 5 or more children, yet in my series of successful busi-
ness men who had surviving children, 33-5
pNr cent of their children came from families
of 5 or more, that is, eight times as many as the public school group. The corresponding figure for the professional class was i6-3 per
cent or four times as many. Again, the per-
centages of the relatively sterile 2-child and
i-child families at the expensive school are 36-4 per cent and 6 5 per cent, which is considerably in excess of I5 *I per cent and 3 o per cent for the business class, while the figures for the professional class are 25 * 2 per
cent and 7 * 8 per cent. Nevertheless, in Medicine and at the Bar,
the families of public school men, although still below replacement, were significantly
larger than those of men educated elsewhere. This also held for the learned professions as
a whole-the Bar, Medicine, Church and Home Civil Service. (Teachers were not examined in this way because nearly all were at public sch6ols or Oxford or Cambridge.) Head masters had more children than mem-
bers of any other profession. Public school boys prefer some professions to others, thus 34 per cent of successful barristers were at public schools, but only 23 per cent of Fellows of the British Academy and 20 per
cent of Fellows of the Royal Society.
6. The Wife's Status and Occu.pation. A
special study was made of professional men to see if marriage into a family the father of which appeared to be wealthy led to an increased size of family, but the iesults were inconclusive. Fourteen medical men, however, who married university graduates had an average surviving family of 2 43 children.
Aristocrats who marry commoners have significantly smaller families than those who marry aristocrats.
7. Success. Those who reached the very highest naval ranks had significantly larger

families than the lower ranks mentioned in Who's Who. In the Army and Church the larger families of Generals and Bishops, compared to the less successful men, showed a barely significant difference. Two hundred and eight Fellows of the Royal Society, representing Science, had an average of I.75
children, and IO9 Fellows of the British Academy, representing Scholarship, had I - 69 children.
8. Three hundred and six Conservative M.P.s had an average of i 98 children, while I33 Labourmembers had I 44 children apiece.
9. In the small material examined, no evidence was obtained of differences in fertility of different religious groups, e.g.
Roman Catholics and Jews. io. The seriousness of the fall in the birth
rate is emphasized. This is brought about by two institutions-late marriage and the misuse of contraception. It is suggested that
committees be set up in each profession to alter conditions so as to favour marriage at 25 instead of 33.
ii. Earlier marriage has elsewhere been found to lead to less misuse of contraception because younger people face the future with more confidence. The authorities in each profession, particularly in the Forces, must ensure as far as possible that fertility is not
a bar to advancement.
REFERENCES CARR-SAUNDERS, A. M. (I922) The Population
Problem, Oxford.
CATTELL, R. B. Quoted by Rumney (I936), p. I3. DRYSDALE, C. V. (1913) The Small Family System,
London, Fifield. ELLis, Havelock (1933) Psychology of Sex, London,
Heinemann. FISHER, R. A. (I930) The Genetical Theory of
Natural Selection.
FISHER, R. A. (I94I) Statistical Methods, Edin-
burgh, Oliver & Boyd, 8th edition.
GLASS, D. V. (I938) Eugenics Review, 30, II7. MACCLEARY, G. F. (1937) Menace of British De-
population, London, Allen & Unwin. OSBORN, F. (1940) Preface to Eugenics, New York,
Harper & Bros. PATERSON, A. Spencer (I932) Eugenics Review, 24,
I9I. RUMNEY, J. (I936) Population, November 1936. TITMUSS, R. M. and K. (I942) Parents' Revolt,
London, Secker & Warburg. WAGNER-MANSLAU (I932) Eugenics Review, 24, 3.
Eugenics Review, Vol. XXXV, Nos. 8 and 4

