THE MIXING OF RACES AND SOCIAL DECAY*

* By The Right Rev. E. W. BARNES, Sc.D., F.R.S.,
Bishop of Birmingham

I HAVE chosen to address you on a subject
of great importance. With regard to it
strong differences of opinion exist. As *we consider various aspects of the subject we grope our way uncertainly.
Let us begin with statements that all will accept.

And the most careful education, painstaking and thorough though it be, at times fails. Such failure is, it seems, especially likely to occur when the type of civilization which the education aims at producing differs markedly from that which may be called
ancestral.

Some Facts of Inheritance
First, the various races of mankind interbreed freely with one another. International enmity, racial prejudice, cultural differences all seem, speaking generally, impotent to prevent interbreeding.
Secondly, the extension of world trade and of transport facilities is steadily increasing the mixture of races and in consequence the likelihood of interbreeding.
I add a further statement that is steadily winning acceptance; physical and psychical qualities are inherited by the same laws of inheritance. As an illustration of this state-
ment we may say that from a tuberculosis parent a tendency to tuberculosis can be inherited; likewise from a drunken parent a tendency to drunkenness can be inherited. In either case, in mating, the dangerous gene or genes may be rejected, or they may be handed on as recessives; but, if rejection or subordination does not take place, the evil tendency will show itself when the environment gives it a chance.
What we have to insist upon in addition to the above fundamental facts is that the complex of desirable qualities, or modes of behaviour and of appreciation, which we call civilization, is a recent acquisition of humanity: it may easily be destroyed or, at least, injured. Our civilization is a fragile thing, which can only be preserved by the education of each successive generation.
#The Gaiton Lecture delivered before the Eugenics Society on February i8th, 1949.

Unsatisfactory " Pockets " in our Society
It is much to be regretted that we lack authoritative knowledge which will enable us to forecast such failure. There is general
agreement that in our industrial areas, and in some of our villages, " pockets " of feeblemindedness exist: the children from families in these pockets are expected by elementary
teachers to be-and in fact often arebackward at school. It seems certain that mental dullness is inherited more often than not. But though " pockets " are formed by
half-breeds, if we may for convenience so describe children who are the offspring of different racial stocks, and though children from these " pockets " fairly often prove unsatisfactory to their teachers, it is difficult to know how far their defects are due in innate limitations rather than to harmful home influences. As we put the inquiry we sometimes receive over-confident opinions: colour prejudice, which in Britain is instinctive and strong, tends to distort judgment.
There is no doubt that grave social decay often appears in places like seaports where races mix. But we must remember that, when there is no race mixture, if war leads to conditions under which children run wild,
or defective housing creates circumstances leading to immorality, even good stocks will tend to decay. The best we can say is that, when conditions improve, recovery can be rapid. But, I repeat, civilization is fragile: it is a pattern of lving more easily broken
than repaired.

II

12 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Intermarriage Between Nordic Races
Recent experience has certainly shown that interbreeding between different Nordic races does not lead to degeneration. In our country the two world wars produced for a time violent hostility towards the Germans. But so well is it established that interbreeding does not produce harmful results that we hardly ever meet with prejudice against children because one parent is a German. Speaking generally the same statement holds of the mating of all European races. Differences in national and religious tradition make marriages between Britons and members of Latin races somewhat unpopular; and the same is true of marriages with Slavs and with some of the peoples of south-eastern Europe. But from such alliances troublesome or degenerate children are not expected. As regards the Jews, I always remember a saying of my Cambridge tutorhimself partially of Jewish ancestry-" A little Jewish blood is a good thing: too much is a mistake." One can hardly expect the Jews to accept the second part of this statement, which must not be taken too seriously: the first part expresses a widely held opinion.
It is when we pass from European stocks which presumably have had, possibly in neolithic times, common ancestors with ourselves that doubts or prejudices appear.
Mating Between Members of Advanced Civilizations
The world has three great civilizations, Arabian, Indian, Chinese, which have largely arisen independently of our own. How far can interbreeding between members of these civilizations and ourselves be welcomed ? This is a most perplexing inquiry. Still more difficult is the question as to interbreeding between members of the four advanced civilizations and those belonging to the more primitive negroid races of Africa.
There is no a priori reason why the mating of persons belonging to different advanced civilizations should be harmful. Chinese civilization-and we may regard that of the Japanese as an offshoot-is older than our own and also is probably more stable. Like

every advanced civilization it has its imperfections which, because we are alien to it, we notice with critical eyes. But there is no evidence that, if the best representatives of British and Chinese culture marry, the children are unsatisfactory.
Seaport Degradation
In the seaports of China and of other Eastern countries the offspring of European seamen and Chinese women often form a degraded element in the population: in our own seaports the same is true of the children of Chinese seamen and British women. But many social workers believe that the degradation is not due to racial disharmony: it must rather be regarded as the product of progressive social decay which, given the environment, would show itself were there no racial intermixture.
The Formation of Mixed Races
One would certainly expect that a stable home life would often be lacking when two parents inherit different cultures; and anthropologists seem in general agreement that the social consequences of the mixture of two divergent races originally tend to be disquieting. But, if the process of intermarriage continues, a mixed race will develop in a few generations and in general character will show some measure of permanence. Individuals of this mixed race may tend in Mendelian fashion to revert to ancestral types. But experience seems to show that complete segregation, either physical or psychical, is rare. A new physical type with a corresponding cultural pattern, satisfying to the dominant characters of the mixture, is gradually established. Unless such a mixed culture is markedly inferior to that of the races from which it originates, one cannot conclude that the mixture of different civilizations is to be condemned. If the levels of civilization of the component races are markedly different, one may expect the resulting level to be a sort of mean, inferior to the higher civilisation. The higher race will be acutely sensitive to this taint of blood. But the lower race gains and possibly humanity as a whole profits. We must

THE MIXING OF RACES AND SOCIAL DECAY

remember that in humanity there are no pure races: we are all hybrids.
The Creation of " Pure " Stocks
The so-called pure stocks of history have resulted from the interbreeding of groups isolated from the rest of mankind. If the group be not too large, a few centuries will suffice to produce a definite physical type with a strong and stable pattern of living and thinking. A race developed in this way shows, when its isolation ends, a strength quite out of proportion to its numbers. Whether it will have developed desirable physical and mental qualities will depend on the mutations which have taken place. I need not remind you that, when asked as to the origin of mutations, the wise man remains silent.
The ancient Greeks, intellectually the finest race that earth has so far produced, seem to have been evolved in a few centuries from the interbreeding of members of the decaying Minoan civilization with invaders from the Balkans or further north. Possibly the two races did not differ greatly in their essential make-up. They may have been peoples of a relatively recent common origin of whom the invaded had had the stimulus of Cretan civilization. If such speculations are true, there will have been a parallel to the Norman Conquest when migratory Teutons invaded more sedentary Teutonic stocks in Britain. We cannot deny that in the end the Norman Conquest stimulated the intellectual life of England and probably improved the English stock by diluting the Celtic, or pre-Celtic, strains within it.
The Eurasians and their Qualities
Let us return to modern times, and briefly consider the mixture of races belonging to different modern civilizations. The Eurasians, or Anglo-Indians as they are flow commonly called, which are the result of our now-ended rule of India, furnish an example of a mixture of two stable and very different civilizations. It is a mixture which has attained to some measure of stability. Originating, often enough, in alliances which were none too reputable, the Eurasians have

become a respected caste-I do not use the word in a technical sense-in India's varied population. They lack the force of the British, the British capacity for leadership, the British readiness to take risks, and they do not show the outstanding intellectual ability of the best Indians; but they make excellent clerks, careful, honest and hardworking. We have, in fact, during the last two centuries seen in their development the creation of a mixed race of value to human civilization.
This verdict would be disputed by many -especially army officers and their wiveswho have served in India. I believe that the army verdict was often the result of a colour prejudice from which few of us are wholly free.
Christian Missionaries and Anglo-Indians
The most significant sidelight on the problem of racial intermixture in India is probably to be found in the attitude which Christian missionaries from Britain and America have been led to adopt. As is well known, most of them became advocates of Indian independence; but also a number of the more progressive, those who gave admiration to, and sought the friendship of, men like Rabindranath Tagore and Mahatma Gandhi, advocated intermarriages. Such advocacy, and his reasons for it, are to be found in a book by C. F. Andrews entitled What I Owe to Christ. The author, a Fellow of his College at Cambridge, was a close friend of the two men I have mentioned, he had a wide knowledge of political and social affairs and in his time was called-justly, I believe -the best-loved Englishman in India. He was convinced that so long as Christianity was the religion of a race that refused intermarriage with Indians, the spread of Christian principles in India would be retarded. So far as Christian intermarriage has taken place-and I stress the word Christian-the results appear to have been good.
Indian Immigration into England
But, when the particular mixture of races occurs in England, doubts arise. Even in central England there are more Indians than

14 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

is generally recognized. They come as can easily give rise to national rancour. So

university students, as pedlars, as medical a new cause for war is emerging. Within the

men, or in the vague hope of obtaining work. last few weeks there have been serious racial

There is in our industrial areas a supersti- riots between Africans and Indians in South

tion that it is " lucky" to have an Indian Africa. Probably nations and their leaders

doctor at childbirth and, of course, many all over the world are reaching the conclusion

Indian doctors are men of ability; they that the desire to rule alien lands is a foolish

acquire large practices, especially in the form of megalomania: if this be so, one

poorer quarters of industrial areas. When fruitful cause of war will end. But popula-

they marry English women, the marriages tion pressure may create a far more dan-

appear to be successful, though a return to gerous cause of conflict. A few centuries

India and polygamy is an obvious danger. hence the voluntary limitation of population

The Indian pedlars work in industrial increase by the different nations of mankind

areas and surrounding villages. They seem may prove the most urgent of international

markedly attractive to certain types of needs.

English girls and form with them disreput-

able " pockets " in the areas where they France and Muslim Immigration

congregate. At times the indignation of the The Muslim faith is sufficiently near to the

decent people among whom they dwell flares Christian to make the clash between the

out in riots. If such immigration of low- Western and the Muslim civilizations at

grade Indians continues with present con- times bitter. The days when Arabian culture

sequences, we shall see the growth of Anglo- was progressive are long distant, though he

Indian centres of social disorder in many of would be a bold man who prophesied that

our large cities. These centres can easily they would not return. Arab culture is to-

become plague-spots from which moral con- day strong because its faith is militant and

tamination spreads. It may be that the also because there is within it absolutely

Christian enthusiasm of teachers and wel- no racial prejudice. For these reasons it has

fare workers will lead slowly to social im- during the present century swept across

provement. But if there is a steady influx negroid Africa. Napoleon defended Muslim

of low-grade Eastern immigrants it is hardly polygamy because it formed a barrier to

likely that wholesome influences will rapidly colour prejudice. The French links with

become effective. With our vast populations Algeria-formerly a possession and now an

it is dangerously easy for individuals and ally of equal status-have brought French

groups to escape the sort of pressure that and Arab culture into intimate relations.

fashions good citizens.

In rural France one finds garrisons of Arab

troops. French children of mixed descent

Alien Immigration and Population Pressure are not rare. In parts of Marseilles the

The problem of undesirable immigration mixture of races has created deplorable

is world-wide. There will soon be few lands moral squalor. French people in France

free from this form of population pressure. seem to be free from our instinctive colour

The population of the world is now some prejudice; but when they live in England

2,200 millions; it is increasing with dan- they show themselves at times sensitive to

gerous rapidity. Already the amount of the racial mixture that during the present

fertile land available for food supplies is century has proceeded rapidly in their home

inadequate: owing to bad husbandry it is country. Owing to the fall of the purely

diminishing. Naturally, people try to emi- French birth-rate, foreign immigration into

grate to regions where food supplies are France has of recent decades been large.

relatively easy to obtain and where economic Many Italian immigrants have proved good

opportunities seem to exist. Moreover citizens. But, if the populafion changes of

attempts to prevent such immigration are the last half-century continue, a new racial

resented with increasing bitterness; they type will gradually be evolved, with far-

THE MIXING OF RACES AND SOCIAL DECAY

I5

reaching political consequences. There are influence is being felt. Such migration is

those who say that the disquieting instabi- leading to further racial admixture. In

lity of French governments since the fall of thirty American States legislation to prevent

Napoleon III is a consequence of a changing marriage between whites and Negroes exists

racial type.

-in one instance a Negro has been defined

as one in whom there is more than three-

Mixture of Races in South Africa and West sixteenths of Negro blood. The California

Indies

Supreme Court has recently declared such

I have left until the end of my survey the legislation unconstitutional. Americans,

most important and difficult of all aspects whether they like the prospect or not, must

of the mixing of races, the problem of the accept the fact that a Negro strain in the

Negro in South Africa and in the U.S.A. In population is spreading. How should this

each country the " colour problem " is a outcome be regarded?

domestic political issue of the first magni- The earlier stages of disreputable inter-

tude. Dislike of intermarriage and fear of course between white and black belong to

Negro domination show themselves in white the past. Coloured people in all but remote

attempts at restrictive legislation. Anxiety areas of the United States of America have

is greater in South Africa because there the acquired a mixture of white blood. When-

white man is an intruder; and developments ever a so-called Negro makes his mark in

in the West Indian islands suggest that public life, inquiry almost always shows a

ultimately a partially coloured population mixed ancestry. In fact, the American

will be universal. Descendants of Dutch " Negro " is already of a different race from

settlers naturally wish to retain a racial the African from whom he is partially

heritage of which they are rightly proud. descended. This fact is probably the cause

Their civilization is far higher than that of of the wide divergence of American opinion

the Negroes among whom they live and as to the right attitude towards " black "

distinctly higher than that of the Indians citizens. Those who live in Southern States

who seek admission as traders. Without where the Negro strain in the coloured popu-

Negro labour in the gold mines the industry lation is strong are prejudiced against any

could not be carried on as at present; and, form of political or social equality. Those

in fact, climatic conditions make it natural who know the qualities and potentialities of

that manual labour should be supplied by what we may call the " new " Negro have

the Negro. We have, in fact, a situation no such prejudice. The "new" Negro is

which has recurred throughout history. already developing a characteristic culture.

Two races live side by side: the one of His religion is a form of Christianity which,

higher culture is dominant but increases though intellectually primitive, is emotion-

slowly in numbers: the other becomes in- ally strong. For " Negro spirituals " a

creasingly necessary because it supplies musician of the quality of Walford Davies

manual labour; it has also the higher birth- had great admiration. Some plays and

rate. Inter-breeding takes place and in the stories due to " new " Negroes show the

end a mixed race with a lower civilization is beginning of new forms of art.

evolved.

At the recent Lambeth Conference of I948

The Negro Problem in the U.S.A.

there was a strong delegation of white American bishops. Some were men of out-

In the U.S.A., as is well known, the out- standing quality, whose insight and judgment

come of the Civil War was freedom for the marked them out for leadership. I was

slaves coupled, theoretically, with full civil interested to find that almost invariably in

rights. The actual denial of the franchise private conversation they spoke well of the

in the Southern States has been notorious. way in which the Negroes (" new " Negroes,

Of recent years Negroes have been migra- of course) were developing. There was no

ting to the north, where their political extravagant praise: a man of pure European

i6 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

descent naturally values his white blood. But there was a general belief that, given the right kind of social education and also just economic opportunities, the " new " Negro would prove a good citizen. Their verdict is, I think, that which we ought generally to accept.
General Conclusions
May I sum up the conclusions that seem to emerge from our survey ?
Racial intermixture cannot be avoided. A benevolent despot would prefer not to mix divergent civilizations or cultures. Such mixtures, even if they are not, as often, disreputable in origin, involve that different patterns of lving impinge upon one another

to the disadvantage of each. At the beginning racial admixture is usually unsatis-
factory: it leads to social decay inasmuch
as the impalpable things, such as the religious and moral strength that are of highest
value in culture, tend at the outset to dis-
appear. But, if economic conditions become satisfactory, if there are opportunities for social education and, more especially, if pressure towards wholesome living can be
brought to bear, the future of a mixed race, as it becomes stable in its make-up, is by no means unpromising.
Whether the mixed races now being fashioned in the world's turmoil will be great in human history, no man can say. Let us not be pessimistic: we are all hybrids.

DROSOPHILA AND MAN

THE sun that bids them rise and dance Death brings at his setting;
Even so is Man, his brief days spent In toil and vain begetting.

One shuffle and a life is spun: The white fly tipped with purple paint;
The fly breeds true but infant Man May prove a tyrant or a saint,

His years are but a fruit fly's hour Timed by Thy clock Eternity;
His genes as theirs are but Thy stock Patterns for posterity.

Whose brood may over-run the earth Before it circles once the sun
By Thy time-mortal time is short And fast the generations run.

Each gene in place; each docketed; Since Genesis each species' fate
Ordained by Thee, while innocent
The future generations wait.

But Thou canst check them, only Thou Knowest that man needs more than skill
To breed himself as he breeds fliesGrant him this wisdom, and the will;

Give him the courage, too, to own Vainly he breeds without Thy plan:
So may he in Thine image grow Even towards perfect Man.
SIGRID NEWFIELD.
Eugenc Riew, Vol. X

No. 1

