UNCHECKED POPULATIONS:
SOME COMPARISONS OF RAPID GROWTH
By J. G. C. BLACKER

M OST readers of the EUGENICS This conclusion was based on the figures of

REVIEW will probably be familiar population increase in the United States, and

with the main thesis of the Malthus regarded it as being a conservative

Malthusian theory of population. Malthus, estimate. In some back settlements, he said,

writing at the end of the eighteenth and the doubling periods of fifteen years had been,

beginning of the nineteenth centuries, main- recorded, and he cited the opinions of Euler

tained that human populations have a and Sir William Petty, the former believing

biological tendency to increase at a rate that an unchecked- population would double

faster than that at which it is possible to itself in twelve and four-fifth years, the latter

increase the means of subsistence. But since in ten years.

man cannot live without food, this tendency How far, we may ask, were Malthus's

is restrained by a number of " checks." deductions of the potential rate of increase of

These consist of first, positive checks, which human populations correct? How long would

tend to raise the death-rate-principally war, it in fact take for an unchecked population to

famine, and disease; and second, preventive double itself?

checks, which tend to reduce the birth-rateprincipally " vice " (in which he included birth control and abortion) and " moral restraint" (by which he meant postponement of marriage).
Let us suppose, however, said Malthus, that we have a hypothetical population which is not subject to any of these checks. How fast would it increase? Such a population, he admitted, has never existed in practice:

Before attempting to answer these' questions, however, we-should examine more closely what is meant by an " unchecked " population. Dr. G. F. McCleary, in his mostreadable expose of the Malthusian theory, defines it as
a state of society in which war has been abolished and all preventable diseases prevented; in which all economic deterrents to early marriage have been removed, and in which artificial limitation of the family is not practised.*

It will be allowed that no country has hitherto In other words, a society in which mortality

been known where the manners were so pure and simple, and the means of subsistence so
abundant, that no check whatever has existed to early marriages from the difficulty of providing for a family, and that no waste of the human

is as low, and fertility as high, as are humanly possible.
On this basis, our questions outlined above were posed in I947 by the distinguished

species has been occasioned by vicious customs, by towns, by unhealthy occupations, or too severe labour. Consequently in no state that we have yet known has the power of population been left to exert itself with perfect freedom.*
Nevertheless, for the sake of the argument, Malthus maintained that such a population

French demographers Paul Vincent and
Louis Henryt in the following terms: how
long would it take for a population with the maximum possible fertility to double itself if it were also subjected (a) to the lowest recorded mortality of modern times, and

would increase in a geometrical progression,

doubling itself in at most every twenty-five *McClearv, G. F. The Mllalthusian Population Theory.

years.

1953. Faber, p*I05-

t Henry, Louis and Vincent, Paul. " Rythme maxi-

* Malthus, T. R., An Essay on Population. Everyman mum d'accroissement d'une population stable."

Edition (7th ed. I872), Vol. I, p. 7.

Population, I947, 2, 4, pp. 663-680.

235 THE EUGENICS REVIEW, January I956. 47, 4.

236 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

(b) to the " natural " mortality of Malthus's time-i.e. a level of mortality which might be expected for that era if it were not artificially raised by famine and want.
For their maximum fertility, Henry and Vincent took that of the Roman Catholic population of Quebec in the middle of the nineteenth century, whose crude birth-rate for several decades varied between forty-five and sixty per thousand; for their minimum mortality by modem standards, that of New Zealand between I934 and I938. The combination of these two gave a rate of increase such as to double a population in sixteen or seventeen years. For their " natural "mortality of Malthus's time, they took the Swedish figures for 1750 and I820; the former gave a doubling period of twentyeight years, the latter twenty-three years.
Since Henry and Vincent made these calculations, however, various fresh developments have occurred. The New Zealand mortality of the I930S no longer represents the lowest that has been achieved, for with the widespread use of antibiotics and other
medical advances, mortality in many western countries has plunged to levels undreamed of by pre-war demographers. Furthermore anthropologists and others have collected data of communities and populations whose fertilities have surpassed even that of the nineteenth-century Quebec Catholics.
It is not the purpose of this article, however, to make calculations of doubling periods for hypothetical populations by combining different levels of mortality and fertility. Instead we shall confine ourselves to describing actual populations, which, if they do not rigorously fulfil all the conditions of being " unchecked," have nevertheless developed rates of increase which at least approximate towards those envisaged by Malthus.
The French Canadian Population in the Eighteenth Century
In the later statements of his theory, Malthus based his doubling period of twentyfive years primarily on the figures of the United States censuses of I790, i8oo, i8ioand I820, attempting at the same time to make a

generous allowance for immigration.* But although the annual number of immigrants may have appeared small in comparison with the excess of births over deaths, the continuous influx of people into the United States tended to distort the age structure of the population, so that the American rate of demographic growth is an unsatisfactory index of the potential power of natural increase of human populations.
A better example can be found in the evolution of the French Canadian population in the first half of the eighteenth century. The bulk of the migration from France to Canada took place during the seventeenth century, especially between I663 and I67I, when 2,500 migrants crossed the Atlantic. But between I67I and I740 the number scarcely averaged more than fifty per
annum, which was probabjy more than
balanced by the numbers of those leaving the French settlements on the St. Lawrence for Louisiana or New England.
The demographic characteristics of the French Canadian population have recently been'the subject of an excellent study by M. Jacques Henripin of the University of Montreal.t M. Henripin's data is based primarily on the material contained in the monumental Dictionnaire Genealogique of Mgr. Cyprien Tanguay, published in seven volumes between I87I and I890. M. Henripin's work provides a pioneer example of the use that can be made of genealogical material for demographic analysis. His results give us information about a population living over two centuries ago that can rarely be obtained for populations alive to-day.
The French Canadian population at the beginning of the eighteenth century had few economic motives to family limitation. They were sparsely scattered along both banks of the St. Lawrence, where the needs both for agricultural development and for defence
* A Summary View of the Principle of Population.
I830. Reprinted in Glass, D. V. (ED.). Introduction to Malthus. London, I953, PP. 124-132.
t Henripin, J. La Population Canadienne au debut du XVIIIe Siicle. 1954. Presses Universitaires de France (Institut National d'Etudes Demographiques, Travaux et Documents, Cahier No. 22).

UNCHECKED POPULATIONS

237

against the Iroquois Indians cried out for reached the astonishing figure of 65-2 per

more manpower. Furthermore the Roman thousand for the decade I76I-70. Quite why

Catholic Church maintained a far greater the birth-rate rose in this way, M. Henripin

influence over the lives of the colonists than never fully explains. Demographers, how-

it -did in France, where the philosophical ever, tend to regard the crude birth-rate as an

attacks upon religion and the social and unsatisfactory index of fertility, since it

political attacks on the temporal power of varies greatly with the sex and age structure

the Church are thought to have gone far of the population. They prefer nowadays to

towards undermining the religious inhibitions use average family size, or, where fluctuations

against family limitation. At all events it is of fertility are involved, the gross reproduc-

clear thait among the French Canadians tion rate.* Among M. Henripin's French

in the eighteenth century both birth control Canadians a sample of seventy-five com-

and abortion were for all practical purposes pleted families comprising 629 children gave

unknown, and the only artificial means by an average family size of 8&39 children. This

which fertility was kept in check were cannot be regarded as representative of the

celibacy and postponement of marriage.,

whole population, however, since many

The average age of first marriages amnong families-possibly as many as 64 per cent

women was 22-4 years, which was, sub- -remained " incomplete "; that is to say,

stantially younger than the equivalent 'ge of the marriage was broken by the death of

twenty-six years for women in France during either the husband or the wife before the

the last years before the Revolution.* latter reached her menopause. The gross

Unfortunately we have no data on the reproduction rate calculated by M. Henripin

proportions married in each age group after was 4.4, which must be the highest figure

i68i, and at that time the numbers q men ever recorded for any population. t In France

and women were still unbalanced as a-'result during the same period, the gross reproduc-

of the excess numbers of males immigtating tion rate is thought to have been in the

during the i66os. The i68i figures show that neighbourhood of 2.5,4 while in Sweden

only five per cent of women reaching the age during the last quarter of the eighteenth

of' thirty were still unmarried, but it is century, it never exceeded 2'25. §

probable that as the numbers of the sexes The fertility data are the most interesting

evened out, the proportion of spinsters in part of M. Henripin's study. He shows,

each age group tended to increase. However, among other things, that the French

the crude marriage rate was consistently Canadian women bore on the average one

high throughout the eighteenth century,'and child every two years, which clearly invalid-

when a marriage was broken by the death ates the view expressed by some writers that

of either the husband or the wife, the when no artificial restriction of births is

surviving partner generally remarried within

a few years. The net result of these factors was that the
French Canadian population at the beginning of the eighteenth century achieved a level of

* The gross reproduction rate has been defined as "the number of girl children born to one average woman of a community throughout her reproductive life." Blacker, C. P. and Glass, D. V. Population and Fertility. I938. Population Investigation Committee,

fertility as great as has ever been recorded p. I9.

for any other population. The crude birth-
rate, which averaged about fifty annual births per one thousand of the population during the second half of the seventeenth century, rose during the eighteenth, and

t The reader is left with the impression that there is an inconsistency in M. Henripin's figures, since his gross reproduction rate is more than half his completed family size, despite the fact that the GRR is derived from age-specific fertility rates based on all women, including spinsters and widows.

* L. H(enry). " La Nuptialite a la fin de I'Ancien Regime." Population, I954, 9, 3, pp. 542-46. Henripin cites Bourgeois-Pichat's figure of twenty-four years nine months for France, but this was based on the registered figures for Paris only.

+ Bourgeois-Pichat, J. "Evolution g6n6rale de la Population FranSaise depuis le XVIIIe Siecle." Population, 195i, 6, 4, p. 645.
§ Kuczynski, R. R. The Balance of Births and Deaths. 1928. Macmillan (New York). Vol. I, p. 39.

238 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

practised, women would in the normal
course of events bear a child every year. He also throws light on the controversial subject of fertility and lactation. He shows that when the child died before its first birthdayand the period of lactation was thereby cut short-the average interval before the next conception and birth was substantially
reduced.
The principal check to population growth
among the eighteenth - century French Canadians was mortality. Henripin believes that plague and other infectious diseases were less prevalent in Canada than they were in France at that time. But smallpox made
considerable inroads in the population in a number of years, principally I699, I703, and
I733, while famine and severe cold likewise
took their toll.
The crude death - rate rose during the
eighteenth century from 23-6 per thousand in I70I-I0 to 33-8 in I76I-70, reaching a maximum of 39-6 in I75I-60, partly attributable to the war which culminated in the
*capture of Canada by the British. But the general rise in the death-rate was probably due, not to a real rise in mortality, but to an increasing proportion of old people in the population, since in the second half of the seventeenth century the younger age groups had been artificially swelled by immigration from France.
The crude death-rate is thus an unsatisfactory index of mortality, as the crude birthrate is of fertility, and unfortunately M.
Henripin's data do not permit an analysis of mortality rates by age groups. He has, however, made an estimate of the infantile death-rate, which is often regarded as a sensitive and valuable index of mortality conditions. The figure M. Henripin arrives at is 246 deaths under one year per I,000 live births, though his method of calculation must leave a wide margin of possible error. By modern standards this rate is of course extremely high, though there are still a few under-developed countries such as Burma where the infant mortality rate passes 200.
By eighteenth century standards, however,
it was not unduly excessive. The Swedish
statistics for the second half of the century-

-the best that are available for any country during that period-show an average infant mortality rate of 203-5 per I,000 live births, and it is probable that mortality conditions were better in Sweden than in most European countries. *
Between I700 and I750 the French Canadian population increased from about I5,000 to about 50,000-a rate such as to double their numbers in just under thirty years.
It may be concluded, writes M. Henripin,
that with earlier and more generalized marriage than were prevalent in Canada at that time, a doubling every twenty-five years could have been achieved. Some of the " checks " to population increase of which Malthus speaks were little or non-existent for -the Canadians: famine, late marriage, poverty, life in large towns.
It may be added that mortality conditions improved substantially between the beginning of the eighteenth century and Malthus's death in I834. Plague disappeared from western Europe and smallpox was greatly reduced after the publication in I798 of Jenner's discovery of vaccination.
Thus we may safely conclude that Malthus's doubling period of twenty-five years was entirely reasonable for his own era. But that of fifteen years which he cites for certain " back settlements " could only have been achieved if their populations had contained an abnormally low proportion of old people. Euler's doubling period of twelve and four-fifth years, and Sir William Petty's of ten, were clearly absurd.
The North American Hutterites
Probably no human community has. approached more closely to Malthus's unchecked population than the Hutterites of North America. The Hutterites are a religious sect of anabaptists founded in the first half of the sixteenth century by Jacob Hutter, an Austrian religious reformer who who was later burned at the stake in I536. After generations of persecution and wanderings, a group of them migrated to America in
* Gille, H. "The Demographic History of the
Northern European Countries in the Eighteenth Century." Population Studies, I949, 3, I, pp. 34-36.

UNCHECKED POPULATIONS

239

the nineteenth century, where they settled in
South Dakota between i874 and I877. Such has been their rate of increase that from the four original settlements of i88o, ninetyeight had developed by March I953, and were

control practices on fertility during the period I880-I950 has probably been close to zero, except perhaps since 1945.
The only forms of deliberate family limitation that may possibly be used to any

broadly scattered on both sides of the U.S.- extent are sterilizing operations on the

Canadian frontier in North and South women:

Dakota, Montana, Alberta, Saskatchewan, and Manitoba. In these " colonies," as they are called, the Hutterites live a communal life based on their concepts of fundamental Christian principles, and as nearly as possible completely isolated from the outside world.
The demographic characteristics of this strange people have recently been the subject of a fascinating study made by two American sociologists, Joseph W. Eaton and Albert J. Mayer of Wayne University, in I950 and I95I.* They provide what is perhaps a unique example of a population with an extremely high fertility and at the same time

In the course of medical examinations by the physician of the field staff the presence of a number of abdominal scars among women over thirty-five years old was noted. It was his impression that the incidence of hysterectomies and other sterilizing operations was rather high. Whether this impression is correct awaits verification. However, our data does seem to suggest that there may be some effort to control natural fertility at this age level.
Second, all the expenses of family life are shouldered, not by the individual families themselves, but by the community as a whole. Housing, food, clothing, and education are provided by the colony.

a high level of living involving not only the full application of modern medical knowledge, but also abundant nourishment. Their
way of life, though simple and austere, could scarcely be more healthy.
Two chief factors conduce to high fertility among the Hutterites. First, their strong religious opposition to birth control; second, their communal mode of living and general prosperity, which relieve the individual of
any economic incentive to family limitation.
Birth control, write Eaton and Mayer,
is a major factor affecting the demographic pattern of all modern populations. Hutterites often refer to it as murder. One informant warned that " worldly " people who engage in the practice will have to face on Judgment Day the hundreds of unborn children whom they have " killed." But religious belief alone is no proof of practice. Catholics have equally strong theological objections to birth control, but their fertility in urban areas is becoming more and more similar to that of persons of equivalent education, income, and social status, who have
no stated religious objections to planned parenthood.
The evidence is good that among Hutterites religious conviction and nuptial behaviour correspond closely. The net effect of birth

The birth of another child in no way lowers the standard of living. The carpenter just makes another bed. The family may be given an apartment with an extra room and if the mother needs additional household help, a relative or neighbour comes in to share the work. The colony pays all medical bills.
One effective check to fertility, however, does exist: the religious taboo against marriage before baptism, and since the Hutterites are not generally baptized until they are at least nineteen, marriages beforethat age are rare. After baptism, marriage generally follows fairly rapidly, and the median age of marriage for women was twenty-two years, and for men 23-5. Out of a sample of seventy-six women aged forty-five to forty-nine, only two were still unmarried.
The net result of these factors is that between I946 and I950 the Hutterites had a crude birth-rate of 45.9, a gross reproduction rate of 4-0036, and the median number of live births to women aged forty-five to fifty-four was io-6.
In contrast to their exceptionally high fertility, the mortality has been generally low.

* Man's Capacity to Reproduce. The demography of a unique population. Illinois, I954. A briefer and less technical account may be found in the Population
Btulletin (ed. Robert C. Cook), 1954, 10, 8.

Neither vice, poverty, disease nor war, write Eaton and Mayer, has been a factor in recent
Hutterite history, during which their phenomenal

240 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

growth has taken place. The sect's means of sub- are consistently higher than the equivalent

sistence has increased more rapidly than their numbers. When their ancestors arrived in I830, there was barely enough money to keep body and

rates for males, while in most countries the converse in true. This feature has been

soul together. Contemporary Hutterite colonies attributed to the exceptionally high fertility

are highly mechanized. The peoplelive in well built of the Hutterite women, for it has been shown

homes. They enjoy excellent credit. Because of
the belief that austerity is a religious virtue, their furnishings, clothes, and food are simple but they are adequate. No Hutterite in a colony has ever

that the risk of death through childbirth for the mother increases substantially with each successive birth after the fourth, and very

applied for or received public welfare assistance, markedly so after the eighth. Thus the

even during the depression years. The average experience of the Hutterites illustrates a

colony has about 6,ooo acres of land, with a
good water supply, electricity and a telephone. It has been able to save enough money to

point emphasized by Vincent and Henry in their article cited above; namely, that a

purchase new land and equipment and to build combination of maximum fertility and

homes to establish a branch colony every ten to minimum mortality is in practice impossible,

fifteen years. Hutterites, despite their rapid growth, are more prosperous to-day than they have ever been during the seventy-year period
under review.

since the high level of fertility will itself tend to raise mortality.
The four Hutterite colonies enumerated in

In addition to their general prosperity, the the United States census of i88o comprised a

Hutterites are a " medically sophisticated total population of 443 persons; the census

people." They have no inhibitions about conducted by Eaton, Mayer, and their fellow

making full use of the benefits provided by workers in I950 revealed a total population

modern medical science, and the expenses of 8,542. Thus the numbers of the Hutterites

thus incurred are paid by the community. had increased nearly twenty-fold in seventy

The crude death-rate is in fact 4-4 per years. Only a very small fraction of this

thousand, which must be one of the lowest increase can be attributed to migration. A

figures ever recorded. But it provides a good few families and individual converts joined

example of how the crude death-rate may be the colonies between i88o and I895, but the

a misleading index of mortality. A far movement petered out after the turn of the

larger proportion of Hutterite population is century. Since i9i8, the colonies have on

concentrated in the younger age groups than balance tended to lose migrants, and the rate

in most western populations, which naturally of increase has if anything been retarded.

produces a lower crude death-rate. Eaton The rate of natural increase of the

and Mayer's figures do not tell us their Hutterites-that is the difference between

average expectation of life at birth, but a the birth and the death rates-was 4I*5 per

comparison by age groups of Hutterite thousand for the decade I94I-50. This figure

mortality rates with those of other western is substantially higher than that recorded of

populations shows that while mortality any nation since the second world war. If

among Hutterite adults is slightly lower than the present pattern of Hutterite fertility and

among adults of the United States as a whole, mortality is maintained, they will double

that for children under fifteen is rather their numbers in approximately sixteen

higher. The average infant mortality rate for years, and will reach a total of 64,500 by the

the period I946 to I950 was for the Hutterites end of this century.

forty-five deaths under one year per I,000 But Eaton and Mayer think that it is

live births. Comparable figures for other unlikely that their present rate of increase

western countries during the same period can be maintained for long. Apart from

were: United States 32, Canada 44, England economic difficulties, the more the Hutterites

and Wales 36, Switzerland 36, Netherlands increase, the more difficult will it become for

3I, Australia 27, and Sweden 24.

them to preserve their isolation from the

One curious feature of Hutterite mortality outside world, and their immunity from

is that the age-specific death-rates for modern cultural and ethical values which

females between the ages of fifteen and sixty affect fertility.

UNCHECKED POPULATIONS

24I

Already, they write, there are signs that there a total of somewhere between IO and I3

are doubts about some of the fundamental beliefs of their system of religious values, which is an essential factor in their high true rate of reproduction. Long before their colonies begin to show overt signs of disorganization, birth-rates may be a reliable indicator of the rate of change of fundamental Hutterite beliefs under the impact of competing American values.

million.* Like most South American countries,
Venezuela is on the average sparsely populated. The total surface area is approxi-
mately 900,ooo square kilometres and with
the present population at about 5-6 million,
the average density works out at between

Venezuela

six and seven persons per square kilometre. This figure, however, has little relation to

The North American Hutterites are a unique people, because the combination of unlimited fertility within marriage with a high material standard of living is nowhere else fourid.
Yet in many under-developed areas during the last decade death-rates have been reduced to levels comparable with those of western countries, despite the fact that the level of living of large sections of the population has remained miserably low, and fertility very high. As a result rates of population growth of the order envisaged by Malthus are becoming almost commonplace.
At present, the country with the highest

reality, for 6o per cent of the population is gathered into a coastal region comprising only about i6 per cent of the land surface. Of these, 700,000 are in Caracas, the capital,
and 500,000 in the Zulia petroleum area on Lake Maracaibo. In contrast, the vast
forest areas to the south cover about 47 per cent of the surface of the country and contain about 2i6 per cent of the population.t
Oil is the principal industry of Venezuela, and is indeed the life-blood of her economy. In I954 I4.3 per cent of the total world output of petroleum came from Venezuela, and the following table gives an indication of
her position in world production:

rate of natural increase in the world is Venezuela. In I954 this country had a crude birth-rate of 46-7 per thousand, and a crude death-rate of io i-giving a rate of natural increase of 36.6 per thousand.* The present position has been achieved both through a rise in the birth-rate and a decline in the death-rate. During I935-39 the recorded

1954 PETROLEUM OUTPUT IN MILLIONS OF
CUBIc FEET United States .. .. 367 Middle East .. ..I62 Venezuela .. .. .. I09 Remainder of Latin America 28
Others .. .. .. 92

birth-rate averaged 32-7 per annum-four-

Total World Production .. 758

teen points below its present value, while the crude death-rate averaged I7-9-7-8 points

Source: United Nations. Economic Survey ofLatin America. I954. Pp. I05-Io6.

above its present value. The decline in

infant mortality has been more striking Between I947 and I95I Venezuelan oil than that in the crude death-rate. It has production increased by 9-3 percent annually, dropped from I35 infant deaths per i,000 but the I952 figure was only 6 per cent above live births in I935-39 to sixty-seven in I954. that of I95I, and in I953 there was an

In I920 the population of Venezuela was
approximately 2-4 million; in I950 the
census figures showed a total of just under
5 million. The projections made recently by
the Population Division of the United

absolute decline from I05 to I02 million
cubic feet. In I954 it was up again to IO9 million, but, in the words of the United Nations Economic Survey of Latin America
(I954), "the dynamic impulse of the

Nations indicate that by I980 it may reach * United Nations. The Population of South America
I950-80. I955. New York.

* Population Index, I955, 21, 7, pp. 2I8, 220. These t Grelier, Joseph. " Venezuela, Terre de Contrastes."

figures are still provisional.

Geographia, Oct. I955, pp. I3-I9.

242 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

petroleum industry appears to have lessened States, which is the principal purchaser of

in recent years; this combined with the Venezuelan oil. The European market is

prospects of competition from other producer already beginning to feel the effects of

regions, raises a serious question for increased competition from the Middle East

Venezuela's economy."

oil fields. Both her food imports and the

Agricultural techniques in Venezuela are development of her domestic agriculture are

backward, and yields are poor. To combat dependent on the proceeds from her oil

this situation, the government has embarked exports, as is the exploitation of the im-

on a policy of " investing petroleum profits mensely rich deposits of iron ore in the

in the diversification of domestic agricultural mountains east of the Orinoco.

production." Protective duties, agricultural credit, subsidies and minimum prices have Mauritius

served to stimulate home production, as well Few words are more abused to-day than

as the development of irrigation and the the adjective " under-developed." As one of

cultivation of hitherto unexploited land. the delegates to the I954 World Population

Cotton, rice, maize, and sugar cane in Conference in Rome remarked to the writer,

particular have increased, and the total if the word were used in its proper sense,

quantum of agricultural and livestock Canada could be regarded as one of the most

production has expanded steadily from some under-developed of countries, India as one of

74I million bolivars in I947-48 to 960 million the most developed. The present tendency

in I952-53 (1948 prices).

is to use it simply as a euphemism for poor

But Venezuela is not self-supporting in the and backward.

matter of food:

Venezuela is an under-developed country

Owing to the present state of agricultural in the fullest sense of the word. If her

development as well as environmental difficulties resources are to be exploited as they should

in producing certain basic 'dietary elements, be, she will need a substantially larger

Venezuela is obliged to import increasing quantities of foodstuffs to meet the consumer demand. The 29 per cent increase in agricultural output

population than she has at present. Whether or not her rate of population increase is too

in the last six years has made possible some great to permit the smoothest and most

reductions in imports of rice, maize, sugar and rapid development is a debatable question.

vegetable oils, but imports of flour, oats, milk,butter, eggs and the like have shown a steady upward trend. Consequently in 1952 the quantum of imported foodstuffs was i8 per cent

But the same cannot be said of other countries, where the foreseeable limits of economic development have already almost

larger than in 1948.*

been reached, but which have nevertheless

Cocoa and coffee are exported, but except for extremely high rates of population growth.

a rise in I952 and I953, there has been a The problem has become most starkly general decline in the volume exported since apparent in a number of small islands,

I948. several of which belong to the British

Overall, Venezuela has, since the war, Commonwealth, and perhaps in none of these increased her means of subsistence faster has it become more acute than in Mauritius.

than her population. There has been a A recent report of the Committee on

3X7 per cent annual increase in goods and Population of the Mauritius Legislative services available per capita during the last Council, under the able chairmanship of Mr. ten years. How long this can be maintained M. Herschenroder, the Director of Statistics, is of course a matter of speculation, but it will emphasises the urgency of the situation.

clearly hinge largely on the state of the oil The different elements of the problem are market. The drop in petroleum output in lucidly explained, and the Committee's

I953 was principally due to a temporary conclusions and recommendations are contraction of the market in the United courageously and unequivocally stated.
Mauritius has one of the highest fertilities,

* I.N. Economic Survey ... (I953), p. 178.

in the world. The crude birth-rate for the

UNCHECKED POPULATIONS

243

quinquennium I949-53 averaged 47-5, and the be economically active. The Director of

gross reproduction rate in I952 was 3'I9I5. Statistics concludes that" a good estimate of

As in Venezuela, the present high level of optimum population works out in round

fertility is a comparatively recent develop- numbers to 400,000 persons. The present

ment. Between I933 and I937 the birth-rate population has accordingly in his opinion

averaged only 34 6 per thousand, and the already well outstripped the optimum figure

Committee attributes the recent increase for the island."

largely to the general prosperity of the island Only two possible solutions present them-

since the war. Sugar exports in I952 and selves; one is emigration, the other family

I953 were five or six times as great as in planning. Of these, the former can only be

I938; there has been full employment and regarded as a temporary expedient for

an absence of major cyclonic disturbances. alleviating the pressure of population; if a

At the same time mortality has fallen, permanent solution is to be found, it must be

principally due to the " virtual eradication " through the control of fertility.*

of malaria, the use of antibiotics, and

improved social welfare services. The crude Conclusion: Food and Medicine

death-rate, which averaged 26-9 in I933-37, Some people feel that because no populadropped to I5.3 in I949-53. Infant mortality tion has ever existed which has been

has been halved from I62-5 in 1938 to 8o08 in I952, and the average expectation of life at
birth has increased from thirty-five years in I944 to fifty years in I952.
Thus the crude rate of natural increase has jumped from 7.59 per thousand in I933-37 to 32-2 per thousand in I949-53. In I92I, the total population of Mauritius was 376,485; in I952 it was 50I,4I5. If the present pattern

completely " unchecked," the whole concept of an unchecked population is too abstract to be of any practical consequence. Malthus
clearly disagreed with this view, and so may others to-day. There is, however, a
significant difference between the present situation and that which faced Malthus I50
years ago. Malthus regarded the production of food

of fertility and mortality are maintained, the as being the chief factor determining the rate population will have passed the million mark of population growth. In this view he was

by i982.
Such an increase, however, could only be disastrous, for, the Committee thinks, the recent increases in production cannot be
maintained for long. The report examines the potential expansion of sugar, alcohol and molasses, tea, electricity, potatoes, livestock, and other minor industries, and concludes that " the increase contemplated will not represent more than 30 per cent of the present national income of the Colony." If the present standard of living is to be maintained, this potential increase " would, if carried out, raise the permissible maximum of the population susceptible of finding subsistence in the island on present standard

probably substantially correct-for that era. The growth of population in various countries of western Europe in the eighteenth century presents many problems which have yet to be fully explained. But historians now tend to lay more stress on the increased food production of that time than on the advances of medicine. Unquestionably the most important development of medical science
was the discovery of vaccination, but, as already mentioned, Jenner did not publish
his results until I798. But if the growth of population was mainly
due to increased food production, it does not follow that a large section of the community had been permanently living on the barest

to 66o,ooo. This figure of population will in minimum necessary for survival, or that the all probability be reached towards the end of chief cause of mortality had been sheer

I962."

But even this number is very far from * The recommendations of the Committee, and the

representing the optimum population for Mauritius, if a suitable proportion of it is to

reaction of the Roman Catholic Church in Mauritius are further discussed in the N-otes of the Quarter. (p. 209).

244 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

starvation. Certain diseases were at that reduced without the necessary concomitance

time endemic and when a poor harvest or of increased production of food, and the

total crop failure brought under-nourishment governments have then initiated large-scale

to part of the community, these diseases development programmes in frenzied efforts

flared up and killed off at least as many to keep pace with the expanding populations.

people as died simply because they had Whereas in the eighteenth century popula-

nothing to eat. A recent example of this was tion growth spontaneously followed in the

experienced in the Bengal famine of I943, wake of the expanding economy, to-day

when malaria, cholera, and smallpox wrought economic development is fostered in the

terrible havoc among the famine wake of the growing populations.

" destitutes."* These periodic upsurges of These generalizations doubtless over-

mortality formed one of the major checks to simplify an extremely complex problem,

population growth before the eighteenth and require numerous qualifications and

century, and as agricultural production reservations which cannot be listed here.

developed and methods of transport im- But the fact remains that the situation in

proved, these crises were gradually mitigated. many under-developed countries to-day is

Thus if the growth of population in the fundamentally different from that in western

eighteenth century can be attributed, in part European countries in the eighteenth

at least, to an increase in the means of century.* This fact should be borne in mind

subsistence, it may also be interpreted as the by those who draw parallels between the

result of an expansion of the economy. growth of population in Asian, African,

The economic revolution of the eighteenth and South American countries to-day, and

century preceded the medical revolution of that in western countries in the early stages

the nineteenth.

of their demographic revolution.

But in many " under-developed " countries Yet the principal conclusion remains the

to-day, other causes are at work. Though same: that if the standard of living is to be

temporary periods of prosperity may have permanently raised, fertility must, sooner or

contributed towards the growth of popula- later, be controlled.

tion, the primary cause has been the

application of modern medical science, in particular the elimination of endemic

could, in countries where " malaria transmission is perennial as in Guiana, Mauritius and Venezuela," serve to raise the birth-rate as well as to reduce the

malaria.t Thus mortality has first been death-rate. (Cited in the Mauritius Population Report,

p-5).

* Famine Inquiry Commission (I944-45) Report on
Bengal. Pp. I1I6-I23.

* For other important differences, see S. Kuznets, Under-developed countries and the pre-industrial phase in advanced countries: ant attempt at

t According to E. J. Pampana, M.D., Chief of the malaria section of the W.H.O., the control of malaria

comparison." Paper presented to the 1954 World Population Conference in Rome.

