A SATISFACTORY POPULATION FOR BRITAIN ?

23

heterozygote, it follows that the population can never be reduced to uniformity. It is mainly the fertile heterozygotes who are responsible for producing the next generation, and being a type which never breeds entirely true to itself it will necessarily
always produce a mixed population. If the types AA and aa were quite infertile, and never produced any children, they would still be constantly renewed in each generation
as offspring of the fertile Aa type. If these types have only partially reduced fertility,
they will contribute a certain amount to the next generation, and a state of equilibrium will be set up in which all three types will be represented, their proportions depending on their relative fertilities. The
study of this type of population is not yet

far advanced, but it is of interest to note
that it is stable and adaptable. A change in conditions, altering the fertilities of the three types, will produce a fairly rapid change in their relative proportions until the new
equilibrium position is reached. If the
conditipns go back to their former ones the
population will also change back to its original state. Perhaps this quality of adaptability is of value to a population as
well as to an individual. I should emphasize again that parts of
this paper are rather speculative. If observation and theory advance sufficiently, no doubt in 50 years' time much of it will seem naive. Nevertheless, I think that even what we now know sheds some light on the problems of eugenics.

A SATISFACTORY POPULATION FOR BRITAIN?
By SIR CHARLES ARDEN-CLOSE, K.B.E., C.B., F.R.SS

STUDENT$ of demographic problems
are well aware that there is no generally
accepted or infallible test for the number of people in any country which will provide an all-round optimum of well-being, however that may be expressed. But in this country we have at least one simple condition which must be fulfilled before all else, and that is,
we must be fed. And that is a condition which it is becoming increasingly difficult to
ensure. To simplify the issue, let us assume-and
the assumption is not an unreasonable onethat it is not necessary for a country to be entirely self-supporting in the matter of food, and that a margin can be allowed, differing in each case, which will permit of a satisfactory and legitimate risk which may be taken in peace or in war. It may also be assumed that such a risk might, in certain circumstances,

involve the reduction of the standard of nutrition down to a rather low level.
That this country does face a problem of the kind is evident from the reports which are published, from time to time, in the newspapers. These give us facts and opinions about numbers, food and agriculture, about migration and employment, about imports of food and the payment for them; varied information and varied opinions. Let us take examples from The Times of a single date, January 24th, I950. A leading article in that issue dealt with the question of the size of the average family in Great Britain, which now, according to the Royal Commission on Population is 2-2, and is somewhat below the replacement figure.
The writer of the article stated that, " The crux of any population policy for Britain is not to promote large families but to enhance

24 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the popularity of families with three or four million fewer, and the same picture was

children." The tendency of the article is to perceptible in continental Europe, in Aus-

deplore the existence of the habit of having tralia there was the pressure of enormous

very small families, and to approve of the undeveloped resources on an inadequate

attitude of " the important minority who still population." From this it would appear that

prefer not to limit their families." It was not Mr. Menzies would consider a population

intended to advocate a general return to the of from 35 to 40 million suitable for

very large Victorian family. The Royal Britain.

Commission pointed out that " An eventual Here is a possible solution of this problem.

decline from the nineteenth century rate We all know that there is, as a fact, no small

of population growth in Great Britain . . . difficulty in paying for our food and raw

was inevitable . . . and . . . it would be material from abroad, even in peace time and

impossible for such enormous numbers to with the help of Marshall Aid. But we know

sustain life in Great Britain in any circum- also that it is reasonable for a heavily

stances now foreseeable." There is, in fact, a industrialized country to import some of its

limit. Is it possible to say what that limit food. It is a question of the ratio between

should be ?

home-grown and imported food. And what

On the same page of the same issue of The stress should we lay upon the possibility of

Times there appeared a letter from Professor war ? Let us fix the ideas by supposing that

John Jewkes, of Oxford, under the title we might safely import one-third of all the

" Paying for Food Imports." He wrote that food that we eat, so that, if outside supplies

the test of whether the dollar crisis continues were to fail, we could still rely upon a two-

or not is to ask: "What would happen if thirds full ration.

Marshall Aid ceased ? " And he stated that We must now take the advice of the

we could not continue to import present experts of the farming community. Sir

supplies of food from dollar areas, and, at the James Turner, President of the National

same time continue to import our present Farmers' Union, said on November gth, I949,

quantity of raw materials. " And the nearer that we ought to be able to supply half our

we approach the end of Marshall Aid the food needs from this country by I952. If

graver becomes the crisis." Briefly, we have we take our numbers to be about 49 million

some 49 million people to feed and shall that means that we could feed from our home

find it difficult to feed them.

resources 241 million people. If we could

In the same issue there was news from import safely one third of all we eat, the

Australia. The Prime Minister of Australia, total population that we could feed would be

speaking at a conference of societies inter- 36-75 million, let us say 37 million, and this

ested in immigration, said: "While in the happens to be about the average figure

United Kingdom a population of 50 million mentioned by Mr. Menzies. This figure,

was depending on resources adequate, per- 37 million, was the population of Great

haps, for a population IO million or I5 Britain in I9OI.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XII, No. 1

