THE GERMAN STERILIZATION LA"W
Discussion on Professor Muckermann's Lecture

O N October 30th, at the rooms of the Linnean Society, Professor Hermann Muckermann, until July I933 Direc-
tor of the department of eugenics in the
Anthropological Institute at Berlin, addressed a Members' Meeting on " The Eugenics Movement in Germany." The President of the Society, Sir Humphry Rolleston, took
the Chair.
In the first part of his address, Professor
Muckermann dealt with questions of race, defending his thesis that it was necessary to protect the indigenous racial composition from mixture with other races which were alien and perhaps antagonistic. Every
nation, he said, had its special character, which depended not only on history and environment, but essentially on heredity.
If we wished to retain our own character, we had to preserve our racial composition. This principle involved a deep respect for the cultural abilities of every nation, though our love was primarily directed to our own, as to a mother. This love, he asserted, did not depend on a sense of racial superiority. The practical measures in Germany were concerned with certain enactments governing the contracting of marriage, supervision of immigration, and the control of racial influences upon education and public life.
Turning to problems of human heredity, the lecturer outlined the progress that had been made in research upon the heredity of useful and pathological qualities, especially of a higher psychic kind, and discussed differential fertility in the eugenic sense of the term. The offspring of hereditarily wellendowed families were not sufficiently numerous to replace their parents. The practical steps taken in Germany included eugenic education, schemes for diminishing the number of hereditarily afflicted persons and preserving and increasing the number of those with useful qualities, and sterilization.
Some of the figures relating to the practice of sterilization under the new German Act

were highly instructive. In Baden up till June I5th, I934,* there had been 3,025 petitions for sterilization, i.e. on behalf of I *2 per cent. of the inhabitants of the state. Of these petitions 675 were voluntary and 2,350 were compulsory, that is to say they were sent in by some person other than the candidate for sterilization. A few of the total number of petitions were refused before receiving consideration by the Eugenic Courts-66 out of 3,025; of the remaining 2,959, I,903 were granted or ordered, and of these 572 (289 males and 283 females) have so far been carried out. More of these I,903 persons will doubtless be sterilized in due course. Professor Muckermann did not say how many of the 572 sterilizations above referred to were voluntary and how many were compulsory.
In Hamburg, I,325 petitions had been
received, 782 voluntary and 543 compulsory.
A few-8 of the total number-had been refused before consideration by the Courts; 76I sterilizations had been ordered; and 364 persons (I55 males and 209 females) had been sterilized.
From March 5th to June 2Ist there had been 244 petitions in Kiel, I3I concerning males and I33 females. All had been granted or ordered and 62 persons had been sterilized to date. In approximately the same period there had been 325 petitions in Berlin, I43 voluntary and i82 compulsory. All of them had been granted or ordered.
It was noteworthy, said Professor Muckermann, that two-thirds of these petitions were on behalf of feeble-minded persons and the remaining one-third were almost exclusively concerned with schizophrenics and epileptics. Extremely few members of the other categories specified in the German Sterilization Act had hitherto been sterilized.
Prof. Muckermann concluded his instructive
lecture with the following sentexnces: " I have
* The Act came into force on January Ist, 1934.

267

268 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

tried to give you an objective account of all prac- was a more relevant issue. The German law

tical measures referring to national eugenics in Germany and of their scientific foundations. There is no doubt that in this respect great progress has
been made in my country. I should be happy if the

was a compulsory measure. This had social, medical and eugenic consequences. Socially
there were evident an indifference about the

acceleration given to the eugenic movement in individual and a readiness to apply force in

Germany by legislative measures might greatly this most personal matter, which confficted

assist the growth of the eugenic movement and of eugenic ideas in England. In both countries there is
no more important idea than to remain as faithful

with civilized ethics; and this indifference was sometimes openly expressed by respon-

as possible to scientific principles and to the super- sible biologists and administrators in Ger-

natural principles of ethics that involve the respect many. It was unpleasant to consider that

for the well-founded liberty of conscience. The national honour and welfare depend on this fidelity
to truth and conscience. This attitude is in accordance with the views of Sir Francis Galton, the

policemen were to be invoked to hale along, and even to hold during the sterilizing operation reluctant subjects, from the age

founder of eugenics, whose epitaph ought to find a of I4 onwards.

place beside those of Newton and Darwin in Medically the measure had already been

Westminster Abbey."

reported by responsible authorities to be

Major A. G. Church said that when he intro- prejudicing the relations of patient to family

duced the Sterilization Bill in the House of doctor, promoting distrust on the one side

Commons in I93I, he was bitterly attacked and erroneous diagnosis on the other; it was

by many bodies, but more particularly by making mental hospitals and the psychiatric

Catholics and in the Catholic Press. It was clinic places which people shunned and

therefore of particular significance that Pro- feared. As to these consequences there was

fessor Muckermann, himself a devout the testimony of well-known psychiatrists:

Catholic, should openly advocate steriliza- it was doubtful whether any amount of pro-

tion as a means of dealing with one of the paganda would counteract them or restore

gravest social problems of our time and that confidence in doctors and their discre-

proclaim as he did the fact that he was the tion, which was an essential element in

inspiration of the present Sterilization Law treatment. Many persons who had recovered

in Germany. It behoved us, as Members of from their mental illness had now to choose

the Eugenics Society, to give wide publicity between sterilization and lifelong incarcera-

to this fact, which he hoped would serve to tion in hospitals for the insane. Catholics,

remove the misconceptions and misappre- for example, had only this latter altemative

hensions of large sections of the religious to being sterilized. -It was a cruel dilemma

community in this country regarding the for those whose religion or conscience forbade

effect of the measures which we advocated. sterilization.

Dr. A. J. Lewis said that for him the chief All these dangers and sufferings might be

interest of Professor Muckermann's guarded thought, by those who put the State before

presentation lay in the references to com- all, to be worth incurring if eugenic ends

pulsory sterilization. The earlier part of the were being truly served. But it was doubtful

paper, which had dealt with the racial whether compulsory sterilization did this.

question, excelled in under-statement, which For one thing the German law expressly

was perhaps to be expected in any apologia forbade voluntary sterilization: however

about such " delicate matters," as Dr. clear it might be that a person was a carrier

Muckermann had called them; the theories of transmissible disease, or was unfit to

and practice put forward were matters of bring up children, he could not be sterilized

political feeling; they rested on belief and unless he had manifested one of several

not on biology, as might be seen from Dr. named diseases. It ignored in its drastic

Muckermann's own writings and those of provisions the possibility that most valu-

other Gernan proponents of Heimrassigkeit. able positive qualities might be present in

But for us in England the question of com- those who had also one of these specified

pulsory as against voluntary sterilization conditions. However high their endowments

THE GERMAN STERILIZATION LAW

269

in many directions, the definite occurrence about his patient's medical history, he often

of, say, an attack of mild mania meant com- replied that he did of course realize the

pulsory sterilization. In this, as in many situation in regard to this particular patient

other ways, the wholesale and ruthless pro- and had actually completed an application

visions of the German law, as laid down and for his sterilization; but he had omitted

already widely enforced, were out of keeping to send it to official quarters-an oversight

with eugenics in its positive aspect, as well on his part! Or again, he would say that, on

as its negative. The individual case might the medical history, he could not make a

properly be judged on its merits in the present definite diagnosis and so had not considered

state of knowledge, but the studies made did it timely to apply for sterilization. In many

not justify sweeping measures of this sort cases an intentional misdiagnosis was made

applied to the whole nation willy-nilly. in order to obviate the necessity for making

Much further research was needed, as the an application.

scientific writings of Professor Rudin and The general practitioner was often faced

others showed in less propagandist days. with the choice of loyalty to his patient or

But the new law had already, according to adherence to the state laws, and for a variety

foremost workers in the field, made it difficult of reasons he was likely to choose the former

to collect trustworthy information from and as best he could circumvent the latter.

which further knowledge might be drawn as

to the heredity of these somewhat hetero- Professor F. C. S. Schiller suggested that too

geneous groups of diseases, like schizophrenia. much stress should not be laid on the defects

If research was impeded or stifled by a law, of the German eugenical legislation or on the

if people became afraid of consulting doctors administrative difficulties to which it gave

and of entering hospitals, if valuable qualities rise. No doubt it was unwise to force the

were in part extirpated, if voluntary steriliza- pace, and probable that compulsory steriliza-

tion was forbidden, if human privileges and tion would prove less workable and effective

fundamental rules of civilized life were than a voluntary measure. But these mis-

ignored, then a law which did such things takes could be corrected, and should not

was scarcely a step in advance.

stand in the way of our recognising the great

In concluding his remarks Dr. Lewis historic importance of the action of the

reminded the audience that it was not German Government. The eugenics move-

sterilization that was the root of those evils, ment had been started in this country and

but compulsory sterilization; from voluntary we had talked about it for some fifty years;

sterilization, he said, no such consequences but we had never succeeded in getting any-

were to be feared.

thing done. Now for the first time a great

modern state had committed itself to a far-

Dr. A. Gilpin amplified Dr. Lewis's reaching eugenical programme. If it suc-

remarks on some of the dangers of compul- ceeded, or even seemed to succeed, similar,

sory sterilization by an account of some of possibly improved, programmes would have

the events that took place behind the scenes to be adopted in all countries that were not

in connection with amplications made under inclined to resign themselves to progressive

the German law. In a town of 200,000 inhabi- internal decay. There was one point he was

tants, applications for eugenic sterilization very curious about, and about which he

had been made in 4,000 cases and it was would like the lecturer to give some informa-

interesting to note that of these merely a tion. Could he tell them by persuading whom

handful had been notified by general prac- it had been possible to put through this

titioners. When a general practitioner was legislation ? If it was by convincing one

informed that such and such a patient of his man, or even a few, it seemed to him an

was probably suffering from a disease that important argument in favour of institutions

came within the categories mentioned in the that rendered such action possible, for he had

Act, and was asked for further information to confess himself very sceptical whether it

270 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

could ever be obtained from the vote-catch- ditions and sterilization of the unfit and their

ing timidity of the leaders of our present progeny were not instruments of race purifi-

democracy.

cation but of political extinction. On purely

technical grounds we should note with dismay

Dr. D. I. Frost expressed the view that the application of the German Sterilization

politics and medicine nowhere linked up Law not only to manic-depressive psychoses

more closely than in eugenics, and asked the but also to schizophrenia. Application of the

Society, as a scientific body, to accept the latter term was being widened from the

implications of this connection and admit concept of the dementia praecox group to

that Professor Muckermann's address re- refer to any dissociating process in any

flected the revolutionary changes in Germany psychosis; not to schizophrenia the disease,

chiefly from their political facet. The shifting but to schizophrenia the symptom, which was

of the eugenic leadership from Berlin to part and parcel of the majority of psychoses.

Munich corresponded only to the translation So that the carefully numbered and appar-

of political leadership from the Reichstag to ently limited list to which the German law

the Brown House.

applied really included every form of mental

Examining the situation in England, the breakdown.

speaker reminded the audience that the The voluntary sterilization advocated in

certified insane numbered roughly I50,000 the Brock Report was also suspect. Steriliza-

persons, and that, in addition, there existed tion, voluntary or compulsory, added no

in the country over 350,000 persons who at advantage to the individual sufferer and

some time or other had been certified. If a indeed it added one more inferiority to those

sterilization measure similar to the German already heaped upon him by society. Volun-

one operated here, not only this half-million tary sterilization was the thin end of the

persons would be affected but lar;e numbers wedge and threatened not only the person of

of their collaterals. Enough was known the unfit but the liberty of political malcon-

about mental disorder to show that heredi- tents. Sterilization might be advantageous

tary transmission was not the dominant after social changes had eliminated unneces-

factor in its etiology. While £Io,ooo,ooo was sary conflicts and hardships; but till then

spent on more segregation and only £Io,ooo he opposed it.

on research, it was impossible to say that we

had exhausted every avenue of investigation. Mrs. Grant Duff said that at the Inter-

Even within the category of mental deficiency national Hygiene Exhibition in Dresden,

only 5-Io per cent. of patients had mentally three and a half years ago, the following

defective parents. Mental defect had in- warning was set up in large letters on the

creased ioo per cent. in the past twenty walls of the German section: "If you

years, while the population had grown only have a disease, don't get married until you

by I4 per cent. The effects of social and are cured. If your illness is incurable and

economic stress had never been worked out; hereditary, don't get married without first

nor had the effects of maternal malnutrition being sterilized! " She had inquired at the

or of attempted abortion-which, he said, time if it was legal to get sterilized in

was in many cases " an economic incident." Germany, and the answer was " No, not yet,

In times of crisis it was particularly im- but we have prepared a Bill which we hope

portant to bear in mind the social factor in will soon become law." This was in June,

mental disorder. In France, 2o per cent. of I93I-nearly two years before the National

the inmates of mental hospitals in the larger Socialist Party came into power.

towns were (according to the speaker)

foreign immigrants-chiefly political refugees Dr. Kenneth B. Aikman asked the lecturer

from Germany. What, he asked, were the whether in his opinion, considering that the

effects of political persecution in Germany German people had been inundated with

itself ? Mental breakdown under terror con- eugenic propaganda and were highly patriotic,

THE GERMAN STERILIZATION LAW

27I

sufficient numbers of volunteers for sterilization would be forthcoming to allow of a useful scientific investigation of the results ff (i) their sterilization law had been on a voluntary basis originally or (2) were made
voluntary now. Mrs. C. B. S. Hodson suggested as a pos-
sible explanation of the wide variations in the number of cases of sterilization from different areas in Germany the possibility that these
might be correlated with differences in the method of administrating the new law.
Taking an analogy from America she said that States with compulsory laws for the
most part showed a negligible number of

operations whereas California, having administered as a voluntary measure a law
which read as entirely compulsory, authorizing the operation only on patients who had signed an application for it, had its wellknown high record of sterilizations for eugenic purposes. The administrators of the
German law, whom she herself had met, had an infectious enthusiasm for the racial value of sterilization and proclaimed as heroes of
the Fatherland those who volunteered for the operation or freely consented to it. Where
they succeed in carrying public opinion with
them the grave difficulties created by a compulsory system would not be likely to arise.

CHARACTER AND PERSONALITY |
An International Quarterly for Psychodiagnostics and Allied Studies
Editor: ROBERT SAUDEK-London Contents of Number 2, Volume III, December
J. B. RHINE, Duke University: Telepathy and Clairvoyance in the Normal and Trance States of a Medium.
WILLIAM BROWN, Oxford University: Sleep, Hypnosis, and Mediumistic Trance.
WILLIAM McDOUGALL, Duke University: On the Nature of Spearman's General Factor.
A. A. ROBACK, Cambridge, Mass.: Personalysis: A Study in Method. News and Notes. Book Reviews.
Subscription price 7/6 per annum; Single Copies 2/-
The previous numbers have now been reprinted, so that a complete set of the Joumal can be supplied.
LONDON: GEORGE ALLEN & UNWIN LTD
40 MUSEUM STREET, LONDON, W.C. I
Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVI, No. 4.

