THE BIOLOGY OF GROWTH

A Review of its Place in Heredity and Evolution
By G. R. de BEER
[Fellow of Merton College, Oxford]

H ERE is a collection of five lectures* from a diet which is deficient in lysine.

which were delivered in 1925-6 by Such a diet is, however, insufficient for
members of the staff of the Univer- growth if administered direct to the young

sity of Missouri, in an attempt to present a animals themselves.

comprehensive concept of growth. While Another important piece of work which

each lecture contains matters of interest, might have profitably been included is that

they are not all equal in value. A sympo- of Drew (I923). This investigator observed

sium of this kind cannot be expected to that if tissues of an adult animal are allowed

show that cohesion which is usually looked to decompose at the temperature of the body

for in a book, but which a course of lectures (i.e., to undergo autolysis), they furnish a

by different persons need not necessarily substance which has remarkable powers of

achieve. Furthermore, when delivered in promoting growth when administered to

the form of lectures to stimulate curiosity tissues growing in vitro. Further, this effect

and to focus attention, the subject matter is very similar to that which is produced by

under review is excellent, but it appears a an extract of a cancerous tumour. The more

trifle thin when cast into book form.

malignant (i.e., rapid-growing) the tumour,

Certain matters have been omitted which the more effective is its extract. It would might reasonably be expected to occupy a appear then that cancerous tissue differs place in an elementary exposition of the from healthy tissue in that it possesses con-

phenomena of growth. One of these is the tinuous supplies of this growth-promoting

detail of the growth of the uterus of a substance, whereas healthy tissue possesses

pregnant mammal, which is effected by in- it only when and as it is damaged. It is

crease in size and not in number of the cells further probable that this autolysed extract

which compose the uterine wall; the subse- plays a part in the normal process of repair

quent involution of the uterus after birth of the body, when damaged tissue is made

takes place by reduction of the size of the good by the growth of other tissue to take cells. This important case serves as a warn- its place.

ing that growth and cell-multiplication are The description of the pineal gland as

not necessarily synonymous. When dealing being situated " at the base of the brain " is

with nutritional requirements, an interesting a little misleading, and the physico-chemical

point which might be mentioned is (as postulates in the form of a catechism are Osborne, Mendel, and Ferry showed in I9I2) hardly illuminating. With regard to the that that constituent of protein known as first of these: " Why does growth occur? lysine, which is essential for growth, can be Because there is an inherent tendency, or

synthesized (or substituted for) in the body force, which causes cells to divide," Gray of an adult mammal suckling its young (I927) has shown that there is probably no-

fundamental association between growth and

* Robbins, W. J., Brody, S., Hogan, A. G., Jackson, C. M., and Greene, C. W., Preface by Hooker, H. D. Growth. London and New Haven, 1928. Humphrey Milford, Oxford University Press, Yale University Press. Pp. xiii and I89. 83 fig. Price $3.00
(x4S.)

cell-division. These two processes are the factors which determine the size of individual cells. In some cases they may establish a well-defined equilibrium, but in others not. At all events, the authors exerted

i8i

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

caution in not referring to the remarkable fats are laid under contribution as sources

work of Gurwitsch (I926) on the cell-multi- of energy. Further, he has shown (I926b)

plying effect of certain physical rays which that the selection of the kind of material

were supposed by him to be produced by which an embryo uses as a source of energy

certain living tissues. Fortunately, this at a given moment is made by factors

caution may be relaxed, now that the essen- residing within the embryo, and is inde-

tials of Gurwitsch's results have been con- pendent of the supplies of the various

firmed by Reiter and Gabor (i928).

materials available. The succession: carbo-

The book has, however, an unfortunate hydrate-protein-fat, is of great interest

demerit in that, although published in I928, from several points of view, which Needham

it does not take account of the results of discusses (I926c and I927c). It is the order

studies on growth which appeared in the of: ascending calorific value, descending

preceding three years from the work of a degree of intramolecular oxygenation, attack

number of investigators, chiefly on this side by digestive ferments in the intestinal tract

of the Atlantic. As the study of growth has of higher animals, decreasing solubility in

itself grown very rapidly during these years, water, decomposition during autolysis, sim-

it is regrettable that the opportunity was plicity of synthesis by solar energy, etc.,

lost of presenting an up-to-date account of and Needham is inclined to ascribe a phylo-

it. The new results are certainly not as genetic significance to it.

widely known as they deserve to be, and There is no relation between the periods

advantage will therefore be taken of this of maximum combustion of proteins and

opportunity for bringing them succinctly to fats and the periods of the maximum

notice.

absorption of these two classes of food-

The late Dr. T. S. P. Strangeways, who stuffs (Needham, I927a), but there does

devoted so much of his life to the investiga- appear to be a relation of this kind in the

tion of problems of growth in tissue-culture, case of the combustion and absorption of

was led to conclude (I924) that the ten- carbohydrates (I927b). The nature of the

dencies of a cell to multiply and to become material which is absorbed during any given

specialized and differentiated were more or period is probably controlled by variations

less mutually exclusive. This important in the permeability to water-soluble and to

view is all the more significant when con- fat-soluble substances of the cells of the

sidered in the light'of Drew's (I923) experi- blood-vessels of the blastoderm. Further

ments, in which he obtained the re-differen- work indicates that in the building up of the

tiation of the structure of the tubes of the embryo, molecules of protein are brought

kidney or of a mammary gland from sheets into the body of the embryo intact, and are

of tissue which were dividing rapidly and there broken down before being re-formed

had lost their previous differentiation. The re-differentiation was induced by adding con-
nective tissue to the culture. This result is in full accordance with that of Champy (I9I4), who found that epithelium and con-
nective tissue grow only very little when they are present in a culture together, but as soon as the connective tissue dies the

into its own characteristic protein molecules. The developing chick presents the very
interesting phenomenon of the " foie transitoire " in the cells of the yolk-sac, which
regulate metabolism until the embryo's liver is sufficiently well formed to take on this
function for itself (I927b). The yolk-sac

epithelium loses its differentiation and grows of the chick is in this respect analogous and

rapidly.

indeed perhaps homologous to the placental

Turning now to the raw materials which chorion of the mammal. Lastly, Needham

an embryo uses when it grows and differ- (I927d) has examined the degree of efficiency

entiates, Needham (I926a) has shown in the with which the yolk and white of the egg are

case of the chick that carbohydrates are converted into the flesh and blood of the

made use of first, then proteins, and lastly chick.

THE BIOLOGY OF GROWTH

183

GROWTH OF CANCEROUS CELLS

within the limits of probable error in the

No mention of sources of energy during taking of measurements. When more than

growth would be complete without reference one type of cell is present, as is always the

to Warburg's (I926) important results case in all animals above the Protozoa,

derived from experiments on the respiration growth-curves are insufficient for the con-

of healthy and of cancerous cells. Whatever struction of the real equation on which the

the material from which energy is derived, processes of growth are based. It is there-

a healthy tissue obtains energy by burning fore futile to expect to be able to " obtain

the raw material with oxygen: the process the laws of growth " simply by a considera-

known as aerobic respiration. A cancerous tion of curves.

tissue, however, obtains its energy by split- Of a different nature are the results of

ting up the molecule of raw material by Huxley's (I924a) re-investigation of certain

fermentation. So sugar is broken down to phenomena, and his discovery that in a

lactic acid by the process known as glyco- number of cases iin which an organ grows

lysis, and no oxygen is required for this relatively faster than the rest of the body,

process. Obtaining energy by these means the differential growth-rate is constant

is accordingly called anaerobic respiration. during long periods and is susceptible of

Healthy tissues can obtain energy by glyco- interpretation by a mathematical formula.

lysis when they are deprived of oxygen, but (This formula is y = bx", where x is the

they respire aerobically when oxygen is body, y is the organ in question, k is a con-

available, and glycolysis then ceases. But stant usually about i.5, and b is a constant

a cancerous tissue will continue to obtain of proportion.)

energy by glycolysis, however much oxygen is supplied to it, and the more malignant the DIFFERENTIAL GROWTH

tumour is, the more energy does it derive Without going into the causes of constant

from glycolysis. A cancerous cell therefore differential growth-rates (which remain

differs from a healthy cell in that its power obscure), attention may be paid to a number

of aerobic respiration is damaged or of interesting and important consequences

destroyed.

which result from them. An organ or part

While dealing with energy-sources, those which grows at a constant differential rate

who are attracted by general rules with re- when compared with that of the rest of the

markable exceptions to them will be inter- body is called a heterogonic organ. Such an

ested in the fact that the amount of energy organ is the abdomen in female crabs, which

(number of calories) which is necessary to in them is wider than in the males; for,

double the weight of the new-born of all while in the former it is heterogonic, its

mammalian species investigated is propor- growth in the latter is proportional to that

tionally the same for all, except for man: of the rest of the body, or isogonic. Females

4,808 calories are required to make i kg. of of the so-called fiddler-crab are found with

normal body, except by man, who requires a narrow abdomen, and this has hitherto

siy times as much (Rubner, I908).

been taken to imply that in these individuals

Gray (i926, i928a, and i928b) has carried there has been a qualitative change towards

out a number of investigations into the maleness. Huxley (I924b) has made it clear

growth of fish, and has been led to some that the phenomenon is merely one of quanti-

conclusions of great importance regarding tative reduction in the relative growth-rate

the attempts which have been made to (i.e., in the constant k) of a heterogonic

" explain " the growth of an animal by organ.

means of a mathematical formula or It has been known for some time that

equation. He has shown (I929) that, when male earwigs may be of one of two types:

the growth of an organism is plotted in the either " high " with large caudal pincers,

form of a curve, that curve can always be or " low " with small ones, and the distinc-

represented by more than one equation tion between them has hitherto been ascribed

184 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

to a difference in the factors inherited by is exerted in favour of larger size. At all

the individuals of one or the other type. events, this explanation of orthogenesis has

Huxley (1927a) has made it clear that the lifted the latter conception out of the cate-

difference is not one of hereditv but of de- gory of mystical fancies on to the level of a

velopment, for there are two " equilibrium- genetical and physiological problem.

positions " into which the degree of develop- It is of interest to note that the mathe-

ment of the pincers fall. The effect of an matically predictable size of a heterogonic

increase in the size of the body is the trans- organ appears to be a maximum limiting

ference of an increasing number of indi- value, as is shown by the fact that in crabs

viduals from the " low " to the " high " the claws (heterogonic in the male) can tem-

equilibrium-position. A similar phenomenon porarily become reduced below this value, as

is observable in respect of the size of the can the width of the abdomen in female

horn in the beetle Xylotrupes (Huxley, crabs (in which it is heterogonic). It is quite

I927b).

possible that this limiting value may be

These results are of considerable general found to be due to some simple geometrical

importance, for they show that the distinc- relation, such as that of an area increasing

tions between " high " and " low " forms isogonically to an area remaining stationary,

of certain insects, which have hitherto been as Bidder (I925a) has suggested.

considered to be of taxonomic importance, Now, the heterogonic organs in male crabs,

have no basis whatever as a means of the claws, are made up of a number of joints,

classification (Huxley, I927c).

and if the relative sizes of the joints are

EVOLUTION IN A STRAIGHT LINE

compared, it is found that the heterogony is more pronounced in some joints than in

Another aspect of the work on constant others (Huxley, I927c). These facts lead

differential growth-rates has an important to the following important conclusion:

bearing on the phenomenon which is usually since (i) the proportion of size of organ to

known as orthogenesis in evolution. When a size of body varies at different absolute sizes

lineage of animals is considered, it is often of the body if the organ is heterogonic; and

found that a certain variation (such as the (ii) the proportion of the parts of the organ

development of horns or antlers on the head, also vary inter se at different absolute sizes-

for instance) becomes progressively accentu- therefore species of animals with heterogonic

ated, as if evolution were taking place along organs have no constant specific shape.

a straight line in a definite direction. It is It is a remarkable thing that the joint of

now plain (Huxley, 1924a) that this result the claw of the male crab which grows

will be achieved if the variation in question fastest is not the terminal joint, but the

involves a heterogonic organ, and if the size penultimate one; and similarly the portion

of the body enlarges. This enlargement of of the abdomen in which the growth is

the body can in many cases be actually relatively the greatest is near the hind end,

shown to have taken place (as in that of the as Miss Shaw (I928) has shown. These

fossil Titanotheres), and in the case of deer, regions may therefore be regarded as

the relative antler-size rises steadily with growth-centres.

absolute body-size (Huxley, i926).

Another remarkable feature is that the

The orthogenetic accentuation of the growth of the heterogonic claw appears to

heterogonic organ is therefore nothing more affect the growth of the limbs in the adjacent

nor less than a correlated variation. Why segments. In most crabs and lobsters the

the size of the body should increase during large claw is on the first walking limb, and

evolution it is not easy to say, but it is it is found that, when compared with the size

known that several factors, both internal and of those of the female, in the male the second

external (such as glands of internal secre- to fifth walking limbs are larger, and the

tion, temperature, etc.), are concerned in it, limb just in front of the claw (the third

and in many normal environments selection maxilliped) is smaller. Further, in

THE BIOLOGY OF GROWTH

Palwmon carcinus, the claw is on the second animals during evolution, so that it should

walking limb, and here it is the third to transgress neither maximum nor minimum

fifth walking limbs which are larger in the limiting values. Should this occur, the

male than in the female, and the first walk- animal would become extinct, and this is

ing limb is smaller (Huxley and Tazelaar, probably the field in which the explanation

I929).

of the extinction of a number of fossil

animals of monstrous size is to be sought.

THE LIMITS OF GROWTH

The factors concerned in this connection,

If studies on heterogonic growth show that however, only act indirectly in their control

specificity of shape is not invariably to be of growth, by killing off the animals which

found in a species, other considerations show have grown too much or too little for their

that specificity of size in a species is not particular mode of life. It remains to con-

universal either. Bidder (I925b) has pointed sider the factors which act directly by conout that, as a rule, aquatic animals grow trolling and limiting growth during

throughout life and have no fixed final adult development.

size. This power of perpetual growth cannot, however, be possessed by terrestrial or THE HEREDITARY FACTORS

aerial animals without involving a disturb- Of these factors there is unfortunately

ance of physical and mechanical relations of little to say. It is, however, clear that the

the animal with its environment, as a result limitation of growth in development has its

of which the animal's life would be impos- hereditary as well as its embryological

sible. As Haldane (I927) shows, the size of aspect. Concerning the latter, mention must

an animal living on land cannot increase be made of Hesse's (I927) demonstration of

beyond a certain value, for in the process of the fact that for each type of structure of

enlargement the weight of the body in- an animal and for any given area of the in-

creases faster than, and outstrips the ternal surface of its gut, there is a maximum

increase in, the strength of the legs. A size size of the body which cannot be exceeded

is reached at which the legs will not support owing to limitation of raw material digested.

the body. To take another example: since With regard to the hereditary limitation of

insects breathe by means of blind tubes, the growth, it is obvious that some factor must

length of tube which permits a minimum be transmitted from parent to offspring

essential renewal of oxygen is limited. This which brings it about that in identical en-

factor, therefore, limits the maximum size vironments Pekingese are invariably smaller

to which insects can aspire.

than St. Bernards. Robb (I929), who has

In a similar way, it can be shown, as investigated the growth of giant and of dwarf

Hesse (I924) points out, that warm-blooded races of rabbits, has shown that the per-

animals cannot live in cold climates unless centage growth-rate is identical for both

they are of large size. The larger the from birth to puberty, but the dwarfs are

animal, the smaller is the ratio of its surface only half the size of the giants at birth.

to its volume. As heat is lost by radiation The greater size of the giants is therefore

from the surface, a large animal has a heat- due to a more rapid uterine growth.

loss which is low relatively to its size. Heat- The study of the factors which control

loss is made up for by combustion, and the growth is one of the most important in

fuel is obtained by eating. A small warm- biology, in plants as well as in animals, and

blooded animal living in a cold climate has a reference must be made to the admirable

heat-loss so large relatively to its size that, summary by Prat and Malkovsky (I927) of

in order to make up for it, it would require the state of knowledge as regards growth

to consume more food than it would have from a botanical aspect. But the study of

time to eat.

growth is no less fundamental in eugenic

The examples here considered show how science. The hereditary aspect as reflected

important is the control of the size of in the inheritance of the most suitable size

i86 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

for a given environment; the embryological aspect, concerned with problems of nutrition and infantile environment; and the pathological aspect, dealing with endocrine disorders, and, most serious of all, with tumours; all these must form the foundation of that knowledge which is the prerequisite to any attempt at applying it in the control of any species, whether domestic plant or animal, or pest, or man.
LITERATURE CITED
Bidder, G. P. (1925a) Constant diflerential
growth-ratios and their significance. NATURE.
115. P. I55. -(1925b) Growth and Death. PROC. LINN. SOC.
London. p. I7. Champy, C. (I914) La presence d'un tissu an-
tagoniste maintient la differenciation d'un tissu cultivi en dehors de l'organisme. COMPT.
REND. Soc. BIOL. 76. P. 31. Drew, A. H. (I923) Growth and Differentiation
in Tissue-Cultures. BRIT. JOURN. EXP. PATH.
4. P. 46.
Gray, J. (I926) The Growth of Fish. I. The relationship between embryo and yolk in Salmo fario. BRIT. JOURN. ExP. BIOL. 4. P. 215.
-(I927) The Mechanism of Cell-division. III. The relationship between cell-division and growth
in segmenting eggs. BRIT. JOURN. ExP. BIOL.
4. P. 313. -(1928a) The Growth of Fish. II. The growth-
rate of the embryo of Salmo fario. BRIT.
JOURN. ExP. BIOL. 6. p. IIo. -(1928b) The Growth of Fish. III. The Effect of
temperature on the development of the eggs of Salmo fario. BRIT. JOURN. Exp. BIOL. 6. p. 125.
-(I929) The Kinetics of Growth. BRIT. JOURN. ExP. BIOL. 6. p. 248.
Gurwitsch, A. (I926) Das Problem der Zellteilung physiologisch betrachtet. Berlin.
Haldane, J. B. S. (I927) Possible Worlds. On Being the Right Size. London.
Hesse, R. (I924) Tiergeographie auf Okolo-
gischer Grundlage. Jena. -(1927) tJber Grenzen des Wachstums. Jena. Huxley, J. S. (i924a) Constant differential
growth-rates and their significance. NATURE. I I4. p. 895. -(I924b) The variation in the width of the abdomen in immature Fiddler-crabs considered in relation to its relative growth-rate. AMER. NATURALIST. 58. P. 468. -(1926) The annual increment of the antlers of the red deer. PROC. ZOOL. Soc. London. p. 102I.

-(1927a) Discontinuous variation and Hetero-
gony in Forficula. JOURN. GENETICS. I7. P. 309.
-(1927b) Studies on heterogonic growth. IV. The Bimodal cephalic horn of Xylotrupes gideon.
JOURN. GFNETICS. i8. P. 45.
-(I927c) Further work on heterogonic growth.
BIOL. ZENTRALBL. 47. P. I51.
Huxley, J. S., and Tazelaar, M. A. (I929) Growth-gradients and the axial relations of the body. NATURE. I23. P. 910.
Needham, J. (I926a) The energy sources in
ontogenesis. I. The urea content of the developing avian egg. BRIT. JOURN. RxP. BIOL.
3. P. I89. -(I926b) II. The uric acid content and the
general protein metabolism of the developing avian egg. BRIT. JOURN. ExP. BIOL. 4. P. II4. -(I926c) III. The ammonia content of the de-
veloping avian egg and the theory of recapitulation. BRIT. JOURN. ExP. BIOL. 4. P. I45. -(1927a) IV. The relation between absorption and combustion of protein and fat in the developing avian egg. BRIT. JOURN. ExP. BIOL.
4. P. 258.
-(1927b) V. The carbohydrate metabolism of the developing avian egg. BRIT. JOURN. ExP. BIOL.
6. p. 6.
-(I927c) VI. The relation between combustion, constitution, and concentration in the developing avian embryo. BRIT. JOURN. Exp. BIOL.
5. P. 27.
-(I927d) The developmental efficiency of the avian embryo. BRIT. JOURN. ExP. BIOL. 5. P.
43.
Osborne, T. B., Mendel, L. B., and Ferry, E. L. (19I2) The r6le of gliadin in nutrition. JOURN. BIOL. CHEM. I2. P. 473.
Prat, S., and Malkovsky, K. M. (1927) Ursachen des Wachstums und der Zellteilung. Proto-
plasma. 2, P. 312. Reiter, T., and Glbor, D. (I928) Zellteilung und
Strahlung. Berlin. Robb, R. C. (I929) On the nature of hereditary
size limitation. I. Body growth in giant and pigmy rabbits. BRIT. JOURN. Exp. BIOL. 6.
P- 293. Rubner, M. (I9o8) Das Problem der Lebensdauer
und seine Beziehungen zu Wachstum und Ernahrung. Miinehen and Berlin. Shaw, M. E. (I928) A contribution to the study of relative growth of parts in Inachus dorsettensis. BRIT. JOURN. Exp. BIOL. 6. p. 145. Strangeways, T. S. P. (I924) Tissue culture in relation to Growth and Differentiation. Cambridge.
Warburg, 0. (I926) Ueber den Stoffwechsel der
Tumoren. Berlin.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXI, No. 3.

