A STATE CERTIFICATE OF MARRIAGE. *
BYR. A. GIBBONS, M.D., F.R.C.S.E.,
Gynaecologist to the Grosvenor Hospital for Women.
(Together with a report read of a Conference on this subject and a survey
of State Regulations in Europe.)
I make no apology for bringing this subject before the Society, because it is par excellenc the one which takes a special interest in any suggestion bearing on the well-being of the community in general, and would surely use its influence should legislation of any kind be proposed which would be of benefit in improving the racial qualities of the nation. There is an additional interest in bringing such a subject before this Society, seeing that as all cannot be expected to agree with questions raised for the first time, especially those of a revolutionary character, one will have the advantage, in any discussion which follows, of hearing expressions of opinion opposed to, or in harmony with my suggestion, for it is well understood that all members of this Society have at heart whatever affects the well-being of our race.
Any legislation which would be the means of raising the standard of health at marriage is likely to be followed by the advent of healthy children, which, in the long run, must have a profound influence for good upon our nation.
There can be no question about members of the medical profession being most anxious to do all in their power to improve the standard of health generally, yet it is certainly remarkable that up to the present there has been no attempt to secure healthy marriages by legislating for a certificate of health to be produced before marriage takes place, and it may well be remarked that surely the first step tolWards endeavouring to obtain legislation with regard to anything concerning health, ought to be made by members of the medical profession.
At the present time, we have no means in our power to prevent any marriage taking place, no matter what may be the religion or the condition of the individuals about to be married. In respect to the teaching and law of the Roman Catholic Church, the following is of interest:-
"No human authority has any right to absolutely prohibit any individual against his antecedent will from contracting marriage, as such prohibition would be contrary to the natural law, e. g., the State cannot lawfully forbid the marriage of the poor or physically defective. "
The result of our general apathy is that marriages are daily taking
place all over our Empire, when, in many instances, one or both
*Read before the Eugenics Education Society, May 2nd, 1924.

118 EUGENICS REVIEW.
participating in them may be so affected by illness as to render the birth of healthy children impossible. A certificate of health would be the means of having marriage postponed until health was re-established.
I propose to consider this subject shortly under the heads of those conditions which, in my opinion, offer the strongest reasons in support of my plea for a State Certificate, because they are the ones most commonly met with as having profound influence on child-birth and birth-rate. It is obvious that, as I am asking for State legislation, the arguments brought forward must be strong ones in support of it, and I venture to think that the facts I shall adduce will strongly impress those who may never have considered the advisability of State legislation with reference to marriage. I shall confine my remarks to those points having reference to the influence of these affections on childbirth and on general health. The affections I allude to are:-
(1) Syphilis, (2) Gonorrhoea, (3) Tubercle, (4) The condition of genuine poverty, (5) Mental deficiency.
(1) SYPHILIS.
This malady is caused by an infecting organism called the Sphirochaeta Pallida, which was discovered by Schaudin and Hoffman in 1905, an-d this, quite apart from its action on the body generally, and its cause of ill-health, influences the birth-rate and infantile mortality in a serious manner. Owing to this malady, at least three times as many children die in the nine months before birth as die in the first twelve months after birth. It is estimated that, according to different observers it is the cause of from 25%(' "to 50%(2) of abortions and still births, whilst Hochsinger, (8) and Veeder (4) and Jeans state that
about 44.4% of pregnancies in syphilitic women end in abortions or
still-births, and, of the infants born alive, about one quarter die. It must be remarked that this does not include the children with
congential syphilis surviving more than 12 months after birth, and who die later on from debility, or who are delicate puny children, always requiring constant care and attention.
To syphilis must therefore be attributed a high percentage of sterility, for it must be remembered that if a woman gives birth to only still-born children, she is as sterile, as regards the State, as if she had never conceived.
Statistics regarding 10,000 consecutive labours in each of two American Hospitals, state that in one case, the still-births due to syphilis were 32% of the total births up to 14 days after birth, and
(1) Causes of Ante-Natal, Intra-Natal and Neo-Natal Mortality. Armand Routh, M.D.
(2) Royal Commission on Veneral Diseases. Appendix to First Report and
Final Report.
(8) Hochsinger (1910). Wien. Klin. Woch. XXIII, 881, 982; 1898. Studien Uber die Hereditare Syphilis (A. Holder, Leipzig).
(4) Veeder and Jeans (1916). Amer. Journ. Dis. of Children XI, 177a

STATE CERTIFICATE OF MARRIAGE.

1190

that, in the latter, 9% of the still-births were syphilitic, although all
recognised cases of maternal syphilis were refused. (5) Of syphilitic women, about 80% are married, and of the latter,
about 75% have acquired the disease from their husbands, and these
figures alone strongly support my thesis in favour of a State certificate of marriage. (6)
The foregoing figures are sufficiently startling, and it is not necessary to mention the more or less continued ill-health caused by theSphirochaeta Pallida. Allowing that many men marry in ignorance of their condition, possibly imagining that they have been cured of this disease, for which they may have been previously treated for many months, the necessary examination before granting the certificate of marriage would prove that they were not fully recovered.
Since 1906, we have the means of diagnosis by testing the blood for what is termed the Wassermann reaction, which would be made as a matter of routine, and would shew the condition present, and if positive, marriage for the time being could be postponed. This blood test, which we now have at our command, shews where this diseaseis in active process.
The necessity of such a medical examination would be a real blessing to many honourable men who contemplate marriage, conscientiously believing themselves to be well. I have brought first-born children into the world who have proved to be affected, when the fathers have assured me that at the time of their marriage they had not the faintest suspicion that anything was wrong with them, and there are others who have married, feeling far from well at the time, but not knowing that their malaise was attributable to a former infection.
(2) GONORRHOEA.
The micro-organism of this disease is called the Gonococcus, and may be extremely virulent. It may, on the other hand, be attenuated, so that the symptoms may be of less severe type than that of what is termed an acute attack. Many women are infected by their husbands immediately after marriage, and the attack may be so slight that they do not know from what they are suffering, and are only driven to seek: advice by the continuance of the symptoms. This has been called "The Gonorrhoea of the Innocent, " and is important as shewing that every attack is not severe, otherwise advice would be sought much earlier(7). It matters little however, whether the attack be a slightor a severe one, for in either, the result of the gonococcus may be most disastrous. The proof that the effects of the gonococcus on women
are so serious is that about 70% of the inflammatory affections met with in them, are due to the infection of this organism, and it is the commonest cause of both absolute and relative sterility. (8)
The gonococcus is intensely contagious, and may infect indivii-

(5) Holt and Babbit. Trans. Amer. Assoc. for Prev. Inf. Mort. 1915. Page 151.
(6) Fournier (1890). Syphilis et Mariage. G. Masson, Paris.
(7) La Blenorrhagie Chez la Fenune, Paris, 1894. (8) George Luys, Text Book of Gonorrhoea, page 18, 1918.

120 EUGENICS REVIEW.
duals through the use of towels, sponges or unclean thermometers, as well as in the ordinary manner.(9) This was demonstrated by the epidemic of vulvo-vaginitis in the city of Posen, when within 14 days 236 school girls between 6 and 14 years of age were attacked. This epidemic was traced to the public Bath House, where, on account of inadequate accommodation, two or more girls were obliged to bathe in the same tub, the girl who was the cause of the trouble having been infected by the use of her mother's towel. (10) Even in this affection in children cases of extension of the process do occur, and may lead to fatal peritonitis, the mortality being as much as 20% (Galvagno).(11)
In England and Wales, 24% of infants who become blind after
birth, owe their condition to the gonococcus, (12) and about 70°% of
the cases of inflammation of the eyes in the new born are due to maternal infection by the gonococcus. (13)
I have referred to sterility due to the Sphirochaeta Pallida, but that arising from the gonococcus is due to a different cause. It is because it lessens the birth-rate by preventing conception; probably
50% of all cases of sterility are due to it.
In the investigation by Glunen of a number of sterile marriages, the gonococcus was found to be present in 71.3%(14) -a sufficiently alarming number for reflection.
(3) TUBERCULOSIS.
Tuberculosis depends upon a micro-organism termed the Tubercle Bacillus. All know the disastrous effects of this organism in causing consumption throughout the world. There is however, one consoling thought concerning it, viz. that since the discovery of the tubercle bacillus in 1882, the death rate due to it is falling. The annual mortality for the last ten years is shewn in the table.
Now although we know that the tubercle bacillus by its action on the ovaries may bring about sterility, we also know that when some girls marry with tuberculosis, there may be nothing to prevent conception, with the result that during the whole time of pregnancy their health may curiously enough be improved. They may even increase in weight and feel well. Unfortunately after the birth of the child, the condition of the lungs is apt to become worse, sometimes causing a rapidly fatal termination. One of the greatest authorities on tuberculosis states that women with actual tuberculosis should not be allowed to conceive, and that if, unfortunately conception has occurred, pregnancy ought to be terminated, for the strain of child-birth is
(9) Veil et Bayon, "Epidemie de Vulvite A Gonocoques: Transmission par Thermometre," Semaine Medicale, 1904.
(10) Welt-Kakels; New York, Med. Journ. 1904. (11) Koch, Kolle w. Wassermann Handbuch der Pathogen: Mikro-Organismen.
Band IV, 1921. (12) Registrar General's Report; also Appendix to Final Report of Royal Com-
mission on V.D., Pp. 141-142. (13) Royal Commission on V.D., Final Report, page 12. (14) Torkel. Sterilitat des Weibes Monatsch. f. Geburtscb. w. Gynokol, 1907.

STATE CERTIFICATE OF MARRIAGE.

121

usually followed by acute exacerbation of the disease and often by death. (15)
The necessity of medical examination, in the case of those seeking marriage with tuberculosis, would be the means of saving many lives, for marriage could be postponed until treatment had rendered the indidividual well and ready for matrimony. In the case of men, who usually are the breadwinners, there is always risk of prolonged illhealth, and inability to carry on regular daily work, with the consequent strain and anxiety always so serious in tuberculosis. The knowledge that tubercle has been discovered at the medical examination with reference to the State certificate, when its existence might never have been thought of, would enable men to have advice, and thus recover health before attempting marriage.
(4) GENUINE POVERTY.
In contemplating legislation for healthy marriages, one is bound to take into consideration the circumstances of all those desiring matrimony when it is likely to have a prejudicial influence on health. Therefore if young people, who have no visible means of subsistence, who have no regular employment, and no immediate prospect of any, endeavour to obtain a certificate, it could be refused until it could be shewn that the man had a reasonable prospect of keeping his wife, for otherwise, with the improvidence and want of forethought proverbial in such individuals, marriage would be followed by the birth of children who would most probably be insufficiently fed, neglected and finally become a burden to the State. It might be suggested that in such cases, the State might insist in each individual taking out a life policy of insurance, and that, should the necessary medical examination prove unsatisfactory, the policy would be withheld, and marriage postponed.
I need not go further into this matter, but I feel bound to mention it because it cannot be considered good from the point of view of the State to allow marriages in circumstances of poverty. It may be said that by withholding the certificate in the case of real poverty, illegitimacy would be increased but I do not think the amount of illegitimacy would be materially altered; it will continue as long as the world lasts, and nothing which can be done will ever alter it.
(5) MENTAL DEFICIENCY.
In Great Britain and Ireland, according to the most recent figures collected, there were 178,000 mentally affected, (16) and we know from statistics that mental deficiency, instead of decreasing, is, notwithstanding all that has so far been done, steadily increasing, and the cause of this, in the vast majority of cases is undoubtedly heredity. I merely mention it here, but as I have discussed it elsewhere, I do not intend to enter upon the subject now, because quite apart from it, I have brought forward sufficient evidence concerning the first four points, to shew how necessary this State certificate of marriage has become if we are to have healthy marriages and healthy offspring.

(15) Sterility in Woman. By R. A. Gibbons, M.D., F.R.C.S.E., Page 176. (16) E ighth Annual Report of the Board of Control for the year 1921, pp. 7 and 55.

122 EUGENICS REVIEW.
I particularly wish to emphasize the fact that my suggestion is not to prevent marriage, but to postpone it under the first three headings until health has become established.
It is of course understood that there are many conditions of impaired health which would cause postponement of marriage. It is obvious that with the powers conferred on medical examiners with regard to such legislation, no doctor would permit a girl broken down in health from overwork, anaemia, &c. to be married. He would recommend her to consult her doctor, or apply to some institution for regular treatment until health was restored.
I have been careful to bring forward under the first three headings ,only those extremely common affections, the specific micro-organisms of which can be actually demonstrated, and which have such an appalling influence on the health of the community, the figures I have quoted proving the enormous loss of infant life. I feel certain that these numbers will prove a shock to many who have not the least idea that conditions at the time of marriage leading to such grave consequences exist.
The deaths from syphilis and tuberculosis are shewn in the tables, and if such were the actual numbers of deaths, it is difficult to calculate the enormous amount of suffering and shattered health amongst those still alive from these affections. Whatever the incidence of the first three diseases I have mentioned on the whole population may be, a certificate of health would alone enable us to state what it would be on those about to be married, and we have only to concern ourselves with them; but however small that incidence may be, a State certificate would ensure disease being discovered, treatment adopted, and many valuable lives saved, besides avoiding such numerous premature and still-born children.
The machinery of such a suggested certificate would, if adopted, be extremely simple, for it would only be necessary to be medically examined and a copy of the doctor' s certificate sent in when the banns were published, or arrangements made with the Registrar' s Office. (17) In the case of girls, the examination would be no more than that necessary for life insurance.
It is significant that even now, and I speak from my own knowledge, there are some educated men who, in their anxiety for the future of their daughters, suggest that their prospective sons-in-law should be medically overhauled.
I can well understand that should legislation be enacted, there will be many evasions in the beginning, but gradually, as the public become educated in tne knowledge that the law is really salutary, it would be considered just, and in the best interests of the State. But I am only concerned with the establishment of the principle, and, if accepted, all details must necessarily be settled later. Let me say, however, that we all know how difficult it is to bring about fresh legislation, and when we remember that it took twenty years before the Royal Commission on Venereal Diseases was established, notwithstanding the importance of the subject, we cannot expect rapid legisla-
17) Registrar General's Report.

STATE CERTIFICATE OF MARRIAGE.

123

tion on any matter at the present time, however urgent we may consider it to be.
In conclusion, I may say that although several years ago I thought the idea of legislation for marriage an original one, I feel sure it must have occurred to many. It is certain however, that, as far as I am aware, no steps have hitherto been taken to allow the idea to fructify.
I trust therefore, that in bringing the subject before this Society, it may be the means of stimulating action, and inducing those who have power and influence, to exert them in establishing that which would tend to raise the standard of national physique, and be of lasting benefit to the British race.
DEATHS FROM TUBERCULOSIS IN BOTH SEXES IN ENGLAND, WALES, SCOTLAND
AND IRELAND.
For the last two years, the numbers in Ireland arefor the Irish Free State only.
England 1913 1914 1915 1916 1917 1918 I 1919 1 1920 1921 1922

and Wales 49476 50298 54295 53858 55934 58073 46312 42545 42678 42777
Scotland 8005 7696 7819 7672 7625 7700 6326 6042 5737 5818
Ireland 9387 9089 95251 9323 98 9576 8648 7651 4598* 4484*
Totals 66868 67083 71639 708537329 753 61281 562381 53108 58079
*Irish Free State only.
DEATHS FROM SYPHILISC, (BOTH SEXES).
1913 1914 1915 1916 1917 1918 1919 11920 11921 1922 England
and 2069 2146 1885 1946 2127 1994 1857 2023 1799 1472 Wales

Scotland 213 227 178 175 199 177 193 237 199 162

Ireland 87 116 90 71 81 87 76 90 * *

Totals 2369 2489 2148 2192 2407 2258 2126 2350 1998 1634

*Unable to obtain figures for these years.

England and Wales Scotland .. Ireland ..

MARRIAGES. 1918 1919 1920 287163 369411 379982 34529 44069 46754
22570 1 27193 26826

1921 320852
39243
-

1922 299524 34394

124 EUGENICS REVIEW.
The PRESIDENT opened discussion with a frank statement that he came to this subject with an open mind.
He said that he had been inclined before listening to the Paper, to propose that rather than any move for a State Certificate at present, it would be well first to encourage Voluntary Certificates, but on the whole he inclines to the view that better than compulsory medical examination, would be the State requirement of mutual declarations exchanged between parties about to be married, setting out their state of health, and including further a statement that neither had previously been divorced, nor been in prison, and so on. Any false statement in such declaration should be punished with imprisonment without the option of a fine, and the annulment of the marriage. This, as he pointed out, would avoid very many of the difficulties inherent in a compulsory certificate system. He asked the medical authorities present to make some statement on Insanity and Epilepsy, for he felt that these two conditions really came more within the scope of Eugenics as being truly hereditary in mnany of their forms, and therefore of racial importance.
Syphilis, however widespread the misery may be which it causes, has not been shown conclusively to go to the third generation.
The President laid much stress on Dr. Gibbons' proposed poverty disqualification. He pointed out that from every point of view an adequate income tended to be symptomatic of Eugenic value in a stock.
SIR JOHN BLAND SuTroN was the first speaker in discussion. He congratulated Dr. Gibbons warmly on his Paper, which he described as an "Hosean" denunciation of modern marriage. He did not feel very optimistic of securing amongst candidates for matrimony a sufficient care for the next generation to make them willing to take precautions of Eugenic value.
SIR W. ARBUTHNOT LANE spoke next and emphasised the clear way in which the more important facts at issue had been stated. He gave it as his opinion that State Certificates must eventually be demanded by public opinion, but that it would probably be a long time before public knowledge and public conscience reached the necessary level for action. He noted however, the very rapid advance which has been made within the last 15 years, in the public understanding both of morals and of the hygiene of morals. He said it was really marvellous that these subjects were now treated openly and frankly in the daily press, and added that the public owed a great debt to the work the Press had done for enlightenment.
SIR JAMES DUNDAS GRANT spoke as follows:-
Dr. Gibbons deserves the gratitude of all interested in National Health. The deplorable incidents which he has witnessed have obviously and naturally stirred his feelings, and the facts which he has placed before us cannot have failed to convince us that somethiag must be done and can be done to mitigate the disastrous effect on married life of the evils to which he has drawn our attention.
His very special opportunities for studying these questions as they arise in domestic circles have made his exposition exceptionally valuable and impressive, while those of us whose spheres of observation have been more limited have in other directions ample evidence in support of his statements and his deductions.
The aurist has from time to time to deal with cases of deafness in inherited syphilis, and has the melancholy duty of imparting to the patient or friends the news that there is practically no hope of cure. Disfiguring and evil smelling conditions of the nose from the same cause are frequently met with. These are among the most obvious of the many unhappy results of marriage contracted during the active stage of insufficiently treated syphilitic disease. Along with these we often find opacity of the cornea of the eye due to the same cause, and for the most part, equally intractable.
Again, the specialist in diseases of the throat, who is called in to treat tuberculosis of the larynx, has reason to be appalled when the patient is a woman who has recently gone through the pains of bringing into the world a child whom she is unlikely to be spared to tend and nurture.
In all these instances, how much better on the whole it would have been if-

STATE CERTIFICATEZ OF MARRIAGE.

125

marriage had been avoided, or at all events, postponed until restoration to health had taken pace, and an assurance to the effect had been obtained!
As regards the individual's own health, there are insurance statistics which shew that in the time during which there were 6.1 per cent. of deaths with no his-
tory of syphilis, there were 12.6 per cent. in those with a history of this disease,
and obviously a considerable shortening of life. I feel sure that the propagation of Dr. Gibbons's views will lead many who pro-
pose marriage to think of their condition of health before entering into that honourable estate. It it only a step further to consult the family or the panel doctor for personal satisfaction, a little further possibly, under the guise of life or health insurance, to undergo the "Insurance" medical examination. It has indeed been shrewdly suggested that a prospective father-in-law might wisely insist on his. daughter's future husband being "well insured." We know that many people have an objection to being medically examined for life insurance, but after they have submitted to it, it is the rule for them to be highly gratified with the result. I am convinced that many of those who shrink from marriage owing to a rooted, though mistaken belief that they are afflicted with some disease that can be transmitted to their offspring, would have their fears removed, and take theirshare in the joys and interests of life, and marriage be encouraged rather than otherwise.
Dr. Gibbons's recommendations may seem too drastic, but at all events it must be allowed that if they constitute a counsel of perfection impossible to be put at once into operation, it is only a matter of time for them to receive complete approval, and ultimately to be put into force.
The Speaker proceeded to give further details ofthe ravages of syphilis and stated as his opinion that the question of transmission to the third generation was still an open question. He further laid considerable stress on Dr. Gibbons' Tuberculosis evidence. Frequently he said that maternity seems to act as a stimulus and stop further progress of tubercle; but after childbirth a woman is apt to lose ground very rapidly, and in fact, to be at times in danger of death.
The President then called on THE REV. HUGH CHAPMAN (of the Savoy Chapel). He said that ever since he had lived amongst the poor he felt that no one should be married without a £10 Note in his pocket and a clean bill of health, and he was. very glad to have heard Dr. Gibbons bring forward so clearly and unequivocably this important subject, but he also felt that it was rather like the hope of a millennium to find a State Certificate in force. He then proceeded to describe his experience both in "society" and in the "slums" and he said that everywhere, whether there is religion or is not religion, he does find conscience; and in his opinion the spread of knowledge, both of the nature of diseases and of their hurtful hold on the next generation, will act through love by the consciences of men and women to restrain from marriage with the knowledge of transmitting such disease. Already he knew of many people desiring marriage who would not go forward until they knew that they were clear of disease. He analysed love as being that other-regarding force of affection, which if it is real, will prevent anything that would hurt the beloved object. He spoke at some length about the problems of those condemned to a life of misery by the inheritance of mental or moral defect, or by that general unfitness of character which prevents their facing the battles of life or seizing its happy opportunities; and said he felt it was the responsibility of any generation to prevent a further renewal of such existences. Coming back to his main theme he called for an attempt to-
combine commonsense and piety which would link up those two great professionswhich are in different ways devoted to the help of mankind-the Medical Profession and the Priesthood.
He voiced wholehearted appreciation of the debt of our generation to medical
men for advance in many directions. PROFESsOR McILtoY, who spoke next, while thanking Dr. Gibbons for his.
Paper, and corroborating the facts that he brought forward in support of his proposals, gave it as her opinion that two difficulties made any such attempt impracticable. She laid stress on the great technical difficulties of any unequivocal certi-
ficates in cases of Gonorrhoea. Her only doubt was as to whether legislation. even though it might interfere with poetry in marriage, would increase happiness_ She admitted that the bringing of the unUt into the wor-ld was a question which worried the medical profession-. She believed that the surest way was to awakeii the public conscience on these matters.

126 EUGENICS REVIEW.

MR. E. B. TURNER spoke as follows:

I am not a Member of this Society and I came here to-night to listen and learn -I have listened and learned. I have thought very deeply of this matter for many

years, so it is no new thing at all to me. Uneugenic marriages bring trouble inevitably upon the couple marrying, but
they are not the only people to consider. We have got to consider their children,
the children of the next generation, and further we have got to consider the people
as a whole in the life of to-morrow. Dr. Gibbons' suggestion is of course an ideal,
but it only reminds us how illogical as a nation we are in this matter. Before a
marriage we always enquire about "a settlement" for material possessions; no surprise or dismay is caused by going carefully into the financial prospects of both parties and making arrangements accordingly. Truly it should be first of all our object to look out for physical and mental health; this is a far more important endowment than stocks and shares.
I have recently bee i with large audiences of people all over the country and I cail assure this audience that they desire enlightenment. The public wants to know. I am always being asked by young people when they have heard about disease " Should not a Certificate be demanded of everyone before marriage." And further they are constantly asking me where they can go to be as they call it "vetted " before marriage. With this in my mind I would propose that a beginning be made by cutting down the Certificate to the demands which the V.D. campaign would bring up, namely: Syphilis, Tubercle and Alcohol. I would further suggest that a person who shows, however slight, symptoms of mental defect, should, if they are suffering from V.D. thereby be brought under the Mental Deficiency Act.
PROFESSOR MACBRIDE also spoke, and he thanked Dr. Gibbons very heartily for his Paper and said that the mass of evidence brought forward had converted him, although he had originally had doubts as to whether anything practical could be done, and he added that he thought that the voluntary demand for a Certificate would be of great value in focussing public opinion and creating a feeling on that point to the pitch of conviction at which compulsory certificates might become
effectual.

LETTER READ IN THE CONFERENCE.

87, Harley Street, W.I.

I have read Dr. Gibbons' paper with much interest, and, whilst appreciating

with him, that there is much teaching to be done before the public will call for

action, I feel that it is a paper like this that provides the data which must give

ground for reflection.

It is becoming increasingly evident that the time has more than come when the

nation must take advantage of medical knowledge to improve the standard of the

mental and physical health of the people. Apart from statistics, it is obvious to all

thoughtful men that the number of mental degenerates is steadily increasing, and

no doubt the chief cause of this is that nothing is done to prevent mentally enfeebled

and degenerate individuals from begetting large numbers of children, most, if not

all of whom are sub-normal, and as they grow to maturity, go to swell the ever

increasing ranks of the unemployable.

The whole trend of modern medicine has been towards the side of prevention,

and the success which is thus achieved far exceeds that of the older so-called curative

methods. For social ills the remedy is the same,-to prevent their arising if

possible, but in this matter the prophylactic measures must be directed by the

State; medical science can but indicate where the dangers lie. But it must be borne

in mind that the legislature never acts until a demand comes from the people, there-

fore the public must be taught. We hope that the National Council for Mental

Hygiene will devote some of its energies to this most pressing matter. The cry

that will be raised against it will be the old one of the liberty of the subject, not-

withstanding that it is based on fiction. There is no class distinction in this

matter, but no grade of society stands to gain more by a better standard of mental

and physical health than the poor.

The steady increase in the numbers of mental degenerates will ultimately make

some preventive action imperative, and any present lack of insight or want of

courage must only make the difficulty greater as each year passes. When we stand

condemned for our inaction by the rising generation, we shall not be able to plead

ignorance, for knowledge we have in abundance, but through apathy or folly we

fail to use it.

(Sgd.) MAURICE CRAIG.

STATE CERTIFICATE OF MARRIAGE.

127

NOTES OF RECENT ATTEMPTS AT HEALTH CERTIFICATES OF MARRIAGE IN EUROPE.
SWEDEN. This is the only country which appears as yet to have a tolerably strict legislation for health in marriage. Control is effected by a declaration being required of each candidate for marriage, coupled with the exaction of severe penalties for any faulty declaration. It will appear that this must involve in some cases previous medical examination. This "Eugenic" Marriage Law was brought in in 1915.
Quoting from the Report sent us by the State Institute for Race Biology, Uppsala:
Legal Impediments to Marriage.
(1) "Persons suffering from Mental Disease, Idiocy, and Epilepsy are prohibited from marriage.
(2) "Persons suffering from Venereal Disease in a contagious phase may only marry after obtaining the 'King' s Licence.'
(3) "Relationships. -The 'King' s Licence' is required for marriage with nephew or niece. "
The Banns are announced through the Parochial Authority according to Statute, and the following declaration has to be signed by the intending parties.
Declaration. (Translation). "I hereby affirm on my soul and conscience:
(1) That I have not married before, or that I have married before no one but 'N or M.'
(2) That so far as I know I am not in direct descent related to my betrothed, nor to the brother or sister of my betrothed.
I am not brother or sister to anyone from whom my betrothed is descended, nor am I myself descended from brother or sister of my betrothed.
I have not been married to anyone, who in the direct line is a relation of my betrothed, nor am I myself in direct line related to anyone to whom my betrothed has been married formerly.
I am not epileptic nor do I suffer from venereal disease in a contagious phase.
(Signature)
GERMANY. In Germany there is some variation between the different States as to Marriage Law, but it is now a Statutory Regulation that Registrars shall hand to every intending couple on their first application for marriage licence a pamphlet advising Medical Examination before marriage is contracted.
HOLLAND. In Holland there is at present no State Regulation to prevent disgenic marriages, but a "Voluntary Association for Health Certificates for Marriage" is making rapid strides. In 41 Boroughs the Registrars have instructions to hand to all applying for marriage licences, a pamphlet setting out the necessity of health for Marriage, the advisability of Medical Examination, etc. The

128 EUGENICS REVIEW.
application for Licence precedes .marriage by a fortnight; and in certain places, namely, in the Hague, Free Medical Examination is offered to all desiring to avail themselves of it.
This propaganda now covers about 1 in 7 of the annual marriages, and the Society is pressing the Government to make this a State Regulation on the model of German Leglisation.
VIENNA. A voluntary society in Vienna offers Free Medical Exam-ination of couples intending marriage. The exact recent figures have not yet reached this Office, but an account of the rapid progress of the work was published recently in our REVIEW under "Notes and Memoranda," and we heard recently that the increase in the number of' couples availing themselves of this opportunity was steady, and has quite swamped the original organisation coping with it.
UNITED STATES. Our readers are reminded of the material existing on the regulations in Ameriha. Most of the States have tolerably stringent laws prohibiting the marriage of defectives and mental patients. To this, several diseases believed frequently to be dependent on inherited diathesis are included.
These have been published too recently to allow of repetition here.

