VERA HOUGHTON
International Planned Parenthood Federation (I.P.P.F.)

ITS HISTORY AND INFLUENCE

Introduction

Sanger began in 1912 her lifelong fight to free

H--1HE INTERNATIONAL PLANNED Par- women from unwanted pregnancies. In the

lenthood Federation, founded at Bombay beginning Mrs. Sanger saw birth control solely

lin 1952, was preceded by a long series of in relation to the health and happiness of the

international conferences, organizations and family. It was later, in 1917, while writing her

committees dating back to the neo-malthusian book Woman and the New Race (published in

movement of the nineteenth century. The 1920) that she began to realize the contribution

first of this series was the International Neo- that birth control could make to a nation's

Malthusian Conference, held in Paris in 1900 survival. Her visit to Germany in 1920 in search

under the presidency of Dr. C. R. Drysdale; of more scientific methods of birth control

this led to the formation of the FMdiration crystallized this belief. She was appalled by

Universelle pour la Riggneration Humaine.

conditions there: the degrading poverty, an

Between 1900 and 1911 three further con- aftermath of war; the subjugation of the women

ferences were held, at Liege (1905), the Hague and the attempts being made to build up the

(1910) and Dresden (1911). By 1912 the birth rate seemed to her to hold a fresh threat

Fedration Universelle comprised constituent to peace. Mrs. Sanger returned to New York

bodies in fifteen countries (eleven in Europe; with the contraceptive jelly but also with a

one each in North, Central and South America new message-"birth control must save the

and one in Africa). Before the next, the world from another and more devastating

Fifth, International Malthusian Conference holocaust." The direct connection between

could be held the 1914-18 War had begun and overpopulation and war became the recurrent

there was a gap of ten years during which new theme of her speeches. Shortly after her return

pioneers, Mrs. Margaret Sanger in the United she sounded a second warning that Japan's

States and Dr. Marie Stopes in England, came population would one day explode beyond its

on the scene and a new "birth control" move- borders unless birth control was adopted

ment began to take shape.

immediately. But it took twenty-eight years,

The term "birth control," coined by Mrs. during which time Japan's population increased

Sanger, soon became popular in England as from 56 to 80 million, and the chaos of World

expressing better the aims of the movement than War II to persuade the Japanese Governmen1

the older more clumsy term "neo-malthus- to adopt a policy of population control. In 1954,

ianism." In time "birth control" itself became on her fourth visit to Japan, Mrs. Sanger was

outmoded and we now have "planned parent- invited to address a committee of the Japanese

hood" or "family planning."

Parliament: she spoke at a session of the Upper

PART I: 1912-1945

House Welfare Committee on the subject of "World Population and Birth Control."

Mrs. Margaret Sanger

On Mrs. Sanger's second visit to London, in

As a public health nurse in New York Margaret 1915, she met Mrs. Edith How-Martyn, then

'49 THE EUGENICS REVIEW, October 1961, 53, 3.
ER-D

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

active in the suffragette movement, who made organization which was formed eighty-four

the arrangements for and took the chair at Mrs. years ago (1877) "to agitate for the abolition

Sanger's first public meeting here. Present in the of all penalties on the public discussion of the

audience at that meeting was Dr. Marie Stopes population question" and "to spread among the

whose well-known book ,Married Love was to be people by all practicable means a knowledge of

published in 1918, followed by Wise Parenthood. the law of population, of its consequences and

In the years ahead the paths of these three of its bearing upon human conduct and morals."

women converged many times: for Margaret

Sanger and Edith How-Martyn it was the Birth Control in Asia

beginning of a long and close association; to- The year 1922 marked the beginning of the

gether they organized international conferences, modern birth control movement in Asia:

established an international information centre Margaret Sanger on her first world tour spoke

in London and travelled extensively for birth to packed audiences in Japan and China and

control. Theirs was a revolution of thought news of her work spread to India. As a result of

which spread throughout the world.

meeting Mrs. Sanger, a young Japanese woman,

In order to test the so-called Comstock law Baroness Shidzue Ishimoto (now Senator Mrs.

in the United States Mrs. Sanger opened the Kato) devoted herself to the emancipation of

first birth control clinic in 1916, following Japanese women: in 1935 she started a birth

which she was imprisoned for thirty days for control clinic in Tokyo which was closed down

creating a public nuisance. In 1918 she won her two years later by the Japanese militarists

first great legal victory, establishing that a when she was arrested along with many other

physician who in good faith gives birth control liberal thinkers. Since 1946 Mrs. Kato has been

help or advice to a married person to cure or an elected representative of the Japanese Upper

prevent disease is not contravening the law.

House and a vigorous supporter of the new

family planning movement; she was a Vice-

Dr. Marie Stopes and her Clinic'

President of the I.P.P.F. from 1953 to 1959 and

In 1921, Dr. Marie Stopes opened at Holloway took a leading part in the organization of the in London the first birth control clinic in Fifth International Conference on Planned England and founded the Society for Con- Parenthood at Tokyo in 1955.

structive Birth Control and Racial Progress. In the same year, a second clinic, ostensibly a maternity and child welfare centre, was opened at Walworth by the Malthusian League. The Walworth Centre was later taken over by the

In China Mrs. Sanger quickly gained the
support of the medical profession: in 1930 a
group of university professors, physicians and social workers formed the Peiping Committee on Maternal Health, a pioneer organization for

Society for the Provision of Birth Control Clinics which in 1930 joined with several other
groups to form the National Birth Control
Association (now the Family Planning Association) with which at first Dr. Stopes cooperated.
Of the early pioneers only the Malthusian

the promotion of scientific contraception, and in 1935 the Chinese Medical Association passed
a resolution "that the Chinese medical profession should officially recognize that contraception is a part of the activities of public health, especially in the field of maternity and child
welfare."

League in England and the Society for Con-

structive Birth Control kept their separate Demographic Conferences

entities to the end. The Society ceased in Following the Fifth International Malthusian

October 1958 with the death of Dr. Stopes. Conference in London in 1922, Mrs. Sanger

The Whitfield Street clinic which she left to the persuaded the American Birth Control League to

Eugenics Society continues as the Marie Stopes invite the next, the Sixth, to New York in 1925.

Memorial Clinic. The last of the "malthusian" One result of the New York Conference was the

Drysdales, Dr. C. V. Drysdale, died in Feb- promotion of the second in the series of inter-

ruary 1961 and with him ended an historic national organizations, the International Fed-

I5o

INTERNATIONAL PLANNED PARENTHOOD FEDERATION (I.P.P.F.)

eration of Birth Control Leagues, the active Committee and its International Evaluation

work of which was, in 1930, undertaken by the Sub-Committee.

Birth Control International Information Centre

in London.

Dissemination of Information

The next big step was the convening in 1927 During the years 1929 to 1934 five reports

of the first World Population Conference: were issued by the International Medical Group

not another comparable conference was held and published in England under the auspices until the United Nations World Population of the Birth Control Investigation Committee.

Conference met at Rome in 1954. Margaret Edited by Dr. C. P. Blacker, who was both

Sanger brought together at Geneva leading Chairman of the International Group and

demographers, scientists, sociologists and phy- Honorary Medical Secretary ofthe Birth Control

sicians to discuss the subject of world population Investigation Committee, these reports sum-

in the hope that a policy would be formulated marized statistical and medical information to put an end to its uncontrolled growth. That about contraception as it became available in hope was not fulfilled. In the weeks immediately different countries. Their publication was facil-

before the conference a number of associations itated by grants-in-aid from the Eugenics

opposed to birth control began to put pressure Society. Later reports appeared in the Journal of

on the President, Sir Bernard Mallet; to save Contraception edited by Dr. Abraham Stone and

the conference from disruption the sponsoring published in the United States. The Journal committee took a last-minute decision to rule subsequently renamed Human Fertility, ceased

out of order all mention of birth control or publication with Volume 13 in 1948. malthusianism. That incident was referred to In connection with the General Election of

twenty-seven years later in the President's 1929 several women's organizations formed a

opening remarks at the United Nations World joint committee under Mrs. Eva Hubback for the

Population Conference (Rome, 1954). Again, purpose of questioning parliamentary candidates

the warning was given: there was to be no about their views on birth control and an infor-

so-called propaganda; the object of the Rome mation office was opened in Westminster by

Conference was not to discuss policies or to Mrs. How-Martyn. After the election this office

make recommendations but to seek information became a permanent Birth Control Information

on population trends and relevant matters. Centre and in 1930, following the Seventh

But whereas in 1927 all mention of birth control International Birth Control Conference at

was excluded from the proceedings of the Zurich, it was renamed the Birth Control

Geneva Conference, at the Rome Conference International Information Centre; Mrs. Sanger

in 1954 papers were accepted on such subjects became its President and Mrs. How-Martyn

as "The Present Situation of Family Planning the Honorary Director. In 1936 they were suc-

among Farmers and Coal Mine Workers in ceeded by Lord Horder and Dr. Maurice New-

Japan" by Dr. Yoshio Koya; "The Pattern of field respectively.

Birth Control in Puerto Rico" by Dr. Joseph M. At the Zurich Conference, physicians,

Stycos, and two by Dr. Abraham Stone: "Bio- clinicians and lay workers from twelve countries

logical Factors influencing Human Fertility" met to discuss the work and procedures of

and "Present Day Family Planning Techniques." existing birth control clinics, contraceptive

The immediate outcome of the Geneva techniques and the need for research. Biological

Conference was the formation of two scientific methods of conception control were here dis-

organizations, one of which-the International cussed for the first time and reports received on

Union for the Scientific Study of Population- sterilization procedures; the psychological

exists to-day and collaborated in the organ- aspects of birth control were also considered.

ization of the Rome Conference. The other, the The main recommendations of the Zurich

International Medical Group for the Investi- Conference may be summarized as follows:

gation of Contraception, has been replaced by that birth control must be regarded as an

national committees and by the I.P.P.F. Medical essential part of public health programmes and

I 5I

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of preventive medicine in all countries; that the Adviser for Field Work Services (1957-1961).

spread of contraceptive knowledge is the best The six years 1930 to 1936 were for the Birth

means of reducing the incidence of abortion; Control International Information Centre a

that instruction in contraceptive techniques period of much activity and influence. Official

should be introduced into all medical curricula; correspondents were appointed in twenty-five

that facilities for therapeutic and eugenic countries and personal visits were made to

sterilization should be available to persons twenty-one countries either by the President,

for whom existing contraceptive methods are Mrs. Sanger, the Honorary Director, Mrs.

impracticable, and that no chemical contra- How-Martyn or other members of the Centre,

ceptive for which the formula is not available among them Janet Chance, Gerda Guy and

should be prescribed by doctors. Here was the Frida Laski. The London Centre attracted

blue-print of the future and its sponsors were many visitors from abroad some of whom later

the nucleus of the present-day International held political power in their own countries;

Planned Parenthood Federation: Mrs. Margaret others became well known for their work in the

Sanger, Founder and President Emeritus; Mrs. scientific, medical and social welfare fields.

Elise Ottesen-Jensen, President; Dr. Abraham Recalling the events of this period Mrs.

Stone, a Vice-President until his death in July Laski writes "I well remember the time

1959; Dr. C. P. Blacker, Administrative Chair- Jawaharlal Nehru came to one of our weekly

man (1959-1960); Dr. Helena Wright, Chair- lunches, and how sympathetic he was towards

man, Medical Committee; Governing Body our work, and during the Round Table Con-

members Dr. Anne-Marie Durand-Wever (1953- ference of 1930 all the Indian wives of the

1960) and Professor Hans Harmsen, both of delegates were invited to a meeting."*

Germany.

At that time the All India Women's Confer-

ence representative in London was Dhanvanthi

Personalities and Progress
The year 1930 marked the turning point of the
birth control movement in the west; in the east it was notable for the establishment of the first Government birth control clinics in the world, by the Mysore Government in India. In England the Ministry of Health issued in July 1930 its Memorandum 153 MCW informing public health authorities that contraceptive advice could be given in cases where further pregnancy would be detrimental to health; while in the United States the National Committee on Federal Legislation for Birth Control, organized

Rama Rau whose husband, Benegal Rama Rau, was later knighted and served as High Commissioner for India in South Africa and Japan. In recognition of her many years of work for women's social and political movements Lady Rama Rau was given in 1959 the Indian award of "Padma Bhushan": President of the Family Planning Association of India and a member of
the Indian Government Family Planning Board, Lady Rama Rau was Joint President (with Margaret Sanger) of the I.P.P.F. in 1952-53 and at present holds the office of Chairman of
Council.

in 1929 by Mrs. Sanger, was gaining support

for a "Doctor's Bill" to modify the Federal Asian Problems

Postal Law so as to allow contraceptive inform- In November 1933 a conference on Birth Control

ation and appliances to be sent through the in Asia, organized by the Centre, was held in

mails by doctors, hospitals, dispensaries and London. Its purpose was to study the population

druggists. Secretary of that committee was Mrs. problems of India, China and Japan, to de-

Dorothy Brush who in 1937 accompanied Mrs. termine the obstacles to the practice of birth

Sanger on a third world tour; at the Stockholm control in these countries and to discuss ways

Conference (1946) Mrs. Brush was appointed of overcoming them. The findings of the con-

secretary of an international liaison committee; ference were summed up in the British Medical later she became in turn editor of the I.P.P.F. Journal (December 2nd, 1933) as follows: bulletin Around the World News of Population

and Birth Control (1952-57) and Honorary * THE EUGENICS REVEW, April 1954, 46, 16.

I52

INTERNATIONAL PLANNED PARENTHOOD FEDERATION (I.P.P.F.)

Even if birth control alone would not serve as a Japan, Hawaii, Canada and the western coast

complete remedy for the economic problems of Asia, granted even that the difficulties in the way of its dissemination were created by the very miseries it aimed at relieving, it yet offered, all speakers were

of the United States. Two further visits to India were made by Mr's.
How-Martyn, in 1936-37 and 1937-38. In 1938

agreed, a contribution to the solution of these the work of the Birth Control International

problems; and they differed only in their estimates of how important (in relation to other measures) this contribution might be.
Many years later as Prime Minister of India, Pandit Nehru, in a speech inaugurating the Sixth International Conference on Planned Parenthood (Delhi, 1959) said: "Some of us really have arrived at the stage of advocating family planning because ... in our thinking of national planning it has become inevitable... as part of the larger movement for raising the standard of living." He continued, "we have

Information Centre was transferred to the National Birth Control Association for which
purpose an international sub-committee was set up under the chairmanship of Mr. J. H. Guy. This committee decided to concentrate effort and funds on developing the work in India and appointed Mrs. Rena Datta, the Scottish wife of the Indian Principal of the Forman Christian College, Lucknow, as N.B.C.A. Organizer in India. After six years of valuable work there she returned to England in 1945.

found that we can never plan at all for the nation and our Five-Year Plans have no meaning if the population grows at this rate" (2 per cent per annum).
As a result of the Birth Control in Asia Conference the All India Women's Conference invited the Centre to send a representative to India to put the case for birth control before the delegates. In response to this invitation Mrs. How-Martyn went to India in 1934: her visit helped to prepare the way for the more
extensive tour of 1935-36 when the A.I.W.C.
invited Mrs. Sanger to be its guest speaker at
Travancore.
The stated objectives of the 1935-36 tour were

A Tribute to the Pioneers
After the outbreak of war Mrs. How-Martyn
went to Australia in 1940; she died there, in 1954, in her eightieth year. Mrs. Laski con-
cludes: "There is little that would have given Edith How-Martyn more happiness during these last few months of ill health than the knowledge that the movement to which she had devoted her last years had blossomed out into the International Planned Parenthood Federation."
The devotion of the pioneers of the period from 1912 to 1945 is unexampled in the history of the I.P.P.F.; their influence incalculable. In addition to carrying out an exhausting programme of work they had also to organize

to arouse public interest in the establishment of fund-raising campaigns to finance it: one of the

birth control centres, to focus attention on the more successful was the Malthusian Ball held

relation of population control to national under the patronage of H.R.H. Princess Alice,

welfare and international peace, and to Countess of Athlone, at the Dorchester Hotel,

encourage public health agencies and officials London, in 1933. Some, like Clinton and Janet

to include contraceptive instruction in all health Chance and Harry and Gerda Guy, gave not programmes. The countries visited were India only the greater part of their time but a good (where Mrs. Sanger met Mahatma Gandhi), deal of their money to the movement.

Ceylon, Burma, Malaya, China, the Philippines, Part 2 will appear in a future issue ofthe REVIEW.-EDITOR.

I53

