REVIEWS OF BOOKS
GENETICS
Sterm. C. and Sherwood. Eva R. (Editors). The Origin of Genetics. San Francisco and London, 1967. Freeman. Pp. xii+ 179. Price 18s. paper, 36s. cloth.
ONE OF THE most intriguing events in the history of genetics was the "rediscovery" of Mendel's work at the turn of the century. In their book Curt Stern and Eva Sherwood have collected together all the relevant papers by those concerned in the "rediscovery". Also included is a completely new translation of Mendel's paper Experiments on Plant Hybrids (1865) because the editors found many inaccuracies in the original translation of 1901.
Mendel was most fortunate in choosing the pea (Pisun sativum) for his genetic experiments. In subsequent studies with the genus Hieracium he was less fortunate for this plant has been shown to be frequently parthenogenetic or apogamous which explains why he was unable to verify the results of his earlier experiments on peas.
Though the deeper significance of Mendel's work was not appreciated at the time, his two papers on plant hybridization were not completely neglected. In 1881 the German Botanist Focke published a comprehensive work of reference on plant hybridization in which he referred to Mendel's experiments on several occasions, though without apparently recognizing their true significance. All Focke's references to Mendel's work have been reproduced in full in this book.
It was directly through Focke's work that Correns became aware of Mendel's publications. Clearly, however, both Correns and de Vries collected their own experimental evidence long before they became aware of Mendel's publications. The communications in which these men announced their findings have been included in this book along with letters in which they describe how they came to know of Mendel's work. The editors do not include any communications by Tschermak because his papers of 1900 ". . . not only lack fundamental analysis of his breeding results but clearly show that he had not developed an interpretation".
R. A. Fisher collected together all Mendel's results and in a now famous paper published in 1936, presented statistical evidence which indicated that the results were much closer to theoretical expectations than would be predicted by chance. Fisher even suggested that Mendel may have been deceived by an assistant who knew too well what his master expected. Sewall Wright agrees that Mendel's data fit the ratios much closer than would be expected by chance but he disagrees with Fisher's explanation and suggests that it might have been the result of the cumulative effects of a slight subconscious tendency to favour expected results.
This is a most interesting collection of original papers, essays and letters by those involved in the "rediscovery" of Mendelism and deserves to be read widely.
ALAN E. H. EMERY
Brink R. Alexander (Editor) with the assistance of Derek E. Styles. Heritage from Mendel. Madison, Milwaukee and London, 1967. University of Wisconsin Press. Pp. xii+ 455. Price 75s.
1822 WAS A VINTAGE year-Galton, Mendel and Pasteur were born, and a discussion of the lack of communication between Galton and Mendel forms the introduction to Sturtevant's contribution in this book, a collection of the twenty-one papers presented at the symposium, sponsored by the Genetics Society of America, in commemoration
195

