THE
EUGENICS REVIEW

Editorial Offices: The Eugenics Society, "Eug,enics is the study of agencies under

69 Eccleston Square, London, S.W.I. social control that may improve or impair

(Telephone-Victoria 2091/2.)

the racial qualities of future generations

Editor for the Society-Maurice Newfield. either physically or mentally."

THE GALTON LUNCHEON 1940

President's Address on Eugenic Policy

T HERE was an attendance of about blaze abroad any doubts that there may be

fifty at the Galton Luncheon, which
was held at St. Ermin's Hotel, Westminster, on Saturday, February I7th, I940, with The Rt. Hon. Lord Horder, G.C.V.O., M.D., President of the Society, in the chair.

in the minds of the Council and of the members of this Society as to exactly what eugenics stands for at this point in human history. We would like to put it to them that
our activities were very well defined and extremely authentic. I have no doubt about

Lord Horder's Address

their authenticity, I have a little doubt about their definition.

Lord Horder said: Before I embark upon But first of all as to these domestic matters.

the few remarks whicb, against my own Most of you know that after the initial

inclination and, as I now think, against my concussion which the announcement of war

better judgment, I promised to make, I brought to every group such as ours, when

think we all have a duty as eugenists, and we had stabilized after the shock, we

that is to rise for a few seconds in honour decided-and I hope everybody agrees-to

of the memory of a man who, British to the carry on. We did this despite the absence of

core, was recognized all over the world as our General Secretary, Dr. C. P. Blacker,

having made not only a large but perhaps upon whom we lean so heavily and so

the greatest contribution that any individual justifiably, and despite the loss of others by

has made to the eugenic idea-Havelock reason of war work-witness the absence of

Ellis. Professor Crew, who should have given the

(The company stood in silence.)

Galton Lecture to-day-also despite the

Lord Horder continued: I am in some- diminished income of the Society, the effect

what of a difficulty. My remarks were of the black-out and difficulties of transport,

primarily intended to be of a domestic kind. which of course affect our meetings and

I was to say what was happening to our lectures. Despite all these things we decided

Society during war time and what our to carry on, if only because we felt that in

policy was; but we have some of our friends war, dysgenic though it is, and perhaps

of the Press here, and they, of course, are because war is so dysgenic, there are a

not very much interested in our domestic number of ways in which the Eugenics

afairs, nor should we like them perhaps to Society might be helpful to the community.

3

4 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

We thought that there were opportunities committee to inquire into the whole position

as well as handicaps in the situation.

from the eugenic angle.

My colleague, the Chairman of the Council, Then, of course, family allowances are

reminds me of some of the good points to linked up very closely with the question of

set against the bad ones. We had just com- war marriages and pensions. We have also

pleted Dr. Baker's researches, leading to the to watch certain matters which might easily,

production and placing on the market of if they were not watched-or even perhaps

" Volpar." It remains to see whether clinic- if they were-lapse and be neglected,

ally-you know what I mean by that term- matters which we believe to be very import-

Volpar comes up to the expectations of the ant from our angle. One is the question of the

laboratory worker. Well, that piece of work census. Is it really in the public interest, even

has been completed. The Darwin Fellows in war time, that the census should be

had just rounded off their respective pieces waived? We want to consider that. We

of research, and, thanks to our rather have to watch the Chancellor of the Ex-

generous subsidy of the Population Investi- chequer in view of his quite reasonable

gation Committee and the Population desire to get the money to pay £6 or £7

Policies Committee, the work of those two millions a day for this gigantic effort which

committees was quite far advanced before the Allies are making. We have to watch

this shock came upon us. So things might him when he does such extraordinary things

have been worse.

as to lower the income tax allowances for

With regard to the programme that the married people and children-an extra-

Council proposes during war time, in the ordinary piece of legislation. I have a letter

first place the REVIEW will be continued, from Sir John Simon in answer to an inquiry

the format remaining the same, though from myself in which I took the liberty of

some diminution in size has become neces- saying that the Council of the Eugenics Society

sary. I am glad to tell you that the health was amazed at this particular clause in the

of the Editor, Dr. Newfield (for whose Finance Bill. I am not going to burden you

gifts in this direction all of us have great with that letter but it seems to amount to

admiration), which was rather precarious this, that in scaling down a number of

three months ago, is not nearly so precarious benefits this particular benefit was included.

now. Then the members' meetings will con- We think it should have been excluded. We

tinue; the approach of "Summer time'" think that at a time when the Government

will make their continuance more practic- should be concerning itself with the down-

able and we hope they will be popular. ward trend in population, income tax

Propaganda is rather severely restricted by allowances for married people and for

force majeure, the pressure coming mainly children should at least have been excepted,

from our valued Treasurer; but it is not even if only on principle. The amount which

shut down, it will continue.

the Chancellor hopes to get by this extra-'

We have just appointed a Committee for ordinary piece of legislation is negligible,

the study of the eugenic aspects of family but the principle is not negligible.

allowances. That Committee will, of course, I return to the question of propaganda.

make contacts with other bodies, such as What are we going to do about propaganda ?

the Family Endowment Society, pursuing The original title of our Society, as Mrs. Grant

the question actively. All sorts of move- Duff reminds me, was the " Eugenics Educa-

ments bear upon this important question of tion Society." The name was changed because

family allowances. There is no system yet, it was thought that research was as important

no large rounded policy on the part of the as education, if not for a time more impor-

Government in this respect, and therefore tant. It is chiefly our financial position which

the Council thought that, especially now compels us to reduce propaganda activity for

when this question is so pertinent, it would a time, but I am going to suggest that there is

be good that we should have an ad hoc another reason why propaganda activity

THE GALTON LUNCHEON I940

5

should be, if not reduced, controlled rather
severely. Are we sufficiently dear upon what it is
that we should just now educate the people
eugenically? It is easy to propagandizeGod knows how easy it is ! You can propagandize to such an extent that the word becomes very ill-odorous. It is so simple to try to educate people, so difficult to be certain of the truth and permanence of the things on whi6h you educate them. Of course, some of us who have had scientific training are quite sure of our biological principles, but it is difficult to get biological principles over to people who have not had scientific training, because as soon as you depart from your biological nomenclature you run the risk of not telling them the
truth. When we get down to the human problem-biologically it is not difficult with
horses and dogs and chickens and pigs-the
elusiveness of it comes home to us. Supposed
as I am to be quite confident about my out-
look on eugenics, the elusiveness of the problem nevertheless strikes me in a way
which makes me somewhat sceptical as to what at this time in the history of the nation
and the race we should call eugenics
education.
Our Treasurer, in answer to the invitation which I sent to members of the Council, has given me his outlook upon this particular point, and I am going to quote him. He says: " So long as one is content to keep the good and the bad far enough apart,
all goes well. It is so obvious that the bigger vitality, the mental and physical range of some men and women, immeasurably out-
strips the similar qualities of others, so that the choice between good and bad is never in doubt." But he goes on to say: " It is easy for the animal breeder who has stumbled upon better types in quite short periods, because he can fertilize many females by one male and eliminate non-desirable types. That is easy, but in the human animal it is a different matter. The moment we get down
to definitions, to the separation of genetic from environmental factors, the problem becomes one for scientific analysis, for experiment, for criticism, and for research." I

am bound to say that I am sympathetic with
our Treasurer over that aspect of our eugenic problem. One or two generously-
minded members of the Council suggested
that I should give the Galton Lecture in the
place of Professor Crew. If I were giving the
Galton Lecture this is exactly the problem I
should deal with. I should try to examine the
whole field. In Galton's day it was not so
difficult as it is in ours. Galton was an anthro-
pologist of great distinction, he was a pioneer in the anthropometric field. And, by the
way, what has happened to anthropometry in these days? Why are we not measuring
people and weighing them and noting the
colour of their eyes and hair as he did?
The Swedes are doing it. In Sweden to-day
a book can be bought which tells the reader
what is the normal Swede, what is the
healthy Swede, healthy physically, and from
intelligence tests and so on. The Swede has
got himself " taped," we have not; we know much less about the British type to-day than Galton did in his.
Turning now to the question of environment, many of you remember the flutter in the dovecot when Julian Huxley gave the Galton Lecture. I will confess to you that I found Julian Huxley's Galton Lecture not devoid of fallacies, though at the same time full of healthy criticism, because in effect he said, " we eugenists must take more note of environmental factors." Very well, but is it true that environmental effort to-day may lead to eugenic benefits tomorrow? To what extent is it true, if it be true at all? That was Julian Huxley's major premise. We all know that if a number of growing boys and girls are given an extra milk ration, their stature, their weight, their health, and even their intelligence can be increased; but between that and the implication that you will improve-what says our Founder?-" the racial qualities of future generations," between those two positions a great gap lies and only by research can the gap be filled. Critics have accused us eugenists of decrying the social services. I say quite boldly in reply that this is not true. We have never decried the social services. We have never put any

6 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

drag on the wheel of those who are trying to scientists, beginning with our potential

improve human conditions through environ- Galton Lecturer, Professor Crew, and ending

mental agency. I myself have been preaching with Professor Waddington, with 22 names

the amenities to my fellow citizens for years, in between, is a confusion of the issue. I

though nobody listens very much; but that believe eugenists to have a scope and a field

does not prevent me from being intensely quite apart from environmentalists, and I

interested in the eugenic problem, which is believe that our " Eugenic Aims and

a different one, and I think we are getting Objects," which were revised last year, and

these things somewhat confused.

which appear in our report, still indicate a

The critics also accuse us of making class great scope for eugenics. There are problems

distinctions. Well, I am quite as much which are not environmental in essence,

interested in one class as another, as I believe there are problems which have to do with

we all are. What we want is the truth on heredity, there are problems which concern

this question. None of us, I take it, have all the efforts that could be made to improve

any bias or prejudice against blue blood or the stock. They are all stated in our

red blood or pale green blood, but if a certain " Eugenic Aims and Objects," and although

class, qua class, produces through heredity, these overlap again and again with social

as distinct from environment, a better race, services and with environmental efforts for

then we have got to accept that, be it human betterment, they are essentially

the poor, the middle, or the upper class. genetic in their implication.

But I do not think that as eugenists we are I said at the beginning that war is dysgenic.

very much worried about the sociological We are agreed about that. It is estimated

distinctions between the classes.

that there were half-a-million births sacri-

Should we at this stage of eugenics " go ficed as a result of the last war. The number

into committee," as the saying is, over this of births that will be sacrificed this time

whole question of the geneticists' stand- nobody knows, because we do not know

point ? You will remember the manifesto how long the war will last. But war is

of the biologists who answered the question dysgenic because those 500,000 births would

put to them by the Science Service of have been amongst the more desirable, and

Washington, " how could the world popula- not the less desirable, of parents. In other

tion be improved most effectively genetic- words, the war results in a lowering of

ally ?" The manifesto was published in fertility in the very stocks that we eugenists

Nature last September, and it was commented want to encourage, and it leaves the fertil-

on very fairly, I think, by Dr. Newfield ity in the less desirable stocks relatively

in the October issue of the REVIEW. The untouched. That is the special problem

gist of the manifesto seems to be that until presented to us eugenists by the war, and it

you have given people equal opportunities, is one more reason, if another reason were

until you have removed race prejudices, necessary, why the activities of our Society

until you have given children a better should continue during the national emer-

field for upbringing, until you have dis- gency.

seminated knowledge of birth control, until That is all I have to say. It was suggested

you have effected permanent sterilization, that there should be a short discussion, and

until there has been a wider spread of I think that is desirable. Probably you will

knowledge of biological principles, until, think it reasonable if I restrict the speeches

finally, there is conscious selection which to five minutes each.

requires an accurate direction or directions for such selection to take-until you have Discussion

done all these things, the manifesto says, Mr. B. S. Bramwell thanked the President

you cannot begin to do anything with for giving such an interesting talk. They

eugenics. Well, I dissent entirely, and I all felt it a great loss not to have Professor

think this manifesto from these distinguished Crew with them on that occasion, but he

THE GALTON LUNCHEON I940

7

hoped that his Galton Lecture would be even more worth while in war time than in

given at some future date and that also peace.

another address might be forthcoming from Mrs. Neville Rolfe said that she was one

the President. The expression of his doubts of those who attached very great importance

by Lord Horder had been most stimulat- to public opinion, and she felt it vitally

ing. He had shown an open mind, the mind necessary that the Eugenics Society during

of one who was ready to learn at any age. the war should make the broad principles

There was one question on. which he of eugenics known, particularly to the

desired to say a word or two, namely, younger generation. She quite agreed that

war marriages. On considering it from the there were a number of technical points

point of view of a citizen, his own opinion still undecided. It must be remembered that

was that where young people had had a there was a time lag of about thirty years

definite attachment to each other they between the findings in the laboratory and

should take the risk and get married, but the practise of the man in the street. The

from the point of view of a eugenist that did principles of eugenics and the biological

not carry very far unless they were going principles that affected the development of

to have children. That brought one up living things, plant, animal, and human were

against the question of what was to be the known, but even to-day the majority of the

future of the children. It might sound rather schools taught no biology. It was vital that

brutal in a way, but he thought the position biological principles as related to human

of the offspring of a war marriage when the problems should be part of the equipment

husband had been killed was more important of every young person in the community.

than the position of a widow. They could Herein was a vital activity in which the

all sympathize with the childless widow so Eugenics Society should be engaged during

far as her loss was concerned, it was a the war, when the potential parents of the

tremendous blow to her life, but from an future were grouped together in the fighting

economic point of view he did not know forces. The ideals of eugenics, with the

that she had suffered so much hardship. human responsibilities they involved, as

These young people should be encouraged to affecting behaviour, as affecting selection of

have at any rate one child, and where the partners in marriage, as affecting parent-

husband might be killed in a few weeks he hood, were vital matters on which informa-

thought the state should be very liberal to tion should be given to the " under thirties "

the orphans, even possibly at the expense of in the Defence Forces, munition services,

the childless widow. The point was one, and so forth. As a believer in education,

however, that would need a good deal of which was the democratization of knowledge,

"rubbing in " to the politicians, because she considered that in this respect the

widows had votes and children of tender Eugenics Society to-day had a great responsi-

years had not.

bility if due weight was to be given during

The Hon. Mrs. Grant Duff said that she the war to the technical knowledge available,

felt very deeply indeed that the Eugenics because, unless the young people were

Society had work to do in war time which interested, unless there was understanding

was even more important, if possible, than and appreciation of the position, that

the work it did in peace. In " Eugenic Aims technical knowledge would take very much

and Objects" the Society's work was longer to become a useful factor in the

described as being educational and re- mental equipment of the community. The

search, endeavouring to ensure for the means were various, the broadcast, litera-

future of humanity the very best things that ture, the Press-there were various angles

eugenics stood for. Any work that they could of approach to-day in which the broad

do to make people realize more about these principles of the responsibility of the in-

things and their effect upon the future of dividual for the future quantity and quality

humanity was not only worth while, but of the race could be stated and brought

8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

home. The result would be to give to in- that there was no question of the Society

dividuals at one and the same time the deserting its ideals, but it was extremely

feeling of freedom and of responsibility. difficult during war time to get people to

Mrs. How-Martyn wished to emphasize pay attention to more important things, and

the point that had been raised about the it might be that to that extent eugenics was

children of war marriages and about possible rather at a standstill. He spoke as one

war orphans. The position made it incum- who had been converted, not so much by

bent upon them to push forward with the the Society as by the logic of events as he

idea of children's allowances. In her own witnessed them. It had been an admirable

view not only should there be allowances, but idea to hold the Galton Luncheon, for

every mother should be given a vote for although it could not be said that the

each child under sixteen years of age in Society had embarked on any new policy, yet

addition to a vote for herself. It would it was paying tribute to the fact that

be better to give the vote to the mother eugenics was a live subject of supreme

because she would probably pay more importance for the community, and that the

attention to it than would the father, and work of the Society must go on. Obviously,

a woman who had votes for her children as a result of the war, new problems arose

would be listened to by the House of and old problems became accentuated, so

Commons.

that although they might have diminished

Lady Chambers said that having been a resources and less leisure yet they did have

member of the Society from its inception, greater opportunitites. He felt that by

she had always been extremely interested taking an interest in the Eugenics Society

in its educational work. She felt it important during war they were helping to keep alive

to " get over" to the man in the street the a great movement and one which might well

existence of such a thing as race respon- be in days to come of greater importance

sibility and its imperative demands upon in world affairs than the things which

every individual. If that could be got into engaged the minds of statesmen at the

his mind, the sinews of war in the shape of moment. Finally he wanted to say how

subscriptions would be forthcoming. This much he appreciated what Lord Horder had

was a Society which included scientific done to maintain the Society at a useful

workers doing investigation in a subject level during this exceedingly difficult time.

which, as they confessed, they did not Mr. Gun (Society of Genealogists) said

understand completely, but, in so far as that it was an enormous pity that the

they understood it, they wished to give B.B.C. could not arrange for talks of the

their help to those who needed it and to kind that they had before the war. Nowa-

circulate the knowledge which was of such days every talk over the wireless seemed

vast importance to the community. She had as if it must have direct relation to our

always looked on the Society as a means of war effort. Yet a proper teaching of eugenics

distributing over a large area the work of was necessary especially in view of the mad

the greater minds who were concerned with racial theories which were now prevalent on

this subject of eugenics and population, and the Continent. Whether they could carry

so to make more people understand in this the war into the enemy's territory and show

country and in all countries the fact of that if eugenics was properly studied the

racial responsibility and the need for con- race of gangsters who now infested certain

tinuing the race from their best stocks. In parts of Europe might never have arisen he

order to do this she thought they should did not know. But he thought that some-

encourage the marriage of all people who thing on those lines must be tried, and he

were likely to be good parents both physically agreed most thoroughly with Mrs. Neville

and mentally and from the character point Rolfe that good heredity must be ensured as

of view.

far as possible if nations were to be free

Mr. Cecil Binney (Barrister-at-Law) said instead of slaves.

THE GALTON LUNCHEON I940

9

Mrs. Hubback (Principal of Morley College) were the law of the land, it was essential that

desired to associate herself with Mr. Bram- any particular schemes which were ultimately

well and others in thanking Lord Horder adopted in this country should have a

for the work he continually did for the eugenic tendency.

Society. She had, unfortunately for herself, Many of them deeply regretted the pros-

a very wide experience of voluntary associa- pect of a declining population, and she

tions of every kind and of their presidents. believed that family allowances had a

She knew those presidents who were merely contribution to make in that respect. But

decorative and those who in addition worked. she wanted to make it clear that the greatest

Their own President was one of the latter. " whole-hoggers " amongst them, while

He attended all committee meetings and believing in family allowances, did not

followed every detail of the Society's work. believe that such allowances, whatever the

Busy man as he was, he gave not only of scheme put forward, would by themselves

his time but of his mind. She wanted to bring about any rise in the birth-rate. It

base this tribute on a wider ground because was a fact that the birth-rate had not risen

they were grateful to Lord Horder, not only to any appreciable extent in countnres

for the work he did for the Society but also which had got family allowances already.

for what he did for so many good causes, That, however, was neither here nor there,

some of them unpopular. She wished to because hardly any country had family

praise Lord Horder's courage even more allowances of such an amount as to cover

than his ability and conscientiousness, for the cost of a child, and if the scheme was to

it required much courage to speak as he have any effect on the birth-rate the allow-

did for some causes that were with many ances must be sufficient to cover that cost

people almost a subject of levity.

at different economic levels. But even if that

Lord Horder had pointed out that one of kind of scheme were ultimately achieved,

the chief tasks immediately in front of the they must recognize that family allowances at

Eugenics Society was to inquire into the their best could only be one of the factors that

eugenic aspect of family allowances. Many might lead parents to wish to increase their

who had been working for these for twenty families. The other factor was the question of

years or so felt that they were at last public opinion, to which Mrs. Neville Rolfe

becoming practical politics. This was so referred so eloquently. It was necessary,

mainly because many people regarded it as especially in view of-the successful re-

a solution of one of the greatest economic searches in contraceptive technique, to

problems of the war, the problem of the make people realize that having children

vicious spiral, the problem of ensuring that was not entirely their own affair. Some men

the children in families with small incomes looked on having children as others might

did not suffer unduly from the economic look on having dogs or pigeons, a thing

hardships of war, and of seeing that the entirely for themselves. The attitude which

national income-that part of it which it was necessary to get across in order to

could be spent-was most wisely spent. bring about an increase in the birth-rate

That, of course, was not the aspect from was that having children was not an affair

which eugenists primarily wanted to look of the parents only but an affair of the

at it. If family allowances came about- community. If that feeling of responsibil-

and she for one firmly believed that they were ity were encouraged, then it must be made

coming-they were bound to come as a possible economically for people to have the

poverty-relieving scheme, and they were children. They must remove the financial

bound to be at a flat rate. But those who burden of parenthood or help to relieve it

were supporting a scheme along those lines before they could ask people to look upon

were doing so because they felt that it was childbearing as a matter which affected the

of the utmost importance that the principle whole nation. This was not an easy subject,

should be registered. Once family allowances and that was why those who believed in

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

family allowances were extremely glad that the Society was prepared to face up to the problem and to make available its resources, first of all for an inquiry, and when the inquiry was finished, for whatever action
might be necessary. Lord Horder said that he was very grate-
ful to Mrs. Hubback for what he took to be
in essence a vote of thanks. He was not
unwilling to believe that whatever he might have done in respect of various activities which in his judgment contributed to human
health and happiness had been the result of courage rather than of intelligence! Of the
two qualities it was perhaps of courage that there was the greater lack. A friend of hishe called him a friend, but he rather thought
the intention of his speech was not too

friendly-once said of him that he seemed to
be interested in everything from birth control to cremation. He accepted that
compliment at its face value. He was a doctor and therefore his interest did begin with birth, and even before birth, and as to the disposal of the human body after death, that also was a matter of sanitation, if
nothing else. He hoped that those present generally
would agree with Mr. Binney that it had been worth holding this Luncheon. Although it might not have made any constructive addition to their policy as eugenists, it had
demonstrated that they were alive, and that they were bent upon extracting from this
evil thing, war, whatever good may accrue to their fellow human beings.

ABORTION- RIGHT OR WRONG? *

By DOROTHY THURTLE
Author of the Minority Statement in the Report of the Inter-Departmental Committee on Abortion

Origin of Inter-Departmental Committee
Tr' HE disappointing results of the Maternity and Child Welfare Act of I9I8 in
reducing maternal mortality and morbidity led to the appointment, in I928, of an Inter-Departmental Committee with the following terms of reference: " To advise upon the application to maternal mortality and morbidity of the medical and surgical knowledge at present available and to enquire into the needs and direction of further research work." This Committee finally reported in I932, and subsequently a further investigation was undertaken by medical officers of the Ministry of Health, who paid visits to various centres and made a detailed examination of actual conditions, and of the working of the I9I8 Act. The results of this investigation were published in I937, and although the I928 Committee made reference to abortion, the medical
* Substance of a paper read at a meeting of the Eugenics Society on March igth, 1940.

officers went further and recommended that
an examination should be made into the
influence which abortion may exert on
maternal mortality and morbidity and
future child-bearing. The Inter-Departmental Committee on
Abortion was accordingly set up in May, I937. It consisted of fifteen members, of which five were women. Of these five, four were titled women and the fifth was myself. Two were doctors. One of the women
doctors resigned at an early stage, for domestic reasons, her place being taken by a male barrister, so that four women only
served on the Committee for most of the time. The male members were two barristers, one being the Chairman, Mr. Norman Birkett, three gynaecologists, one medical officer of health, the chief London magistrate, one coroner, one prosecuting solicitor, and a representative each from the Ministry of Health and the Home Office.
Memoranda was submitted by individuals

