ULTIMATE VICTORY.
By G. ARCHDALL REID, F.R.S.E.
THE present war is a long-distance race in which the Germans are sprinting. Soon their breath should fail. But-I am careful to write literally and to avoid all exaggeration-this conflict, however huge, is no more than an episode, belated and, therefore, indecisive, in an immensely vaster struggle which has raged not for months or years but for scores of centuries, in which whole peoples have perished and the dead number not hundreds of thousands but thousands of millions, and of which the prize is not precarious political supremacy in Europe for a few generations, but world predominance irrevocably established by nature. In this greater conflict also the Germans have sprinted during recent years. But the effort comes too late. True decision was reached nearly a century ago.
The facts in the case belong to common knowledge and are not disputed. They relate not to those vague spiritual qualities with which all nations endow themselves and by means of which they expect to rise superior to numbers, resources, and geography, but to bodily traits. As a rule, it is difficult to obtain acceptance for unfamiliar readings of familiar facts. But in the present instance the evidence is so clear and abundant that there is no room for mere opinions. We deal with a problem of science. Whoever disagrees should be prepared not with general negations, but with ability to indicate precisely in what particulars the evidence is wrong or the reasoning invalid. It will clear the ground if I begin by stating the evidence. Meanwhile I must ask the reader, if at first he cannot perceive any connection between the preliminary facts and " Ultimate Victory," to exercise a little patience. The connection will be made abundantly clear.
i. The diverse races of mankind sprang from a common stock. It follows that they are not immutable. Scientific proof of a common origin is afforded- by the fact that all races are able to interbreed.

124 EUGENICS REVIEW.
2. Each race-Anglo-Saxon, West African, Esquimaux, and the rest-fits its ancestral environment especially well.
3. No two men are exactly alike in any particular. Even parents differ from offspring, and brethren from each other. As a rule, the nearer the kinship the smaller the range of difference. Thus negroes differ more from Englishmen than the latter among themselves. The closest resemblances are found in members of the same family. In brief " Like tends to beget like, but with variations."
4. Among other particulars men vary in their powers of resisting diseases. High or low powers of resisting any disease do not necessarily imply high or low powers of resisting any other disease. A man weak or strong against measles or whooping-cough may be strong or weak against tuberculosis or malaria. Here, again, like tends to beget like, but with variations, and, as a corollary, the widest differences are found in men of different races. Thus tuberculosis tends to run in families; but the susceptibility of individual members varies, and, as a rule, Africans and American Indians are much less resistant than Englishmen.
5. Nearly all prevalent and lethal diseases, particularly those that claim many victinms among the young, are zymotic; that is, they are caused by living microbes, of which there are many species, each the cause of a separate disease. Deaths from microbic diseases are so much the rule that we call them
natural." 6. A few microbes cannot produce disease; they perish
within the body. Only numbers can infect. Thus, it has been experimentally proved that less than sixteen thousand anthrax bacilli do not produce illness in a young rabbit, a very susceptible animal. The minimal dose varies with the individual. The greater the susceptibility the smaller the dose necessary. For that reason individuals who resist infection in an environment in which the microbes of a disease are relatively few, may contract the disease in an environment in which they are relatively numerous.
7. The microbes of nearly all human diseases are strictly parasitic in man. They cannot persist unless the human

ULTIMATE VICTORY.

125

population is sufficiently dense to furnish a continuous supply
of food. 8. Their areas of prevalence are conditioned by the mode
in which they pass from victim to victim. (a) Some diseases (e.g., measles, whooping-cough, influenza) are air-borne. The neighbourhood of an infected person is dangerous. They spread with extreme rapidity through a susceptible population, and have penetrated to all parts of the habitable globe. (b) Tuberculosis is the principal earth-borne disease. The microbes, to which light is inimical, fall to the ground with dust and are subsequently inhaled with it. Consequently it is contracted within doors, and is especially prevalent under bad conditions of crowding, light, and ventilation, such as prevail in North European cities. It, also, has penetrated to all parts of the world. (c) Water-borne diseases (e.g., typhoid and cholera) spread mainly by infected drinking water, but they may also be conveyed by filth-eating insects (e.g., flies). Insect-borne diseases (e.g., plague, malaria, yellow fever, and typhus) cannot spread beyond the area infested by certain blood-sucking insects, mosquito, fleas, lice, and the like.
9. Insect-borne diseases may afflict sparse and nomadic populations, as also may epidemics of air-borne diseases. Water-borne diseases are usually restricted to settled populations. Tuberculosis is par excellence the disease of civilisation. It may be taken to savages, especially those inhabiting cold climates, but its microbes are thickest in such crowded areas, large cities, and air-tight houses as are found in North Europe.
IO. Some diseases, notably those of the air-borne group, run a short and rapid course. Almost everyone falls ill when first exposed to sufficient infection, and in a limited time dies or recovers. There is little or no natural immunity. Whoever recovers is a changed person. He has acquired immunity. The microbes cannot live in him. For a period, which is usually life-long in some diseases (e.g., measles), and of shorter duration in others (e.g., common cold), he has become incapable of again contracting the same malady. Other diseases (e.g., tuberculosis) run a prolonged, indefinite course. Not nearly everyone who is exposed to infection falls ill, for many are

126 EUGENICS REVIEW.
naturally immune; but of those who fall ill a great proportion die. Recovery, when it occurs, is not due to that peculiar change known as " acquired immunity," but to an improvement in general health which, in turn, is generally due to an improvement in the environment. The liability to illness remains, and, therefore, people from slums who have recovered in a sanatorium often suffer again and die when they return to their own houses.
I I. The microbes of many diseases are so prevalent within certain areas that no man escapes infection unless he is naturally immune, or death unless he is resistant. Thus all negroes in West Africa are exposed to malaria, and in England nearly all the people who survive early youth have recovered from the infection of measles or resisted the infection of tuberculosis.
12. When a disease of the type of measles invades a region in which it was previously unknown (e.g., a Polynesian island), an epidemic occurs which includes practically the whole community. Since almost everyone is susceptible, the microbes increase at an enormous rate, and, therefore, there is no escape from them. Young and old are stricken, the sick are left untended, work is neglected, famine follows. The whole, or a half, or a third of the population perishes. Then the disease, its food supply exhausted, departs, perhaps to return again in epidemic form in a future generation. On the other hand, the disease tends, as in England, to become endemic (constantly present) in a large and populous region, especially in one which
is in frequent communication with other centres of population. For new births supply sufficient susceptible material to enable the microbes to persist. rhe disease is then a child's malady, for everyone is early exposed to infection and is thereafter immune; the sick are tended; work is carried on; that which in isolated communities is the cause of immense disaster, dwindles, for most people, to little more than a nuisance. Such a disease as tuberculosis furnishes a sharp contrast. Owing to the long duration of the illness, and since recovery confers no immunity, it is endemic from the first. Where it newly comes it stays, and usually exterminates.

ULTIMATE VICTORY.

I27

13. Every human race is "acclimatised," or resistant to,
every human disease in proportion to the length and severity of its past experience of that disease. Thus Africans are more resistant to malaria than Englishmen, who, in turn, are more resistant to tuberculosis. We in England call the climate of our own land healthy. But it is healthy only to races that have experienced a similar complex of diseases. Actually, it is more deadly to West Africans, and, indeed, to all savages, than the worst parts of West Africa to Englishmen.
We have now arrayed our facts. Our next task is to determine, if possible, the way in which races become resistant to their familiar diseases. Many medical men, reasoning from such diseases as measles, have surmised that parents transmit some part of the immunity they have acquired through illness and recovery to offsprihg and descendants, and that in this manner high powers of resistance are gradually evolved in the race. But this hypothesis, once popular with students of heredity, but now almost universally rejected, ignores such diseases as tuberculosis which confer no acquired immunity, but, on the contrary, inflict nothing but weakness and injury, and which, therefore, were the supposition true, should cause races to deteriorate till they became extinct. As a fact, perhaps more than any other disease, tuberculosis has been the cause of an evolution protective against itself. No sort of racial deterioration can be traced to it or to any other disease. Thus Englishmen and Africans, who have long been afflicted by tuberculosis and malaria respectively, are not more degenerate than Terra-del-Fuegians and Esquimaux to whom nearly all diseases are strange. Manifestly the theory of the transmission of acquirements, is in conflict with the facts.
On the other hand we know, each of us of our own knowledge, that individuals naturally vary in their powers of resisting this and that disease, and that each lethal and prevalent disease kills off the weak against itself, and so, within its area of prevalence, leaves the race to the strong. Obviously, we have here a clear case of selective breeding, such as that by which man has altered his domesticated animals and cultivated plants, and which, in the case of many

128 EUGENICS REVIEW.
races and diseases has operated with extreme stringency during almost geological time. If the facts furnished by disease be examined, it will be found that they all accord perfectly with the theory of Natural Selection. Thus tuberculosis weeds out people who cannot resist its infection, and the races afflicted by it have all evolved increased powers of resisting infection. Measles weeds out not the people who resist its infection, but those who recover from it, and the races afflicted by it have evolved not natural immunity, but increased powers of acquiring immunity. So it is in all other instances. Each disease is not only the antecedent of an evolution protective against itself, and against itself only, but it is the antecedent of an evolution which fits exactly the kind of weeding out done by it. Since there are scores of diseases and thousands of races and sub-races of mankind, exhibiting every stage of evolution, the instances to which we may appeal number tens of thousands.
The theory of Natural Selection has never achieved universal acceptance. If anything opposition to it has strengthened during recent years. Biologists, who are not exempt from the common human blindness to familiar facts, have always fixed their attention exclusively on wild animals and plants which it is not possible to observe sufficiently closely. Thus, no one, watching houseflies, sparrows, and grasses, our commonest wild animals and plants, is able to distinguish significant types, or, even were that possible, to follow individuals through their careers and ascertain what types survive and what perish. If, then, with wild creatures in view, we declare (or deny) that natural selection is the cause of evolution we found our opinions on what we think probable. But if we turn our attention to man, whom, being men ourselves, we are able to observe very closely from birth to death, we are able to found our opinions on actual observation. We then see very plainly that nature does select and that her selection is followed by protective evolution. If selection followed by evolution occurs among men, who are said to have " escaped from selection," it is at least probable that it occurs among other types with similar consequences.

ULTIMATE VICTORY.

129

However, if doubts still linger, consider the case of townfolk. Large cities, and especially their more crowded quarters, contain a complex of diseases and ill-conditions which enfeeble and render liable to disease. They are centres of stringent selection from which surrounding areas are constantly infected. On the average their dwellers are more sickly and puny than country folk. The problem we have to solve is: Are city populations inferior by nature, or only because their environments are unfavourable for individual development? Is their " degeneracy " inborn or acquired? It is commonly supposed that there are such things as " race-poisons," and that city folk, poisoned during generations, belong to permanently deteriorated types. One medical man, whose statistics have furnished stock quotations for half a century, declared that so great was the racial deterioration that in London no families of a purely urban descent of four generations exist. He forgot the Jews, who have a purely urban descent of forty generations, and he forgot that so great is the migration and inter-marriage between town and country that it is practically impossible for a British family to have an urban descent of four generations. As a fact, which anyone can observe for himself, all races are able to exist in cities in proportion to the length and severity of their past experience of urban life. The capacity to do so arises only slowly and after centuries of Natural Selection. SavagesRed Indians, Polynesians, Australasians, African Negroes, and the like-perish very quickly, and for that reason they are very rarely seen in Europe. Englishmen, who have had a long ancestral training in slowly growing villages and towns succeed better. Jews, who are derived from those terrible slums, the Ghettoes of the middle ages, flourish best of all.
Again, consider the case of the negroes. For seventy centuries or more an immense stream of African slaves poured into Southern Europe and Asia. So old was the traffic that the writer of Genesis was aware of it. " Cursed be Canaan. A servant of servants shall be his brethren." Slaves are valuable property, more easily bred than imported; yet not a trace of
their descendants remains in Europe and Asia. Transported from environments relatively unfavourable to the spread of

130 EUGENICS REVIEW.
tuberculosis to conditions more favourable, they perished utterly. More recently the Dutch and English introduced many thousands of East Africans into Ceylon for military service. Seven years after the last occasion " there were left just 440, including male descendants." But four centuries ago the Spaniards began to transport Negroes to America. The Aborigines, who had even less experience of tuberculosis than the blacks, had died out, and the Spaniards needed labourers. Employed in agriculture in a hot country where white men and tubercle bacilli were yet few, the Africans were able to persist, and, as the conditions slowly grew worse, to undergo evolution. To-day, though it is still said that " every other adult negro dies of consumption," they are able to dwell even in the northern cities of America and Europe. A negro colony in Europe
could readily be established by American blacks.
It appears certain that all, or nearly all, zymotic diseases took origin in the eastern hemisphere. It was there that human populations, sufficiently dense to furnish a continuous supply of food to the microbes, earliest established themselves. The discoverers of America suffered from malaria which they found already present in the tropical forests, but apparently from no other diseases save those they imported. On the other hand, we have authentic records of the first introduction to most places in the new world of nearly all our familiar diseases, for example, tuberculosis, small-pox, cholera, measles, whoopingcough, and yellow fever (originally a West African malady). Moreover, western aborigines, beyond other men, are weak against all diseases except malaria, to which the native inhabitants of the great South American tropical forests are
particularly resistant. In the east our oldest legends and myths tell of pestilence
and plague-of air and water-borne diseases, for instance, of the pestilence that fell on the Greeks before Troy, and that which destroyed the Assyrians before Jerusalem. At first, as far back as the Stone Age, the population was nomadic and sparse. Insect-borne diseases, if they existed, were, doubtless, endemic; air-borne diseases came and went in desolating epidemics, which the stricken people attributed to the wrath of

ULTIMATE VICTORY.

131

their gods; but the conditions were unfavourable for water and earth-borne maladies. Gradually as the population grew and the microbes passed more readily from victim to victim, the
stringency of selection increased. Only the fittest survived; the races underwent protective evolution, each according to its special circumstances; till at length the remote descendants of the early nomads dwelt in cities under conditions which would have been impossible to their ancestors. The air-borne diseases passed from the epidemic to the endemic stage, and the earth and water-borne diseases established themselves. Finally,
when the men of the old world had become capable of enduring the hard conditions imposed by civilisation, when the microbes
of disease were thick on the garments of every man, Columbus,
sailing across an untracked ocean, ended the long separation between east and west, and initiated the greatest event, the vastest tragedy in human history. The diseases of the east burst with cataclysmic violence on the inhabitants of America, and the races of half the world began to replace those of the
other half. At once the very ancient conditions of the old world were
reproduced; but, because the field was quite virgin, with greater fearfulness. Air-borne diseases, like a light thrown from a child's mirror on a darkened wall, flickered in vast and recurring epidemics from end to end of the land, and penetrated later to Australasia and Polynesia. Everywhere they piled the earth with dead. Thus, in I841, Catlin wrote of the United States, " Thirty millions of white men are now scuffling for the goods and luxuries of life over the bones of twelve millions of red men, six millions of whom have fallen victims to smallpox." Insect- and water-borne diseases also took toll. But the principal part was played by tuberculosis. The following are instances, given by Robert Louis Stevenson, of the way in which it goes to work, in a Polynesian island where the conditions are far less favourable to its spread than those found in temperate America and much of Australasia. " The tribe of Hapaa is said to have numbered some four hundred when the smallpox came and reduced them by one-fourth. Six months later a woman developed tubercular consumption; the disease

132 EUGENICS REVIEW.
spread like fire about the valley, and in less than a year two survivors, a man and a woman, fled from the newly created solitude. . . . Early in the year of my visit, for example, or late the year before, a first case of phthisis appeared in a household of seventeen persons, and by the end of August, when the tale was told me, one soul survived, a boy who had been absent at his schooling."
All sort of reasons have been alleged for the incapacity of Western Aborigines to persist under civilised conditions. Thus we are told that they pine under " domestication " " like caged eagles." But if the returns of any Department of Public Health in the new world be examined, it will be found that their immense mortality is due to imported disease. Races as savage in Asia and Africa do not perish. To every European settlement in Asia and Africa is attached a native quarter. No city of the North European type has such a quarter in all the western world.
In the century, the most critical in human history, that followed the discovery of America, the Spaniards and Portuguese, then powerful maritime states, seized the tropics and elbowed the weaker British and French into the seemingly inhospitable north. But the tropical forests were defended by malaria, which prevented white immigration, and, therefore, the spread of tuberculosis. Their natives still persist in considerable numbers. In temperate North and South America European diseases created a vast void into which poured an unending stream of colonists. Thereafter, just when the times were fully ripe, Wolfe won his victory on the Heights of Abraham. That little fight is half forgotten, but, beyond any
battle known to us, it was laden with tremendous fate. It placed all North America in the grasp of the Anglo-Saxon and gave his race almost limitless space for expansion. Subsequently he colonised Australasia. His place in the sun, his ultimate world-
supremacy was now established. Two periods during which occurred great migrations and
permanent conquests are known to history. The first began, or first began to be chronicled, early in the Christian era, and led to that arrangement of races in Europe which persists to

ULTIMATE VICTORY.

133

this day. The second, the one we are considering, occurred a thousand years later. Both periods were distinguished by the more or less complete extermination of the conquered people. If history teaches any lesson it is that conquest is never permanent unless accompanied by the elimination of the conquered. If the latter are spared they are sure, in the end, to expel or absorb the conquerors. Thus the Anglo-Saxon conquest of Britain, and that of Hungary by the Huns, both of which were marked by unsparing slaughter, have persisted, while the Roman Empire, and that of the Saracens in Spain, are but memories. The English of the Pale have been absorbed in Ireland, and the Scandinavian invaders in Russia. The Austrians are disappearing from Italy, and the Turks from Europe. The immense Tartar conquests are no more. Very modern instances of permanent conquests are found in savage Africa, where the conquered are usually " eaten up."
Of old the sword was the means of founding permanent empires. But with the rise of civilisation its power failed. The object of wars changed. Civilised peoples, unconscious as their savage ancestors of the remote future, seek wealth and dominion, not empty lands. Before the Christian era, during many centuries of civilisation, governments, but not races, altered their boundaries in Europe. Then came the barbarian irruption, which not only overthrew government, but established strangers, whose heirs still inherit the seats of ancient and departed peoples. Finally, civilisation dawned again, and though during the last thousand years there have been wars and conquests innumerable, and though political boundaries have shifted as kaleidiscopes, the boundaries of races have altered very little. The governments of Europe, but not its races, are now once more in the melting pot.
When America was discovered a second and greater period of migration, extermination, and permanent conquest began. The sword played a part, but it merely opened the way. A more terrible and drastic agent followed. A migrating race armed with a new and deadly disease and high powers of resisting it, possesses a weapon of awful power. In this second and vaster
series of permanent conquests our own race played the principal

134 EUGENICS REVIEW.
part. With the exception of temperate South America and parts of the western seaboard of that continent, it has colonised almost all the regions of the new world in which it is possible for a European race to flourish. In the coming future no other people will be so numerous, so widespread, or in command of resources so tremendous. Canada and Australasia may follow the example of the United States, and separate politically from the parent stock. But the race itself is secure. It is impossible, within the bounds of probabilitv, to imagine a conjunction of circumstances capable of uprooting it from its new habitations. The sword and disease are the only agents of racial elimination known to us, and now the latter, like the former, is losing its power. We know the whole habitable globe, and all its more lethal maladies. Already each of these has been carried by travellers to almost the farthest limits within which it is possible for its microbes to persist. A new and death-dealing disease is, on biological ground wildly improbable, and even did it arise, it would affect all races equally.'
Contrast Great Britain's western colonies with her mere conquests in Asia and Africa. To the latter we have carried no strange diseases, but in them we have found several which are new to us. The natives, better suited to the conditions (of heat, light, disease, and the like) persist, and under the peace we have brought, multiply at a rate with which our own hampered immigration cannot keep pace. Judging by the analogy of all history, our ultimate and certain fate in them is absorption or expulsion. A handful of aliens cannot for ever control multitudes to whom they teach their own arts. Even over South Africa, where natural conditions are least adverse, hangs the shadow of ultimate native predominance.
1 Many species of microbes not normally parasitic on man, for instance, those which cause septicamia and tetanus, are capable, under conditions exceptionally favourable to themselves, of setting up disease. But they lack *the distinguishing characteristic of the true parasite, the ability to pass from victim to victim. The evolution of this power, as wonderful in its way as human limbs, would be vastly more difficult at the present time, when art and nature combine to protect man, than anciently, when savage communities were liable to be weakened by famine and other hardships. Experience of many kinds of microbes has rendered man relatively resistant to all infection. No really new diseases are ever discovered. All so-called new diseases are merely ancient maladies newly discriminated and named.

ULTIMATE VICTORY.

135

The natural history of man for unnumbered centuries is mainly a history of his evolution against disease. The story unfolded by it is of greater proportions than all the mass of trivial gossip about kings and queens, and the accounts of futile dynastic wars and stupid religious controversies, that fill so large a space in his written political history. In the latter, as told by historians groping in obscurity and blinded by their own preconceptions, men and matters are often distorted out of all reality. A clever, but prejudiced, writer may pass base metal
into perpetual circulation as gold. But human natural history deals, without obscurity and without uncertainty, with greater matters. Study it, and the mists clear away from much even of political history. We see forces, unrecognised, enormous, irresistible, unchanging, working slowly but mightily towards tremendous conclusions-forces so enormous, irresistible, and unchanging that we are able even to forecast the remote future. We see that the great migrations and permanent conquests are
drawing to a final close. Spain lost her opportunity when she grasped the tropics. France failed on the heights of Abraham. Russia can conquer only hardy aliens. Germany joins, wcontest already decided. The battle is over, and with us rests the ultimate victory.
As stated in the beginning of the present article the facts on which we have depended are known and are indisputable. Our whole business has been to trace relations of cause and effect between them. Throughout we have passed from antecedent to consequent. It is always instructive to reverse the process. A path retraced is, by reason of its new perspectives, all the more completely known. For very obvious reasons, the conquest of one race by another is never permanent unless accompanied by the elimination of the vanquished. The Anglo-Saxons have more space for expansion than any other people. But though their conquests in the east are very extensive, their opportunities for racial growth are limited to the west. In the former the natives persist and multiply, in the latter they approach extinction. Why this remarkable contrast? Why do the natives in the west perish? We know of only two agents that destroy races-the sword and disease. Our wars have been more bloody

136 EUGENICS REVIEW.
and prolonged in the east than in the west, where, indeed, we have introduced the Pax Britannacus among warring tribes. Evidently, therefore, the agent of destruction has not been the sword. That it has been the only alternative, disease, is confirmed by an immense mass of precise testimony, including the records of every Department of Public Health on the spot. To what diseases are the Western Aborigines especially susceptible? In every case to imported diseases. To their one great native disease, malaria, they are, within its area of prevalence, particularly resistant. In fact it is their principal bulwark against European aggression. Why are the western natives less resistant than the races of the east to the diseases from the east? They follow the rule that every race is resistant to every lethal and prevalent disease in proportion to the length and severity of its past experience of it. Why is that the case ? Only two explanations are conceivable-the transmission of acquirements, and the natural selection of favourable variations. The former, even apart from the decisive evidence furnished by disease is a discarded doctrine. There remains only natural selection which fits every instance exactly.
Here we have a chain of precise facts and definite explanations. If the chain is weak it must be weak in at least one link. What link?

