EUGENICS AND EDUCATION
The Practices of Ancient, Primitive, and Mediaeval Societies

By Professor R. RUGGLES GATES, LL.D., F.R.S.

Address to Section L of the Centenary Meeting (I93I) of the British Association.

G REEK methods of education are nated before they had an opportunity to

often cited as an ideal, but eugenics perpetuate their kind.

is usually regarded as a very modern

development. Yet various practices of the MEDIAEVAL APPRENTICESHIP

Greeks were clearly eugenic in their effects. The institution of apprenticeships and

The age of Pericles, with its supreme deve- guilds, which grew up in the Middle Ages,

lopments in philosophy, science and art, was clearly eugenic in some of its effects.

could only have been realized after several The relationship of master and apprentice

centuries of essentially eugenic selection. existed not only in the trades, but also in

During this period, natural selection must the professions, such as law and medicine,

have coincided with selection of the best and university scholars were apprentices in

mental and physical elements of the Greek the same sense. The apprentice system

race, for there has been no such concentra- gave the guilds considerable powers of con-

tion of genius at any other period in human trol, not only as regards economic status,

history. When these selective processes, but also in relation to marriage and repro-

which are so difficult to control, took another duction. Apprentices could only marry

turn, the decay and downfall of the race was when they had reached a certain status and

as rapid as had been its rise.

efficiency; the less efficient never had the

Among primitive peoples, seriously defec- opportunity of handing on their inefficiency

tive children quite generally have their to later generations. A law enacted in I562

existence terminated. The narrow margin made a seven years' apprenticeship for any

of safety of the tribe will not permit of the " trade or mystery " compulsory, and it

racial handicap which wo'uld result from the was not until I8I4 that all restrictions were

additional burden of unproductive mouths to removed, allowing anyone to take up any

feed. And who can say that they are not trade without previous training. In modern

in their way wiser than we, who go to the times all the essentials of apprenticeship are

other extreme and in the name of humani- continued as regards the professions, and

tarianism not only use all the resources of notwithstanding the difficulties created by

science to keep alive those whose whole trade unions, some trade apprenticeships

existence can only be a misery, but even continue, though usually for a shorter term

create conditions in which many of the of years. Extension of the principle of

mentally or physically unfit can marry and apprenticeships would undoubtedly be an

perpetuate their kind at the public expense. advantage, both from the educational and

It is undeniable that former ages were in the eugenic point of view.

some respects more eugenic than ours. For But in modern society such checks to

even with their high birth and death rates reproduction are removed, and the most

they unconsciously created conditions in thriftless and improvident can marry and

which the more vigorous and hardy tended produce children which they are unable to

to survive and multiply, while the weak- support. At the same time as these checks

lings and defectives were generally elimi- to reproduction were removed from the less

305

306

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

endowed members of society, economic com- INDIAN AND ESKIMO CUSTOMS

petition and the necessity to pay for the increasing provision for the support of the incapable and their offspring have progressively increased the economic pressure on the better endowed, who are thus forced to delay marriage and limit their offspring. In this way both economically and mentally the country is being led towards bank-
ruptcy.

That primitive tribes have some regulations or taboos which are clearly eugenic in their effects, may be shown by one or two examples. The " white Indians " of Panama are albinos who have occurred in
some numbers among the natives for several centuries. Owing to lack of pigmentation in skin and eyes they are at a disadvantage in the strong sunlight of their native land.

The studies of Mr. E. J. Lidbetter* on pauperism in a slum area of East London, begun in I9IO, have thrown much light upon the nature of city pauperism in
general. He finds that the pauper community is composed of two closely-related and intermarrying elements: (i) those
showing original defect and transmitting it,

The condition is a simple Mendelian recessive to normal skin and eye colour, so that two white Indians will have only white children. But tribal law forbids that such matings shall take place. Our civilization has at present no effective means by which marriages even much more serious in their
consequences can be prevented.

(2) self-perpetuating low-grade stocks com- An instance of a different kind may be

posed of the mildly incompetent, the taken from the Eskimos. They believe that

spiritless and dull. One hundred pedigrees, an evil spirit keeps watch to see that men

many of them going back five or six generations, and many statistics of the whole

commit no breach of the innumerable taboos. t
It is strictly forbidden to sleep out on

available population in this area have been the edge of the ice when seal hunting. This

collected. Here we have a race of pauper is a very desirable regulation for the safety

stocks, breeding together, not marrying to of the tribe, but the reason given by the

any extent with the normal population, and Eskimo is that the Sea Spirit does not like

not diminished by modern improvements in her creatures to smell human beings when

conditions or in education. The insane, the they are not actually hunting. The taboo

tuberculous, and the feeble-minded each is reinforced by a circumstantial myth, in

tend to marry their own kind within the which a certain spirit stole away the entrails

group, which as a whole remains essentially of two men who slept one night on the ice-

the same from generation to generation. edge. Thus it would appear that a prohibi-

Lacking in parental responsibility, they tion which is beneficial to the race is irra-

have a much higher fertility rate than tionalized by attributing its origin to the

the rest of the community. There is no whim of a spirit, and is enforced by

evidence that they are recruited to any constructing a myth setting forth the

considerable extent from the normal popu- imaginary but serious consequences of dis-

lation, nor that they send any recruits to obedience.

the normal population. The pauper community is thus a distinct element in the population, largely derived from the mentally deficient and the mildly incompetent, closely related, and remaining relatively stationary for at least a century while the rest of the population has responded to
gradually improved conditions.

We may therefore conclude that what we now call eugenic measures and educational
methods began equally early in the history of mankind. Racial advance can only take place when conditions resulting in eugenic selection are accompanied by adequate educational facilities for those who are best

able to profit by them.

* See, for example, " Heredity, disease and

pauperism," Proc. World Population Conference, t Rasmussen, K., Intellectual culture of the

1927, pp- 326-337.

Hudson Bay Eskimos. Copenhagen. I930.

EUGENICS AND EDUCATION

307

FUNCTION-AND COST-OF EDUCATION worth is all too prevalent and will lead us

While eugenists and educationists should along the road to racial decay. In this

thus co-operate, there is traditionally a country the cost of the education of defective

fundamental difference between eugenics children ranges from £25 to 1388 per head,

and education, since eugenists are concerned depending on the nature of the defect and

mainly with the inborn qualities, the here- the conditions of education, as against ;6I2
ditary potentialities of succeeding genera- per head on normal children in the ele-

tions, while educationists, as such, are en- mentary schools.* But educational tenden-

gaged in bringing out and developing to the cies in modern societies have still more

full those inherited qualities. It is these serious effects. Anyone who discusses the

potentialities with which we are all con- subject, especially with the teachers in our

cerned. But the eugenist is better able primary and elementary schools, soon

than many educationists to appreciate the realizes the appalling frequency of low-

fact that the potentialities of youth are not grade intelligence bordering on feeble-

so unbounded as some would optimistically mindedness in many of our schools. Sir

suppose, but that they are necessarily George Newman states that in the ele-

limited and determined by the organic in- mentary schools of England and Wales

heritance each has received from his there are half a million dull and back-

parents.

ward children, and another half-million so

Individuals, even in the same family, are born with large inherited differences in ability and in aptitude for particular kinds of mental or physical activity. It is well known, and has been shown by psychological tests of pupils, that education increases rather than diminishes these differences in aptitude. We all improve more rapidly by practice in doing the thing we like best than in learning to do that in which we are less interested or efficient.
Universal education can never bring all men to the same level. On the contrary, it serves, as many educationists already recognize, to emphasize still further the mental differences which already exist. The ideal of a well-directed educational

defective mentally or physically as to be unable without medical treatment to derive reasonable benefit from school education. The continually increasing School and State Medical Service is to some extent dysgenic in its indirect effects, and the
medical profession as a whole is only begin-
ning to realize that the racial effects of its activities may be even more important than
the direct results in prolonging and improving the life of the individual. While
the teaching of school hygiene will have some ameliorative effect, yet something much more fundamental is required, to replace unsound constitutions by children who are racially vigorous and show relative freedom from physical and mental defect.

system should therefore be to give every

individual the opportunity of developing to AN AMERICAN PARALLEL

the maximum by his own efforts, with aid Dr. W. M. English, President of the

according to his grade of ability, the apti- American Psychiatric Association, has

tudes which will enable him to make the recently quoted statistics which show that

maximum contribution to the life of the in the United States there are i,800,000

community.

persons with the mentality of children

Believers as we all are in education, it below nine years of age. Of these, 6oo,ooo

is necessary for us to take a wider view of are below the mental age of seven and

the racial effects of education than has should have constant supervision through-

hitherto been taken by our legislators or by out their lives. The great majority of these

many of our educationists. The view that cases he believes are the result of heredity,

populations exist as blind mouths to be fed by education regardless of their racial

* Report of Chief Medical Officer of Board of
Education for I928, p. I05.

308 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

and he finds that feeblemindedness is legislation and of the urgency of the racial

increasing alarmingly in all civilized problems involved is not confined to parlia-

countries.

mentarians, but is general throughout our

As Karl Pearson has said, " No degene- population. Enlightenment on these sub-

rate and feeble stock will ever be converted jects can only come through a form of

into sound stock by the accumulated effects education which will give the younger gene-

of good laws, education, and sanitary ration some sort of biological outlook. Man

measures, though such means may render is an organism and will fail in his destiny,

the individual members of the family pass- as he has failed many times before, if he

able, if not strong members of society." refuses to recognize the applications of bio-

Dr. Willoughby, in his recent inaugural logical law to his own species.

address as President of the British Medical Those who wish to neutralize eugenic

Association, stated that half the insured action usually begin by minimizing the im-

population in Britain came under treatment portance of heredity. But the advances of

in an average year. The claims for sick- genetics in relation to mankind in recent

ness and disablement benefit increased con- years* have made the evidence overwhelm-

tinuously and had virtually doubled in ing that the inheritance of all sorts of

recent years. Even in Germany, whence differences, great and small, normal and

we borrowed the scheme of National Insur- abnormal, is as intense in man as in other

ance, its dysgenic effects on the people are organisms and follows in general the same

already being recognized.

laws, which geneticists and cytologists have

All students of the subject recognize formulated during the last thirty years.

that selection of racial stocks is the chief That this applies equally to the inheritance

means by which racial improvement or de- of mental differences, no one who has

generation can take place, but in the post- examined the genetic evidence can doubt.

War period we have laid ever increasing

burdens upon the naturally endowed members in all strains of society in order that, in effect, the least endowed might be aided to multiply at their expense. It is difficult to conceive anything more dysgenic and
disastrous in its effects on the race. Clearly then, there are trends in modern
civilization which are leading towards downfall such as overtook all the civilizations which have preceded ours. Modern legislation is oblivious of these racial problems,
or of the racial effects of the laws passed
by modern legislatures.

INHERITANCE OF AMENTIA-
This is not the place to discuss that evidence, but I will cite one or two instances which indicate in the clearest way that mental defect is largely perpetuated by
inheritance, evlen although there is much
to learn regarding the limitations and interrelationships of the various types of mental defect from an inheritance point of view. Tredgoldt states that of I24 of his patients with neuropathic heredity, it was found to be present in the direct ancestral line of 98 cases (or 8o per cent.) and in collateral lines

BETTER-NOT MORE-EDUCATION

of 26 more. Similarly, Dr. E. Sayer found

Having thus exposed a few of the sub- that in the families of Ioo mentally versive tendencies of post-War legislation, defective children there was a family history

we may well ask what can yet be done to of insanity in 31, of epilepsy in ii, while

alter these dysgenic currents and arrest the one parent was mentally defective in 34,

racial decay before it is too late. Can we, making a total of 76 per cent. On the con-

by taking thought, stem this tide and intro- trary, of ioo normal children, 7 showed a

duce eugenical conceptions into educational and other legislation?

* See, e.g., Gates, R. R., Heredity in Man. Con-
stable. 1929.

Our need is for better (not more) education. Ignorance of the biological effects of

t Tredgold, A. F., Mental Deficiency (amentia).
Fi1f*tEhUGEEdiNtiicosn.REBvaiiEllwi,EreI,9IT3i.ndall & Cox. 1929.

EUGENICS AND EDUCATION

309

family history of insanity, 6 of epilepsy, results of Lidbetter, already quoted, regard-

and 2 had one parent who was mentally ing pauperism. In both cases it is found

defective, a total of I5 per cent. Dr. Tred- that the bulk of the defect arises from a

gold rightly concludes that " the extent of stratum only a little higher, which is itself

neuropathic inheritance is quite insignifi- subnormal.'

cant in the mentally normal as compared Some acquaintance with such questions

with the defective population."

can be gained through the study of ele-

Among school children in this country of mentary biology, which forms the necessary

ages 7-I4, Dr. E. 0. Lewis* finds 40 background to them all. A serious defect

mentally defective per i,ooo in certain rural of the present English school system is the

districts and 2I per i,ooo in urban areas. lack of sufficient biological teaching. Every

Sir George Newman, Chief Medical Officer schoolboy and girl should, as an essential

of the Board of Education, in considering part of their education, receive some in-

this Report,t concludes that perhaps io per struction regarding the nature, structure,

cent. of school children are dull and back- and action of plant and animal organisms,

ward, and I-2 per cent. more are mentally as well as their relationships and reactions

defective. Yet we are asked to contemplate upon each other. They should know some-

this state of affairs with equanimity, recog- thing of heredity, and realize that every

nizing our duty to care for these defectives organism inherits and transmits its genetic

throughout their lives, but without making peculiarities, down to the finest details of

any serious attempt to reduce their numbers difference.

by removing the cause.

Man's increasing knowledge has created

conditions in which the need for biological

AND THE SOCIAL PROBLEM GROUP

fitness can be disregarded for a time; but sooner or later the day of reckoning comes,

Dr. Lewis, in his investigations, found and the race which has been breeding too

that whereas idiocy and imbecility appear largely from its worst stocks finds itself

to be equally distributed in all social strata, supplanted by more vigorous and efficient

yet feeble-mindedness (which constitutes 75 strains. This may happen slowly and

per cent. of mental defect) shows great almost imperceptibly or it may happen

differences in incidence in different schools with disconcerting speed. It has happened

and villages and in differen't parts of the many times in the history of mankind.

same town. He concludes that the majority Races have developed their culture, lost

of feeble-minded come from a relatively their stamina through reversed selection,

small social group numbering some io per differential birth rate, crossing with lower

cent. of the population, who are themselves races, or through other causes; and then,

subnormal, constituting the retarded or perhaps centuries after the social damage

' social problem group.' This gives a clear has been done, their decadent descendants

basis for the hope that in future the carriers have been finally swept away by a more

or transmitters of feeble-mindedness may virile but less evolved people, and the cycle

be recognizable by suitable mental tests. It of development has begun over again. is also very strikingly in harmony with the

* Report of the Mental Deficiency Committee,
1929.
t Report of Chief Medical Officer of Board of Education for I928.

$ It by no means follows that the bulk of the working classes are unsound or defective in their inherited capacities, although some opponents of eugenics attempt to suggest that such a conclusion would follow.

B Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIII, No. 4.

