Pauperism and Heredity.*
A FURTHER REPORT.
BY E. J. LIDBETTER.
It will be rememibered that early in 1910 a Committee of this Society was formed to consider the Eugenic bearing of the Reports of the Royal Commission on the Poor Laws which had just been published. Those reports dealt at very great length with the numerous aspects of the Poor Law problem, but they dealt almost exclusively with administrativre matters or with the subject from the point of view of possible legrislation.
In neither of the reports was anv attempt made to analyse or define the personality of the Pauper, his character, antecedents or capacity.
To this latter work the Committee appointed by this Society
devoted their energies with the object of discoverina whether and to what extent pauperism could be attributed to bad heredity, either by the transmission of actual defect or the perpetuation of low-grade
types. Those concerned in the administration of the Poor Law had long
been struck by the tendency of particular families to apply to the Relieving Officer in almost everv domestic contingency and indeed for whole familes to spend their lives in intermittent chargeability, but until the investigation undertaken by this Society the problems of the Poor Law do not appear to have been considered from this point of view. The Annuial R.eports of the Local Government Board were based upon a mass of statistical data in which the several qualities of pauperism were classified-sick, able-bodied, temporarily sick, children, etc.,but offsprinig were never considered in relation to parentage except as dependent children, or legally liable relatives; and this is still the case..
In this connection it will be remembered that the statistical formula of the L.G.B. was established long before the significance of Galton's work was recognised-in fact in early Victorian times and on the social and political views of that period-and as the whole value of statistical data lies in its comparability ,changes in the Annual formula would only be made with great reluctance-even if a case for such change haci been made out.
It might be argued at the present time that no such case has been made out and in that event it must increasingly be the business of this Society and those who think with us to accumulate the evidence upon which alone the change can be made, or, if that be too big a task, to indicate the method of investigation to that end. UJnfortunatelv some of the greatest difficulties that beset the enquirer at present are such as can only be removed by those in high authority, as for instance the limitations of parochial boundaries, or access to material records in particular cases. To take the first point, there are 28 separate Poor
* A paper read before the Eugenics Education Society in 1920-re-written .

PAUPERISMI AND HEREDITY.1

153

Law areas in the County of London alone, and the population to be
dealt with is a mobile one. The chargeability of a particular case may be distributed over several of these areas (or elsewhere outside the County) so that just as the various Poor Law authorities have now no
knowledge as to relief afforded beyond their boundaries, so, and for the same reason, the investigator cannot ascertain all the facts.
Indeed the problem is one that can only be properly undertaken by
an authority larger than the one which our Poor Law system at present provides and endowed with fuller powers.
A preliminary report of the Committee appointed appeared in the REVTIEW in November, 1910,t from which I make the following ex.
tracts: "That element in pauperism which represents and transmits
original defect, almost completely neglected in the investigation and wholly neglected in the recommendations of the Commission, is the one we wish to take into consideration.
The determination of this element is not a matter of opinion but of the application of methods of careful investigation. It is
impossible to disregard the fact that the typical dependent in the minds of the commissioners is not the typical dependent who habitually receives relief. Yet it is precisely the latter who is
primarily the subject of Poor Law relief, and who affords the chief burden on the public purse.
I-He is not the man who responds to a call on manly independence or stands ready to take a place made available through the Labour Exchange. He was born without manly independence and is unable to do a normal day's work however frequently it is
offered to him.
In a general sense, anid of course with manv exceptions, the unemployed represent relatively weaker stocks. With a diminution of work elimination falls on the less qualified. This is complicated by the factor of age; elimination at 40 years of age is possibly asbociated with elements of original weakness.
If a man can do only half the work required in these davs of standardised wages, it is rather futile to attempt to introduce him into the industrial system."

"It is to be noted finally that degenerate tendencies do not manifest in transmission a single set of characteristics but take on a great multiplicity of forms. A single family stock produces paupers, feeble-rninded, alcoholics and certain types of criminals. If an investigation could be carried out on a suffici.ently large scale we believe that the greater proportion of undesirables would be found connected by a network. of relationship, a few thousand family stocks probably provide this burden which the community
has to bear." It was intended by the Committee presenting this report that it
should be regarded as a preliminary statement on a subject to be much more exhaustively dealt with later. None knew more clearly than
t "Eugenics Review," Vol. 2, No. 8 (November, 1910).

154 14UGZNICS RVIMIM.
the committee concerned the fragmnentary character of the evidence which in the limited time at their disposal they had been able to produce. As time went -on and the discussion became more general, and as the diagrams produced eame to be used for lecturing and other purposes a very healthv criticism was developed. Much of this critisiem was unsound and we need not be troubled with it now, but much of it was quite sound and called for further investigation.
Among other points made was that the results were selective and that so far as the causes of pauperism might be regarded as hereditary they gave no indication as to what proportion they bore to t-he sum total of pauperism. This was a perfectly legitimate criticism and one that had to be met. No considerabre argument could be advanced or supported as to the hereditary aspect behind pauperism until this question had been dealt -with. In short it was necessary to examine a particular pauper community and ascertain what proportion of chargeability current on a given date could be connected with similar or earlier chargeability. This was the task attempted in an investigation that was carried on for two years uintil War conditions made it impossible to carry it on anv longer.
The place a-elected for this investigation was a small Poor Law Area in London with a populetion of about 140,000 and, at the time the investigation was commenced, a pauper community in all classes of about 2,A50 and including 800 Imbeciles and Insane.
These figures give some idea of the extent of the work attempted. The scope of the work may be gathered from the obiects sought, as follows:
1. To ascertain the measure of family chargeabilitv and as far as possible reduce the results to pedigree form.
2. To ascertain the age of onset and the incidence of repetition in chronic cases.
3. To measure the periods of chargeability against the periods of independent support.
4. To secure records of fertility and suirvival in the several classes. 5. Generally, to compare the ascertained family chargeability
with individiual chargeability.
As has been already suggested the work was never brought to a successful conclusion. There were two reasons for this. The first is that the work was too much-for an individual enquirer to undertake. It is a mistake to think that such an investigation is a straight-forward operation which may be undertaken and by diligence carried to a final conclusion. My experience is that the work is never finished. It grows as it proceeds. In whatever stage the investigation may be, there is always more to do than has been done. This is peculiarly the case with investigations as to heredity. The investigator never finishes a cashe leaves it for a time, and then returns to it-to find a variety of new material awaiting inclusion.
From all this we may gather the progressive character of the work. After the investigation had been going on for about 12 months the accumulation of material was overwhelming.
The second and fatal difficulty was, however, the War. With-'

PAUPERISM AND HZREDITYu

155

in a few days of the outbreak of War all ordinary activities were set aside in favour of special services. This continued with increasing intensity to the exclusion of all otber matters. Meanwhile there
was going oni a steady dissipation of the special community which
foimed the subject of this enquiry. The older people died, the younger were absorbed into military or other War service, whilst the lowering of the standard of employable labour drew all the middle-aged into employment. The following figures shew how far the process went:
Numbers in the two main Institutions:
At date investigation commenced (.July, 1918) 1,490. 1st January, 1914 .. .. .. .. 1,595.
,, 1915 .. .. .. .. 1,587.

,, 1917 .. .. .. .. 1,096.

,, 1918 .. .. .. .. 990. ,, 1919 .. .. .. .. 792.

It muist also be borne in mind that as the people disappeared so also did the material witnesses, not chargeable, whose evidence was necessary for the investigation.
In this way the investigation was brought to an end after nearly two years of work, in which only the foundation of the enquiry was laid.
These facts are material in considering the results achieved-
especially the fact that much work was irretrievably lost and that only such matter can be shewn as lends itself to disconneeted review.
One of the most important problems in pauperism has been that of intermittent chargeability-what is known in Poor Law circles as
"the ins and outs." In the course of this enquirv it was possible to arrive at ertain figures hearing on the question. The following figures shew the number of persons present on a given day in 1918 in the two institutions referrec to above (both in the same Poor Law area) and the number of times which the several persoins had been previously innates. For this purpose the two institutions were taken together
and treated as one:--

Number in

Number of times admitted. Workhouse.

1st Adrnission .. ..

445

:2nd ,,

.. ..

197

3rd ,,

.. .

106

4th ,,

.. ..

62

5th ,,

.. ..

39

6th ,,

.. ..

29

7th ,,

.. ..

11

8th ,,

.. ..

18

9th ,,

.. ..

11

Number in Infirmarv.
240 74 41 25 18 9
7
7 3

Total. 685 271 147 87
57 38 18
25
14

1Oth ,,

.. ..

More than 10 and under 20

More than 20 and under 80

More than 80 and under 50

11 26 16 11

2 18
18 39
5 21 1 12

156 1UGENICS REVIEW.
Among Workhouise cases, I each of 52nd, 63rd, 77th, 96th, 10th,
113th, 130th, 152nd and 1.Qs4th time of admission. Among Infirmarv cases, 1 each of 55th and 11 5th time of admission. These latter would, of course, be extraordinary cases-. Mainly men
allowed ouit from day to day to look for work--who seldom found it. These nimibers are of course the minimum. They include only
the chargeability that had occurred in the area under review and as
many of the persons concerned were tramps, fre.luenters of Common
Lodging Houses and otherwise homeless there would be much chargeability elsewhere which could not be included.
The significance of these figures will perhaps be better understood if I pass from the general to the particular. In Diagram No. 1. in the3rd generation, numbers, 8, 9, 10 and 11 four brothers:
No. 8. Entered House at 60 years of age, was out for two short periods, average 85 days each, and had on the appointed day been in continuously 6 years, 4 months and 15 days. Total chargeability 7 years and 11 months.
No. 9. Entered at 48 years of age and has never been out since. Period chargeable 20 years. Has a club foot.
No. 10. Entered at age of 34 years. Total period chargeable 15 years, 7 months, 21 days. Last unbroken periodi 7 years, 6 months, 20
days. Has been out 32 times, average stay out 7 months and 1 day; total period out since he first came in, 13 years, 2 moonths,, 13 days. No. 11. Entered at 26 vears of age. Total period chargeable at the appointed day 20 years, 9 months, 17 days. Last unbroken period t years. Has been out in all 60 tinmes, average 2 months, 13 days, aggregate since he first came in 12 years, 3 months, 1P, days.
Of these three brothers two were unmarried and the others had wives and chiletren. The wives carried on the homes when the men. entered the House.
No. 16. Entered at the age of 62. Has been in 8 years, 10 months,
2.8 days. Has been out twice: four days in all.
Some attempt was made to prepare a table of relationship fre-quency, but the variety of relationship disclosed amongst those chargeable was so great, the complications so diverse, that this had to be abandoned. Probably 50)/% of those chargeable on a given day-
had either on that date or upon some previous date, not too remote,
soine one or more relatives chargeable. This part of the subject is so complicated that it cannot be properlv dealt with in this paper or upon the data available. The pedigrees alone give some indication of its
importance and complexity. These pedigrees are set out in diagrams numbered 1, 2 and 3, and shew a remarkable volumne of family and inter-related chargeability.

Hoe If

jr 0

IV

w 4v eT Tk

2

Diagmm No. 1. Pedigree of a group of chronic and occasional paupers, closely inter-married, in six generations. From an E.ast Londion district. Period 11801-11914. On the left,, mildly incompeteiit able-bodied, centre, tuberculosis and insanity and on the right intermittent sickness.
No. 2.

.y (y

Ol

(y SI ol

eL

Diagmm No. 2. Pedigree of a grotip of Non-moral able-bodied paupers. Period i8io to I9114- Four generations. North-East Loiidon district.

No, 3.

1-
&.. eV (2) .) qL-?m --I

I
tt q w

& --&

4.
N

q-rlpl

I
Q (i. a (Y Q (y --ffl

ic

I
(2) & WQ (. bL w

z

-i4-6

) -V--Ai 0 A. 0Q Q (:.r (p, * e. (p, (t e w & 005.7 (t (t ot 0 (.y

z J.

.9 B 3

4t (Y (E. Q Q (t

Diagram No. 3. Insanity and destructive eye disc-ase. Inter-marri-ed with pauper groups on either side. Five generations. Period i8I2-I9I5- EastLon&n district.

PAUPERISM AND HEREDITY1

157

Key to the symbols used in the diagrams:

10 Normal.
Not known.
I(i Occasional pauper.

et Insane pauper.
O Reared in Poor Law Schools.
@ Died under one year.

,(i) Chronic pauper.

) Mentally defectives.

B=Blind.

T=Tuberculous.

E=Epileptic.

C=Criminal.

S= Suicide.

D=Deaf &Dumb,

NOTE .-The dotted lines (thus...... ) indicate irregular un-
married) relationship and illegitimacy.

DIAGR GM No. 1 .

A gtroup of mildly incompetent persons in six generations. Verv little sickness shewn.

Paupers:-

Chronic

..

Occasional

..

Insane . .

Reared in Poor I.aw

Schools

13 64
6
7

Non-paupers:--

Known noii -paupers 55

Not known

81

Died in infancy . . 21

90
Tuberculous 10: Epileptics 3: Blind 1.

107

DIAGRAM No. 2.

Paupers:Occasional .. ..
Chronic .. .. Insane . . .. . Reared in Poor Law
Schools .. ..

40 16 3
24

Non -paupers:
Normal Not known. Died in infaincv Tuberculouss

35
.9
18
2

DIAGRAM No. 8.S.

A case of Insanity and destructive eye disease.

Paupers:Occasional
Chronic Chronic Blind. . Insane .. Insane Blind .. Epileptic

* 46
5 7
. 11 5 1

Non-paupers:-
Not known.. Infant mortality Normal
Tube.rculous

81 20 29
1

These three pedigrees have been selected for this paper because -they shew in such a clear way thc distinctive character in each group, No. 1 what Mr. Wells calls "the mildly incompetent, spiritless and dull ." No. 2 the non-moral or immoral type and No. 3 Destructive disease and insanity. Professional men and others interested in Diagram No. 8 will find it set out in greater detail, but without more

158 EUGENICS REVIEW.

recenit additions, in "Brain," Volume 23", Part 8 (1918) with memor-

andum on the eye disease by the late Dr. Nettleship.

Generally speaking these classes are found in combination all in

the same group, but here the.y are found clearly defined and are so

presented. From this point of view it is particularly interesting to

notice their combination in marriage and in reproduction, for not only

do they reproduce as the biological student would expect, but like

attracts like in marriage to a remarkable degree.

^

In the course of this investigation the data were collected for up.

wards of 200 pedigrees. Few of these however contain as many units

as those produced (numbered 1, 2 & 8,) and some are too small for

practical use at present. Many of the smaller ones are however of

special interest, particularly to mendelian stuctents. Of thebe latter

four are here produced (numbered 4 to 7) shewing the transmission of

a particular defect through the apparently normal member of the stock.

orco

No. 4.
G
eQ e @ Q t Q
No. 5.

PAUPERISM AND HEREDITY.

159

No. 6.

No. 7.

160 6UGENICS REVIEW.
It should be understood that the completion of these data is going on, but very slowly-mainly hampered for want of the necessary funds.
It is necessary to define more clearly the attitude of Eugenics to pauperism. In so f4vr as the receipt of public assistance is of a temporary character-as for instance in non-recurrent temporary sickness, or relief for the family of a man bona fide unemployed or in the case of orphans maintained in Poor Law schools whose parents were not suffering from sickness known to be hereditary-we are concerned in the matter onlv to the exteint that eugenics requires the best environment for the biologically desirable. This is however a sort of side issue of' eugenics proper and many no doubt will deny that it has any relation to eugenics. WTe are mainly concerned with the Poor Law in so far as pauperism is in relation to hereditary defect and its reproduction. Two questions are cardinal to this issue. Can it be shewn that there is in existence a definite type of pauper family? Secondly, and if so,. is the pauperism in such families associated with a definitely transmissible characteristic standing in relation to the pauperism as cause and effect?
I think there can be no doubt that the figures and the diagrams I
have produced abundantly answer the first of these questions in the affirmative. With regard to the second question the diagrams have
been specially selected because they shew in each case transmissible characteristics not onlv associated with the public dependence, but also standing in relation to it as cause and effect. Not only is the distinguishing characteristic to be observed in each aeneration, but the inter-marriages are with the same type.
In the discussion which followed the issue of our first report it was repeatedlv declared that destitution leading to public assistance is the consequence of adverse environment. The main part of the discussion has been round that point. But if the enquiry is pressed forward and found to lead to a clear bioloaical classification the effect must be to greatly increase the difficulties of those who argue environ. mental cauisation.
The fact is also very important from the point of view of classification within the Poor Law. Nothing is talked of more freely, nor on the whole more loosely, than this business of classification. When it is more generally recognised that the physical structure, as well as the
mental qualities of mian are the result of long generations of adaptation and that the only force making for practical efficiency in this process
has been elimination by death, and further that the Poor Law population represents a type of borderline individuals who could not survivebut for the protection the Poor Law affords-when these facts are recog-
nised and form part of our mental outlook on these (jiiestions, we shall
hear less of classification which merely follows traditional sociology, and make sonme attem)t to arrive at classification on a more scientific basis.
Obviously this is a problem that can only be dealt with by a considerable enlargement of Poor Law areas, and the distribution of PoorLaw charges on a nmuch broader basis than at present. The distinctly parochial element would then disappear, the purely local inducement to get rid of chargeabilitv would no longer operate; it would be possible

PAUPERISMI AND HEREDITY

161

to provide separate institutions for particular classes of case (because
there would be in the enlarged areas sufficient numbers chargeable in
each class to make it worth while to equip) a special institution for that
class), the general mixed workhou.se would disappear, except as a receiving house, and the way would be cleared for a more thorough and more enlightened classification and the elucidation of special problems in
relation to the several classes. It might then be fouLnd that a certain proportion of the habitues
of our Workhouses-not a large proportion but still a considerable number--present in themselves a special sort of problem which could only be dealt with by prolonged or permanent treatment. Many of these, as the data shews, are mere parasites upon society, spending their lives between the workhouse, and prison, or on the road. In any case thev render to society no adequate retuirn for their maintenance, they exist by begging, by petty theft, by the exploitation of publie
and private charities and by occasional incursions into the land of
work, often with immediate and disastrous results to those whose laboujr they undersell.
The enlargement of Poor Law areas would make possible, and the need to place such individuals somewhere in a scientific classification
would compel, that larger and mlore comprehensive enqjuiry that is so
necessarv in these matters. Out of that would grow a practical application of the science of heredity, increasing as our knowledge grew. Every interest would converge to add to our knowledge in these matters and to emphasise the advantage of the use of that knowledge in the practical affairs of every-day life.
Another point of the utmost importance to Eugenics is the decline in pauperism. The decline which I have already indicated is made up of two parts. The first is a real decline in the number of persons dependent on the State. The second is only a statistical decline due to the gradual bringing into operation of the scheme for the break up of the Poor Law. This is of course wholly artificial, consisting as it does of a large number of persons transferred from one public fund to another.
The former movement is a bye-product of the war due to the lowered standard of employable labour and to the attraction of high wages. In the main the persons affected have been men and women beyond the former age of employed labour and to this extent is highlv satisfactory. But it has also included a certain proportion of younger people-the feeble-minded not so bad as to be permanently detained, the mild epileptic, the spiritless and dull people and the mildly incompetent who form the apparently normal unit in these pedigrees. Whilst a lower rate of pauperism is a desirable condition in the State, we must recognise that there are limits beyond which a reduction is undesirable. The policy of getting rid of chargeability at all cost has its value in Poor Law economy as at present arranged, and it serves the purpose of the statistical economibt; but it looses sight of the fact that biological forces operate in man as in other animals, ana that in the intervals of chargeability not only is the apparent saving not affected, but unless we or the forces within the child distinguish it from its parents, the condition of intermittent pauperism is established for at least another

162 2EUGZNICS REVIEW.
generation. This is not a demand for the wholesale extentiorn of pauperism, but rather a plea for the recognition of the fact that society as et present organised must produce a fair proportion of individuals inherently incapahle of keeping pace with the normal population, and that these individuals tend to transmit their incapacity.
And a larger aspect of this same problem arises in the scheme for the break up of the Poor Law. Whatever may be said of the system that is passing away it did hold this intensive community together. There seems to be a danger that under the new system this community may be dispersed not only in the administrative sense, but actually distributed so that the family may cease to be the unit for administrative purposes. This affects eugenics in many ways. As I have indicated, the study of this problem-which I hold to be essential-can be carried on effectually only if the administration is vested in one authority. Again the Eugenic ideal is inseparable from the idea of family unity. Already both parental and filial responsibility have been very much weakened by the changes affected and in progress.
The attempt to separate the temporarily sick but otherwise selfsupporting individual from the person.s who are paupers first and sick afterwards is all to the good. Again the proposal to transfer the Poor Law Schools to the Educational Authority will give facilities for a higher standard of educational opportunity for the children reared in thesc schools-perhaps not free from the taint of pauperism, but in any case free fromi the hampering effects of parochial control and the limitations of parochial outlook.
But in both these cases some effort should be made to give the benefits of the better system to those of civic or Eugenic worth.
It is at this point that the possible effects of the new system are apparent. Any scheme which can in effect distinguish the case of temporary and bona fide distress so as to break that class away fron the biological communitv of paupers mutst be regarded as a desirable scheme. The wider that class of case can be distributed in the general community the better must be the result because the more quickly will it be absorbed.
Such a scheme might become a sort of social rescue scheme part of which already exists in the scheme for insurance against unemployment. It needs to be supplemented by the provision of national homes for orphan children apart from the gencral body of Poor Law children and selected on a biological basis.
Certain other proposals might be made having for their object the double purpose of restoring desirable elements to the normal community and on the other hand isolating this community of perpetual paupers. No scheme of Poor Law reform can be held to be satisfactory which does not start at this point, that is at the effort to distinguish and isolate this group. It must be the very foundation of all reform. The method should be educational in the broadest possible sense, and the end restorative on the one hand and isolation on the other. There is no other way. On no known biological principle can you hope to raise these groups and on no economic principle can you make them selfsupporting. It is better therefore for all concerned that they should be in the descendant phase.

PAUPERISM AND HEREDITY.

168

It is upon the urgent need for further research that I would lay final emphasis in concluiding this paper. Upon the necessity that is for an altogether more energetic and concerted effort to get togetber, and make available, that mass of reliable data which is so necessary before a practical application of the idea of Eugenics can be at all possible. Few, if anv, of the suggestions put forward as "constructive eugenics'$ can be supported without question or qualification, and none of those
put forward as "restrictive eugenics" carry that measure of certainty that alone would justify collective action.
In fact we have no applicable science yet, and no promise of that without a far greater and much more comprehensive research than has yet been undertaken.

