THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Mendel, Gregor. Experiments in Plant Hybridisation. Edited by J. H. Bennett, introduction by R. A. Fisher. Edinburgh, 1965. Oliver and Boyd. Pp. ix+95. Price 21s.
THE TITLE OF this book does not give a full idea of the delights it contains. As well as a reprint of Bateson's translation of Mendel's paper, together with an introduction by Fisher and Fisher's marginal comments, we have also Fisher's classic 1936 essay on the history of science "Has Mendel'swork been rediscovered?", and Bateson's biographical notice of Mendel.
There would, in fact, be very little for a reviewer to say except recommend this book were it not for the intriguing nature of the question Fisher raised about Mendel's data. As is well known Mendel's data appear improbably close to expectation. In one part (the progeny tests of F2 dominants to determine the proportion heterozygous) the data are in fact significantly deviant from Fisher's sophisticated expectations for the data fit a 2:1 ratio, but with the size of progeny grown, a proportion of the heterozygotes are not expected to be detected as such and should be scored as homozygotes, so that less than 2:1 should be observed.
It is, however, pertinent to ask in this centenary year whether Fisher proved his hypothesis that someone such as Mendel's gardener polished up the results. Fisherian expectations assume that binominal expansions of 1:1 or 3:1 give the correct expectations. However, pollen grains do not come at random but in tetrads, so that unless pollen grains are randomized we should expect ratios to be better than Fisherian. It still, therefore, remains an open question whether or no Mendel's results are really too good to be true.
This speculation does not detract from the interest of Fisher's paper, and the publication of all these papers together make a delightful little volume all schools and all biologists should wish to have, for together they provide an education not only in the origin of genetics but in the anatomy of experiment.
J. M. THODAY
Robinson, Roy. The Genetics of the Norway Rat.
Oxford 1965. Pergamon. Pp. ix+804. Price £10.
WHEN, IN 1925, Morgan, Bridges and Sturtevant published The Genetics of Drosophila,

genetics meant formal genetics and nothing else.
In mammalian genetics, the purely formal
aspects have always been less predominant, and
The Genetics of the Mouse contains a good deal
of material on the anatomical, embryological
and physiological effects of single genes which
the late Sir Ronald Fisher did not regard as
genetics at all. Few people would now take so
narrow a view of genetics, and the reviewer
hopes that he will not be regarded as unduly restrictive in what he thinks mammalian genetics
is about. For it seems to him that the title of
this book The Genetics of the Norway Rat is seriously misleading. The rat has always been a poor relation of the mouse in that the number of individual genes which have been identified is small; so is the amount of work on the effects of individual genes, on mutation, spontaneous and induced, on linkage and so on. If all the work on the more traditional aspects of genetics
in the rat was properly assessed and presented in a disciplined manner, it would not fill 200 pages. How, then, is it possible to write a genetics of the rat of four times that size, and costing £10? The rat has been used for a multitude of studies in many fields of biology and medicine, not to mention psychology. Increasingly in recent years, inbred strains have been used for such studies, and the comparison of strains inevitably yields inter-strain differences for any feature studied. From the genetical point of view, these are trivialities unless they yield critical information about the nature of the genetical structure which differentiates these strains, and this they have so far conspicuously failed to do. The book under review is largely composed of lengthy discourses on such interstrain differences which make no contribution to genetics whatsoever. To call a book so largely consisting of that kind of material The Genetics of the Norway Rat is an appeal to the wrong category of purchasers (unless, of course, one relies on the libraries which have little choice in what they have to buy).
On the other hand, the book may well be useful to research workers other than geneticists who use the rat as an experimental animal. Sooner or later, they all come up against strain differences, and this book will help them to discover what is already on record. The author

30

