iFIEDRICH WILHELM SCHALLMEYER:
.A 1857-1919 A Pioneer in Eu,enics IX- By MAJOR LEONARD DARWIN, Sc. D.

HEN transmitting to the library be devoted to the control of the selective

of our Society a copy of the I920 processes, this being based on researches in

edition of Schallmeyer's work regard to heredity. He advocated the medical

"Vererbung und Auslese", I should registration of all citizens and the state

to be permitted to say a few words about control of the medical profession. He was

He died in I9I9, and neither that event greatly influenced in his writings by the

the publication of the above-mentioned " Origin of Species," and he was at this time,

was, I believe, noticed at the time in like the author of that work, a believer in the

-EUGENICs REVIEW. This omission was inheritance of acquired characters, a belief

ss due to the poverty of our Society he subsequently abandoned. His ideas were

time and to the post-war conditions formed in the first instance before he had

evailing. As I was President at that studied Galton's writings. Indeed it was his

wish in some measure to make good desire to study that author's works which led

uomssion.

him to learn English, a task perhaps facili-

eyerwas bornat Mindeheim in I857, tated by his wide knowledge of other

one of a large family, and his father languages. He started his eugenic campaign

m business. He achieved distinction in in Germany uninfluenced by Galton.

jts at the Gymnasium at Augsburg Schallmeyer's second and more important

h began to study law. Soon after- work, " Vererbung und Auslese," was first

he turned his attention to philosophy published in I903, it being written as an

then finally to medicine. In I887 he entry for a competition organized and

e a general practitioner in a small financed by the famous Krupp. The subject

town, but before long came to feel of the competition was " Was lernen wir aus

help individuals at the expense of the den Prinzipien der Deszendenztheorie in

incompatible with his conception of Beziehung auf die innerpolitische Entwick-

es, which moreover deprived him of king und Gesetzgebung der Staaten ? " A

ties for research. After further prize of high value was offered and three

of study he became a specialist in scientists appointed as Judges. They awarded

diseases at Dusseldorf. He retired it to Schallmeyer's work in preference to

seven years' work and spent the those sent in by sixty other entrants. Several

er of his life in research work near subsequent editions were issued, all carefully

Early in life he had visited Brazil, brought up to date, that of I9I0 being already

freed from duties he travelled in in the Society's library. The edition of I920,

East. He died in 19I9. .

forwarded herewith and published after his

eyer's short first work " Uber die death, contains so many alterations as almost

k6rperliche Entartung der Kultur to amount to a new book, and is valuable as

eit und die Verstaatlichung des indicating the progress of eugenic thought

Standes" was published in i89i, in Germany. Schallmeyer's last years were,

ye years spent in trying to find a in fact, mainly occupied in an endeavour to

His main theme was that medical popularize eugenics.

by preserving those of weak constitu- Schallmeyer's aim was, in fact, to prove

tributes to the deterioration of the that the qualities of human groups are

urged that attention should rather prone to change as the result of an incessant

33

34 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

though imperceptible selective process. This arises because individuals are endowed with
different hereditary dispositions and because they contribute unequally to the formation
of subsequent generations. Favourable social conditions do not, he held, usually tend to
promote racial progress; in fact they tend to endanger it by limiting the action of natural selection. Governments must in-
fluence racial processes both quantitatively and qualitatively and this can be done most effectively by propaganda. It is to be noted that Schallmeyer called the science he dealt with Rassehygiene not Rassenhygiene, and by it he meant the hygiene of the genotype.
Lest it should appear from the above that
Schallmeyer's work was only known in Germany it may be mentioned that in Holmes's " Bibliography of Eugenics," pub-
lished in I924, there are twenty-three entries against his name, dating from I89I to I9I9. Again at the Eugenic Congress held in London in I912, the most important eugenic meeting held in England up to that date, a

paper was read by Dr. Agnes Bluhm in
Schallmeyer was spoke of as " one of leading spirits of the German euge movement" (See " Problems in Eugen4
p. 388). The main theme of his works illustrated by indicating that " when thro'
the skill of the obstetrician a mother w much contracted pelvis brings a livng into the world" he thus " contri
towards the spread of" this trouble coming generatioIns (ibid. p. 390). I s like to see this paper reconsidered irr light of modern additions both to m knowledge and to eugenics. It maL added here that Dr. Alfred Ploetz, who now, I believe, been for a longer
fighter in the eugenic field than any living German, was welcomed in En on that occasion as a representative country. Which of these two pionee had greater influence in changing Ge thought in the right direction it is not non-German to attempt to decide. meyer was anyhow first in the field.

Pubishers: DAVID NU1T, Lodon - G. E. STECHERT & Co., New York - NICOLA ZANICHELLI, Bologna - FELIX ALCAN,

AKADEMISCHE VERLAGSGESELLSCHAFT m. b. H., Leipzig - F. KILIAN'S NACHFOLGER, Budapest - F. ROUGE & CIE,

THE MARUZEN COMPANY, Tokyo.

1939

83rd Yar

INTERNATIONAL R

OF IT:IFI ST]1 UI

~C' 'Q LI NTr1IA

Pbished every
Editors: 0.

Bm.oiBtON(IeaOch

number cownaiing
- P. BOTTAZZI -

ioo So iao . BRUNI

paM)
- AP

1S THE OnLY REVIEW the contributors to which are really inteidonal.

G. SCORZA. General Secretary: Paolo

18 THE OnLY REVIEW that has a really world-wide circulation.

15 TE ONLY REVIEW of synthesis and unification of science, that deals in itsarticles with thenewest and most fundamental problems of afl

of knowledge: scientific philosophy, history of science, scientific teaching and advancement, mathematics, astronomy, geology, physics,

biological sciences, physiology, psychology, such as those on the contribution given bv

history of religions, anthropology, linguistics: articles sometimes con-tituting the different nations to the advancement of science; on determinism ; on the

real and proper most fundamen

cal and chemical questions, and particularlv on relativity, on the physics of the atom and of radiations ; on vitalism. Scientia thus

the main oroblems interesting the intellectual circles of the whole world.

IS TE ONLY REVIEW that among its contributors can boast of the most illustrious men of science in the whole world.

The articles are published in the language of their authors, and every number has a supplement containing the French translation of al the that are not French. The review is thus compltely accessible to thase who know only French. (Writ for a free copy So the General Sciensa, Milan, sending sixpence in one stamp of your country, merely to cover packing and postage.)

SUJBSCRIPTION: 45 Shillings Substantial reducts are granted to thbo who take up more than one year's subscription.
For ifonnasion apply to " SCIENT " Via A. De Togni, 12 - Mano (Italy)

