DISTRIBUTION OF THE SICKLE CELL GENE*

A NEW LIGHT ON THE ORIGIN OF THE EAST AFRICANS

By HERMANN LEHMANN, M.D., Ph.D., F.R.I.C.

ROFESSOR JAMES HERRICK of In Africa there were occasional reports ol

Chicago, whose place in medical history sicklkemia from the Sudan and West Africa

is secure for his work on .coronary but not until the second world war were large-

sclerosis, reported in I9I0 a curious finding scale surveys undertaken. R. W. Evans pub-

in a Negro student with chronic anamia. lished his results in I944 and I945 and

Whereas normally the red cells of the reported a 20 per cent incidence of sicklxemia

blood seen under the microscope have the in 56I Africans from Nigeria, the Cameroons,

appearance of round discs, in this patient the Gold Coast and Gambia. G. M. Findley

numerous elongated " sickle " shaped forms and his collaborators, also from West Africa,

could be seen. These Professor Herrick called published in I946 a survey of several

sickle cells. The anaemia associated with thousand individuals and found a similar

these cells was called sickle cell aniemia. frequency of the gene; an analysis of their

It was soon found that many other Negroes material according to tribal origin did not

harboured these abnormal cells, and that suggest that the trait was of ethnological

more often than not there was no assoc- significance. H. C. Trowell found sickle cells

iation with an anaemia. They could be in East Africa in I945 and Altmann reported

produced in vitro by incubating blood in I945 their absence in South African

anaerobically and it was found that blood Negroes. Beet in I946 found an incidence of

cells from many Negroes might look perfectly about I2 per cent in Northern Rhodesia and

normal when fresh but would take on the he reported that there were less sickle cells in

sickle cell shape on incubation. Individuals the Balovale south of the River Zambezi than

in whom the sickle cells could thus only be in those on its north bank ; he suggested that

demonstrated by artificial measures in the this might indicate that the trait had come

laboratory were called sickle cell trait carriers. from the North and that the river had acted

It was demonstrated only recently by Pro- as a barrier against its spread southwards.

fessor Linus Pauling in the Californ-ia Insti- There were reports that sickle cells had

tute of Technology (I950) that sickle cells been found in a number of non-Negro popu-

contain a haemoglobin which differs in lations and even in certain species of deer.

its physical properties from normal adult These were usually shown to be based on

haemoglobin and Pauling and his colleagues artefacts. The sickling phenomenon was

separated the two by electrophoresis.

shown in I950-5I by M. F. Perutz and his col-

In I923 Huck showed in Baltimore- that leagues to be due to a peculiar physical

the sickling phenomenon was inherited as a property of the sickle cell (S) haemoglobin.

Mendelian dominant. Numerous investiga- Whereas normal adult (A) haemoglobin is

tions were made in the U.S.A. to define the equally soluble whether oxygenated or re-

incidence and racial distribution of the sickle duced, S haemoglobin is quite insoluble in its

cell haemoglobin. About Io per cent of reduced form. When Shaemoglobin containing

American Negroes were found to be cells is reduced either by incubation without

"sicklemic " but other races did not seem access of air-when the oxygen is used up by

to harbour the gene. Occasionally findings the leucocytes of the blood-or by addition

were made in people of European descent, of reducing agents, the haemoglobin crystal-

but a Negro ancestry could never be ruled lizes inside the cells and the resulting

out to everyone's satisfaction.

" tactoids " distort the cell and give it the

* A paper read at a Members' Meeting of the Eugenics Society on December x6th, 1953.

bizarre shape of the " sickle cell." It is obvious that other external stresses such as

I0I

I02 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the drying of a blood film can produce very similar distortions and some experience in the recognition of sickle cells is required to differentiate between " true " and " false " sickling (Fig. i). However the development of the technique of paper electrophoresis enables us nowadays to make a clear-cut definite distinction between normal and S haemoglobin containing cells (Fig. 2).

Uganda.
The writer investigated the sickle cell trait
in Uganda and Tanganyika together with Mr.
A. H. Milne- in I949. To our surprise we
found a very much higher incidence than had
up to then been reported in East Africa. Dr. A. B. Raper, working in Kampala, Uganda, had found it to be ii per cent, whereas we found it to be at least twice as high in Uganda, and in Tanganyika the inci-
dence was 35 per cent. When we compared our results with those of Raper more closely it struck us that we had examined different tribes. Raper's figures were derived from hospital post-mortems at Kampala and ours in Uganda from a survey of local schools. The post-mortem material in the Kampala Government hospital deals predominantly with immigrant labourers who come from Ruanda Urundi and who are quite different from the local Baganda, who tend to remove their relations from hospital before they die (Fig. 3). The Banyaruanda, though Bantu speaking, are in appearance much more Europoid. We therefore decided to examine Baganda and Banyaruanda separately and found that there were considerable differences, the percentage of sicklaemia in the Baganda was ig and in the Banyaruanda 8. We then decided to make a tribal survey of sicklkemia of Uganda. This country lies at the point of contact of several ethnological groups, in particular the Nilotes, Half Hamites and Bantu. Thus widely differing tribes could be studied within a comparatively
small area. Nearly 5,ooo persons belonging
to twenty-four tribes about one in I,OOO of the population of the Uganda protectorate
were examined (H. Lehmann and A. B. Raper, I949). Every possible precaution was taken to obtain true random samples as it

FIG. 1 Compaiison- of true and "false" sickle cells. A bove, tiue sickle cells in an American Negro (Huck, 1923). Below, distorted cells mimicking the. sickling phenomenon seen in a blood slide, from a Ye.enite Jew (Dreyfuss et
al., 195I) (from Dreyfuss et al., i953).

was realized that the African way of life tends to create genetic " isolates " within the
same tribe. (Lehmarn, I95I.)

TABLE i

NNiiltlisocseipaeckkiing trbes

Lango ...

Acholi ...

J aluo

...

Lugbara ...

Kakwa ...

Alur

...

J onam

...

Madi

...

... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...

Number examined
278... 14I... ... 130
... 120

... ...

101
114

... ...

109
lo9

ofPesricceknltwamgiea
27 27 28 21
25 25 26
3

DISTRIBUTION OF THE SICKLE CELL GENE

in

|:

'Lin of origin

K

l|~~~~~~~~~~in

Anode

Sickle Cell Trait Carrier

Non-Sickler

FIG. 2. Separation by filter-paper-electrophoresis of normal and sickle cell hamoglobins. In an electric field and in an alkaline buffer haemoglobin will move towuards the positive pole. Sickle cell haemoglobin will move mcre
slowly than normal haemoglobin.

It will be seen that in the Nilotic speaking group there was a remarkably homogeneous sicklemia incidence. The exception were the Madi who are found in the most northerly
,orner of Uganda and who extend from there
into the Southern Sudan. Recently Dr. A. C. Allison has re-examined the Madi and has told the writer that he has found a much higher incidence of sicklaemia than we discovered in I948-49. On the other hand Dr.

H. Foy and his colleagues (I954) have surveyed the Southern Sudanese and found that the Nilotics fall into two groups, those which are allied to the Uganda Nilotics showing a high incidence whereas others like the Dinka, Nuer and Shilluk do not. These latter Nilotics resemble in their pastoral and dietetic habits the Half Hamitic tribes such as the Masai, Turkhana, Karamajong.

A 0,
lM r~~~~~~~~~~M
FIG. 3. A patient from Ruanda Urundi (left) and a local Muganda (right) at Kampala Hospital. The immigrant
Banyaruanda differ from the Baganda by their more Europoid appearance.

I04 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

TABLE 2

Half Hamitic speaking Number

tribes

examined

Bahima*

... ... I66

Sebei I24...

...

...

Suk

128...

...

...

Karamajong ... ... 156

Teso 4I6...

...

...

Percentage of sickliemia
2-4 o-8
39
3-2
17.8

The Half Hamitic speaking tribes are

pastoral and have arrived from the North

together with their famous cattle which

resembles that of old Egypt. They have settled in the grazing lands of Uganda along

-7 .......

the rift valleys and have kept themselves

fairly separate from their Bantu neighbours.

They differ from them in their Europoid

features (Fig. 4). It will be seen that they

have very few sickle cells. The single excep-

tion is the Teso. They however have not the

Caucasian features of the Hamite stock,

they are a largely agricultural group settled

among Nilotic and Bantu speaking tribes.

Agricultural work in Central Africa is mostly

carried out by women and the best way to

recruit labourers is to marry them. The Teso

have thus freely intermingled with their

neighbours and the possession of the sickle

cell trait is an additional physical character

distinguishing them from the Hamitic group

with which they have been classed on a

Johnston, I904).

linguistic basis. Whereas there was a fairly uniform picture
of high sicklaemia incidence among the Nilotics and low frequency of the gene among the Half Hamites a wide variation
was seen among the Bantu tribes.

TABLE 3

Bantu speaking tribes

Number examined

Bairu ... ... ... 139

oPfesricceknltaaegmiea
2

Banyaruanda ..

Banyoro

...

Batoro ...

...

... 496 ... 9I
... 120

8 I2
'!5

Baganda

... ... 740

Bakonjo ... ... ... 102

Barundi ... ... ... io8

I9
i8
I9

Bakenyi ... ... ... 88

26

Basoga ... ... ... 24I Bagishu ... ... ... 207

29 30

Baamba ... ... ... 140

45

* Although the Bahima now speak the Bantu language of their subjects,they have-for obvious reasonsbeen included by Dr. Raper and myself in this group.

Here the sickliemia appears to be inversely proportional to the contact the various tribes
have had with their most recent Half Hamitic invaders Thus the trait is least common
among the Bairu who have lived for genera-
tions as helots to the ruling class of Half
Hamitic conquerors, the Bahimat on the best
pastoral land in Uganda (Fig 5) Next come the Banyaruanda, Banyoro and Batoro, whose traditions and customs testify to prolonged contact with the Bahimam and whose aristocracy possesses Hamitic features The contact of the Baganda, Bakonjo and Barundi with the Half Hamitic peoples has
until recent times been less direct and has
been bywayof their neighbours,the Banyoro, Batoro and Banyaruanda (Fig.7)
The Basoga and Bagishu, two closely
related tribes live remote from the track of
the cattle grazing peoples. The SouthBasoga to whom the table refers live in the
swampy country of the upper Nile, north of

DISTRIBUTION OF THE SICKLE CELL GENE

I05

FIG. 5. A member of the Bairu
group, a Bantu tribe showing
Europoid features (fiom Johnston
1904).

Lake Victoria. The Bagishu live on the

western slopes of Mount Elgon.

The Baamba are a secluded pygmoid tribe

in the forests of the Mountains of the Moon.

They claim to be autochthonous and of all

the tribes we investigated these people with

their prominent ridges of the eyebrows, the

broad base of the nose, the wide mouth and

the weak chin are furthest removed from the

Bahima and come nearest to the " arch

type" of the forest Negro which Sir Harry

7.~~~~~.

Johnston, the first Governor of Uganda,

pictured in I904 in his book on the

Protectorate (Figs. 6 and I2).

A map of Uganda with the invasion route

of the cattle-owning Half Hamites will show

how the sickle cell trait incidence is lowest

among the Bantu living in the path of their

movement and is highest the farther away

they live in the less accessible swamps,

jungles and mountain forests (Fig. 8).

Dr. C. A. Allison (I954) has recently pointed out that there is an alternative to

FIG. 6. A member of the Baamba tribe, playing the board zither. Note the pygmoid stature, the ridges of

this ethnological explanation of differences in the incidence of sicklaemia among the.Bantu

the eyebrows, the broad base of the nose, the wide mouth and the weak chin (from Trowell and Wachs-
mann, I953).

of Uganda. The conquerors took for them-

selves the healthiest and least malarious

areas of the country. If the sickling gene has more closely the contact between a Bantu

a selective advantage and S haemoglobin is tribe and the Half Hamites the less malarious

less desirable to the malarial parasite than will be their surroundings. This attractive

A haemoglobin, sickling will be at a higher theory will have to be carefully examined,

frequency the more malarious the surround- but the fact remains that the higher the

ings of a tribe. There is no doubt that the sickling rate the lower will be the admixture

Half Hamitic tribes all live in the least of physical Hamitic features in any one

malarious areas of Uganda, and that the Bantu tribe.

Io6 THE EUGENICS REVIEW
FIG 7
Two Baganda, Court Musicians
to H.H. the Kabaka of
Buganda. Note the Uganda harp which shows features
similar to those used in ancient
Egypt.

Sickle cell trait and blood groups as " markers " for links with Africa
The late Dr. A. C. Haddon of Christ's College, Cambridge, often discussed-though never published-a theory of the invasion of Africa by an Asiatic population in Neolithic times. The East African cattle (unlike the Egyptian type Bahima cattle) and the East African poultry are closely allied to those of India. Some time in the Neolithic period a profound change took place in the skeletal type of the East African. Whereas

previously the configuration was elegant and
small, there appeared all at once coarser and bigger structures. The fact that they
turned up in considerable numbers led Dr.
Haddon to think that the people to whom they had belonged could not have gradually risen
in Africa, but had arrived there as a group from elsewhere, possibly from India.
The fact that the sickling trait was more closely associated with the " arch type" of East African Negro made it possible that it could be used as a marker to trace the

4t-X; - < : ;-1 l;-; >

\

W
7'I

*

-¢ M w
;i't.'-. .;.'

I8. Te route of the migra
tion taken by the cattle-owning .'.'17 ''.'Hal!f.Ham.i-tes in Uganda. The

pastoral tribes followed the rift

-N:S1.I~", -

zj

: ;- 'tvtaahilenleUypfspoeraervsotsiNidlieenagsattnhdaentsdhweawmempsotsunoo-ff

Uganda. The Bantu speaking

- t, ;tribes living along this route have a lower sickle cell trait

:< ' vi<ncidence than those who live

farther away.

4^

A>S *, ' S . . - . , '

DISTRIBUTION OF THE SICKLE CELL GENE

I07

origins of the East African. The writer would like to pay tribute to Dr. J. C. Trevor of
Cambridge University and to Dr. A. E. Mourant of the Medical Research Council Blood Group Reference Laboratory for sup-
porting what must have then seemed a wild
scheme of visiting India in search of the sickle cell trait.
Dr. Mourant did not give his help unreservedly. He made the writer promise to combine the search for the sickling gene with the investigation of the blood groups of any aboriginal Indian tribe he visited. It may
therefore be appropriate here to describe briefly the help which can be given to such a task by a blood group survey. There are a number of human blood group systems, the best known is the ABO system. The ABO chromosome has one locus which is either A, B.or 0. As we have two chromosomes of

each type, one from each parent, every man has two ABO chromosomes which confer on, him the blood groups A, B or 0 respectively.\ As 0 is a recessive, we can have the following

TABLE 4

EACH BLOOD GROUP SYSTEM REFERS TO A CHROMOSOME

ABO chromosome

A or B or O

MNS chromosome

MorN

Sors

Rhesus (CDE) Corc Dord Eore Forf

chromosome

I|

.

phenotypes A (AA or AO), B (BB or BO), AB and 00. Another system is the MNS system. Here two loci are known, one can be occupied either by the M or by the N gene, the other by S or s. This results in the following possible combinations for two

FglD d
RRhh.. CCHHRROOMMOOSSOOMMEESS

Fig. 9. The Rhesus Chromosomes.

According to- the theory of Fisher

and Race the Rhesus genes com-

bine to form different chromo-

somes. The frequency of these

chromosomes differs in different

human populations: r is more

vsvAustralfraeqsueinta,inRo

Europe, in Africa

R.
and

in the

highest frequencies of R1 are

seen in Asia.

z0
EUROPE AUSrRALASIA AFRICA

ASIA

io8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

chromosomes: MMSS, MNSS, NNSS, MMss, several per cent only in people associated

MNss, NNss, MMSs, MNSs and NNSs.

with Australasia; cDe (R.) is not a frequent

These possible blood group combinations blood group except in Negroes where A. S.

not only help to distinguish between different Wiener discovered a high incidence in I946.

individuals-which is most important in Since then it has been found at a very high

legal cases or in the establishment of pater- frequency all over Africa by many workers,

nity-but they are also differently distributed particularly by Dr. A. E. Mourant who has

among the various races of mankind. On the been associated with numerous studies in

Asiatic-European land mass B is most fre- all parts of that continent. Regardless of

quent in India and becomes rarer the farther the Negroid group to which the people be-

away a population is from that sub-continent; long, whether Bantu, Nilotic, Half Hamitic

M is more frequent than N west of the " Bird- or Pygmie, no tribe has yet been found south

sell line" named after the Californian of the Sahara in whom the R. frequency is

anthropologist who showed that N was more not above 50 per cent. The highest frequency

frequent than M east of a line running from so far has been seen in the Bushmen of South

north to south just west of Japan and Africa where A. Zoutendyk and his col-

Australia. The frequency of blood groups is a leagues (I953) found it to be above 8o per

very stable feature and remains with immi- cent.

grant races for a long time, although like all It was thus clear that in the search for

genes they cannot be quite neutral in the links with Africa among Indian aboriginals

evolution of mankind by natural selection. an investigation of blood groups was most

Thus the Caucasoid Australians have of important-particularly one of the Rhesus

course more M than N, and very ancient system which might show a high R.

aboriginal communities in the heart of India frequency.

differ from all other Indians by having a high The Nuffield Foundation generously

A frequency.

financed an expedition to South India in

The Rhesus system knows of four loci on I952 and I was lucky enough to be joined on

the chromosome and an even wider varia- it by Marie Cutbush, an authority in work

tion of possibilities exists. It is debatable on blood groups.

whether the Rhesus genes are truly at differ-

ent loci or whether they are all factors India

attached to the same locus of the chromo- India has been invaded by successive

some. In any case the various combinations waves of populations, each wave penetrating

are of great anthropological interest. There less far south than the one before it. Thus

are known or assumed C, c, D, d, E, e, F and f. the Aryans are in the North, and the older

F and f have only recently been added to our Dravidians in the South of India. Still older

arsenal and most anthropological studies aboriginal tribes have either been absorbed

have been concerned with the CDE system into the modern Indian society as low castes

(Fig. 9). The combinations are found at or have been driven into less accessible

varying frequency in different parts of the jungles or hills. In the South of India the

world: cde(r) is rare everywhere except in Nilgiri hills are populated by a variety of

Europe where the frequency is highest such old communities widely differing in

among the Basques and is the higher the culture and appearance.

more the populations coming into Europe The upper regions of the Nilgiris, the

have intermingled with the type of people of "blue mountains," are a rolling country

whom to-day's Basques are a remnant; where the Todas graze their buffaloes. Their

CDe(R1) is found everywhere, but it is men are magnificent-looking bearded indi-

highest in Asia where it may have a frequency viduals of proud bearing. They resemble in

of well over 8o per cent in many populations; appearance the Eastern Mediterraneans, and

CDE(RZ) is very rare everywhere but up to connections have been traced between their

recently has been found at a frequency of cattle culture and milking ritual and customs

DISTRIBUTION OF THE SICKLE CELL GENE

IO9

discovered in ancient Assyria. A rather less magnificent but otherwise similar looking tribe are the Kotas who are the craftsmen of
the Nilgiris.

TABLE 5

INCIDENCE OF THE SICKLE CELL TRAIT IN THE NILGIRI

HILLS

(All individuals except the Todas are unrelated).

Number of Number of

persons persons with Percentage

Community tested

sickle cells incidence

Paniyans ... 6i 21 34

Irulas ... ... 124 39 31

Kurumbas ... i6

3

Badagas ... I9I I6 8.4

Todas ... ... 84 3 4

Kotas ... ... 86 o o

Canarese ... 95 0 0

Telegus ... lO9 O 0

Malayalees ... iii O O

Tamils

... I28

O

O

The fertile slopes of the mountains are intensely cultivated by an agricultural community, the Badagas, who are related to the Dravidian Canarese. In jungles, or employed as near-slaves on the land by the other tribes

live the Veddoids; Irula, Kurumba, Paniyans. They belong to some of the most primitive, races of mankind, and- up to recently were still food gatherers without any knowledge of agriculture. We received the
generous hospitality of the Pasteur Institute and the Nutrition Research Institute at
Coonoor and from there examined the various populations. The sickle cell trait was soon discovered and it was seen to be primarily a feature of the Veddoids.
We were less successful in our search for
the R. blood group. In fact the Veddoids,
who had the sickle cell trait at a frequency up to then only seen in Africa, failed to produce a single R0 individual. Nevertheless it was the Veddoids who differed most markedly from all the other Indians of the Nilgiris (Fig. io). The others had in common the Europoid features of what the anthropologists call the Mediterranean race, while the Veddoids showed the ridges of the eyebrows, the broad base of the nose, the wi-de

. i F~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~1

a~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~;~-

..........~~~~~~~~~~

~~~ ~~.........__X

FIG. Io. The difference between the Veddoids and other Indian aboriginals. Left, a Paniyan woman (Veddoid); right, a Toda with typically Mediterranean features (from v. Eickstedt, 1935).

IIO THE EUGENICS REVIEW

mouth and the weak chin we had seen in the group (52 0 and 34 B) and the 82 Todas had

arch type of the forest Negro in East Africa. the highest B frequency ever found (27 A,

Unlike their neighbours, the Veddoids 45 B, io 0). The Badagas and modern South

showed more blood group A than B and what Indian Dravidians seem to be the result of

was more surprising still, Miss Cutbush dis- a mixture of the two extremes, the Toda-

covered a frequency of R. of 4'4 per cent, Kota element, an " arch Indian " prototype

higher than had been seen up to then any- and the Veddoids. I should like to acknow-

where outside Australia. The Veddoids had ledge my indebtedness to Dr. Ada Kopec of

actually been called Australo-veddoids by the Nuffield Blood Group Centre for calculat-

the eminent Indian anthropologist B. S. ing the blood group frequencies reported in

Guha (I937) because of similarities in this paper. The methods of calculation are

skull figuration between them and the those of Dr. A. E. Mourant (I954).

Australian aborigines. They thus showed a The absence of R. and the high sicklaemia

link with Africa as regards their sickling gene rate in the Veddoids precludes the theory

and with Australia in their Rhesus blood that the sickle cell gene can have been

groups. The fact that some sickle cells were imported from Africa. Not only would such

also found among the Todas and Badagas a movement of African stock into India have

may be due to occasional miscegenation. brought with it a higher frequency of Roy but

Professor C. von Fiirer-Heimendorf has also any known contacts of Negroes with

told me that he has recently discovered a India were with Aryan and Dravidian ele-

ritual involving exchange of wives between ments and would scarcely have penetrated

the Todas and the Kurumbas.

and singled out the isolated groups of

TABLE 6 BLOOD GROUP FREQUENCIES IN THE NILGIRIS

Veddoids.
It is of course possible for the sickling gene to have arisen in India independently by

Dravidians

Veddoids mutation, but there again it is unlikely that

System
ABO Number tested
A, A,
A B
0

TCealneagruesse BBaddaggass KoTtoadsasand hKIururluasmbas

Tamils

Paniyans

77 1187 3'03
I4.90 23-85 61-23

64 I1235
0
12-35 I5-26
72.21

I68 7°00 1227
8-27
33 17 58 54

194
2136 4-38
25-74
I8-I5 56-ii

this would have been restricted to the Veddoid aborigines. Shortly after we made our observations in South India K. J. Dunlop and U. K. Mozumdar reported the finding of sickle cells among some tea plantation coolies in Assam who were aborigines of Bihar:

MNS Number tested ...
MS
Ms NS

67 19-61
40.84
14-60

57
23.91
41200
°0

141
23-20
56-58
I56

i6iI
3 1'29
42.31 0

Tanti. Miss E. W. Ikin and the writer examined ioo Oraons and 23 Kharias, Bihar aborigines working as forest labourers in the

Ns

24-95

35g09

8-65 26-40 Andaman Islands, but we could find no sickle

Rhesus Number tested ...
CDe (R,) CDue (Ru,) CDE (Rz) cDE (R,) cDe (R,) cde (r)

6I 60-98 6-40 o-6
iI*65
-
20.32

64
62-27 I6-63
-
140o6
7-03
-

I52 69-29 8-o2
-
-
3-7I I8-99

i56
66-72
-
4-43 15.76
-
13.09

cells.
If one assumes a connection between the sickling phenomenon in India and in Africa,
the absence of R. among Indian Veddoids
suggests that the trait was carried from Asia

to Africa, presumably by the same kind of

An interesting observation was that the people from whom the Veddoids of South

Todas and Kotas showed in their blood India have derived.

groups to an extreme what is considered It is noteworthy that Veddoid remains

typical of the modern Indian generally. The have been reported in Persia and in South

Indians are noteworthy for a high frequency Arabia; in Arabia they have been largely

of blood group B and a low frequency of studied by C. S. Coon (I943).

R, (cDE). The Todas and Kotas had no -Following our study of sickle cell distribu-

gene E at all and a very high frequency of B, tion in Uganda, which had shown a possible

in fact the 86 Kotas had not a single A blood ethnological significance of this feature, a

DISTRIBUTION OF THE SICKLE CELL GENE

III

large number of investigations were made all over the African continent. A detailed account of this work cannot be given here;
an exhaustive table will be presented in Dr.
A. E. Mourant's new book The Distribution
of the Human Blood Groups (I954). Unlike the high Ro frequency the sickle cell trait was
found to be only patchily distributed in Africa. The highest incidences have been reported from East Africa when they varied from 30 to 45 per cent in some Bantu tribes. Considering the highest incidences only, it was found that they fall towards the West, at the coast they are only 20-25 per cent. They also decline the farther one goes south,
in Rhodesia they are about io per cent and they become practically nil in South Africa.

The Bushmen, who have the highest R. fre-
quency recorded, have no sickle cells at all
(S. B. Griffiths, I953), similarly the " yellow"
pygmies of Central Africa were found to be
virtually free of sickle cells. Thus the trait is not a universal African feature and one
might suggest that it entered the continent well after the African races had established themselves, and that the present East African population is a mixture of the high
R. non-sickling Bushmen type with Veddoids bringing R, and sicklemia as their
contribution. The fact that Veddoids are still found in Persia and in Arabia brings them to the former land bridge between Asia and Africa in the region of Aden, the trait may thus have entered Africa from the North

PERSIA A F R IC A

>30 per cent -20-30 _1=100-2-0 20 t

J

~~~~~~VEDDIANS

HIGHEST SICKLE CELL TRAIT INCIDENCES
IN AFRICA
FIG. Iii. Distribution of the Sickle Cell Trait in Africa in its relation to the Veddoids of Asia. Veddoids live in Arabia, Persia and South India. Some communities in the interior of the Nicobar islands and of Malaya also show Veddoid features. It is suggested that Veddoids brought the sickle cell gene to Africa.
entering at the southern end of the Red Sea.

II2 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

East to spread southwards and westwards. Since then Hamitic and Semitic elements, Somali and Abyssinians have settled in the
North East of Africa and have interrupted the continuity between the Veddoids of
Arabia and the East African Negro (Fig. ii). Dr. P. Brain (I953) has recently pointed
out that this proposed migration of the sickle cell gene is much like that suggested for the shorthorn Zebu. This Asian cattle breed is thought to have entered Africa at the southern end of the Red Sea and to have spread from there along two routes: westwards to the West African coast, down the east coast as far as the Zambezi river which, it is to be noted, it did not cross. Singer asks: "Is it possible that the sickle cell gene was distributed in Africa by the custodians of the short-horn Zebu?" My own guess is that the Veddoids preceded the cattle-owning people, and that the fact that the two dis-

tributed themselves alike only shows the
typical invasion routes into Africa from,,,
Asia; both Romans and Normans came across the Channel but at different times.
Arabia
To test this theory of a connection between the sickliemia of the Veddoids in India and of the East Africans an investigation was made of sickle cell trait incidence in South Arabia. Once again we were fortunate enough to secure the financial help of the Nuffield Foundation, who supported in I953 an expedition to the Andaman Islands and the Wenner Gren Foundation enabled us to combine this scheme with a detour to Aden. On this occasion the writer was accompanied by another distinguished expert in the field of blood group research, Miss Elizabeth W. Ikin of Dr. Mourant's laboratory.

_FIG, 2. Resemblance _ , between the sickle cell
trait carriers of India,
Arabia and East Africa.

^~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~

Veddoid from Southi
Arabia (from Coon, I939).

A Paniyan South Indian Veddoid (from Eickstedt, I935). "Arch type" of East African Forest Negro (from Johnston, I904).

DISTRIBUTION OF THE SICKLE CELL GENE

We examined two groups of people in Southern Arabia: the Arabs themselves (iii), and the Achdam (I04) and we found
the sickle cell trait among the latter at a high frequency. The Achdam are a dark-skinned
people with Veddoid features living near Zabid in the southern half of Yemen. Dr. C. S. Coon, who has contributed most to the knowledge of Veddoids in Southern Arabia,
has, in a personal communication, confirmed that they very likely represent a Veddoid survival. The local Arabs think of them as Negroes because of their dark colour. However their social status is very different from that of the African slaves of Arabia. These slaves, or their ancestors, have indeed been imported from Africa, but their status is comparable to that of the serfs of feudal Europe, and although not free, they are valued, and often beloved, members of the household in which they have found their
home. Intermarriage, though not encour-
aged, is practised, and at present a respected ruler in Southern Arabia is the son of such a
slave woman. On the other hand, the Achdam are curiously similar in their social status to the Indian Veddoids, inasmuch as they have become a caste of untouchable sweepers. Intermarriage with them is out of the question for the Arabs. When the Administration in Aden needed sweepers, they imported the Achdam from Zabid for this purpose (Fig. I2).
The Africans who live nearest to Arabia are the Somali. They are a very proud people who regard themselves as of Arab origin, and it is inconceivable that any of them, or their
descendants, should have fallen to the low

social level of the Achdam. They have no sickle cells (we examined fifty of them and found none) as one would expect from an
African population of the Hamitic type. Thus the Achdam are unlikely to have
descended either from imported African slaves or from the Somali. There is a possi-
bility that they are the last remains of preMohammedan Abyssinian camp-followers. The armies of Abyssinia finally expelled in
the early days of Mohammedan rule, had with them Sudanese and it is just possible that some of these might have been left behind. If the Achdam were derived and had inherited their sickling gene from such Sudanese Africans, they might be expected to resemble the Nilotic speaking tribes with high sickling frequency. Some such Sudanese of the Western Nile, the Jonam, have, within living memory, wandered southward to Kenya where they are now called Jaluo. Their blood groups were examined in I952 by A. C. Allison, Elizabeth W. Ikin and A. E. Mourant. Like all other Africans so far investigated they show a high frequency of the Ro chromosome (82 per cent).
If we compare the Achdam as regards their sickle cell trait incidence and their blood groups with the Veddoids of Southern India and the Jaluos of Africa it will be seen that they have a high sicklaemia incidence similar to that found in the Veddoids and the Jaluos, but that the Ro chromosome has a frequency of only 28 per cent.
A link between the Asiatic Veddoids and the African sickle cell trait carriers would be expected to show a high incidence of the sickling gene together with an Ro frequency

TABLE 7 SICKLE CELL TRAIT CARRIERS IN INDIA, ARABIA AND EAST AFRICA

BLOOD GROUP FREQUENCIES

Sicklaemia 0 A

percentage

A2 B

R0 RuO R1I R2 r RZ R' or R'
CD2 cDUe CCDcDE cde CDE Cde or cdE

South Indian Veddoids
ee ab le

__ 30 56 22 4 iI8 7426 0

0 6677

I513

5

00

Zabidis
4individuals | 23

76 9 5 9 66 34 28

5 33 I3 20

0

0

Jaluos

28 6 i 6 52 8 82 5 0o 0

__5 2__

8____

0
__________9

-II4 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

TABLE 8 COMPARISON BETWEEN YEMENITE JEWS, YEMENITE ARABS AND EAST AFRICANS

BLOOD GROUP FREQUENCIES

Sicklaemia 0 Al A2 B M N Ro IRu R1 Ru1 R2 r RI or Rv

percentage

cDe cDue CDe CDue cDE cde Cde or cdE

Jews
102 individuals

0 67 I9 7 6 76 24 I 20 46 7 22 3

0

Arabs

I52 76 0 6 7 75 25

9 53

9 13

0

0

Jaluos I128 individuals

228

6699 iIIi 4 i66 I5520 38 82

5

o

0
o

4
4

o09

9

higher than that found in the Veddoids and J. B. Birdsell (I950) divides the Australian

lower than that seen in the Africans, and this aborigines into three groups; that in the

is indeed the case in the Achdam. Had these Northern territories-the Carpentarians-is

Zabidis come by their sickle cells from Africa, considered to have more Veddoid connections

in view of the high incidence found a very than the other two which are more intimately

much higher frequency of R. than 28 would related to Negritos and Europoid Ainus

have been expected to accompany the sickle respectively (Fig. 13). Dr. W. H. Horsfall

cell genes.

sent the writer (I953) bloods from seventy-

An indication as to what extent an inherit- two Australian aborigines from a part of

ance of the sickling gene from Africans is Queensland in which, according to Birdsell,

accompanied by a rise in the R, incidence a strong Carpentarian component prevails.

can be arrived at by an analysis of the blood Fifty-seven of these Australians were of

group data we found in the Yemenite Arabs. unmixed native ancestry according to their

The Yemenite Arabs represent a mixture of own accounts and also to their appearance.

pure Semites and Africans. It will be seen No sickling was discovered in any of the

that a comparison with the Yemenite Jews, samples.

who are of the same stock but did not inter-

marry with Africans for religious reasons, shows that in the Yemenite Arabs a moderate Andamanese Negritos

rise in sicklxmia was accompanied by con- Apart from the Veddoids the most impor-

siderable increase in R. frequency. The data tant non-Mongoloid group of aborigines in

on the Yemenite Jews are taken from a Asia, and one for which connections with

survey by F. Dreyfuss, Elizabeth W. Ikin, Africa have most frequently been claimed,

H. Lehmann and A. E. Mourant carried out are the Negritos. Impure traces of them

in I952.

are to be found in South India itself, in the

Australia

Malayan jungle, in the interior of Java and in the Philippines. The racially purest

The finding of a high R. (CDE) frequency survivors are found in the Andaman

in the Indian Veddoids which they shared Islands (Fig. I4).

with the aborigines of Australia but did not It was of interest to see how these people

have in common with the sickle cell trait fitted into the picture of blood group distri-

carrying Veddoids of Arabia made it un- bution seen in pre-Dravidian, pre-Aryan, and

likely that sickle cells would also be a con- pre-Mongoloid Asiatics. Their small stature,

necting link with " Australo-Veddoids " of steatopygia and peppercorn-like arrange-

India and other populations with a high Rz ment of hair growth have linked them in the

frequency. Nevertheless it was thought eyes of many anthropologists either to the

important to examine a representative Bushmen of South Africa or the Pygmies of

group of Australians for the sickle cell trait. Central Africa (Figs. 15 and i6).

DISTRIBUTION OF THE SICKLE CELL GENE

II5

With the approval of the Indian Government it was decided to visit the Andaman Islands. Professor B. S. Guha, the Director of the Department of Anthropology, Government of India, offered his Department's full support in this difficult task. Professor Guha has established a substation of his Department in Port Blair of which Dr. L. Cipriani is in charge. Professor Guha's and Dr. Cipriani's invaluable help was essential to
us.
A glance at the map will show that the Himalayan mountains in their sweep to the South East are continued in the Arakan hills of Burma, which end at the sea where the Irawaddy joins the Bay of Bengal. There the mountain range continues into the sea

southwards in the direction of Sumatra, but only occasionally do its tops break the surface of the water to form islands of which the
most important groups are the Cocos, the Andamans and the Nicobars. It is on the Andamans, situated about 8oo miles south
of Calcutta and 700 miles east of Madras, that pure Negritos have survived in comparatively large numbers. In the old days,
the islands were raided by Chinese and Arabs, who carried off the Andamanese as slaves. This produced fear and hatred with a will to fight to the death rather than to allow a stranger to approach. Stranded crews were invariably murdered and the reputation of the Andaman Islands became
such that sailors avoided them at all costs.

TIATEO CARPENTAIN GENE FREQUENCIES 0 ....21 .40i A
-FI-.SO .01-t0
ASSENT 0IItGRANGE -A A ,a

FIG. I3. The spread of the" Carpentarian" (Veddoid) type across the Continent of Australia (from Birdsell, I1950).-

II6 THE EUGENICS REVIEW
C H I NA

DISTRIBUTION OF NEGRITOS
FIG. 14. The dotted areas show where Negrito influence can be found. Pure remnants of this ancient race can still be met with in the Andaman Islands.

In the eighteenth century, an attempt by the from old nails taken from shipwrecks. Two

East India Company to build a harbour to captured Jarawa children were brought up in

safeguard shipping in these parts had to be Port Blair and taken to the Nicobars, where

abandoned in the face of local hostility they are still living now and where Dr. Sneath,

and supervening disease. It was only then a pathologist in the R.A.M.C. stationed

after the Indian Mutiny, less than a hundred at Singapore, examined their blood groups

years ago, that a serious attempt was and found them both to be 0 and RtR,.

made to occupy the islands, when a penal 2. The Andamanese were friendly and sub-

community was founded at Port Blair.

mitted to religious conversion, to rehousing

The local inhabitants could then be divided and to trade with the newcomers. This they

into three groups closely related to each other did at their peril; there were several thous-

in customs and appearance, but living strictly ands of them less than a hundred years ago,

apart:

but disease and alcohol have diminished

I. Jarawa 2. Andamanese 3. Onge. their number to between twenty and thirty

i. Little is known about the Jarawa, who today. Although the older generation looks

have retained their original hostility up to much like Negritos a Burmese influence is

today. There is no man alive who has actually very obvious in the children. They live on

talked to them in the forests. It is not sur- the border between the mid and south

prising that attempts to befriend them have Andamans, and are employed as Bush

so far failed, for in the past there have been Police to warn off the Jarawa from crossing

wholesale shootings of surprised parties and to the south Andamans, where the Indian

the carrying-off of the wounded as prisoners Government is carrying out a settlement plan

for the purpose of " making contact." What for East Bengal refugees. We examined

one knows of the Jarawa is that they are sixteen of these Andamanese (excluding

virile and strong and extremely primitive; children), and found their blood groups to be

thus, all the metal they possess is derived as follows:

DISTRIBUTION OF THE SICKLE CELL GENE

FIG. 15. An Onge woman from the Little Andamans. Note the small stature, the " peppercorn ' arrangement of hair growth and the steatopygia. Note also, however, that though the stature is small,
there is no disproportion in length
of legs.

ABO
O :5 A1 :5 B :4 A1B: 2

TABLE 9 MNS P

MMS:3 MMs :3 MNS :4 MNs: 2
NNS: 4 NNs : o

P :I2 P :4

RHESUS
R,R, CCDee:I5
R1R2 CcDEe: i

There were no sickle cells and these findings already suggested that there was little

in common between the African Negroes and
the Negritos of the Andamans. Results obtained from such a small group have to be
accepted with great caution, as genetic drift
becomes the more important the smaller the population. However, it was felt that, if the Onge produced similar values, it would be a strong indication that our results were applicable to the Andaman Negritos as a
whole.
3. On the Little Andamans live the Onge, variously estimated to number from ioo to 400. They are neither as hostile as the Jara-
wa, nor have they been as much in contact with the modern world as their unfortunate Andamanese brethren (Figs. I7 and i8). They have been visited from time to time and a few of their men have braved the sea
to paddle in outrigger canoes as far as Port Blair. It cannot be said that they are entirely tame, and the last murder was committed only in I949, when they killed a party of shipwrecked Chinese. On the other hand, a Burmese policeman, Pado, fled to this island
during the Japanese occupation, spent several years there, greatly increasing the confidence of these people towards strangers, and taught one or two of them a few words of
Hindustani. This virile and, judging from the number of children, healthy community has been living isolated up to now and was considered a very suitable population to be examined for its blood groups. Fifty-two of them were investigated. This number represents an appreciable percentage of the total population. Children of parents tested were not included. The results are given in Table io.

ABO
o :7 A1 : 37 B :4 A1B: 4

TABLE io

MNS

P

MMS: 5 MMs: 12
MNS: 5 MNs: 24 NNS: o
NNs: 6

P:42 p: Io

RHESUS
R1R1, CCDee: 45 R1R2, CcDEe: 6 R2R2, ccDEE: i

The two Jarawa examined by Dr. Sneath, -the i6 Andamanese and 52 Onge had a predominant frequency of the Rhesus chromo-
some R1 (6o of 70 R,Rj; 7 of 70 R1R2).

iI8' THE EUGENICS REVIEW
~ ~ ~ ~~~ ~~~ ~~~ ~~~ ~~~ ~~~ ~~~ ~~~ ~~~ ~~ ~~~~~ ~~~~~~~~~ ~

L Oi ,vi,
t~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
7_

FIG. i6. African Pygmies.
Note the "peppercorn"
arrangement of hair growth and the steatopygia. Whereas the
Asian Negrito is well propor-
tioned, the Afiican pygmie's
small stature is made smaller still by disproportionately short
le'gs.
4<"
~ ~~~~~~~~~~ .

<'4 *~ \~

<'. ~,., , "~<'

FIG. 17 A "Facial" on the
Andamans.
The face is covered with a mask of mud and fat and a
pattern is drawn with the fingers. Note the little son taking a lively and interfering
iterest in his mother's "pal-
ette." The Onge lead a happy
famnily life.

'4- -- - :::--- - pattern is drawn with the

DISTRIBUTION OF THE SICKLE CELL GENE

II9

'~.@~9,~.<~> "~q.~.,~S+~'s~'~.:~s2~9g~''~:~: ~..~...~..~...~.........9...........................''

:::...... -...

: .g.'.:.:.... :........

....:....... ... .. , ': ''*

'..'-..:.-.:::.:...:.. ....~~~~~~~~.~~...,..ex..i.....

II |l

-

,.: .

.......-..-.....

FIG. i8. The use of glass flints
by the Onge.
The Onge. still use flints. They are made by knocking a shell
against obsidian. Here one woman shaves another, a new flint is used after every three
or four strokes.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~...

.,.*.+......

Neither the Andamanese, nor the Onge showed the blood group A2, and none had the
Rhesus chromosome R. or R1. TABLE I I
GENE FREQUENCIES OF ANDAMANESE NEGRITOS

Sickle ... A1 Ni ... 54

B 0 R, R, M

8 38 92

8 6i j39

The African Negro shows a high incidence
of R., he has both blood group A1 and A2, and
particularly in East, Central and West Africa the sickle cell trait is found. The Australian aborigines show a moderate incidence of Rz which is rare elsewhere except in the Veddoids. The Veddoids have sickle cells, blood groups A1 and A2. Neither
the African Negro nor the Australians nor the Veddoids have an incidence of R1 higher than 8o per cent. The Oceanic Negro is the only aboriginal who, like the Andamanese
Negritos, possesses no R., no A2, no R., but
the R1 chromosome at an incidence of more
than 8o per cent.

TABLE 12 WHERE DO THE ANDAMANESE NEGRITOS BELONG?

I R,

African Negro Veddoids Australians Oceanic Negro Andamanese

+
-
-
-
_

Rz

R, above 8o%

--

+-

+_

-+

-+

Sickle Cells +-
+ _
_

A, M>N
++ ++
_ --+

I have already mentioned the famous

Birdsell line, which goes from north to south

somewhere west of Japan. East of this line,

the

ratio

of

blood blood

group
group

M N

is

smaller

than

i

to the west of it, M is more frequent than N.

Thus the African Negro and the Veddoids

have more M than N, and the Australian

aboriginals and the Oceanic Negroes living

east of the Birdsell line have more N than M;

the Onge living west of the Birdsell line have

a ratio of N of 3:2. However, the other
findings strongly suggest that the Onge are more closely related to the Oceanic Negroes than to the African Negro and, although they are often bracketed with the Pygmies of Africa, this investigation suggests that they should be more properly classified as the Pygmies of Oceania. It is of interest that the Onge, like the Papuans, have the custom of preserving and carryinrg round their necks, bones, particularly the jaw bone, of near relatives who departed this life.

Greece
The sickle cell trait has been known to exist sporadically in Sicily, Southern Italy and Greece. This was thought to be due to an admixture of African blood in Roman times when liberated slaves marriedinto the families of their former masters. A. E. Mourant (I95I)

120 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

has pointed out that the R0 incidence is somewhat higher in the Europeans from the Mediterranean region than in those from others parts of Europe. Yet while measure-
ment of R. frequency may be used as a
" tracer" of African ancestry, the sickle cell trait can obviously not be used for this purpose. Veddoid blood may have found its way into the Mediterranean peoples: L. Cipriani (I934) reported Veddoid skull features in the Sardinians of today; small, possibly Veddoid, people were discovered among the remains of pre-dynastic Egypt and Cipriani has pointed out that the piriform opening of the skulls of children found
in the Grimaldi cave in Monaco has Veddoid features.
Greece is the only European country so far studied where in small areas the whole population has a high sickle cell trait inci-
dence. Professor Choremis and his colleagues reported such a population pocket from the Lake Kopais area in I95I. The writer has recently visited Lake Kopais with Professor Choremis and a sickle cell trait incidence of I7.7 per cent was found; the true incidence is probably higher because members of families with a known sickle cell anaemia patient were not included in this survey. These people did not differ from other Greeks in their blood groups (Fig. I9) (L. Choremis,

Elizabeth WV. Ikin, H. Lehmann, A. E. Mourant and Leda Zannos, I953).
The sociological factor in sickling incidence As the sickle cell gene is potentially
deleterious, causing a specific anaemia, its continued survival has been the subject of much speculation. The most notable analysis of this problem has been made by Professor
T. V. Neel (I953). It has been suggested that
certain races have a very high mutation rate for this gene, reproducing it with sufficient frequency to replace losses incurred by the amnemia. Alternatively it has been suggested that it confers advantages such as a resistance to malaria which balances its disadvantages in the fight for survival. Allison's correlation of high sickle cell incidence and high malarial infection rate are in support of this theory of balanced polymorphism. Some such mechanism must play a part in explaining the presence of the gene. In addition there is the anthropological factor described in this paper and lastly there must be a sociological one. The highest sickling rates were always found in the socially lowest stratum of a population. In Africa the Pygmoids of the forest, in India the Veddoids of the Nilgiri who are either living as serfs or on the lowest possible human level in the jungle; in Arabia again the Achdam,

:| .

S1l|-

= I _4

- FIG. I9. Children from the Lake Kopais area in Greece.
Professor Choremis from
Athens University is seen here
with a group of children from
fhe community among whom he discovered a high sickle cell
trait incidence. Note that it
would not be possible to point
to any difference between the features of these children and any group of children from
other p-arts of Greece, or, for that matter~,~~fEurroompe.anywhere in

DISTkIBUTION OF THE SICKLE CELL GENE

I2I

the lowest social community, were the carriers of the gene. Similarly the Greeks were slaves of the Turks until recently. These people are forced to live where they are, they are unable to travel and they do not intermarry with their more fortunate neighbours. Inbreeding which usually goes hand in hand with a slave-like condition in life seems to be an important factor in producing a high sickling rate.
Thus three major factors will play a part in producing a high incidence of the sickle cell gene:
I. The anthropological derivation of a population.
2. A genetic regulation such as a high mutation rate or balanced polymorphism and
3. A social situation which produces inbreeding.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I should like to acknowledge gratefully permission to reproduce:
Fig. iA: Bulletin of the Johns Hopkins Hospital,
34, 335 (1923).
Fig. iB: Harefuah, 41, I68 (I95I). Fig. 4, 5, i2C: H. Johnston, The Uganda Protectorate,
London, Hutchinson, 1904. Fig. 7: M. Trowell and K. Wachsmann, Tribal Crafts
of Uganda, Oxford University Press, I953. Figs. io, i2A: E. von Eickstedt, The Mysore Tribes
and Castes, Mysore University Press, 1935. Fig. I2B: C. S. Coon, The Races of Europe, New
York, Macmillan, I939. Fig. 13: Cold Spring Harbor Symposia on Quantitative
Biology, 15, 259 (I950). I should also like to thank Mr. N. K. Harnison and
Mr. W. G. Coltham for their help in preparing the diagrams.
REFERENCES
Allison, A. C. (I954), Brit. Med. J., i, 290.
Allison, A. C., Ikin, Elizabeth W., Mourant, A. - E. (I952), J. Roy. Anthropol. Inst., 82, 55.

Altmann, A. (I945), South Afr. Med. J., 19, 457.
Beet, E..A. (1946), East Afr. Med. J., 23, 75.
Birdsell, J. B. (1950), Cold Spring Harbor Symposia on Quantitative Biology, 15, 258.
BIrain, P. (I953), Man, 233.
Choremis, C., Ikin, Elizabeth W., Lehmann, H.,
Mourant, A. E., Zannos, Leda (I953), Lancet, ii,
9 II.
Cipriani, L. (I934), Proc. xst Internat. Congress Anthrop. Ethn. Sci., I43.
Coon, C. S. (I943), Pap. Peabody Mus., 20, I87.
Dunlop, K. J., Mozumdar, U. K. (I952), Indian Med. Gaz., 87, 387
Dreyfuss, F., Ikin, Elizabeth W., Lehmann,H.,Mourant, A. E. (1952), Lancet, ii, ioIo.
Evans, R. W. (I944), Tr. Roy. Soc. Trop. Med. and Hyg.,
37, 28I.
(I945), ibidem, 39, 207.
Findlay, G. M., Robertson, W. M., Zacharias, F. J.
(1946), ibidem, 40, 83 Foy, H., Kondi, Athena, Timms, G. L., Brass, W.,
Bushra, F. (I954), Brit. Med. J., i, 294. Griffith, S. B. (1953), Nature, 171, 577. Guha, B. S. (I937), An Outline of the Racial Ethnology
of India, Calcutta, Indian Science Congress Association.
Herrick, J. B. (I9IO), Arch. Inst. Med., 6, 517. Huck, J. G. (I923), Bull. Johns Hopk. Hosp., 34, 335.
Horsfall, W. R., Lehmann, H. (I953), Nature, 172, 638. Johnston, H. (1904), The Uganda Protectorate.- London,
Hutchinson.
Lehmann, H. (I 954), Nature, 167, 93 I. Lehmann, H., Cutbush, Marie (1952), Brit. Med. J., i,
404.
Lehmann, H., Milne, A. H. (I949), East Afr. Med. J.,
26, 247.
Lehmann, H., Raper, A. B. (I949), Nature, 164, 494. Mourant, A. E. (I95I), J. Roy. Anthropol. Inst., 78,139. Mourant, A. E. (I954), The Distribution of the Human
Blood Groups. Oxford. Blackwell Scientific Publications.
Neel, J. V. (I953), Am. J. Human Genetics, 5, 154. Pauling, L., Itano, H. A., Singer, S. J., Wells, I. C.
(I949), Science, 110, 543. Perutz, M. F., Liquori, A. M., Eirich, F. (I95I), Nature,
167, 929. Perutz, M. R., Mitchison, J. M. (I950), Nature, 166, 677.
Raper, A. B. (I949), East. Afr. Med. J., 26, I. Trowell, H. C. (I945), ibidem, 22, 34.
Wiener, A. S. (1946), Amer. J. Clin. Path., 16, 477.
Zoutendyk, A., Kopec, Ada, Mourant, A. E. (I953), Am. J. Physical Anthropol., 11, 36I.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLVI, No. 2

