I34 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

... housing is undoubtedly the greatest obstacle confronting young married couples to-day.-Sussex Daily News, July Ist.
The " Economist's " Verdict In order to redress, the perhaps unfavour-
able impression produced in the reader by the parade of many critical remarks, I will conclude with a quotation from the Economist, whose article on the report, published on June 25th, opens with the following paragraph:

The report of the Royal Commission on
Population deserves to rank as one of the great State papers of this generation. This does not mean that it says anything very new or startling; on the contrary, its main principles have been widely discussed and accepted for ten years or
more. But more, and more convincing, evidence in support of these principles has been collected than ever before, and they are set out with such objectivity, with such lucidity and with such human understanding that they must carry
conviction to all. The report closes a chapter rather than opens one; but it closes it with
authority.

SOME BIOLOGICAL CONSIDERATIONS IN SOCIAL EVOLUTION*

By Professor H. J. FLEURE, D.Sc., M.A., F.R.S.

H UMAN biology is difficult because we know so little about the genes we
carry and may pass on. Again, we have very few remains of early man, and any inferences as to the fleshy coverings of the bones are inevitably indirect. Bearing in mind these limiting conditions let us look into a few very general biological characteristics.
Birthplace of Homo Sapiens
Nearly all mankind finds a temperature
of about 65° F. or I80 to i8.50 C. most
comfortable, but needs a certain amount of variation, chiefly downwards, with a fresh wind for example. Probably, therefore, some important phase of human evolution, perhaps of the evolution of Homo sapiens rather than of Homo in the broader sense, worked itself out in a region with temperatures like the above, varied by cool spells.
During the Pleistocene Ice Phases the greater part of Europe and of Asia north of the Himalayas was much colder than this,
* A paper read before the Eugenics Society on May 24th, 1949, and subsequently revised.

but during interglacial phases this temperature may have been fairly common in Western Europe. Equatorial latitudes apparently were warm and wet even during ice phases. North Africa, then much less desertic in the west
than it is now, and parts of South-West Asia seem to have had a temperature not very far from the one above-mentioned. It may therefore be that North Africa, as Charles Darwin long ago suggested, and South-West Asia were deeply concerned in the evolution of Homo sapiens.
We know that many hand-axes or coupsde-poing of the early part of the Pleistocene Age have been found, especially in the Western Sahara and near the Nile. They are often finely chipped, and many may be called works of art. It is difficult to think that they were made by a being other than one very near to modern man. The contrast between these tools and the rough flakes used by other groups in Eurasia at that time is very marked. Unfortunately we lack fully established evidence about skeletons of the makers of these
coups-de-poing, though it is possible that the
Swanscombe skull fragment may be called

SOME BIOLOGICAL CONSIDERATIONS IN SOCIAL EVOLUTION I35

in here on the ground of the finding near it Objection is sometimes taken to the view

of a hand-axe. The skull fragment is of the that a being closely related to Homo sapiens

hinderpart and is very thick, but from its can have lived in the early Pleistocene period,

form it may belong to a sort of precursor of and the objection is on the ground that such

Homo sapiens. Recent application to it of specimens as we have from the Middle

the fluorine test supports its claim to a very Pleistocene are not Homo sapiens, but rather

early date in the Pleistocene period.

the heavy boned types we can broadly call

The hand-axe, or coup-de-poing, with a few Hominids, and that only in the late Pleisto-

types only, is distributed from North Africa cene do we have direct evidence of Homo

via Spain to France and Britain, which it sapiens, unless the Swanscombe case be

seems to have reached in mild interglacial approved. That approval should now be

phases; and also from North Africa east- given.

wards to South-West Asia and India, as well On the archaological side Leakey in Kenya

as southwards via East Africa to the Cape has found evidence of the taking of animals in

of Good Hope.

pitfalls and of their use as food by men who

If we are justified in using this evidence used hand-axes, i.e. the hand-axe men had

and in making the hypothesis, very tenta- already become to some extent hunters,

tively, that North Africa and/or South-West though probably they were far below the

Asia was the home in which Homo sapiens level of the master hunters of the late

underwent some important, perhaps rela- Pleistocene. They were grading from a

tively late, stage of his evolution, we must, vegetarian diet, perhaps with occasional

at the same time, look at other ideas of the small animals, to an omnivorous one with

evolution of man. Mathew long ago empha- flesh playing an important part.

sized Asia as the birthplace of man, and

Central rather than South-West Asia. But Social Consequences of Erect Posture and

this was the idea of a birthplace of Homo in

Other New Factors

the broader sense rather than of Homo Whatever may be the truth about the

sapiens. Menghin at one time favoured India early home zone of Homo sapiens and about

as the primal home and probably was the period of his emergence, the social conse-

thinking of Homo sapiens, but it is under- quences of the erect posture, improved

stood that he gave up this view which, stereoscopic vision, the addition of hunting

further, is not at all generally supported. to the primary collecting habit, and the

Giuffrida-Ruggeri held that Homo sapiens eating of flesh are all very important.

originated over a broad expanse, with con- Every baby has to learn to walk and, by

siderable variation, a point to which I shall reason of the erect attitude, this takes longer

return.

than among animals. The human baby is

So far as it goes, and it goes only a little specially helpless for a long time, all the more

way, the North Africa/South-West Asia because of its almost hairless skin, a subject

hypothesis is supported by another line of I must not go into here, for it would take too

argument. The men who made coups-de- long. This helplessness implies dependence

poing in North Africa apparently lived on a upon its mother, with more opportunities of

poorish grassland, with antelopes of various learning sounds and gestures and of imitating

kinds as typical animals, and with very few action-in other words, more opportunities

trees. If so, they were groundlings; they of education or the passing on of a heritage

had given up the forest glades and the habit of experience, a process which accelerated

of holding on to trees with their front limbs. social change as it developed.

All known specimens of Homo sapiens have The dependence of the baby would in any

the erect posture, and Elliot Smith empha- case have hindered the mother from running

sized the high development of stereoscopic with the hunters, and some physiologists

vision in humanity. Both features are think that the erect posture made a woman's

obviously suitable to life in open country. rapid movements more difficult before the

I36 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

birth of her child-more difficult, that is, doubt existed among the prehuman ances-

than they had been prior to the assumption tors of mankind. Co-operation in hunting,

of the erect posture. Besides this, the long and in the development of a focus, raised that

strain involved in tracking down fast-running sociality to a higher level with a certain

animals, digging pitfalls, and carrying the number of men and their women and children

quarters of the animal killed would be a gathered around the fire, communicating

heavy one for the female constitution. All in with one another, evolving some custom of

all there came to be differentiation of work marriage to reduce quarrels, even if some-

according to sex. The women cared for the times it was little more than an analogue of

children, collected vegetables and little the " pecking order" among poultry.

animals within a smallish radius, and so

could develop a focus to which the men Invention and Consequences of New Tools

might return. Fire is a very early item Pitfalls, throwing of sticks and stones and

of human equipment, in the limited sense boomerangs all had their difficulties and

that people learned to keep a fire going long chances of failure, even after the develop-

before they learned reliable methods of ment of the spear-thrower. After a long

making one. The fire at the focus would be period of dependence on coups-de-poing, no

maintained by the women and children. doubt with wooden implements too, the

Skins to wrap the baby in, clay lining a grass makers of these stone tools learned to use

net to make a basket and so to begin the their skill on flint chips or flakes and to

potter's art, cooking flesh wrapped in clay to mount the flint points they made on to the

protect it from the fire-these are but a few ends of wooden shafts. This gave a much

of the many activities that the women at the better weapon which they learned, still in

focus were able to develop.

the Old Stone Age, to send swiftly to a long

The importance of womanly ingenuity in distance; they invented the bow and arrow.

devising new equipment and new ways needs It is interesting that this weapon was un-

more recognition. The erect posture brought known to the Australian aborigines before

the balancing of the head on the end of the the recent arrival of Europeans, a proof of

vertebral column and the reduction of neck the long isolation of those hunting folk. The

muscles to hold up the skull and jaw. The use of flakes, often mounted in wood, limited

freeing of the hands and, later, the develop- interest in the coup-de-poing, and it became

ment of cooking reduced the stimulus to jaw scarce for a while, but I think survived in the

growth, and this again promoted reduction of Iberian Peninsula and parts of Africa. But

neck muscles. As this was occurring when there was a new outlet for ingenuity. Chips

the association between mother and child could be diversely shaped for scraping, cut-

was developing and lengthening, we have a ting and boring, besides being made into

glimpse of a big factor in the development of points and mounted on wood to serve as

speech, which must have been helped by the spearheads and arrowheads. The latter

freeing of the larynx from pressure of power- could be shaped to promote straightness of

ful neck muscles. The differentiation of work flight and irrevocable insertion in the victim.

between the sexes and the consequent expan- Moreover it was easy, with small things, to

sion of the mother's opportunities may be carry a supply of spare parts in a pouch. The

considered the most potent factor in social use of flakes thus liberated initiative and

evolution. On the men's side we may argue made action at a distance more successful,

that hunting, or making pitfalls, encouraged enlarging the scope of imagination as well as

co-operation between a certain number, with of hunting.

need for communicating with one another Whereas the use as a chief tool of coups-de-

sometimes across a considerable distance, poing, of only a few types, lasted for perhaps

another factor in the evolution of speech. 250,000 years, with only moderate variations

But there is more in the matter than this. in time or in space, once the newer notions

Some measure of rudimentary sociality no come in there is regional differentiation and

SOME BIOLOGICAL CONSIDERATIONS IN SOCIAL EVOLUTION I37

change of fashion in perhaps one-tenth of information about the fertility of matings

that time. The rate of change, still slow, has among hunters living in small groups to-day.

begun to quicken, and the profit from Not very well supported suggestions have

initiative is obvious. Language, ceremonial, been made pointing to their limited fertility,

art, decoration, myth, must all have de- and of course mortality in infancy and child-

veloped considerably. Groups were no doubt hood must be very high.

still small and inbred. Before the newer Of the desire for offspring, especially no

notions arose there were various Hominid doubt sons to hunt and fight there is much

types mostly with heavy brows and jaws and evidence from fertility figurines and some

not all quite erect. After the change, men of rock drawings, as well as from social cere-

modem type, physically, spread far and monial. The widespread ancient notion is

wide and the Hominids vanish, quite possibly still extant here and there that the leader or

interbreeding with modem man ere they king must have power to beget children if he

disappeared. Many think that the so-called is to continue to rule. In several cases he has

Neanderthal type mingled with Homo sapiens been definable as the man who was husband

in the north-west quadrant of the Old of the woman of royal descent.

World, and that the so-called Peking type And there is a further point here. A wide-

mingled with him in the north-east. How- spread fancy among farmers has been that

ever this may be, the establishment of Homo they should take a heifer to a specially good

sapiens becomes quite clear and suggests that bull, because the first fruitful mating of an

Darwin's old hypothesis of sexual selection animal will affect all her subsequent off-

may have been active at a time when old spring by other mates. This fancy of telegony

types were dying out. That this would apply probably has nothing biological in it in the

especially to women is very probable. They strict sense. But the farmer who was careful

mature earlier than men and have corre- about the mating of his heifer was probably

spondingly less bony development, omitting careful about the heifer, too. There are many

especially some of the ridges and rough- indications that the fancy of telegony was

nesses, so a woman with less ridged brows applied to our own race as well. A king or

would be more "womanly " and quite leader might thereby, it was fancied, affect

probably more attractive to men.

the quality of a family a woman might there-

after bear to another man. As the leader was

Demographic Factors

often a superior individual and he probably

This phase was one of differentiation as picked the more presentable mates, we need

well as of refinement of features. To appreci- not wonder that the fancy long maintained

ate this we should reflect upon an aspect of itself. Its large and varied social and ritual

the population question. It is likely that in consequences need not be detailed.

the later part of the Old Stone Age the Still one other point of wide social sig-

population of Britain was not more than a nificance falls to be mentioned here. Among

few hundreds scattered over the country in many of the animals that man observes

small groups. This meant that the desire for closely, mating is almost universally followed

sons to help in hunting would be likely to be by the birth of offspring, often in a seasonal

very strong, and also that close inbreeding cycle. But, in the case of our own race, a

would be almost inevitable. Close inbreeding marriage may not lead to a birth even for

may lead to rapidly repeated doubling of years, and then births may occur in quick

some special character and even to its spread succession. This has suggested to many

to the whole group with the help of natural peoples that, amongst us at any rate, mating

selection. But it is not likely to spread over is insufficient of itself to ensure offspring.

large areas or across barriers to mating. If we add to this the almost universal in-

Isolational factors emphasize both change terest in family likenesses between children

within a group and differentiation between and their forebears, we understand the

groups. It would be valuable to have more development of the ideas of reincarnation

138 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

and of the entry of a vital essence into the 'prospective mother. Some head-hunting groups practise that custom to get vital
essence into their village groups, and it is my belief that the collective burial of skulls in so many great stone monuments of Western Europe comes from the same idea of a vital essence to be used again. The vital essence or soul is stored in the dolmen, and fertility rites nearby promote its emergence from the monument and its entry into a woman for rebirth. The treasuring of vital essence of ancestors would be likely to be specially marked among colonists with the superiority complex, such as no doubt were the builders of our rough stone monuments.
Social Effects of Cultivation
The early stages of cultivation changed the division of labour between the sexes. Men would clear areas for cultivation, might do preliminary hoeing in the case of difficult soil, plant trees, build huts, hunt and fight. Women would look after the children, the fire and the cooking, do the routine work of cultivation, fetch water, make pots, and do scores of other things. It is noticeable that women have traditionally used the digging stick and hoe for cultivation, but that the spade is almost solely a man's implement. Again women have made pots by hand, but, when the idea of the wheel worked by the foot came in, men took over the craft. This probably unconscious abstention from stiffening and strengthening the thigh muscles among women seems worth noting.
The fact of aggregation brought forward the need for regulation, and with this an intensification of the idea of good and evil, of following the established routine or becoming what is now called a Deviator. Numerous groups of cultivators have in this way become fixed in a routine which has so much power over them that their social order crumbles when it has to face a serious crisis.
Many intertropical African communities fixed in a routine are now faced with the danger of collapse of their social order, but not, as is the case with hunter collectors and a few of the isolated cultivator groups, with extinction through decline of fertility. Some

of the factors involved are biological. Inter-
tropical Africa's climate differs considerably
in many places from that which seems
basically suitable for mankind; and we
should look upon the peoples of intertropical Africa as facing a difficult environment. Skin colour may be very dark and so stop some of
the excess of ultra-violet radiation from
penetrating the skin and causing trouble. Lips may be everted and broad and so pro-
mote evaporation. The nose may grow much
less prominently than in cold climates, and so may reduce the warming of the air on the way into the lungs, sweat glands and the opening of hair follicles may be large and
loose, again promoting cooling. I think we
may look upon most of these as modifications of growth favoured by natural selection. But in spite of all this adaptation,
continuous thought and hard work is difficult. Routine, while thus often a safeguard for a group, giving stability as long as condi-
tions do not greatly change, becomes a danger in a serious crisis.
Among cultivator groups with large villages, inbreeding is usually less marked than
in the lowlier groups previously discussed, and thus the intensifying of special inheritances is likely to be less marked. Mankind has passed from a phase of marked differentiation in small inbred isolated groups to a phase of more general mixture and less marked change of characters. Yet these do change. The stimulus to growth of jaw muscles is decreased as cooking improves and implements for bringing the food in small pieces to the mouth are invented. The occurrence of very heavy jaws is a disfigurement that might be a matter for negative sexual selection. In any case there was no longer a high biological value in a heavy, strong jaw. On the whole this tendency to jaw reduction is a marked feature of the transition to the better equipped cultivatorphase. It has gone on since then among many peoples and notably among ourselves in North-West Europe. It may be, when natural selection ceases to act positively in keeping a character up to standard, that this character tends to decline. Whether it is that growth energy tends to direct itself to

SOME BIOLOGICAL CONSIDERATIONS I-N SOCIAL EVOLUTION I39

characters that matter most, or whether it is that variants in the deficiency direction are more numerous than those tending the other way, one can hardly tell at present.
Figures for density of population are of very limited value but, such as they are, we
may say that, among hunting and collecting peoples, they are likely to give one person
per so many square miles. Among hoe cultivators without working animals or manure, one may estimate from three or four up to ten persons per square mile, where land is used for two or three seasons and then left to cover with bush perhaps for twenty years. Where somewhat more intensive cultivation is carried on one may find thirty or so persons per square mile. With ploughs and an established routine the figures go up beyond fifty, and, in special cases, very much higher still.
Acceleration of Rate of Change
I have drawn attention to the fact that men used a very few types of hand-axes without much variation during a quarter of a million years. Habit, routine, group ascendency over the individual are early animal-like features. Later, in perhaps 25,000 years, though one still finds group ascendency and routine, there is more difference from place to place and fashions do change and modes of self-expression are multiplied.
Later again, in about 2,500 years, cultivators in Egypt and South-West Asia undergo an apprenticeship in many crafts accessory to cultivation, and this leads to the prodigious development of the Early Egyptian Dynasties and of early Sumer and Akkad. It also leads to a wide spread of ideas from these early centres of grain cultivation to the Mediterranean and India as well as to the Steppe and Inner Asia, whence they travelled to Danubia on the one hand and China on the other. In Egypt and Mesopotamia, at any rate individuals begin to emerge as historic figures, chiefly as kings and sometimes as priests or nobles. The change in 2,500 years is greater than in the previous 25,000, just as that was more varied than it had been in the previous 250,000. Deliberation, looking before and

after, individual initiative were counting for a little more.
Less than I,500 years later iron has come into use, boats are better built, the potter's wheel is widespread, agriculture is more varied. Athens imports wheat and uses more of her own soil for olive and vine. Greek and Phoenician colonies are planted around the Mediterranean and olive cultivation and the idea of the city spread to the western basin of that sea. Most characteristic of all, thinkers and teachers arise and are revered not only during their lifetime but thereafter by disciples: Lao Tsu and Confucius in China, Mahavira and Buddha in India, Zoroaster in Persia, the Hebrew prophets, the Greek philosophers, the ill-fated Akhnaton in Egypt who was before his time.
Society and the Individual
It is very generally overlooked that the period during which food production has been carried on is but i per cent of the duration of the human story, and that the period since the idea of regular cultivation (at any rate of cereals) began to spread from its primary home in the South-West of Asia and the North-East of Africa is much less still. This means that for over 99 per cent of its period on earth mankind has lived in small groups bound together by many ties, even if they fluctuated to some extent. Further, even after the spread of cereal cultivation, the social group long remained small and the mentality accompanying traditional sociality was not forced to change very radically. Here and there large agglomerates appeared -Babylon, Athens, Rome, and so on-and began the atomization process, the individual becoming liable to be a lonely unit in a crowd, a condition not at all in keeping with the mentality engendered by his history of 6oo,ooo years. Prodigious technical experiments and prodigious flights of thought have been crowded into a mere 4,000 years or less, and this crowding has become intensified a hundredfold since power-machinery became available and gathered men into industrial agglomerates that are called modem cities. We are witnessing in the twentieth century

140 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the result of this violent dislocation of tradi- Change and initiative are signs of health and

tional social psychology, a dislocation long individuality is the fine flower of the social

inadequately realized because men dealt with garden.

a six-thousand-year-period since the creation But along with encouragement of indi-

of the world. The nineteenth-century viduality and initiative there is need of

abstraction called economic man, the religi- cultivation of a common heritage of a group.

ous abstraction called fallen man, and many And that common heritage, until about I50

other ideas still in current use are very much years ago, was for most people something

out of perspective, as is the notion that one intimate, belonging to- a small group, a

can remould man quickly by changing village perhaps, or a group of members of a

environment.

chapel, or a few farmers lending one another

As agglomerates have grown we find men help at harvest, and so on. It was vaguely

making efforts to create more intimate linked up through a social hierarchy so as to

societies, and it has been one of the greatest create a national sentiment, at its best

advantages of British life that circum- linking men of diverse beliefs and outlook.

stances brought into existence a number of The common heritage, or common measure,

groups of diverse beliefs, which quite early in a group, and the encouragement of

had to give up the grosser and more sadistic initiative and individuality in thought and

modes of persecution which persisted into the action are both important if on the one hand

nineteenth century in some countries where anarchic atomization and on the other hand

orthodoxy claimed obedience. Of the revival routine mentality are not to be allowed to

of gross persecution under the dictators of all have their evil influence.

colours in the twentieth century, following John Milton saw all this when he made his

old ecclesiastical patterns, one might say a great plea for toleration, and I shall conclude

great deal, but with little profit.

by a typical quotation from the Areopagitica:

Agglomeration, and thinking in millions, "No man who hath tasted learning but will

is a new thing for mankind. The industrial confess the many ways of profiting by those

revolution was a dangerous experiment with who, not content with stale receipts, are able

very fractional success. Yet at the same time to manage and set forth new conditions to

it is important not to fall back into a static the world. And were these but as the dust

condition, not to succumb to any one and cinders at our feet, so long as in that

orthodoxy as an ultimate social authority. notion they may yet serve to polish and

That way lies stagnation and degeneration. brighten the armoury of truth."

SOCIETY OF COMPARATIVE LEGISLATION
"For the promotion of knowledge of the course of legbsation In different countries, more particularly In the several
parts of His Majesty's Dominions, and In the United States."
Prasidan: The Rt. Hon. Lord MACMILLAN, G.C.V.O. Chairuux of the Executive Committe: The Rt Hon. Lord DU PARCQ Editors: Sir ARNOLD McNAIR, K.C. Sir CECIL CARR, K.C.B., K.C.,
assisted by Professor H. C. GUTTERIDGE, K.C., and F. H. LAWSON, Esq., D.C.L.
Honoryry Secretary: C. E. A. BEDWELL, Esq.

Annual Subscription

ONE GUINEA

Address: THE ROYAL EMPIRE SOCIETY, NORTHUMBERLAND AVENUE, LONDON, W.C.2

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLI. No. 8

