THE
EUGENICS REVIEW
IMMUNITY FROM DISEASE CONSIDERED IN
RELATION TO EUGENICS
By PROFESSOR J. A. LINDSAY, M.D., F.R.C.P.
FEW subjects have received more attention in recent years than that of Immunity. It has been thoroughly studied from the pathological and experimental side, and while much still remains obscure, immense progress has been effected and the path for further advance has been clearly marked out. We now know in considerable detail the mechanism of immunity, and the general defensive machinery of the organism has been in large measure discovered and laid bare. The methods of conferring artificial immunity have attained a certain degree of accuracy, and no one doubts that further progress in this department-progress fraught with much consequence to humanity-will be achieved in the early future. But that portion of the field to which I invite your attention-viz., the biological and evolutionary significance of immunity-has received relatively slight attention. It is a field where the data are abundant but often obscure, and even seemingly contradictory-a field where it is much easier to state the problems than to solve them-a field where we need to be peculiarly on our guard against hasty generalisation and premature synthesis. We shall not proceed far in our enquiries before we receive reminders that Nature's ways are complex, that diversity of law may prevail even where the phenomena seem

II8

EUGENICS REVIEW

J. A. Lindsay:

analogous, and that plausible hypotheses may turn out to be mistaken. To take an example or two-The broad rule seems to be that an attack of any infective disease which is recovered from confers some degree-often a very high degree-of immunity from further attacks. This is true of smallpox, measles, scarlatina, mumps, whooping-cough, typhus fever, enteric fever, and cholera. But other diseases-diphtheria for example-confer no immunity, or at all events a very brief immunity, while others again-such as pneumonia, influenza, malaria and erysipelas-actually leave the patient more prone to attack than before. It might have been supposed that, when the organism threw off the effects of any toxin, it would necessarily acquire some protective mechanism against any further attack-whether by the development of the so-called anti-bodies or in some other manner-but the phenomena of what has come to be designated Anaphylaxis show us that in some cases the effect of a toxin is simply to weaken the defensive powers and render the organism more liable to attack in future. Nature does not work by any single rule. The mode of operation of one toxin is no sure guide to the mode of operation of another toxin.
Again, children and young people are, upon the whole, more susceptible to the influence of infective diseases than adults. Many diseases, e.g., measles, scarlatina, whooping-cough and chicken-pox, are incomparably more common in the earlier years of life. The assumption is that their defensive- mechanismsthe leucocytes, the cells of the lymphatic glands, of the bonemarrow and the splenic pulp and other cells-are less mature, less efficient in their resistance to invading microbes than the defensive mechanisms of the adult. But here, again, the general law permits of numerous and significant exceptions. The bacillus of tubercle spares the infant in large degree, only slightly assails the child, but falls with virulence upon the adolescent and the young adult. Measles is a disease of earlier childhood, while German Measles is a disease of later childhood and of adolescence. We cannot with our present knowledge tell why it is so, but the facts remind us that Nature's methods are not to be summed up in a single generalisation.
Again, the broad rule is that an attack of an infective

IMMUNITY FROM DISEASE

II9

disease is specific and has no influence upon vulnerability to attack by any other infective disease. Thus, an attack of smallpox, or of typhus fever, or of cholera, does not, so far as we know, render the individual either more or less susceptible to attack by any other infective disease. But, here again there are significant exceptions. An attack of measles predisposes to invasion by the bacillus of tubercle, scarlatina renders the patient more susceptible to attack by the bacillus of diphtheria, and there are other examples of the same phenomenon. Once more, Nature's ways are various. We must beware of sweeping generalisations.
To look at this same problem from another point of viewSuppose we ask the question-how does an epidemic once established in any given locality come to an end ? Let us, to simplify the question, take diseases against which we have no definite machinery of defence, e.g., measles or influenza. Are we to suppose that the epidemic rages so long as there are susceptible persons exposed to infection ? This is a plausible view and is widely held, but it does not account for the fact that towards the end of an epidemic there is practically always an abatement in its severity. The cases become not only fewer in number but milder in type. The facts seem to suggest variations in the virulence of the germs and their toxins, such as laboratory experiments show to be possible. Thus, if the virus of rabies be passed through a series of rabbits it becomes more virulent, while it becomes milder if passed through a series of monkeys. An epidemic disease may recur every three or four years, as for example measles, or remain latent for an indefinite period, as for example plague. Professor W. J. Simpson in his Croonian Lectures has shown that epidemics of plague have come and gone in different countries with long intervals between them, often of I30 to I50 years. Now, while the recurrence of epidemics of measles every three or four years may be plausibly explained by the arrival at the most susceptible age of successive generations of children, it is clear that no such theory will account for the long-separated epidemics of plague. In the latter case, we seem to be face to face with some unexplained factor, whether atmospheric, or telluric-we cannot tell-but we

120

EUGENICS REVIEW

J. A. Lindsay :

are again reminded of the multiformity of Nature, again warned against prematuire or too wide generalisations.
Let me now propound for your consideration a few problems which will serve to raise the chief issues involved in the subject of Immunity:-
(i) How does it happen that one individual becomes infected by a certain disease, e.g., Scarlatina, while another individual, in spite of repeated exposure, escapes infection ?
(2) When an individual, having safely surmounted an
attack of infective disease, is subsequently protected for life against further attack, what is the method of
protection, what is the mechanism of Immunity ? (3) How does it happen that certain races are either
specially liable to, or enjoy a relative immunity from certain diseases, e.g., the proclivity of the negro to tuberculosis and smallpox and his relative immunity from malaria and yellow fever, or the proclivity of the Hindoo to plague and his relative immunity from enteric fever ?
(4) Are the facts of Immunity capable of any evolutionary
explanation or anyapplication to the field of Eugenics ? The first question which I have propounded-viz., Howdoes it happen that one individual becomes infected by a certain disease, while another individual, in spite of repeated exposure, escapes infection ?-raises a problem of extreme interest but of great difficulty. It must be noted that the probability of escape varies much in connexion with different infective diseases. In this matter circumstances have sometimes combined to perform a crucial experiment for our instruction. Thus, in the years I873-75 scarlatina prevailed in the Faroe Islands amongst a population where the disease had been unknown for fifty-seven years. Only 38.3 per cent of the population suffered from the epidemic. In I875 measles raged in the same islands, and, including those affected by former epidemics, it was found that 99 per cent were susceptible to infection by this disease. This greater liability of the human family to be infected by measles than by scarlatina is not confined to any one race or any one

IMMUNITY FROM DISEASE

121

country. It is a general experience, and one of which we cannot
offer any explanation. When smallpox invades a community unprotected by vaccination few escape infection. The Black
Death of the Middle Ages and the Great Plague of London, both probably cases of Bubonic Plague, struck down whole populations. On the West Coast of Africa only a very small percentage of Europeans permanently resist infection by malaria.
On the other hand, many persons, in spite of repeated exposure to infection from scarlatina, never acquire the disease. Perhaps an even larger proportion escape from infection from diphtheria,
while there is good reason to suppose that most persons in these countries are at one time or another exposed to infection from enteric fever and tuberculosis, yet the large majority either escape infection altogether or recover after an ill-defined illness.
One theory to account for the escape of an adult from infection is that in such cases the individual has suffered in youth from a mild, perhaps unrecognised, attack and so has become immune. Koch thought this the most likely explanation of the relative infrequency of malaria amongst the adult blacks on the West Coast of Africa. A similar doctrine has been invoked to explain the relative infrequency of enteric fever amongst the adult population of Bengal. While it is possible, perhaps even probable, that this theory is in some cases valid, it certainly does not apply to all cases. There are instances where some diseases, e.g., scarlatina, have been absent from certain populations for prolonged periods, and where, on being introduced, it has been found that the adult enjoys the same relative immunity as amongst populations where these diseases have always been endemic. On the other hand, we have come in recent years to recognise the frequency of larval or frustrate forms of many infective diseases, the patient merely complaining for a few days of a vague malaise or a trifling pyrexia, although really suffering from a mild attack of, perhaps, enteric fever, scarlatina, or diphtheria. I am under the impression-the matter is one ex
hypothesi difficult of proof-that such instances are common, and are the true explanation of many cases of indefinite illness. These cases are important from the Public Health point of view,

I22

EUGENICS REVIEW

J. A. Lindsay:

as the mildest case of infective disease may transmit the disease in a virulent form to some other person. Another theory to explain the escape of an individual when in contact with infective disease is the suggestion that he may have previously been subjected to repeated small doses of the toxin of that disease, doses which have not given rise to a definite illness but have gradually conferred immunity. There is, of course, ample laboratory experience to prove that this is possible, while the Pasteurian method of dealing with rabies is the classical example of this important principle. Students attending the scarlatina wards of a fever hospital often suffer from repeated attacks of sore-throat and slight malaise, without deveJoping scarlatina, and there are some grounds for believing that such individuals are subsequently immune to the disease, but I am not aware that this theory has ever been definitely established. While admitting the probable operation of such laws as those just mentioned, there can be little doubt that immunity from certain disease-i.e., insusceptibility to infection-is in some persons simply an innate or constitutional idiosyncrasy, a personal peculiarity related, no doubt, in some obscure and unexplained way to the qualities of their tissues and secretions. In this connexion, circumstances have afforded us an experimentum crucis. Miss Mary Kingsleya very competent observer-records that of the Englishmen who resort to the West Coast of Africa, some permanently resist infection by malaria. In such cases, the possibility of a mild attack in youth, or of repeated slight doses of the malaria toxin having conferred immunity, is obviously excluded. We must assume some innate power of resistance, probably depending upon the capability of the leucocytes to act either as phagocytes or as elaborators of microbicidal alexins. How far this innate power of resistance is related to generai good health and bodily vigour is not quite clear. The popular impression that persons in good bodily and mental health more easily resist infection than those who are physically weak or mentally depressed is probably well founded. It is generally believed that the bacillus of tubercle is more apt to find a lodgment in the bodies of the debilitated, while the pneumococcus of pneumonia is believed often to attack those in seemingly perfect health. It is probable

IMMUNITY FROM DISEASE

I23

that the formner view has been overstated, cases of tubercular infection occurring in persons of good physique and in the enjoyment of good general health not being very rare, while the pneumococcus generally gives rise to an acute infection only when the powers of resistance are temporarily lowered by chill, intemperance, or the presence of another toxin, such as that of influenza. The broad statement, therefore, that tuberculosis attacks, the weak and pneumonia attacks the strong, requires qualification.
Let us now pass on to the second question, viz., when, an individual, having safely surmounted an attack of infective disease is subsequently protected for life against further attack, what is the method of protection, what is the mechanism of Immunity ? The phenomenon is familiar enough, but its explanation is recent, and perhaps not yet fully elucidated. There are four theories on the subject, viz.:

(i) The theory of Pasteur, that each species of microbe finds in the body a special pabulum, the exhaustion of which starves the microbes and thus confers immunity.
(2) The theory of Chauveau, that microbes are killed by a concentration of their own excreta.
(3) The theory that the tissues acquire a tolerance to the action of the toxins excreted by microbes, a tolerance analogous to that which can be acquired against the
action of such drugs as opium and arsenic.
(4) The theory that in the course of the attack anti-bodies
are elaborated which remain permanently in the blood and tissues and so protect the individual from further invasion.

In spite of the authority justly attaching to the illustrious name of Pasteur, the first theory need not detain us. The varieties of microbes are extremely numerous and the suggestion that for each of them the human body has laid up in store special pabulum suitable for the sustenance of one species of microbe, and of one only, is quite inconceivable. Nor is Chauveau's theory any more probable or any better supported by known

124

EUGENICS REVIEW

J. A. Lindsay:

facts. Our choice must lie between the third and the fourth theories. Is immunity conferred by an attack of any infective disorder a case of habituation, of use-adaptation, or does it depend upon the development of the so-called anti-bodies which remain as a permanent guard of defence ? There are analogies in favour of the former doctrine, which at least merits consideration. But it is difficult to conceive a use-adaptation specific for each variety of invading micro-organism. Also, it is improbable that a use-adaptation to the toxin of any given disease would be permanent for life. Analogy would suggest that such adaptation would soon fail in default of repeated stimulation by the toxin in question. Experience, however, shows that the immunity obtained by an attack of infective disease is in many cases of life-long duration. Most authorities now accept the fourth theory, viz., that in the course of an attack of an infective disease certain entities, denominated anti-bodies, are generated and remain permanently in the organism, constituting its guard of defence against future attack. As to the nature of these antibodies there are three theories, viz.:

(i) The Theory of Behring, that the anti-bodies are products of the animal body formed in consequence of the febrile reaction attending the injection of toxin.
(2) The celebrated Side-Chain Theory of Ehrlich, that when exposed to the action of a toxin the cells build new atomic groups to repair the defect, but the repair goes beyond the necessary limit, and the excess of atomic groups becomes so great that they are thrown off like useless ballast into the blood and form the anti-toxins.
(3) The theory of Buchner and Metchnikoff, that antitoxins represent non-poisonous modifications of toxins.

I cann'ot delay to discuss these theories but must content myself with a remark or two. These anti-bodies have never been isolated, but the evidence leading us to infer their presence seems conclusive. The main interest of the subject from the point of view of this address is whether the anti-bodies are

IMMUNITY 'FROM DISEASE

I25

specific entities or only modifications of toxins. If the latter view were accepted, it is evident that the beneficial operation of these anti-bodies would be of the nature of habituation or useadaptation. On the whole, the balance of opinion is against this view. Ehrlich's theory is now in the ascendant.
I pass on to the third part of my subject and ask the question -How does it arise that certain races of men are either specially liable to, or enjoy a relative immunity from, certain diseases ? Though the data relating to this question are abundant, the subject is a very complex one and will be found to raise some of the most difficult problems of the relative operation and importance of heredity and environment, of " nature and nurture." As examples of the facts to be explained we may take the following :-Negroes are very resistant to yellow fever and in a less degree to malaria, while they succumb readily to tuberculosis and to smallpox. Native East Indians are less susceptible than Europeans to enteric fever, but more susceptible to plague. North American Indians and South Sea Islanders are very susceptible to measles and to smallpox. Jews often suffer less than the surrounding populations during the prevalence of great epidemics, while they show a special proclivity to diabetes, haemorrhoids and diseases of the nervous system. The Irish at the present day suffer much more severely from tuberculosis than the English or the Scotch. Bedouin Arabs and the wandering tribes of the Russian and Central Asian steppes enjoy a large measure of immunity from tuberculosis. These facts might easily be multiplied but the foregoing examples will suffice for my present purpose. Before we proceed to theorise, let us look at some of the cognate facts about which there is no dispute. Thus, it seems a very general, perhaps universal law that when an infective disease invades a community for the first time, or a community from which it has been long absent, it causes widespread devastation, both the attack-rate and the mortality-rate being abnormally high. When measles first appeared in the Fiji Islands in the latter part of the nineteenth century, from one-quarter to one-fifth of the entire population fell victims to the disease. An excessive mortality from the same disease characterised the great epidemic of I875 in the Faroe Islands,

126

EUGENICS REVIEW

J. A. Lindsay:

from which measles had been long absent. Smallpox has repeatedly caused widespread havoc when introduced into unprotected communities. When influenza appeared in this country in the year I889, after an absence of more than forty years, the attack-rate was very high and the cases often severe, while in the subsequent epidemics fewer persons were attacked and the cases were, upon the whole, milder. It is suggested that these facts are best explained upon the theory of Protective Evolution. This theory assumes that when an infective disease prevails amongst any nation, or in any locality, those most predisposed to the disease are gradually eliminated and the stock accordingly becomes progressively more resistant to the operation of that particular toxin. Thus, it is argued, the civilised European, having been long in contact with tuberculosis, has acquired a certain degree of immunity against it, while the North American Indian when he adopts a settled, in lieu of a nomad life, and having had little previous experience of tuberculosis, perishes in large numbers. The negro in America, when he becomes a city dweller, has a mortality-rate from tuberculosis about twice the average of that of the white man, because, according to this theory, in his native Africa or when working upon plantations in the days of slavery, his contact with tuberculosis was relatively slight. The Bushman in South Africa and the Maori in New Zealand are perishing largely because civilisation has brought with it diseases of which these races had previously little experience, or no experience at all. These facts are apparently capable of explanation on the theory of Protective Evolution. But, before we accept this theory as covering the ground, we must enquire whether it is adequate to account for all the known facts. If the theory were of universal application, it would involve the conclusion that all infective diseases which do not destroy a race tend to produce the evolution either of atn inborn power of resisting infection, or of the power of acquiring immunity under the influence of disease,-in other words, a decline either in the attack-rate or in the mortality-rate. That this law is at work, and has a certain influence is, I think, probable, but it is clear that it is apt to be contravened by other factors. Thus, typhus fever has almost disappeared from our

IMMUNITY FROM DISEASE

I2`

midst, enteric fever has shown a notable decline, and tuberculosis in England in less than half a century has been reduced by one half. It is a fair subject for argument how far these results have been due to better housing, better feeding, better sanitation, a more general appreciation of the laws of hygiene, and how far to Protective Evolution. But, look at the other side of the picture. Diphtheria has increased in the United Kingdom since the year i88o. So has pneumonia. Scarlatina has shown a diminution of virulence in the last three or four decades, but measles is as virulent as ever. It is clear that no uniformly effective law of Protective Evolution is at work. Many factors, some of them artificial and some of them extremely obscure, affect the incidence of infective diseases. Thus, the adoption of the principle of compulsory education in the year I870 and the consequent massing together of large numbers of susceptible children in school-houses have probably had considerable influence. Railways, travel, increased facilities for intercourse have operated in one direction, while the erection of fever hospitals, the spread of more intelligent views upon the dissemination of disease and the adoption of the Compulsory Notification of Diseases Act have operated in an opposite direction.
Again, our knowledge of the incidence of disease and the mortality attending upon it in past times is very meagre. Few subjects have been so exhaustively and so successfully studied as that of Egyptian antiquities, yet little is known regarding the prevalence of disease in Ancient Egypt. Professor G. Elliot Smith informs me that of 20,999 ancient bodies, mostly skeletons, examined by him and his assistants there were found ten cases of spinal caries, and one of hip disease, no doubt of tubercular causation. No evidence of the former prevalence of syphilis was obtained. One mummy suggested the possibility of smallpox. No body showed evidence of scarlatina. Trustworthy mortality tables are hardly more than half a century old. All analogy would lead us to suppose that the Law of Protective Evolution
-supposing such a law to exist-would be of extremely slow operation-" The mills of the Gods grind slow but they grind exceeding small." Let us consider that law in relation to tuberculosis. Tuberculosis is a disease of civilisation, of urban

I28

EUGENICS REVIEW

J. A. Lindsay:

populations, of poverty, destitution and over-crowding. Nomad races suffer little. When a race previously of nomad or rural habits adopts an urban life it suffers much more severely from tuberculosis than races long accustomed to the life of towns and cities. On the other hand, as nations progress in civilisation and the general standard of living rises, i.e., when people are better housed, better clothed, better fed, and work or play under more hygienic conditions, the tuberculosis rate tends to fall, and usually falls decidedly and comparatively rapidly. How far is this due to the Law of Protective Evolution, how far to an improved environment ? Is it " nature" or "nurture " ? An interesting experiment, possibly of crucial importance, has been in course of performance under our very eyes. Since the year I865 the tuberculosis rate of, England has been reduced by practically one half, while during the same period the tuberculosis rate of Ireland has remained, with some slight fluctuations, practically stationary. Are we to suppose that the Law of Protective Evolution has been operative in England, but inoperative in Ireland ? Or, are we to account for the facts by recalling that during the period under review the standard of civilisation has risen enormously in England, while it has risen relatively little in Ireland ? I confess the latter supposition seems to me much the more probable of the two. The Law of Protective Evolution probably operates, but its operation is infinitely slow, while improved environmental conditions make their effects almost immediately evident. The negro in America when he becomes a town dweller has a tuberculosis-rate roughly double that of his white fellow-citizen. How far this is explained by the fact that the negro is worse housed, worse clothed, worse fed, and more careless about his health than his white neighbour; how far by the fact that he belongs to a race more recently in contact with tuberculosis than those of European extraction, is a question of extraordinary interest but not easily answered. It is probable, if I may venture an opinion, that both causes are at work-one very slow, the other relatively rapid in its mode of operation.
The Jew affords a tempting field for enquiry into the racial aspects of disease. The following facts seem to be fairly well

IMMUNITY FROM DISEASE

I29

established :-The Jew suffers less than the average of the populations amongst whom he lives from alcoholism, venereal diseases and in some cases from prevailing epidemic diseases. He is not prone to suicide. His percentage of illegitimacy and of stillbirths is relatively low. In modern times he enjoys some degree of immunity from leprosy, which apparently prevailed extensively amongst Jews in ancient times. It must be borne in mind, however, that the leprosy of the Old Testament probably included several diseases, such as psoriasis, vitiligo and scaly eczema as well as true leprosy. On the other side of the account, the Jew suffers more than the average from diabetes, haemorrhoids, nervous diseases in general, especially blindness and colourblindness, the deaf and dumb defect and insanity. The Jewish death-rate under five years of age is much below the general average. Tuberculosis is a doubtful case. It has been affirmed on good authority that the Jewish tubercular rate is relatively low, while the most recent observations point to the contrary conclusion. The point is an important one and it is to be regretted that the evidence is so conflicting. Pneumonia is said to be relatively infrequent amongst Jews but I cannot find any definite data on this subject.
In appraising the significance of the foregoing evidence, certain well-known facts must be kept in mind. The Jew is pre-eminently a town-dweller. He has no inclination for rural life or agricultural pursuits. He does not engage to any large extent in manufacturing industries. He is in the main a brain worker and of sedentary habits. Intermarriage amongst relatives is common in the Jewish communities. The Jewish mother is rarely an out-worker. These facts throw some light upon the prevalence of diabetes and nervous diseases amongst Jews and upon their relatively low infantile mortality. The alleged relative immunity of Jews from tuberculosis, which has been accepted as a fact by Lombroso, Behrend and other authorities, has been variously attributed to the following circumstances, viz.:
(i) That Jews do not often engage in occupations involving much exposure to the weather.
(2) That Jews have a special dislike for dust and practice frequent house-cleaning.

130

EUGENICS REVIEW

J. A. Lindsay:

(3) That Jews are very careful in their choice of meat for food.

(4) That Jews suffer relatively little from alcoholism.

It seems idle to discuss these theories when the fact of which they are advanced as the explanation remains in question. For my own part, I do not think there is evidence to warrant the conclusion that the modern Jew enjoys any special immunitv from tuberculosis, whatever may have been the case in ancient
times. The case of leprosy amongst the Jews in ancient and modern
times is a peculiarly interesting one. Whatever doubt may surround the question of the precise pathological significance of the term leprosy in the Old Testament, we can hardly be mistaken in concluding that the genuine disease was rife amongst the ancient Jews, and the evidence seems conclusive that the disease is rare amongst Jews at the present day. In Palestine leprosy is now much commoner amongst the Arabs than amongst the Jews, and in Russia Jews suffer less from the disease than the surrounding populations. This may well be an example of Protective Evolution.
The fact that the Jew is temperate as regards alcohol in all countries and amidst the most varying conditions of life-a fact which is hardly open to question-seems to throw some light on the much-controverted subject of alcoholism. This temperance would seem to be a recent acquisition of the race, if we may judge from the frequent allusions to intemperance in the Jewish scriptures. It shows that alcoholic excess is not a matter of climate, for the Jew is temperate in all zones of latitude. It proves that poverty and squalor are not in themselves efficient causes of alcoholic excess, as the Jew of the East End, amidst conditions of great hardship, remains temperate. Nor does the suggestion that nations which have for many generations enjoyed free facilities for alcoholic indulgence have gradually eliminated those exhibiting the alcoholic taint, have in fact " drunk themselves sober," seem to fit the case of the Jew. It is possible that another law comes into view here, that psychology rather than biology affords the desired clue, and that the temperance of the

IMMUNITY FROM DISEASE

I3I

Jew is related to the ethical endowments of his remarkable race. But the subject is one upon which I prefer not to dogmatise.
The facts relating to the racial incidence and regional prevalence of plague are exceedingly interesting, and may serve to remind us how extremely complex are the phenomena of infective disease and how much we should be on our guard against too readily adopting seductive and far-reaching generalisations. Plague is at present devastating India and other parts of the East. In India alone the deaths in recent years have exceeded seven millions. The deaths have been almost entirely amongst the native populations, the mortality amongst Europeans being quite insignificant. This latter fact might seem to militate against the law of Protective Evolution, but it should be borne in mind that the European population of India is a mere handful, and consists almost exclusively of the army and its retainers and of persons of good social position. The experience of disease amongst a section of the population so few in numbers and living under such exceptional conditions affords no data for safe generalisation. That the ill-housed, ill-fed Hindoo of Bombay suffers much from plague, while the well-housed, well-fed Englishman suffers hardly at all is, of course, true, and is easily explained when we know the part played by the rat-flea in the dissemination of the disease. Such facts have no racial significance of which we can be sure.
But, how are we to account for the long obsolescence of plague, and its occasional outbursts of devastating virulence? The present prevalence of plague in the East dates from the outbreak at Hong Kong in I894, prior to which year the disease had been slumbering for generations. As already mentioned in this paper, there have been periods of from 130 to 150 years when plague has been almost quiescent in eastern countries. No theory with which I am acquainted affords any probable explanation of these occasional outbreaks of epidemic violence. No change in the habits of the people involved in such outbreaks can be recognised, nor any alteration in the opportunities for closer communication and more intimate intercourse. The law of Protective Evolution seems out of court. We seem to be thrown back upon the hypothesis of some alteration in the activity of

132

EUGENICS REVIEW

J. A. Lindsay:

the virus of the disease, depending, possibly, upon atmospheric or telluric conditions of which we are wholly ignorant. It seems impossible to fit the facts into any racial or genetic
theory.
Outbreaks of cholera suggest a parallel line of reflection. It will hardly be suggested that our immunity from cholera at the present day is due to the law of Protective Evolution, or to anything in the nature of a use-adaptation. Reasons too obvious to require statement clearly exclude such a hypothesis. Our safety from cholera would seem to depend upon two factorsviz., first, our knowledge of the mode of dissemination of the disease, and the adoption of suitable measures of sanitary protec-
tion; and secondly, upon some unknown factor which affects the activity of the cholera virus.
I pass on to the fourth, and last division of my subject, and ask the question-Are the facts of Immunity capable of any evolutionary explanation, and any application to the field of Eugenics ?
We have adduced sufficient facts to render probable the theory that races which do not succumb to the ravages of infective disease tend to develop a certain degree of tolerance of such diseases. This law may in various ways be obscured or even apparently contravened, but its existence and operation can hardly be denied. And what is true of races is probably true, also, of families. Dr. Mott has shown that insanity tends to die out in three generations, there being either a regression to the normal or the stock is eliminated. It would be very interesting if we had adequate data to determine how far this law applies to other diseases-tuberculosis, for example, or cancer. We have heard much in recent years of the error of those who in former times held that tuberculosis was a hereditary disease. That this doctrine, viewed from the pathological point, is erroneous is, of course, certain, but from the genetic or eugenist point of view the doctrine of the hereditary nature of tuberculosis has only changed its form. What is inherited is not the disease, but only proclivity to infection. One of the most recent inquirers into this subject is A. Riffel, who has subjected the question to an exhaustive examination. His plan was to take certain groups of

IMMUNITY FROM DISEASE

I33

families and follow their health history through several generations. His conclusion is that phthisis and other tubercular affections arise especially, and almost exclusively, in certain families; that tuberculosis is propagated from generation to generation, sometimes missing a generation, and that specially affected families tend to die out. The case of tuberculosis is peculiarly important from the eugenic point of view because the disease is specially apt to attack persons just before and during the reproductive period. It is clear that the marriage of members of families much infected with tuberculosis involves risks to the prospective offspring, and the risk is, no doubt, much intensified when the tubercular strain is present on both sides. The prohibition of marriage to persons of decidedly tubercular stock, or even of all persons known to be infected by the disease, is clearly impossible. The most we can hope to do is to make the risks known, and to leave the issue to the operation of an instructed public opinion. About one-third of the cases of tuberculosis which are met in practice show a direct family history of the disease, and, if we include collateral branches, a family tendency to become infected can be traced in nearly one half of the cases. The risk to the prospective offspring in any given case cannot be stated in arithmetical form for the following reasons, viz., (a) Nature tends to revert to the normal, and the normal connotes health and not disease; (b) on Mendelian principles, the dominant characters may contravene the recessive characters, and the former may represent the non-tubercular strain; (c) the fact of Atavism is well attested, and even in a decidedly tubercular stock one generation may escape infection.
Biffen's experiments regarding rust in wheat suggest that Mendelism may yet throw much light upon the transmission of disease in man.
We may venture to lay down the following principles in this difficult matter-No person who is the subject of active tuberculosis should be permitted to marry. In the case of quiescent or cured tuberculosis the question of marriage should be viewed in the light of the known risks involved, due regard being had to the economic position of the persons concerned, their occupation and the possibility of early and effective treatment in the event

I34

EUGENICS REVIEW

J. A. Lindsay:

-always more or less probable-of a recrudescence of the
disease. Finally, two persons both of whom come of an infected
tubercular stock should not marry. If these principles were adopted, it can hardly be doubted that there would be an
appreciable effect upon our tubercular rate. The case of cancer stands upon a somewhat different footing,
inasmuch as the disease falls mainly upon that period of life
which follows the reproductive period. Cancer is hereditary,
but the precise weight to be attached to the hereditary element
cannot be determined with precision. In cancer of the stomach
the influence of heredity has been traced in about five or six per cent, the family of the Napoleons affording a striking example of
special proclivity to the disease. In cancer of the liver Osler found a family history in from I5 to 20 per cent of cases. It is
clear that while the marriage of persons of cancerous stock involves grave risks, the racial significance of such marriages is
relatively slight. Insanity is, perhaps, the leading case where a morbid inheri-
tance is of preponderating importance to the race. Clouston writes as follows on the subject. " The conclusion of almost every man who has recently stuidied and written about mental unsoundness is that evil nervous heredity is by far the most frequent and most potent predisposing cause of the condition. It commonly underlies all other causes. Without its existence there would be very little unsoundness of mind in the world. It is the chief problem of psychiatry. It is the fate which lies on millions of civilised men and women. In some form or other, in some degree or other, some hereditary fault, mental or bodily, affects perhaps the majority of mankind. If all hereditary tendencies to mental and nervous unsoundness and defects could be counteracted, humanity mightbreathefreely." Thisisstrong, language but not too strong. It must be remembered, also, that a neuropathic inheritance expresses itself in many ways-not merely in insanity, but in epilepsy, hysteria, alcoholism, eccentricity, moral obliquity, practical incapacity, intellectual defect. It is, perhaps, the most pervasive evil against which humanity has to struggle, and I fear there is little doubt that it is upon the increase. The marriage of persons who inherit an insane, or

IMMUNITY FROM DISEASE

I35

decidedly neuropathic taint, should certainly be discouraged as much as possible.
When we come to those cases of persons and families who
exhibit a special proclivity to the common infective diseases, we are upon less secure ground. That such a proclivity exists few doctors would deny. It is a common-place of medical experience that some people " take everything that is going "-as the phrase is-while others show a relatively high grade of immunity from infection. It is not easy to see, however, how such facts can be practically utilised for purposes of selection. The deterrent to marriage which might be educed from them is too intangible and too remote to be likely ever to become really operative.
I have only touched the fringe of a vast subject, and one, I think of uncommon interest and of far-reaching importance. It raises some of the most profound problems of genetics, of eugenics, of racial fitness and survival and of racial unfitness and decay. There can be no doubt that disease is the most potent selective agent now operative amongst mankind. Famine is largely held in check. War is becoming rarer. Conflict with the lower animals is no longer a selective factor of any importance, great as must have been its significance to primeval man. Disease remains, is still rife, and in some of its manifestations shows no abatement of destructive power. It has to be combatted by medical science, by hygiene, by an improved social order, by economic adjustment. But it must also be fought by enquiring into the conditions which confer immunity upon individuals and upon races and by giving such conditions full scope in our plans of remedial reform.

