REVIEWS OF BOOKS
BIOGRAPHY
Malthus, T. R. (Edited by Patricia James). The Travel Diaries of T. R. Malthus. London, 1966. Cambridge University Press for the Royal Economic Society. Pp. xvi+316. Price 45s.
FEW PEOPLE ARE interested in T. R. Malthus's theory of population or in the personal characteristics of this much vilified man. But many people have heard of Malthusianism, Neo-Malthusianism and Malthusian practices which are commonly understood to comprise the uses of appliance methods of contraception.
This perverse misapplication of the unfortunate man's surname has led many people to picture the Rev. T. R. Malthus (1766-1834) as the archetypal birth-controller-a sort of Adam or Lucifer. Communists and Roman Catholics have agreed on few things. But they used to join forces in execrating this benign parson whom Communists believed to be a perverter of Marxist Truth and Catholics a corrupter of morals. (Malthus was, in fact, opposed to birth control by appliance methods.)
What was Malthus really like? We are gently told in these recently published travel diaries. The diaries have been meticulously-one might say reverently-edited by Mrs. Patricia James. By a happy stroke of fortune they fell into her hands through the initiativeor luck-of the late Dr. G. F. McCleary who used to be well known to members of this Society. Briefly, Dr. McCleary was a friend of Mr. Robert Malthus, a collateral descendant of T. R. Malthus. In 1960, at the age of 92, Dr. McCleary, the author of several books, among which should be counted The Malthusian Population Theory (1953), visited Robert Malthus in the Isle of Wight in the hope of collecting further material for a second edition. But nothing was then found. A year later, however, McCleary received from the other a parcel containing, among other pieces, a well-preserved manuscript written 162 years before by the sender's illustrious ancestor. Mrs. James, who describes herself as one of McCleary's Honorary nieces, used to read aloud to him during his last years of blindness (he died in 1962); and it was by her pious hands that the manuscript was transcribed and prepared for the printer. Rarely can the editor of a diary have taken more trouble or done a better job; rarely could footnotes and additional information (deftly intercalated in the text) have better supplemented a diarist's references to people, places and events of over a century and a half ago.
The diaries tell us of a tour of Denmark, Sweden and Norway undertaken by Malthus and three others, among them his close friend William (later Bishop) Otter whose daughter later married Malthus's son. The period covered was from 25th May to 3rd August 1799a stretch of some ten weeks at the height of the northern summer when at midnight the sun dips but for a few minutes below the horizon.
The itinerary covered some ten degrees of latitude-from Cuxhaven (reached on 25th May) through Hamburgh, to Copenhagen (7th June) and thence for some 500 miles almost due north to Trondheim reached on 13th July. (Ten degrees of latitude separate Penzance in Cornwall from Lerwick in the Shetlands. The distance by road from Copenhagen to Trondheim was much more than 500 miles). After a few days at Trondheim, the northernmost point, the party, by now reduced to two (Malthus and Otter) turned about and, taking a more easterly course, began their southward journey. The line of their route on the map is shaped like an irregular hairpin or magnet, the convex end being at the northernmost extremity, and the eastward limb, representing the southern journey, being about half the length of the other. The southward itinerary lay from some twenty to some sixty miles east of the northward, and ended about 260 map miles (farther by road) south of Trondheim and some 60 miles east of Oslo. At this point (a village recorded as Magnor, reached on
129

THE EUGENICS REVIEW
3rd August), the pair turned east into Sweden and the diary ends. The penultimate entry reads:
We took leave of Norway with regret, having been delighted with many beautiful scenes in it, & having received the most agreeable and flattering attentions from the inhabitants.
**
The first edition of Malthus's Essay on Population was published in 1798, the year before this travel began; the second much revised and enlarged edition appeared in 1803. Hence the Scandinavian journal, as it was called, was committed to writing during an important interim period in the author's life, when he was seeking for factual confirmation of a principle which he had earlier formulated in theoretical outline. In 1779, moreover, the French revolution had but lately burst on the world, and Napoleon had already raised his head.
*#*
What, from his journal, do we learn about the-diarist? Two things are outstandinghis keen enjoyment of travel and his vivid interest in all he saw. In those motorless and trainless days travel was laborious. You moved forward by short laps, rarely exceeding forty miles a day; and ad hoc arrangements-the hiring of horses and conveyances and the use of boats-had to be made, in advance if possible, at each stage. Among the items regularly noted by Malthus were the temperature, the weather, the meals and the quality of the beds and accommodation. Joie de vivre, zest, and cheerfulness shine through the meticulously corrected but quite legible daily entries. (A facsimile page is given.) The travellers avoided both accidents and all except fleeting illnesses. There were losses of belongings; but these were by accident, not theft.
Among the things noticed and recorded were the physical appearances, costumes, health, earnings and manners of the mostly rural people through whose territories the
travellers passed; the natuiral history, the domestic animals, the agricultural and farming
methods, the industrial activities; also the factors which could influence the age of marriage and therefore the number of children (popn was the author's abbreviation for population), the relation between employers and employed, the styles in which rich people lived, and (perhaps most insistently) the scenery. In all manner of scenery, Malthus took a keen delight. Of special appeal were river valleys flanked by tree-clad mountains or cliffs, islandstudded lakes, and estuaries, coves and fjords giving shelter from the angry winter seas. Information no less than pleasure was an objective of the Scandinavian journey, and Malthus was a tireless questioner. He spoke but English and French and therefore had to rely much on interpreters.
The reader may get the feel of the diaries and sense something of the quality of the man from a few arbitrarily selected passages in which I use Malthus's spelling as reproduced by Mrs. James.
Scenery Soon after leaving Littlehammer we . .. came down a steep hill to a turn of the
river which was incomparably beautiful, & led us into the most inchanting valley that can well be conceived. The road hung over the river, which was studded with various islands, & on all sides, rocks, mountains, grass fields, & picturesque cottages on the ridges of the hills, were combined in the most beautiful manner. The trees of all kinds were luxuriant in foliage, the fields were of the finest verdure which threw an air of softness over the whole picture, & made it appear one of the happiest and most enchanting spots that can well be imagined. (8th July 1799.)
130

REVIEWS OF BOOKS
Military Service and late marriage may check population growth
... The uncertainty in respect to the time of being taken [called up for military service] has hitherto acted as a strong preventive check to the population in Norway, & accounts for their increasing so slowly, though the people live so long. No man could consider himself as perfectly free to marry, unless he had solid possessions, till he had served his time which, from their being taken sometimes at thirty, might not happen till he was forty years old. (24th June.)
Crops The hay is all carried in sledges, & housed immediately. The horses draw the
sledges up a kind of platform into a loft or barn. We have never seen any ricks of either hay or corn. The men in mowing stand nearly upright & take a very short and narrow stroke. (Sognaes: about forty miles south of Trondheim; 22nd July.)
Oust is a village rather larger than usual. The tops of the houses were so flourishing in grass that we asked if they did not sometimes mow them, & were answered in the affirmative. (26th July.)
Amusement for Swedish Villagers
We had in general caused some staring; but this morning more than usual. A party among which were 2 or 3 women collected at the door of our room which was accidentally open & seemed to be exceedingly diverted with all our gestures. They had the politeness sometimes to turn aside their faces that we might not see them burst into a laugh. (Hogdal: West of lake Wenner: 22nd June.)
Clock at Lubeck
There is also a most extraordinary clock dated 1404, with a curious perpetual almanack below, & above a figure of our saviour. When the clock strikes twelve, the 12 apostles come out of a folding door, walk round the figure of our saviour, bow as they pass him, & enter into a folding door on the opposite side. (2nd June.)

The volume contains, in addition to the Scandinavian journal, short diaries of a

Continental Tour, 1825, and of a Scottish Holiday, 1926. There are also five Appendices of

which the first shows how much of the Scandinaviam Journal was used by Malthus in the

sixth edition of his Essay on the Principle of Population (1826). A brief but apt foreword is

provided by Lord Robbins.

Mrs. James has produced a scholarly yet most readable book which.will be especially

enjoyed by people who are interested in Scandinavia, history, travel and T. R. Malthus.

I have spent some happy hours with it.

C. P. BLACKER

131

