THE HERD INSTINCT IN ANIMALS
Its Bearing on the Bases of Human Society By Professor E. W. MacBRIDE, D.Sc., F.R.S.

H UMANITY is distinguished from the organs of both males and females are at

rest of the animal kingdom, partly, their full development. It is, therefore,

no doubt, by certain anatomical fea- the call of sex which brings the vast

tures, but above all by the fact that all crowds contained in these shoals together.

human beings are organized into societies. The females lay their eggs on gravelly

It is this organization which gave mankind bottoms in shallow water; the males de-

their power of survival when menaced by posit their milt on the eggs after they are

competitors far larger and more powerful laid, and the eggs adhere to the stones by

than themselves, and which enabled means of a glutinous envelope. The parents

humanity to win step by step its present then scatter and leave the young to their

dominating position in the organic world. fate. The young hatch out as tiny thread-

All our religious and moral ideals are based like creatures, which require to grow for

ultimately on our relation to one another in three years before they, in turn, are ready

societies. " It was not man that made to lay eggs; how they pass the intervening

society, it was society that made man." time is not well known, but once they have

Now there are various types of society at attained maturity they return to spawn year

present in the world; and there are many after year, and they may live to be ten or

who think that society can be moulded from twelve years old. When one considers

without, according to some ideal plan. In that a full-grown herring will lay in one

the past society has not so been moulded, year 20,000 eggs, it can be seen what a

but has grown. Like other fundamental gigantic family one prosperous herring pair

things it is based on great primary in- may have before they terminate their

stincts, and it seemed to me worth while to careers.

make a comparative study of the develop- That is, however, not the whole story of

ment of these instincts in the higher the herring. Off the coast of Norway, there

animals, in other words to seek to discover is another migration of the herring, half-

why animals of the same species associate way between successive spawning times. At

in groups-what in fact the herd instinct is these times they are spoken of as " fat her-

and how it,has arisen.

ring," because the flesh is rich and oily but

Mankind belongs to the great phylum the genital organs are shrunken. They are

vertebrata, which comprises all animals then following the shoals of minute crus-

with a jointed backbone, a tubular nerve tacea on which they feed and are having a

cord, a brain and eyes, ears and nose. This royal time. There is food and to spare for

phylum is divided into the five classes of all, and whatever struggle there may be to

Fishes, Amphibia, Reptiles, Birds and escape the enemies which prey on them,

Mammals, and of these classes Fish are the there is no struggle amongst the herring

lowest and most simply organized, and we themselves for food. At times, however,

shall therefore begin our study of the herd when they are not spawning and food is

instinct with them.

relatively scarce, each herring separates as

Now, if we confine our attention to the widely as possible from its neighbours, and

British herring fisheries, we find that when hunts for itself.

the herring are approaching our shores they The salmon have a history somewhat

are taking no food, but that the genital similar to that of the herring. They live

97

98 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

and grow in the sea, and there they lead iso- born there is a prosperous salmon fishery.

lated lives, for if caught at all they are only The fish are caught as they are going along

found singly; but they must obtain plenty of the coast to find two rivers up which they

food in the sea because the lines of growth on run. These rivers are the Bush and the

their scales show a very rapid increase in Bann. The Bush drains a region inhabited

size. The scales of a fish grow like the by Roman Catholics, whilst the people liv-

rings of a tree. Every year a fresh ring ing in the Bann valley are mostly Protes-

appears on the scale and by the width of the tant. When the net is emptied, the fisher-

scale one can tell how much the fish has man will pick out a fish and say: " That

grown since the last year, for the growth is a Papist," and of another " He is a Pro-

of the body is in proportion to the width of testant," according as the fish in question

the ring. Then, when they are about three belongs to the Bush or the Bann race respec-

years old they begin a spawning migration tively. I might say that it has been

towards the coast, nosing along it looking established that about 70 to 75 per cent.

for their favourite river. They then run of salmon hatched in a river return to it to

up the rivers, fighting against the currents, spawn, but there is an odd 25 to 30 per

surmounting the smaller waterfalls by cent. of more adventurous souls who look

gigantic leaps, till they assemble in shal- for fresh rivers. This return of salmon to

low pools in the upper reaches. Here the the river of their birth is a marvellous in-

female chooses a gravelly spot for her eggs stance of memory.

and then she looks out for a male, and We shall now examine another instance of

brings him to the spot; then the eggs are the spawning community habit which, to

laid and the milt deposited on them. The my mind, is the most wonderful of all, that

exhausted parents then run down the river is the life story of the eel. We Londoners

one by one and recuperate during the winter are familiar with Eel-pie Island above Rich-

in the sea.

mond, and we realize that in its adult and

During their stay in fresh water the sal- edible condition the eel is a freshwater fish.

mon eat little, but they will take an occa- As it is most voracious and will eat almost

sional fly as a tit-bit, otherwise there would anything, it grows to a very considerable

be no fun in angling for salmon. After the size and is a valuable article of food. It can

young are hatched, they live for two years pick up a living even in a small pond. But

in fresh water and during this period grow when it is fully grown, a strange craving

but slowly: they are only the size of a for salt water comes over it, and it starts

small herring when they enter the sea. In on a long journey to the coast. It will leave

Britain the salmon return to spawn several the water and wriggle over damp meadows

times in succession, but in British Columbia by night to get from pond to pond. I caught

after a successful spawning they die, and one two years ago in a wet spot in a field a

they enter the rivers so gorged with food few yards from the sea cliff in Cornwall.

that they disdain even flies. This is given Once plunged in the sea, the eels from every

by Canadians as the reason why Great river not only in England but in all Europe,

Britain surrendered Oregon to the United nay even from Morocco and the Levantine

States. The Commissioners sent out to shores of the Mediterranean, make their

negotiate, thought that the territory in dis- way across the Atlantic to the same spot

pute was worthless, for the " salmon would about ioo miles south of the Bermuda

not rise to the fly.,,

Islands. There in mid-water the females

Do the salmon really return to the river shed their eggs, which float, and the males

in which they were hatched ? The fisher- emit their milt amongst them. The young

men were always convinced that they did, as they hatch rise to the top. They are

but this point has only quite recently been blade-like transparent creatures with white

fully established. Along the northern blood, so unlike their parents that they

shores of the Irish county in which I was received a different name, and it required

HERD INSTINCT IN ANIMALS

99

the genius of the Italian investigator, acquires in the breeding season a bright

Grassi, to discover their true nature. These rosy tint on his breast, so that he is

slender, opalescent fish begin to fight their familiarly known as a robin. Then he

way back to the river of their birth, a proceeds to build a nest with fragments of

journey which requires three years to accom- water-weed, and having set up his family

plish. As they approach the coast their residence, sallies forth in search of a mate.

shape changes, they develop red blood and When he has found one, he guides her into

become cylindrical, and then in the spring the nest and stands guard whilst she depo-

they swarm up the rivers, keeping as far sits the eggs, which he then fertilizes. He

as possible under the shelter of the banks. continues to watch over the eggs till the

They are no thicker than a small pencil, and fry hatch, and does not desist from his

it is this circumstance which has given rise fatherly care till the young are able to look

to the fable that eels developed out of horse- after themselves. During this period he

hairs. betrays no " community spirit " whatever,

RACIAL MEMORY OF EELS

and is ready to attack fiercely any other fish, whether belonging to his own species

Eventually they reach ponds and slug- or not, that ventures near his home.

gish reaches in the upper parts of the rivers,

and here they feed and grow fat. Since no AMPHIBIAN COMMUNITY LIFE

eels ever return after having once gone down If we now ascend in the animal scale to

to sea to spawn, the young can have no the Amphibia, a class which includes our

acquired memory of their former home, and frogs, toads, and newts, we find much the

they must be directed by an inborn or racial same state of affairs as in fish and for the

memory. One of the most remarkable facts same reason: the mother never takes any

is this-that to the same place in the Atlantic care of her offspring. Most of us regard

not only European eels but American eels frogs, toads, and newts as pre-eminently

come for their great nuptial celebration but adapted for life in water; and whilst that is

when they have spawned and the young normally true for a few isolated species, the

hatch out, the young American eels know vast majority are land animals. But all,

their way back to America and do not with a few isolated exceptions, go to the

attempt to come to Europe, and the young water to lay their eggs, and the young are

European eels have to find their way back for the first period of their existence fish-

to Europe whence the parents came but to breathing by gills and propelling themselves

which they never return.

by their tails. If we take the common

So far we have been discussing fish which, newt, for instance, we find that the young

when once they have deposited eggs, take no live in the water for six months, and then

further interest in them but leave them to lose their gills and migrate to land. They

their fate. Indeed, the adult cod are continue to live on land for four years till

amongst the worst enemies of their own off- they have reached their full adult size.

spring, and the first concern of the cod fry Then, and then only, do they return to the

is to escape from the attentions of their own water. The male begins to court the female

parents. In such fish the community by gambolling around her and occasion-

spirit is based merely on the call of sex, and ally jumping over her and flicking her with

when the demands of sex have been satisfied his tail. When he has worked her up into

the community breaks into its constituent a suitable state of excitement, he deposits

members. But there are isolated cases, his spermatozoa in a packet on the ground.

known principally amongst fresh-water fish This packet is called a spermatophore and

in which one parent at least watches over the the female, walking on the trail left by the

welfare of the offspring. One of the best male, picks up the spermatophore with the

studied of these is the familiar fresh-water lips of her genital opening and thus

stickleback. In this species the male fertilizes her own eggs.

100 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

In the common newt development does hide her eggs away in some secluded spot

not begin until the egg is laid, but in the where they will not be discovered by any

allied genus Salamandra development be- enemy. Owing to the nature of the egg

gins inside the mother, and the young are shell, it is necessary that the egg should be

born as little four-legged creatures with fertilized before it is laid, and in some

feathery gills. But in the case of both lizards and snakes development goes on

salamanders and newts once the sexual play within the mother: the egg shell is burst

is over and the eggs are laid or the young and absorbed before birth, and the young

brought forth, community life ceases and the are brought forth as little lizards or snakes,

adults resume their life on land where they as the case may be. Some may ask how we

lead isolated lives, each hunting in its own can assert that reptiles are adapted to life

beat. on land when many of them, like turtles and

Amongst frogs and toads there is, as is well crocodiles, pass the greater part of their

known, a similar resort to the water in the lives in water. But turtles and crocodiles

spring and a vigorous community life, ac- have the same kind of smooth horny scales

companied by loud croaking on the part of in their skins as lizards and snakes possess;

the males. They appear to rival each their skins are totally unlike the moist

other in the loudness of their calls. There slimy skins of amphibia. The fact is that

will be a period of silence and then one male turtles and crocodiles are land animals

will begin croaking: this seems to act as a which have learned to hunt in water, where-

challenge to the others, and a fresh general as amphibia are really water animals which

outburst of song will take place. Some have learned to hunt on land. Consequently,

observers assert that each male takes up one crocodiles and turtles come to land to lay

particular position, a " calling station " as their eggs, and it is here that the com-

it is termed, and the females make their munity life involved in mating takes place.

way to the male by whose song they are Of maternal care after birth there is little

most attracted. The male embraces one or no trace; some snakes, however, give

of them, clasping his forearms round her protection and warmth to their eggs by curl-

waist and mounting on her back. There ing themselves round them, but these mater-

he remains for a varying period, which may nal attentions cease when the young are

be as long as two weeks, and all the time hatched. It is on the occasion of the great

he is in a state of wild excitement, giving assemblages for pairing and egg-laying

vent to his joy in continual croaking. that the turtle-hunters secure their harvest.

Finally the female attains a condition in Whilst hunting, however, there is no com-

which she is able to lay her eggs. The male munity life. But amongst lizards at least

then deposits his sperm on them, and the -as my friend Major Flower informs me-

embrace ceases; both partners scramble out there is an individualistic partition of hunt-

of the water and take up their life on land, ing ground. He has observed at Cairo that

where they begin their beneficent work of each particular lizard has its own beat; one

feeding on flies and keeping insect life in does not infringe on his neighbour's terri-

general within moderate bounds.

tory. But if a lizard be caught and thrown

When we reach the level of reptiles (tor- down amongst other lizards, a tremendous

toises, turtles, crocodiles, lizards, snakes) battle ensues which lasts until either the

we encounter for the first time animals newcomer is chased away or one of the

thoroughly adapted to land. They all lay original lizards is ejected from his territory.

comparatively large eggs with tough shells When we leave reptiles and consider

which contain so much food in the shape of birds, we make an enormous step upwards

yolk that, when the young one hatches, it is in the scale of life. Birds resemble reptiles

ready to take up the same habits of life in producing large eggs, furnished with

as those pursued by its parents. Conse- abundant food supplies and protected by

quently the chief aim of the mother is to having shells from which the young are

HE1RD INSTINCT IN ANIMALS

hatched in an advanced state of develop- ever, we compare the short darts of the

ment. These eggs, though fertilized inter- lizard with the wonderful flight of a swift

nally, accomplish only the first beginnings or a swallow or even a sea-gull, one realizes

of development within the body of the what an enormous stride has been made by

mother; and in all but the most primitive evolution. The distance across the Atlantic

birds, the mother has to provide them with from Newfoundland to Ireland is over i,6oo

warmth after they are laid, by brooding over miles, and I have traced the same species of

them. During this period, in the case of sea-gull accompanying the steamer for over

many birds, she has to be fed by her part- 8oo miles.

ner, so that the duties of the male are by

no means finished when the act of pairing has been accomplished; indeed, his duties

THE FIRST HOMES

may then be said to have only rightly begun. The art of building a nest which shall

After hatching, both parents share in the serve as a home for the young during child-

task of feeding their young, and swallows hood, is only fully attained by the most

are known to work I7 hours out of the 24 highly developed birds, and, in the case of

hunting for flies, not only to support them- these birds, the young ones are born blind

selves, but in order to satisfy the voracious and naked; but the chicks of the more primi-

appetites of their growing family. Since tive birds, such as the ostrich, emerge from

birds are warm blooded-indeed, as com- the egg as vigorous youngsters well able to

pared with us, they live at fever heat-their run about and look after themselves. I

output of energy is far greater than that of may remark that the ostrich is unjustly con-

the cold-blooded reptiles, and the consump- demned in the book of Job in which she is

tion of food is consequently far greater.

accused of hiding her eggs in the dust and

Owing to their warm blood and their forgetting that the foot may crush them,

ability to retain their warmth, however cold for both sexes take it in turn to brood on

their surroundings may be, birds can live the eggs until they are hatched.

all over the world, and they abound in every Next to the ostrich and its allies (the

climate. Their enormous powers of flight rhea, emu, and cassowary) in the scale of

enable them to colonize remote oceanic is- organization come the game birds-a group

lands which no mammal or amphibian can including our domestic fowl, the pheasants,

reach. Their graceful shape, harmonious grouse, partridges, and ptarmigan; and in

song, and wonderful skill in flight, have this group too the young are born able to

attracted the sentimental attention of ama- run about and feed themselves. The chicks

teur naturalists, and so they have been more accompany the mother for some time after

completely studied than any other class of birth and seek the protection of her wings

animals. We therefore know more about in time of danger, but there is no exertion

their individualistic and community life than necessary on the part of the parent to find

we do of the corresponding phases of the food for her offspring. The only community

life of our nearer relatives, the mammals. life in such species is, as in reptiles, at the

Birds, however, for all their intelligence time of pairing. Then the males display

and display, are simply glorified lizards: their attractions, such as gaudy wings or

their gorgeous feathers are nothing but tail-feathers, before the gaze of the assem-

the overlapping horny scales of lizards with bled delighted females, and the most attrac-

the overlapping part greatly extended and tive males secure the largest following of

frayed out; their wings are merely the fore females, for the males in such species are

limbs and, in some primitive birds, still polygamous. Since they undertake no

carry claws. The beaks of the earliest responsibilities in rearing their families,

known birds were provided with rows of they can afford to have an indefinite number

teeth, and in these same birds there was a of offspring. In the case of the black-cock,

long tail like that of a lizard. When, how- there are in the breeding season regular

102 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

parade grounds, up and down which the the twigs, moss, and grass which it weaves

males march in order to show off their into its complicated nest.

points.

If we contrast birds with the animals

When we ascend above the level of the lower in the scale of structure, we find that

game birds we find the beginnings of rude the main difference consists in the enor-

nests. These may be in the case of the mously greater amount of energy which

penguins mere circles of stone; amongst birds devote to caring for their young and

storks they are rough platforms of sticks, feeding them after they are hatched. This

and the same is true of eagles, hawks, and introduces a style of home life which is com-

similar birds of prey. The nest of plovers, pletely wanting in the lower forms, and with

terns, sea-gulls, oyster-catchers, etc., may this goes a great increase in intelligence.

be a mere dimple in the beach; but however

rudimentary it is, the young stay in it after being hatched and are fed by the parents.

AVIAN LANDED PROPERTY

Where suitable ground for nesting is limi- Another peculiarity of birds is their great

ted, a great many pairs may make their powers of locomotion. These powers intro-

nests close together, and in this way verit- duce the factor of migration, for whilst some

able bird towns are built up. These species remain the year round in the same

settlements, however, are for the most part locality, this is the exception rather than

found amongst sea-birds: for these birds the rule. The year for many species is

find their food in the open sea where de- divided into two great periods, feeding time

limitation of territories is impossible and and rearing time. When the summer comes

supplies of food are practically unlimited: to an end and the next generation are suc-

if land birds were to build their nests close cessfully started in life, all-parents and

together, disputes might arise as to the children alike-take their flight to warmer

delimitation of hunting grounds.

climates where they can continue to feed

A stage above birds with such rudimen- during the winter. Even in the case of

tary nests is furnished by birds which live species which appear to remain all the year

in holes, such as our kingfishers, owls, wood- in the same place, it will often be found that

peckers, and chimney swifts. Here the they consist of Northern and Southern

protection afforded to the young is very strains, and that the Southern strains leave

much greater than in the case of plovers and our shores in the winter and are replaced by

terns, and the home is not so likely to be the Northern strain which comes south to

raided during the absence of the parents on our shores to pass the winter.

their hunting expeditions. The hornbill, During the winter feeding time, an almost

which is a large Asiatic bird with an enor- socialistic amity reigns between the mem-

mous bill, improves even on this arrange- bers of the same species. Except where

ment: the male imprisons the female in a food is unexpectedly scarce, they seem to

hole in a tree and closes the entrance by feed in flocks, and neighbour does not

daubing it with mud, leaving only a small attempt to snatch the food from neighbour.

hole through which he feeds his partner When, however, the species migrates to

during the time she is sitting on the eggs. the breeding grounds in the spring, the

Finally, in the case of the passerine or whole aspect of affairs changes. The males

perching birds we reach the highest level arrive first and each male immediately pro-

of bird-life. This order includes all our ceeds to seize a territory-in a word, to

singing birds and, in addition, swallows, possess himself of landed property. The

crows, jackdaws, and jays. In them the godwit, a sandpiper, flies round his estate

big toe functions as a thumb, its tendon starting from a fixed point and returning

being completely free from the tendons to it again; in fact, he beats the bounds.

which control the other toes, and so the bird When the available territory has been dis-

can use the foot as a hand in dealing with posed of, the unfortunate late arrivals try

HERD INSTINCT IN ANIMALS

I03

to infringe on the settled estate, and fierce LANGUAGE AND REASON

combats ensue, which last until one of the In the case of birds like woodpeckers,

two combatants is driven off. Then, a little which nest in holes also, the supply of suit-

later, the females arrive and each marriage- able holes is limited and violent contests for

able male early secures a mate. There does the possession of these holes may ensue. But

not appear to be amongst nest-building birds it would be a mistake to suppose that once

a contest amongst males to secure a particu- a pair of birds have settled down and are

lar female. Indeed, in many cases, when engaged in the task of rearing a family their

the females arrive and find a male estab- interests are necessarily entirely confined

lished, they may fight for the privilege of to themselves and their offspring. Where

being his wife.

many couples nest near each other, there is

The territory is a hunting ground, within a dawning sense of the community of inte-

which the happy pair can secure food not rests, which, after all, is the foundation of

only for themselves but for their prospective the modern State. If a cat discovers a

families. Once set up in life, pairing takes number of swallows' nests under the eaves of

place, nest-building follows, and then brood- a house and proceeds to raid one, not only

ing on the eggs and lastly, after these are the outraged couple but all their neighbours

hatched, the feeding of the young. Some- will raise a desperate outcry and unite in

times a bachelor male arrives even after mobbing and driving away the cat. If in

mating has been accomplished, and then a wood in which a colony of rooks are nest-

both partners, male and female, may com- ing, a hawk is descried, the rooks give a par-

bine to drive him out, but in most cases this ticular kind of cry which warns the whole

is effected by the male whilst the female sits colony. If they discover a fox or a cat

by awaiting the result.

stealing between the trees, they raise an-

The delimitation of hunting ground can other kind of cry and the colony is on the

be splendidly seen in some of our birds of alert to adopt the proper way of driving

prey as, for instance, in the wind-hover or away the intruder, so that the cries really are

kestrel hawk. These birds are instantly a rudimentary form of bird language.

recognizable by their peculiar hovering That great nineteenth-centur-y naturalist

flight, periodically interrupted by sudden Eimer gives a wonderful instance of this

swoops to the ground. As one walks along community spirit in one of his writings. He

the turf covering the tops of the cliffs around was desirous of obtaining a large number of

the Cornish coast, one sees a pair of wind- sparrows for purposes of dissection, and so he

hovers, or it may be only one. Then, a constructed a trap which he thought suitable

quarter of a mile further on, one encounters for the purpose. This consisted of a long

another pair, each pair keeping rigidly con- tunnel which bent at the end at a right

fined to its own beat. Sometimes the terri- angle so that the inner end which contained

tory coveted may be not so much a hunting the snare could not be seen from the outside.

ground as a suitable place for a nest. Seabirds, such as guillemots and razor bills,

The birds were induced to enter by a number of baits set along the length of the tun-

whose so-called nest may be a circle of nel and no bird that went to the end of the

stones or shells or even a suitable piece of tunnel ever escaped. The first year Eimer

bare rock, select the nesting place with great caught quite a large number of sparrows.

care, choosing ledges on inaccessible cliffs, or on skerries or barren islets far out to sea.

The second year he caught only seven, and those were all young birds, and the third

Here, naturally, ground is dear and eagerly sought after, and nests are built close to-

vear he caught none! He noticed during the second year that whenever a young bird

gether. Often fierce combats arise for the approached the opening of the tunnel the possession of these coveted building sites, older birds began to sound loudly the appro-

and on. combatant may be killed and pushed priate danger cry, and in most cases dis-

over the edge.

suaded the young one from entering.

104 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Numerous problems which lie outside the longed for a year, but there are few instances

scope of this paper are raised by this obser- of the parental care being prolonged after

vation. How did these older birds know this period is past.

that there was danger connected with the The lowest mammalia-the so-called Pro-
entry to the tunnel, seeing that they them- totheria, which include only the spiny ant-

selves had never been inside it? If they eater and the duck-billed mole-lay eggs

had watched their friends and neighbours with thin horny shells. The mother broods

during the first year disappear into the tun- on the eggs till they hatch, and after that

nel, and fail to return, and had deduced that an evil fate had befallen them, can we deny to them the glimmerings of reason?

suckles the young. duck-billed mole, she

In the remains

case of the
during this

period hidden away in a hole excavated in

MAMMALIAN BEGINNINGS

the bank of a river. The suckling period may last as long as six months.

When we leave the birds and approach the last class of vertebrata-the mammals, we reach the group to which anatomically the human race belongs. We emphasize the word " anatomically" because the difference in
intelligence between the highest ape and the lowest living race of mankind is so colossal that many, including Alfred Russell Wallace (who with Darwin put forward the theory of evolution by natural selection), have felt that we have here an instance of a real discontinuity due, as he put it, to a new " spiritual influx." Whatever may be our opinions on that subject, it is undoubtedly true that the vast majority of mammals are no more intelligent than birds; indeed, it might be said that most of them are not so intelligent as birds. Mammals, like birds, have been evolved from reptiles, but they branched off earlier than did birds, and their ancestors were a primitive grade of reptiles of which no living representatives survive. For, although the hair or fur so characteristic of all mammals is nothing but a modification of the horny overlapping scales of reptiles and is formed of the same material, yet mammals have retained a series of glands in the skin which keep it moist (as on a hot summer day we all know to our cost), and these glands correspond to the glands in the skin of amphibia.
All mammalia provide milk to feed their young after birth, and the milk is secreted by milk glands which are nothing but the enlarged oil glands such as are found at the bases of individual hairs. The suckling of the young involves a period of care for and protection of the young which may be pro-

In the next highest group of mammal, the

young are carried about by the mother after

birth forth

in a pouch. The alive, but they are

young are brought exceedingly small.

The new born baby of a 6-foot kangaroo,

for instance, is only about iS/ inches in

length. The whole process of parturition

has been followed in the case of the Virginian

opossum. The mother in this species has

sixteen nipples which, as in the case of the

other pouched mammals, are situated in the

pouch. She produces i8 young at a time,

but the tiny babies are no larger than

beetles, and as soon as they are born they scamper through the mother's fur to get into

the pouch. In this condition the mother,

so far from caring for them, regards them

merely as a nuisance, and sometimes

scratches them off with her toes. If, how-

ever, they escape this fate, each seizes hold

of a nipple and remains attached to it con-

tinuously are more

for some months. young than nipples

Since there some of the

young inevitably perish.

Maternal love awakes after the suckling

has begun. enough to

Even after the young are leave the pouch and to feed

old for

themselves, they return to it for some time for rest and shelter, so that a pouched ani-

mal
it. the

may be said to carry its nest about with The opossum lives in America, and is sole representative of the pouched mam-

mals there; but the cluding kangaroos,

rest of this wallabies,

group, inwombats,

native bears, phalangers, native cats, Tas-

manian wolves, etc., live in Australia and

the adjacent islands.

The highest grade of mammal bring forth

HERD INSTINCT IN ANIMALS

IoS

the young as comparatively large babies, As his sons grow up, however, this supre-

and nourish them by suckling. But the macy is disputed and sooner or later the old

size of the baby as compared with that of the male is driven away or at any rate reduced to.

mother varies with the number produced at a subordinate position,

a birth. The human baby at birth is i8 The association of these herds of animals

inches long-between one-third and one- is obviously a measure for mutual protec-

fourth as large as the mother. The rabbit tion. Their principal enemies are wolves

produces seven or eight young at a time and and animals of the cat tribe, such as lions,

these are not more than one-sixth of the tigers, leopards, etc. But these foes,

mother's length.

although they are always on the alert to,

The nature of the community life deve- destroy laggards and diseased animals, sel-

loped depends largely on the relative help- dom if ever make a direct frontal attack

lessness of the young at birth. In the great on the herd. A charge or stampede of a herd

group of the grazing animals-including of buffalo or of such deer as moose or caribow

horses, cattle, deer, sheep, and goats-the will trample in pieces the fiercest wolf.

young are born at an advanced stage of

development and are able to run about HEALTH AND NATURAL SELECTION

almost immediately after birth. As soon The Swiss Government established a

as suckling is finished they have no diffi- national park in which chamois were pre-

culty in finding food which is everywhere served, and from which they excluded all

spread around them; but in the group of the carnivorous animals. As a result, the herd

flesh-eating animals such as cats, dogs, and of chamois became diseased. They then

bears, the mother, and sometimes both introduced a certain number of wolves, and

parents, must teach their children to catch the herd improved in health, since the

prey and at first procure it for them and weak and diseased members were wiped out

bring it home to them.

and no longer mated with the healthy.

In the first instance, we find that usually The herd instinct-as everyone knows-is.

only one and in any case not more than two also exhibited by wolves, and, of course, in

are born at a time, whilst in the second case this case it is a combination to enable them

the family may be as large as seven or eight. to master large prey which a single wolf

In the first case we find that there is a kind could not tackle. Nevertheless, in the breed-

of socialistic herd; in the second case there ing season every female has her own mate,

is necessarily a den or home and some kind and whilst she is suckling her young and for

of family life. The socialistic herd is neces- some time afterwards she has her den which

sary for mutual protection and especially for is her home, and her mate hunts for her and

the protection of the young. The young in brings home prey for her alone.

their helpless state are the natural objects of These dens-and also the holes of the bur-

attack by wolves and bears. When a herd rowing animals, such as rabbits, rats, andT

of North American buffalo is threatened mice-correspond in a general way to the

with a wolf attack, the adult cows put the nests of birds, but inasmuch as the majority

calves in the centre and walk round and of mammals have paws and not hands or feet

round them so long as the wolves are in like those of the perching birds, there is

sight, so that these never get a chance of little or no architectural skill displayed in

attack. Of course the most efficient defen- their construction. Nevertheless, the polar

ders are the males, which are especially bear, when about to bring forth her young,

armed with horns and tusks; but the social scoops a hole in the snow which she lines.

conditions within these herds are arranged with her own fur, and in this retreat, which

so that there is usually only one powerful soon becomes cosy and warm, the young are

male in each herd, which may be regarded as sheltered till they can hunt for themselves.

his polygamous family, for this male brooks Polar bear cubs born in a cool damp room-

no competitors in his relations with the cows. as we know from sad experience in the Zoo-

io6 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

logical Gardens-soon die of pneumonia. raid, when it comes to raising a family they

The domestic mouse constructs for itself a seem to be strictly monogamous and indivi-

nest under the flooring, which it lines with dualistic. Our herd in the Zoological Gar-

torn up paper.

dens originally included 6i males and nine

HERD SPIRIT IN MONKEYS

females. The nine females were promptly appropriated by nine of the strongest males

Leaving, however, the three great groups -no male took more than one female-and

of the grazing, flesh-eating, and burrowing for some time married life proceeded

mammals, we come at last to the group smoothly, and comparative peace reigned on

of the tree-climbing mammals or monkeys, the hill. Then one of the males who was

which are anatomically most closely allied to happily married died, and his unfortunate

man. Here we find the fore-limb terminated widow was at once set on by about six other

by a hand which is capable of grasping males and was literally torn in pieces in the

objects, and here too we find in some cases conflict for her possession, which arose be-

an approach to the bird's skill in building a tween them. The sympathetic Council of

nest. But unfortunately monkeys are a the Zoological Society decreed that the in-

tropical group of animals; they have not equality in numbers of the sexes must be

attracted to themselves the attention of that remedied. So 36 females were imported and,

*crowd of devoted amateurs who have studied after resting in quarantine for a few days,

the ways of birds, and their home life is were introduced to the hill in the dawn of a

difficult-not to say dangerous-to observe, summer morning. Nothing happened for

so that our knowledge is really very scanty. some hours and then the most tremendous

Nevertheless, a little is known; we have uproar and conflict occurred and five females

'kept for several years a herd of baboon and thirteen males were killed, after which

on the mass of artificial rocks known as the things settled down, and peace again reigned

Monkey Hill in the Zoological Gardens. on the hill.

Tfhe baboon is, however, an exceptional mon- The chimpanzee and the gorilla divide

key in that it has given up climbing on trees between them the honour of being most

and lives in holes in rocks. It walks, in nearly allied (anatomically) to man, and a

consequence, on all fours. The baboons good deal is known about their habits.

hunt in troops: they often raid gardens and Kohier kept a small group of chimpanzees

they are most dangerous animals to en- in captivity in Teneriffe for seven years, and

counter. Recently in West Africa a native studied their habits minutely, and he has

farmer, defending his plots, was torn in recorded his impressions in a book that will

pieces by them. The jaws, powerful in become a classic, entitled The Mind of the

.all monkeys, are especially so in the Ape. The chimpanzees did not breed, so

baboons, where they are prolonged into a that he learned nothing of their relations dog-like muzzle. The troops hunt under a to their young; but he says that a chimpan-

leader and, if one of them is injured, the zee separated from its companions is not a

others come to its assistance. A case is true chimpanzee, and when one chimpanzee

recorded where one member of the troop had been struck down by a leopard. Instead of

was attacked the others flew to its assistance even when the attacker was a big

running away, the rest of the troop sur- human.

rounded the leopard snarling at him with About the gorilla more is known. The

menacing jaws, and the frightened animal retreated, abandoning its prey. Then two powerful male baboons swooped down, seized their wounded comrade by the arms

gorillas move about in family parties consisting of a male with a female and young, and several family parties may be associated together. The female and young are sent

and bore him away to a place of safety.
Nevertheless, although the herd spirit is

up into the trees to sleep whilst the male keeps guard at the foot. The male, indeed,

strong when the baboons are organizing a has ceased to be able to climb trees and

HERD INSTINCT IN ANIMALS

walks on the ground with a limping gait. Early man differed from the gorilla in the

Both sexes construct beds for themselves by type of food which he sought, for whereas

weaving together interlacing boughs, but the both gorillas and chimpanzees live on vege-

families are continually on the move so that tables, early man was a game hunter.

the beds are usually occupied only for a Therefore, since the prey was obtained by

night or two. The great man-like apes of the exertions of all, a just and equable share-

Malaya-the ourang-outang, also live in out of the proceeds was natural. Since,

family groups. They are rather more moreover, the successful prosecution of hunt

remote in structure from Man than is the by organisms not so swift as the hunted

gorilla, and keep more constantly to the required forethought and guile, obedience

trees. They construct nests or " plat- to a wise leader was essential.

forms " of branches, and on these the whole

family lives. A male belonging to the Zoological Society escaped some years ago and

THE TOOL-MAKING FACULTY

was at large for a whole night, but it was The evolution of a leader had already be-

eventually tempted back to its cage. It had gun among the higher mammals. The North

taken refuge in the trees in Regent's Park, American Indians maintain that when herds

and had already constructed a typical plat- of deer and buffalo migrate south at the

form there.

approach of winter, and for this purpose

Our survey of the herd instincts of the have to cross frozen rivers, they are led by

higher vertebrata is now finished, and we an old male of exceptional strength and cun-

may now ask what light they throw on ning. We have already seen that the troops

human conditions. It is clear that animals of baboons follow a leader. If we search

of the same species may live together in for a mark of humanity, other than their

comparative amity when food is abundant flesh-eating propensities, which discrimi-

and easily obtained, and when there is no nates them from their nearest animal rela-

question of marriage or the bringing up of a tives, we find it in their capacity to make

family. Even then the amity is comparative and use tools. There is a great deal to be said

only, and the individuals scatter over the for Bergson's view that reason is fundamen-

feeding ground, not interfering too much tally a tool-making faculty, and grew pari

with each other; but as soon as food becomes passu with increasing skill in producing

scarce the stronger drive away the weaker- tools. To combine families in a tribe and

and for the good of the species this is as it to have the tribe governed by old men of

should be, for only the stronger are fit to long experience and skill was the first great

carry on the race. When reproduction inter- " conquest of culture " over the purely

venes, a fierce individualism breaks out and animal urges of primitive man.

the parents fight fiercely for their families. The development of a hunting community

The ablest parents rear the strongest and into a pastoral community and further into

most numerous children-and this, again, is an agricultural one may have been largely

as it should be, for in this way the next the work of women. When the males

generation is strengthened. It was left for were absent on the chase, the females had

modern civilization to evolve the suicidal to stay behind to care for the young. When

idea of fostering the families of the less able the hunters occasionally brought home the

and more reckless members of the com- young of the slaughtered animals, the

munity by plundering the resources of the maternal instinct of the women may have

families of the thrifty and competent.

induced them to rear them, and these home-

Primitive man-from all the evidence at bred animals became a valuable source of

*our disposal-was a nomad ranging from food when the chase failed. Similarly, the

place to place in his endeavours to gather seeds of grass plants growing near the camp

food. For this purpose, just as in gorillas, in richly manured soil were also seized on

several families were organized into a tribe. to stave off the pangs of hunger; and as this

io8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

source became more and more propitious them, and the history of Egypt is largely

primitive agriculture was born-the protect- an account of the wars necessary to ward

ing deity of the crops is in primitive religion off these raiders.

always a woman.

So long as mankind were always on PRIVATE PROPERTY AND THE FAMILY

the move, property consisted only in what The history of civilization is, for the most

could be carried about, and was therefore part, the history of the efforts to protect

small in amount. Agriculture brought a private property.

more settled life; but in primitive agri- The primary desire to accumulate pro-

culture a portion of forest is burnt down; perty is due to the impulse to provide for the

the soil, fertilized by the ashes of the con- family, and to secure them against disaster.

flagration, is thoroughly exploited for some This impulse is strongly developed in the

years till it is exhausted, and then the tribe passerine birds, as we have seen. The

moves on into a new section of forest. This family is, therefore, the great force which

is the condition of agriculture in Africa to- opposes the advance of disaster; and it is

day. But in the course of his wanderings to be regretted that certain peoples have

primitive man reached the valley of the made the desperate attempt to abolish mar-

Nile-and here, owing to the continually riage and the family altogether. The

renewed fertility of the soil, produced by deep-rooted instincts of their own peasants

the annual inundation, he was enabled to have frustrated the full execution of this

stay on in the same place and to accumulate purpose, but they have done unspeakable property. This is the beginning of real harm. The children, separated from their

civilization and culture, and it was at parents, have degenerated almost into ani-

once evident that it was -utterly unjust mals, large numbers have died, and the sur-

to allow the lazy and incompetent farmer
to live at the expense of the thrifty
one, so private property in land grew up and with it the science of mathe-
matics, for geometry means simply measurement of land, and originated in Egypt. The priesthood of the sun, which laid the foundations of the Egyptian religion, originated in the setting apart of a group of wise men whose duty it was to predict from

vivors constitute packs of wolfish half-
starved savages, whose dreadful appearance has shocked all observers.
The establishment and perpetuation of a
healthy family-this seems to be the goal
towards which all evolution so far has
striven, and mankind will advance only in proportion as this goal is kept steadily in view. This goal is the avowed aim of the

astronomical observations the onset of the Eugenics Society, and it has the highest

annual inundation.

possible sanction, for did not St. Paul say:

As soon as any group of people such as " He that provideth not for his own, espe-

the Egyptians began to accumulate pro- cially for those of his own household, hath

perty, they became the target for the attacks denied the Faith and is worse than an

of the half-starving nomad tribes around infidel."

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXI, No. 2.

