POPULATION CONTROL

Dr. Binnie Dunlop's Addrss to the Eugenics Society

AT the rooms of the linnean Society, majority of couples desired at least one child

Burlington House, on October 29th, of each sex, which brought more than two

Dr. Binnie Dunlop read a paper children into many homes; and thirdly,

entitled " Eugenics, Present and Future " to because the proportion of Roman Catholics

a members' meeting of the Eugenics Society. Sir Humphry Rolleston, President of the
Eugenics Sociy, was in the .
If, said Dr. Dunlop, in a population or in

in the poorest section would presumably have increased greatly. In view of these three factors we should not expect much from eugenic education or, if the social system

a section of a population, no woman had
more than two confinenents, that population or that section of the population would decline in numbers. This fact showed that

continued to be a capitalistic one, from the poorest couples having very sm falhlies in order to approximate their standard of living to that of the richer couples. There-

eugenists could advocate moderate policies. For example, if it were indeed the case that

fore it would seem that legislation would
ultimately be needed to ensure the main-

voluntary steriliztion could not become tenance of eugenic selection and a high

widely available without an Act of Parlia- standard of living, more especially if social-

ment, all that was needed in the long run ism came. So why, asked the speaker, not

for eugenics was that the operation should have legislation now?

be made legal for any person with two The fact given at the outset suggested two

children.

legislative possibilities-based on making

It was doubtful, however, if sterilization voluntary sterilization and abortion available

would become more popular than the usual contraceptive methods and thus appreciably

to any person with two children. Firstly, there might be a law that no woman should

hasten the decline of the relatively high have more than two confinements without

birth-rate of the poorest third of the popula- an official permit-granted, say, by a local

tion. But this birth-rate-and the serious population committee and a national one. It

rate of racial detenoration which it implied, could be enforced if a strong majority of the

although there were many eugenic couples voters so wished, and it would enable the

in this section-would fall rapidly if artificial State to control the quantity and the quality

abortion were made legal for any woman of the population. Secondly, there might be

with two children. This, or a bigger reform a law forbidding any woman in the poorest

of the law of abortion, would certainly be third of the nation to have more than two

enforced by public opinon within twenty confinements. It would fix attention upon

years, and thereafter the natality of the what is and always wil be, whatever the

poorest third would fall quickly. But even scial system, the fundalmental eugenic need;

if it did fall below the replacement birth-rate it would ensure a very high standard of living

level, as was needed, would it remain below for all; it would show other countries the

that level ? Doubt arose, first, because this complete birth control would ultimately

way to prosperity and race improvement; and it would be a fitting answer to the

eliminate poverty, gross degeneracy, and Casti Connubii encyclical of January 1931,

the stocks whose women dreaded child-birth which enjoined Roman Catholics to obstruct

or were not philoprogenitive-in other words, the birth-control means and eugenic doc-

would ultimately make all rich enough, fit enough and wiling enough to have three or more children; secondly, because the

trines whereby man can improve his standard of living and the quality of his race. It would be an injustice to the genetically well-

251

252 2HE EUGENICS REVIEW

endowed couples in the poorest third, but other sections (or gdes) oud have more

the children in these cases would rise into than two confinements without an official

the higher sections. The two ideas might well be combined
thus: No woman in the poorest third (or,
under socialismn, in the lowest grades) of the
nation should be allowed to have more thn

permit. Whatever the scial system might be, said Dr. Dunlop, conditions essential for
the mtenance of a high standard of living were a low birth-rate, eugenic selection, and

two confinements, and no woman in the a self-regarding incentive to effort.

The Society of Genealogists

Has an unrivalled collecton of data, including an index of ovcr two miilion slips relating to Births, Marriages, Wis, , etc. The Society has also a Library of over io,ooo volumes, induding
typescripts and MSS. of Parish registcrs not to be found else-
wherc. The Genealogists' MagaCtixe, the official org of the
Society, is published quarterly and is frec to Members. The rooms can be used for Research purposcs from io-6 daily, induding Saturdays. A prospectus giving the objects of the
Socicty will be sent free on application, or the Secretay will be plcased to show the Society's Collections to anyone interested.

TelAphon Museum 8760.

Apply to the Srtauy,

The So&ay
Chaucer

oHfouGseen,eaMlaoCtistP,lace,

London, W.C.x

Ungomio Review, VOL 1KV. No.4

