D. T. HUGHES
B.Sc., Ph.D., The Chester Beatty Research Institute, London
Some Fundamental Considerations
in Human Population Cytogenetics
D URING THE PAST six years another animal species. But it was not until 1956 that the aspect of genetics, namely cytogenetics, normal basic chromosome number of Man was has joined other disciplines, such as bio- first found to be 46, as a result of work by Tjio
metrical and biochemical genetics, in making a and Levan in Sweden on somatic cells in tissue culcontribution to our knowledge of human popu- ture and confirmation by Ford and Hamerton at lations. The present communication is concerned Harwell, England, in their studies of male germ with outlining the basis ofthe data which is being cells (testis). Then in 1957 Kodani, inJapan, found collected, its interpretation and implications. chromosome numbers of 46, 47 and 48 in germ
Cytogenetics is the study of inheritance in cells. Subsequently a study of somatic chromodirect relation with its structural basis in the cell. somes in a Japanese population, by Makino Much evidence has now accumulated to indicate and Sasaki (1961), revealed a normal chromothat the nucleus controls the hereditary pattern some number of 46 like that observed in all other of higher animal and plant cells. In some micro- human populations since 1956, suggesting that if organisms the cytoplasm, which forms the there are extra chromosomes, supernumerary to extranuclear jelly-like matrix of the cell, controls the basic complement then their occurrence may certain aspects of heredity that are independent be restricted to the germ line cells (Stern, 1959). of the nucleus. However, so far there is no evi- These advances in our knowledge ofthe structural dence for cytoplasmically controlled aspects of basis of human heredity were made possible only inheritance in Man. So we are primarily con- as a result of innovations in technique (Ford, cerned with the chromosomes which are the 1961) that enabled workers to spread a relatively major component of the nucleus, and can be large number of chromosomes for counting observed clearly when a cell undergoes a division. clearly. Subsequent observations on chromoThe role of the chromosomes, as the mechanism some morphology enabled a study group at controlling the potentiality for various genetical Denver in America in 1959 to publish (Puck characters and conveying this potentiality from 1960) a tentative classification of 23 chromosome one generation to the next, was first realised by pairs, on the basis of their morphology. This has Sutton in 1903 in America and Boveri in 1904 in been followed by rapid advances in certain Germany after it was found that halfthe chromo- aspects of clinical medicine such as the role ofthe somes of an individual are derived from each chromosomes in sexual abnormalities (Ford parent. Sutton observed that each chromosome 196 lb). Further work over a wide field is revolucould pair with one other with which it was tionizing our understanding of the causes of linearly homologous. Sutton and Boveri studied many diseases, by revealing the role of heredity. plant and animal species with a low number of Since the study of human chromosomes has chromosomes so that no major technical diffi- marked a new era in some aspects of medicine, culties were encountered in spreading the let us hope that the implications of these studies chromosomes for observation. The Sutton- will be applied even further in Society. Thus it Boveri chromosomal theory of inheritance was would, perhaps, have a desirable effect in improvvindicated by work on numerous plant and ing relations between various populations if it
205
THE EUGENICS REVIEW, January 1963, 54, 4.
ER-D

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

became generally realized that we are all mem- service of medical practice is taking into con-

bers of the same species, allowing our separation sideration the individual's karyotype and where

into different geographical or racial groups to a distinct chromosomal anomaly is associated

assume a secondary importance, as is the situ- with a clinical condition an unaffected "carrier"

ation biologically.

may be advised about the chances of producing

abnormal progeny. This eugenic service is being

Present Trends in the Application of Chromosome limited by inadequate means of identifying

Studies

abnormal chromosomes unless the aberrations

Most research is being directed towards further in chromosome structure are large. Further elucidation of the nature of many inherited technical advances beyond the limits of chromodiseases to determine whether there is a gross some morphology will reduce present restrictions chromosomal abnormality (in number or struc- in identifying carriers of abnormal chromosomes.

ture). In addition, the chromosome complements (karyotypes) of families including patients

Future Applications

with aberrations of some of their somatic cells, Huxley (1959) has aroused discussion concerning

as in leukemia and other forms of cancer, are Man's place in nature and his destiny. He sug-

being studied in the hope of distinguishing gests that since man has now entered the

those karyotypes associated with a hereditary "psycho-social phase" of evolution he is in a

predisposition to develop cancer (Baikie et al. position where he can control evolution of man

1961). Since most studies during the last six and other species, which is an extension of

years have been on medical populations it is Galton's aim of replacing natural selection by

questionable whether there is adequate control artificial selection, but on a larger scale. Huxley

data on the normal range of variation of the made a laudable plea for the creation of a new

karyotype. Studies on normal chromosome scientific discipline "Psychosocial Science" to

variation have been reviewed by Hamerton et cope with the need for objective assessment of

al. (1962) including variation in chromosome Man's resources and knowledge of Man's

morphology, and numbers of chromosomes in evolutionary potentialities and how to direct

relation to age. However no studies have been them. Cytogenetics can make a fundamental

reported on any chromosome variation in details contribution in this field.

of morphology in relation to differentiation of In order to put the control of evolution into

tissues in the body. This may be important since practice more knowledge about the mechanism

it is a common practice to compare karyotypes and range of variation in Man is needed. When

between individuals when the chromosomes are maps of the gene sequence on human chromo-

studied in different tissues.

somes have been obtained (by relating the linkage

Since the finding of changes in the amount of of genes in heredity with chromosome structure),

the enzyme alkaline phosphatase (associated they may possibly serve as a guide for the con-

with protein synthesis) in cells of chronic myeloid trolled production of mutations in any desired

leukaemia, there is some speculation as to direction: reversing deleterious ones back to

whether the blood group genes are situated on normal or inducing new mutations to meet

the linkage group of chromosome 21 or chromo- environmental stresses as they arise. These aims

some 22. Work is proceeding on this question. are considered desirable by many geneticists,

The location of the ABO blood group genes may including Dobzhansky (1961) and Carter (1962).

possibly give us the first definite beginning in But before we can reach this exalted situation it

mapping the autosomes (chromosomes other is necessary to consider some fundamental

than sex chromosomes). In addition, metabolic aspects of our present knowledge and the next

anomalies at the cellular level (Lathe 1961) are steps in advancing it.

being studied in tissue culture (Westgale 1961) and

may be related to the chromosomes when a Variation: the Contributions of Heredity and

chromosomal anomaly is also involved.

Environment

On a social level, the heredity counselling At the time that Darwin discovered the role of

2o6

SOME FUNDAMENTAL CONSIDERATIONS IN HUMAN POPULATION CYTOGENETICS
natural selection in evolution as a result of his expressing Johannsen's concept in terms of studies on variation (on the paleontological, present knowledge: morphological, embryological and biogeographical levels), the mechanism of heredity was Factors Affecting Variation in Man
not known and so he was not able to distinguish In Figure 1 an attempt has been made to reprethe exact role of the environment on variations sent, diagrammatically, the salient features ofthe within a species. Darwin's counsin, Galton, in environment that affect the needs of human 1875, was the first to attempt to determine the genotypes and their phenotypic expression. roles of heredity and environment in variation by Human populations around the world live studying identical and non-identical twins in under a range of environmental variations inman in various environments, the difference cluding extremes of temperature, humidity between heredity and environment being then amounts of light and types of food. As a result of referred to as "nature" and "nurture." However, natural selection in the past we have varieties of it was Johannsen (1911), a Swedish plant man now living in environments to which they breeder, who determined the exact extent of have bodily advantages, for example the Eskimo heredity versus environment, in the inheritance populations of the Arctic and the Negroes in the of a single quantitative character. He studied Tropics. They have evolved in relation to their "pure lines" of beans obtained by self-fertiliza- environments, becoming more genetically stable tion from single plants so that each line had a to these regions by selection operating on their uniform heredity distinctly different from other genetical systems (Darlington 1958). Thus there lines. His experiments demonstrated that varia- is a limitation in the size of populations within tion within the "pure lines" was due to environ- which genetic variation may be studied owing to ment and that differences between the "pure the extent of environmental variation. Ideally the lines" were due to heredity, providing the first size of population studied should be limited to a evidence that hereditary variation is distinct group experiencing similar environmental condifrom environmental variation. (We may recall tions. that Darwin thought that all variation was Genetical variation is dependent on the inherent in an organism's heredity, but changing reassortment and segregation of genes in the in time, in response to environment.) Johannsen germ cells during meiotic "reduction" division (1911) followed his experiments by clear defini- (meiosis). The monk, Mendel, not only distions depicting his observations. He named covered the first laws of heredity whereby genes Mendel's hereditary factors, the "genes", and are reassorted into different combinations in the called the hereditary constitution the "geno- transfer from one generation to the next, but he type": the type which creates. The product of the also discovered that the genes are carried in only reaction between genotype and environment was one cell from each parent. (He observed that one designated the "phenotype": the type which is pollen grain could effect fertilization and lead to seen. It followed that three types of phenotypic the formation of one seed.) The process of germ variation could be distinguished: (a) genotypic cell formation (meiosis) is now known to involve differences not known to be influenced by exchange of chromosome parts between each
environment in their expression, such as eye member of most chromosome pairs (called colour and blood groups of man; (b) environ- "crossing over" or chiasma) so that each mentally induced differences, independent of chromosome obtains a potentiality for a different
heredity, such as certain cultural characteristics; combination of genes. Then only one chromo(c) differences due to a combination of both some out of each pair enters a germ cell to give heredity and environment such as height and a total of 23 chromosomes in each germ cell in weight. The third group is the most difficult to Man. The somatic number of chromosomes, 46, decipher, so that even to-day we have not is reasserted on fusion of the nuclei from two conquered the problem of distinction between germ cells at fertilization. The type of genetic heredity and environment at all levels of observa- variation (outlined above) involving reassorttion in human heredity. It therefore seems worth ment of existing genes is described as
207

UGHT and other forms of radiation
4I

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

AIR
C021c 02

TEMPERATURE

GENOTYPES
found in the world's population of Homo sapiens
represented in terms of their chromosomal phenotypes: -

Male 44+ XY

NORMAL

Female 44+ XX

ABNORMAL involving aberrations of chromosome number and (or) structure

CO-OPERATION with other genotypes
(of the same species and
and species of other genera)
v as individuals,
COMPETITION (orcgoamnmiusnaittiioenss.or as

Sex chromosomes
e.g. XO XXY XXX XXXY

Autosomes
e. g. trisomy
cchhrroommoossoommee 2117 (or 18?)
translocation e.g. chromosome 15/21

translocation with an autosome
Chromosome mosaics

I Plants NUTRIENTS Animals
Minerals

WATER

EGESTION
EXCRETION of waste products of metabolism

FIG. 1. AN OUTLINE OF THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN MAN AND THE ENVIRONMENT

"continuous" variation. The other kind of genetic variation is the "discontinuous" type, called "mutation" by De Vries in 1890. He defined it as an abrupt change in heredity not ascribable to
segregation or recombination. Examples of the range of genotypes, so far found in human
populations are summarized in Figure 1. They are represented in terms of their chromosomes according to the nomenclature proposed by the Denver group in America (Puck 1960). Details of the cases with abnormal karyotypes, involving chromosome mutations, have been reviewed by Hamerton et al. (1962). There is some speculation regarding the cause of the chromosome mutations but owing to the impossibility of confirmatory experimental evidence they may be regarded as due to adverse environmental factors affecting germ cell formation, or due to an unbalanced

combination of genes affecting germ cell formation or cell division during embryological development.
The influence of some environmental factors on genetic variation has been determined experimentally, especially in experimental systems such as the fruit fly (Drosophila) and mice. On the level of biochemical genetics, studies with fungi such as Neurospora and Aspergillus have been quite informative. Thus the ultraviolet part of the light spectrum can induce mutations of microorganisms but not of the germ cells of mammals. But mammalian skin cells can be induced to mutate into cancer cells. In man the latter type of mutation can only affect the genes in a population indirectly if it eliminates a genotype before reproduction. Thus albinos are prone to cancer development in tropical coun-

208

SOME FUNDAMENTAL CONSIDERATIONS IN HUMAN POPULATION CYTOGENETICS

tries. Other forms of irradiation such as X-rays human cell being subjected to cytogenetical an-

and shorter wavelengths can induce mutation of alysis. The number of factors necessary for the

mammalian germ cells even to the extent of ab- growth and division ofa human cell in culture can

normal chromosome numbers and chromosome be defined. Figure 2 shows a simplified represent-

breakage. Temperature is another factor directly ation of the environment of a cultured human

affecting genetical variation ofboth "continuous" cell. It shows a marked reduction in the categor-

and "discontinuous" types. The frequency of ies of environmental factors outlined in Figure I

chiasma formation (structural crossing over) and has the advantage of experimental control.

between chromosome pairs at meiosis has been

TEMPERATURE

found to be affected by environmental tempera-

(controlled by an incubator at 37 + * 50C)

tures (White 1954). Mammals may find it

difficult to regulate their own temperature when

_1

that of the environment is well outside their

AIR

inherited thermotactic optimum (Gruineberg

1952). In view of these observations one may

Oxygen

Humidity

Carbon dioxide

expect more "continuous" genetical variation

in groups that have migrated from one climate

to another in which their genetical system has

| ~ |-

-_ CULTURE

MEDIUM__

--

not been stabilized by selection. In this con-

nection a comparison of the chiasma frequency

of West Indians in their natural habitat with the ._ Dissolved Oxygen

- Carbonic Acid - --

chiasma frequency of those that have migrated

to Britain would be interesting. But since it is not practicable to obtain samples of adult gonad we are limited to observations on their pheno-

- NUTRIENTS - Serum -Amino Acids -Sugar

(

WATER -

PRODUCTS OF METABOlsm

typic variation and somatic chromosomes. - Vitamins 2 Changes in temperature also affect the gene -MineralSalts

mutation rate. Some genes mutate at a low rate

in the environment to which a genotype is becoming stabilized, increasing or decreasing

".GNOTY P

the mutation rate when the organism is placed

at another temperature (Dobzhansky 1951).

Under conditions of civilization man is subject

LIGHT

to other factors besides the main factors in

during observation with a microscope

Figure 1. Notable examples are preservatives

;nd in subculturing.

in our stored food, drugs used in medicine and in our drinks. These chemicals may be mutagenic.

FIG. 2. MAIN FACTORS OF THE ENVIRONMENT IN RELATION TO THE CULTURED CELL UNDER EXPERIMENTAL

In fact caffeine which is particularly high in

CONDITIONS

strong black coffee has been demonstrated to be Unless genotypes are compared in the same or

capable of inducing mutations in experimental similarstandardcontrolled environment, observa-

systems (Novick 1955).

tions on the chromosomes must be regarded with

When confronted with a bewildering array of caution in case of phenotypic variation although

environmental variations contributing to the variation in some environmental factors may

human phenotype and probably capable of have no immediately observable effect on

changing the human genotype, it seems very de- chromosome morphology. Besides, although

sirable to be able to compare genotypes in a stan- chromosomes are known to represent the major

dard environment or in a range of controlled part of the physical basis of inheritance no one

environments. Recent developments in tissue cul- can claim to see the genes on them, not even in

turing technique have made it possible to reduce the structure of the giant salivary gland chromo-

the number of factors affecting the genotype of a somes of Drosophila, which are the largest

209,

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

chromosomes ever found. Both the "gene" and variation between the morphology of chromo-

the "genotype" are genetical concepts and the somes, between laboratories, was found within

elucidation of their structural basis requires the nomenclature groups, which may be due to

further research on several levels of observation differences in technique. Thus the identity of the

including biochemistry, cytochemistry and cell X sex chromosome was based on entirely differ-

morphology. It is not surprising that chromo- entchromosome measurements ineach laboratory

some morphology and chemistry are not always contributing to the Denver nomenclature. In

a direct reflection of the genotype when it is view of possible variations due to technique,

realized that chromosomes respond to changes Patau's (1961) suggestion of classifying the

in cell physiology, since they are a part of the human chromosomes into eight main groups,

dynamic system controlling the physiological without attempting to identify all the chromo-

potentiality of a cell. It is therefore safer to somes by their morphology, seems more

regard chromosome observation as a study of practicable when comparing karyotypes obtained

phenotype at the subcellular level.

by different techniques.

Factors Contributing to the Chromosomal

In order to determine the extent of phenotypic variability of human chromosomes it is desirable

Phenotype

to replace the art of chromosome preparation by

Present techniques, in clinical medicine, for pre- a scientific definition of the variables involved.

paring human chromosomes for analysis are so If it is necessary to have variables, their effects, if

varied that the making of good chromosome any, should be determined. Figure 3 summarizes

preparations has been described as an art (Ford technical factors of the environment that may

1961a). Yet under these circumstances the main contribute to the chromosome phenotype. Apart

characteristics of the human karyotype in terms from the direct examination of chromosomes in

of measurements of chromosome morphology, bone marrow biopsies all other methods require

observed in a number of laboratories, with dividing cells in tissue culture. Factors of the

differences in technique, is similar (Puck et al. culturing environment have to be carefully regu-

1960). The number and size of chromosomes lated in order to avoid the occurrence of somatic

forming the main groups of the Denver system of mutations due to environmental factors to

nomenclature is thus characteristic of normal which the genotype of a cell is unstable. For

individuals of the human species. However, example, if the tissue culturing medium (for

FACTORS AFFECTING THE PURE CULTURE OF CELLS (outlined in Fig. 2)

ANTIMITOTIC DRUGS
for arresting chromosomes at a stage suitable Ior analysis: colchicine. colcemid or vincaleucoblastine Their effect varies with concentraUon
and duraUon of treatment

I
CHROMOSOMAL
PHENOTYPE

HYPOTONIC TREATMENT
to swell cells and spread chromosomes hefore fixation The effect varies with concentraUon and duration of treatment.

METHOD OF CELL SEPARATION from the culture vessel and from one another (as in subculturing)
(a) Mechanical: scraping and pipetting (b) Chemical
(i) Enzymes: trypsin or collagenase (ii) Versene

PHYSICO-CHEMICAL STATE OF THE CELL
I(a) living (b) Dead: structure preserved by various fixation methods

METHOD OF PREPARATION
(of fixed cells) FOR OBSERVATION
(a) Squashing or air drying of cells
to obtain chromosomes in one optical plane
Stini
(ci Slide Mountant (d} Optical system used for observation

.210

FIG. 3. ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS CONTRIBUTING TO THE CHROMOSOMAL PHENOTYPE

SOME FUNDAMENTAL CONSIDERATIONS IN HUMAN POPULATION CYTOGENETICS

cultures of solid tissues such as skin) is not apparently attached by a thin stalk or appar-

changed frequently enough then the products of ently unattached) and secondary constrictions of

the cells' own metabolism can damage their human chromosomes (reviewed by Miller, et al.

genotype and result in abnormal karyotypes. In 1962). Both these features have been observed to

addition it is conceivable that since the physio- vary within a population of cells from one

logical activity of a cell, in culture, is dependent individual, between individuals and between

on the constituents of the culture medium, the studies conducted in different laboratories!

chemical pattern (phenotype) of the chromo- Since the satellites are probably concerned with

somes may depend on which aspects of their nucleolus organization (and hence protein

potentiality are being involved. Thus Sasaki synthesis) it is likely that the frequency with

(1961) has demonstrated experimentally that the which they are observed is influenced by the

relative lengths and arm ratios of human physiological state of individual cells during

chromosomes are affected by the use of an anti- their division cycle and also in relation to their

mitotic drug to arrest cell division for chromo- culture environment. The occurrence of second-

some observation. This produces a definite ary constrictions is also probably influenced by

phenotypic variation in chromosome morphology cell physiology since the present author has

so that caution is needed in comparing details of induced secondary constrictions of some chromo-

length and chromosome arm ratio in karyotypes somes by means of cold temperature treatments

obtained without an antimitotic drug with those of cultured cells.

influenced to various extents by such a drug. Also, care is needed in the use of enzymes for Mapping of the Chromosomes

cell separation during transplantation of cells Numerous possibilities would be open to us if we

from one vessel to another, in culture, since had complete structural maps of the chromo-

excessive exposure to trypsin is known to cause somes indicating the positions and sequences of

chromosome breakage. Versene, a chemical also chromosome parts responsible for the genes.

used for cell separation can also cause somatic Thus it could indicate the direction of evolu-

mutation and its use has been discontinued in tionary changes in genotypes of human popula-

most laboratories carrying out cytogenetical tions. It is perhaps a sobering thought to be

analysis of human cells. Then, hypotonic treat- reminded that the human species probably

ment to swell the cells may be responsible for evolved from lower primates only about 100,000

varying degrees of chromosome uncoiling and years ago (a relatively short time on the geologic-

the appearance of secondary constrictions al time scale) and we cannot be absolutely con-

(regions ofthe chromosomes that do not stain or fident that our present genetic structure will not

only do so faintly) according to the concentration change. But unlike other species, Homo sapiens

ofthe hypotonic solution, duration and tempera- may be able to make a conscious contribution to

ture of treatment. These factors vary from maintaining its genetic structure, or directing

laboratory to laboratory. Thus some laborator- evolutionary development, by utilising know-

ies give hypotonic treatments at room tempera- ledge of genotype-environment interactions. In

ture (another variable item) and others at 370 C. addition, therapy of diseases having a genetic

Since it has not yet been found possible to obtain component, such as cancer could be helped by

clear observations of human chromosomes in identifying which genotypes respond to particu-

one optical plane in living cells all analysis is lar drugs.

conducted on dead cells. The method of cell However, in order to obtain the desired maps

preservation and method of preparing the new techniques will need to be developed, prob-

chromosomes for observation (as outlined in ably involving experiments with human cells in

Figure 3) also contribute to the final picture of tissue culture. In order that the location of the

the chromosome phenotype obtained.

genes may be related to the deciphered patterns

Varied reports have been made concerning the of chromosome structure, advances in biochem-

occurrence of satellites (a ball of chromosome istry and cell physiology, also studied in a

material at the end of some chromosomes either controlled environment, would help. Ideally,

211

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

differences between genotypes are most clearly Dobzhansky, T. 1951. Genetics and the Origin ofSpecies.

demonstrated when they are observed in an identical environment. Already, Waymouth has

p. 42. Columbia University Press. Dobzhansky, T. 1961. Man and Natural Selection.
Amer. Sci. 49,285-299.

developed a completely chemically defined culture medium for the growth of mammalian cells

Ford, C. E. 1961 (a). Methodology of Chromosomal Analysis in Man. Syverton Memorial Symposium on Analytical Cell Culture, Detroit. pp. 105-119.

(Waymouth 1959). Perhaps the controlled Ford, C. E. 1961 (b). The Cytogenetics of Sex in Man.

environment of tissue culture will enable the cytogenetics of individuals in larger populations

Eugen. Rev. 53,21-24.
Gruneberg, Hans 1952. Thermotactic Optimum; The Genetics of the Mouse. pp. 118-121. Martinus Nijhoff.

(experiencing a range of geographical habitats) Hamerton, J. L. 1962. (Editor.) Chromosomes in Medicine.

to be compared, on the levels of morphological and biochemical genetics. In addition, environ-

Heinemann. Huxley, J. S. 1959. Man's place in Nature; The Destiny of
Man, by Huxley et al. Hodder and Stoughton.

mentally induced changes in genotype under controlled conditions would enable some mech-

Johannsen, W. 1911. The Genotype Concept of Heredity. Amer. Nat., 45, 129-159.
Lathe, G. H. 1961. Defective Molecules as a Cause of

anisms of evolution (on a micro-scale) to be Disease. Eugen. Rev., 52, 205-216.

determined experimentally. When tissue culture conditions are com-

Makino, S. and Sasaki, M. 1961. A Study of Somatic Chromosomes in a Japanese Population. Amer. J. hum. Genet., 13,47-63.

pletely controlled by using chemically defined Miller, 0. J., Mukherjee, B. B. and Breg, W. R. 1962.

culture media the physiological expression of genotypes on the cellular level may be deter-

Normal Variations in the Human Karyotype. Trans. N. Y. Acad. Sci., Ser. 2,24,372-382. Novick, A. 1955. Mutagens and Antimutagens. Brook-

mined with accuracy. Then it will be possible, in conjunction with maps of chromosome struc-

haven Symposium in Biology, no. 8, Mutation. pp. 203-244. Assoc. Universities, Inc. Patau, K. 1961. The Identification of Individual Chromo-

ture, to determine the contribution of individual somes especially in Man. Amer. J. hum. Genet., 12,

chromosomes to the control of metabolism. Experimental approaches towards identification

250-276. Puck, T. T. 1960. A Proposed Standard System of
Nomenclature of Human Mitotic Chromosomes.

of chromosome phenotypes by elucidating their Lancet, 1, 1063. Eugen. Rev., 52, 87-90.

genetical patterns of physicochemical structure will be described in a future communication.

Sasaki, M. 1961. Observations on the Modification in Size and Shape of Chromosomes due to Technical Procedure. Chromosoma (Berlin), 11,514-522.

Stem, C. 1959. The Chromosomes of Man. Amer. J.

hum. Genet., 11, 301-314.

REFERENCES

Waymouth, C. 1959. Rapid Proliferation of Sublines of NCTC Clone 929 (Strain L) Mouse Cells in a Simple

Baikie, A. G., Buckton, K. E., Court Brown, W. M. and Chemically Defined Medium. J. nat. Cancer Inst.,

Harnden, D. G. 1961. Two cases of Leukaemia and a 22,1003.

Case of Sex-Chromosome Abnormality in the Same Westfall, B. B. 1961. Characterisation of Cells in Tissue

Sibship. Lancet, 2, 1003-1004.

Culture. Syverton Memorial Symposium on Analytical

Carter, C. 0. 1962. Human Heredity. Penguin Books.

Cell Culture, Detroit. 147-157.

Darlington, C. D. 1958. Evolution of Genetic Systems. White, M. J. D. 1954. Animal Cytology and Evolution

Oliver and Boyd.

p. 99. Cambridge University Press.

212

