THE DEPOPULATION SCARE
A Criticism of Various Statistical Prophecies By C. V. DRYSDALE, O.B.E., D.Sc., F.R.S.E.

EVER since the declining birth rate sure of population, and that the very object

became a clearly established tendency, of their propaganda for family limitation

prophecies of impending depopulation was to diminish poverty and the unduly

have appeared at more or less frequent in- high death rates. The present writer

tervals. The latest of these is by Mr. R. R. showed, by putting the vital statistics in

Kuczynski in his Balance of Births and the form of diagrams, and by the method of

Deaths, which was reviewed in the July correlation, that there was a very close

issue of this REvIEw, and commented on by correspondence between the variations of the

Dr. Fisher in the October issue. I propose birth and death rates in all long-settled

to deal with this in the following article, countries, and that in Holland and Germany

but a short preliminary account of previous the death rate was falling even more rapidly

prophecies may be of some interest, and may than the birth rate, so that the natural

help to clarify a subject which has been increase of population was actually acceler-

beset with fallacies.

ating as the birth rate declined, indicating a

The first prophets made the delightfully rapid rise in the mean duration of life.

simple assumption that a falling birth rate Before the fall of the birth rate set in, the

per se meant depopulation, and actually average length of life in Western Europe

labelled it as such. It took some time to was probably only about 35 years; now it

convince them that, so long as the birth rate is close on 6o years, and is still rising

exceeded the death rate, the population rapidly.

would increase, and that there could be no At this point the actuaries and statisti-

true depopulation until the former fell cians began to take part in the discussion,

below the latter. When this was at last and their first contribution was the wide-

driven home, their next step was to assume spread fallacy, which still sometimes crops

that the death rate would remain at the up from eminent authorities (including Mr.

level then prevailing, so that at the pace Kuczynski), that the death rate per thou-

at which the birth rate was falling it would sand could not be less than a thousand

sink to this value in a certain number of divided by the average length of life. At

years, and depopulation would then set in.
Prophecies of the impending depopulation of France, in which the margin was very
low, were frequent over thirty years ago,
but have not yet come to pass, although the French birth rate has now fallen considerably below the death rate of those times.
The champions of the Malthusian doctrine and of birth control pointed out that a

that time the writer had been claiming that a death rate of io per thousand, which had
for some time existed in New Zealand, was the ideal to be aimed for in this and most other countries, and could be attained by reducing their birth rates to 20 per thousand. This was derided on the score that it would involve an average duration of life of ioo vears, and that a longevity of 5o years was about the limit, corresponding to

considerable proportion of the people of all a death rate of 20 per thousand, so that the

European countries were seriously under- birth rate could not fall below the latter

nourished at that time, owing to the pres- figure without causing depopulation.

25I

252 TE EUGENICS REVIEW

RISING LONGEVITY

increase of population to about 5 per thou-

Both of these objections have been com- sand, and so long as this continues, our

pletely falsified. Our own birth rate has present birth and death rates would appear

fallen to under 17, with a death rate of I2; to be reasonable figures.

Holland, Denmark, Australia, and New Zealand, and many large European towns
have had death rates of about Io per thousand for some years; and the average duration of life in these countries is now probably rising rapidly in the sixties.
The famous formula, I,ooo/longevity=
death rate, is only true for a stationary population, and the writer has shown that for a slowly increasing or diminishing popu-
lation a closer formula is I,oooIlongevity=
Y2(birth rate+ death rate) or the mean
between the birth and death rates.* For example, the longevity of fifty years,
assumed by the actuaries of that time as the limit, would certainly imply a death rate of 20 if the population were stationary, but it would be equally attained with a birth rate of 2I and death rate of I9, or of 22 and i8, 23 and 17, etc. If, on the other hand, a longevity of 70 is possible-as the writer then contended, and which certainly does not now seem absurd-this would mean a birth and death rate of I4.3 for a stationary population, but it would also be attained with a birth rate of I4.3 + I.7 = I6 and a death rate of I4.3 - I.7= I2.6, or with a birth rate of 17 and death rate of ii.6, which are about our present figures. True, we have not reached that longevity, but our birth and death rates have only been at these figures for a very few years. Had our country since the War been able to support its preWar increase of population of about io per thousand for a long period, a birth rate of 20 with death rate of io would have been possible if the longevity had increased to 70 years. But the diminution of our economic prosperity since the War appears to have reduced our power of supporting an

TWO RECENT PROPHECIES Disconcerted by the obstinate refusal of the
facts to fulfil their prophecies, the depopulateurs have recently been discovering certain " latent tendencies " which are suipposed to be operating towards future depopulation, although they are at present masked. One, which aroused a great deal of attention not long ago, was based on the abnormally low birth rates of the War years. This has resulted up to the present time in a higher proportion than the normal of persons at the reproductive ages, and therefore a higher ratio of crude birth rate to fertility rate. In a few years, however, when the smaller proportion of children come to the reproductive age and the present parents pass beyond it, these proportions will be reversed, which, ceteris paribus, will cause the crude birth rate to fall; and on this basis we are told that our population will become stationary within a few decades. That this tendency exists is undeniable, but the prediction of a stationary population based on it has no greater justification than preceding ones, as will be seen after we have dealt with the latest contribution to the subject-that of Mr. Kuczynski. Mr. Kuczynski has discovered another latent tendency, which I hope I may be forgiven for describing as a mere's nest. It is simply that, in spite of our present excess of births over deaths, our women are not reproducing themselves. He has proved by figures, which probably cannot be disputed, that in this and most other Western European countries each woman at the reproductive ages is producing on an average somewhat less than one girl who will grow up to those ages, so that the female population

* More strictly, on the assumption of uniform longevity, and constant birth and death rates,

has virtually already commenced to decline. He therefore claims that a general decline of

=2,303log b-logd, where L is the average dura-
tion of life, b and d are the birth and death rates per thousand, and logs are to base to. This reduces

the population, leading to ultimate extinction, is bound to commence before long. This appears at first sight unanswerable,

to the above simple formula when b-d is small. and it has, of course, been generally

THE DEPOPULATION SCARE

253

accepted; but a very little examination re- probably be even more rapid if the

veals the usual fallacy. At the end of extremely low proportion married in the

Chapter III of his Balance of Births and twenties were raised, and the average dura-

Deaths he states in heavy type:

tion of marriage were therefore increased.

" According to the fertility and mor-
tality in Western and Northern Europe in 1926, ioo mothers gave birth to 93 future mothers only. With the fertility
of I926 the population is bound to die out unless mortality of potential mothers de-
creases beyond reasonable expectations. And fertility continued its downward
path in 1927."

This simple fact, which is fairly generally known, gives quite a different aspect to the question. In a monogamic state of society, in which women are practically debarred from maternity outside marriage, those who are unmarried do not count as mothers, and the birth rate for a given average number of children per marriage depends on the number of men who marry. The War not only killed or mutilated a

In the first place, this statement is wrong, unless we put the word " potential " before " mothers " in the first as well as in the second part. Probably this was only a slip, but it is a vital one, as the whole question turns on it. It is quite true that ioo women at the reproductive ages are under present conditions likely to be followed by only 93 women at those ages in the next generation, but this is not because the fertility of our married women is too low, but because so many of outr women are unmarried.
Even before the War there was always a deficiency of men as compared with women, and the War has greatly accentuated the disparity. According to the last Census of
England and Wales in I92I, the total number of women at various ages and the numbers married were as given in the attached

very large number of men who would now be at the marriageable ages, but it checked economic prosperity and caused many to remain unmarried; and it probably caused a greater proportion of those who married to be sterile.
A simple diagram will help to make the matter perfectly clear (see next page).
Suppose we have a country such as our own in which the population is steadily increasing at the rate of 5 per thousand annually, and for simplicity let us suppose the numbers of the sexes originally equal. As is well known, the birth rate of boys is slightly higher than that of girls, but this is offset by a somewhat higher infantile and child mortality among boys, so that approximately equal numbers arrive at maturity; and we shall assume that all marry. If we

table:

take the average length of a generation as

35 years, the above rate of increase would

Age.
20-24 25-29
30-34

... ...

Total
W5lomen.
I,703,067
1,620,290
I,519,649

Married.
Women.
* 459,789 ... 920,986 ... 1,059,538

Per cent. Married.
* 27. I
... 56.9
... 69.8

require each woman to have 2.38 children on an average who survive to reproduce, or about I5 per cent. more, say 2.75 live born children to allow for early deaths. (On this

35-39
40-44
45-49

1,471,9I3 ... I,089,287 ... 74.2

*- 1,378)I21 ... 1,035,109

75.I

1,243,968 ... 919,283 ... 74.0

basis 2.5 live born children per woman would cause an increase of population of about 2 per thousand per year, which seems

The precise effect of this low proportion to agree with the experience of France.)

of married women on the birth rate cannot Now suppose that from some cause, such

be calculated. But it is quite evident that as the War, the male population at the mar-

if the majority of women married in the riageable ages is suddenly'reduced by 25 per

early twenties, and the average number of cent., without affecting the fertility of mar-

children for each married woman remained riages. The result will evidently be that 25

as at present, the number of births and of per cent. of the women are virtually

girls would be so much higher as to cause a fairly rapid increase; and that it would

sterilized. If they could be removed it would simply mean that the population

254 THE EUGENICS REVIEW
would be reduced to 75 per cent. of its assume the constancy of any phenomenon on former value, and would then go on in- which they focus their attention. creasing at the same rate as before, but It will be observed that the decline in the always 25 per cent. below the value it would female population in the above example can have had without the check. As, however, co-exist with a rise in the total population, the 25 per cent. of unmarried women are not if the excess of births over deaths in the removed, they will simply gradually die out, portion of the community who marry is so that there may at first be an actual dimi- greater than the number of deaths among nution of women, followed by a stationary those who do not marry; and, on Mr. Kucstate, and finally a renewed upward trend zynski's own figures, this should be the until the whole of the excess women have case. Of course, the actual facts are more died out and both sexes increase together complicated than our simple example, as again. All this means is that in a mono- there was already a considerable disproporgamic community the numbers of the sexes tion between the sexes before the War, but tend to equality (which is the best biological this does not affect the fact that if the justification for monogamy). But Mr. Kuc- number of men is suddenly lessened the zynski, having discovered this tendency number of women will tend slowly for a statistically in its early stages, has not decade or two to do the same. During the troubled to find its cause, and has simply war an outcry went up concerning the loss of assumed that the decline of women will con- men and the increase of " superfluous " tinue at its present rate-another example women, and now that nature is beginning to of the inherent tendency of statisticians to redress the balance, Mr. Kuczynski raises

.0-. d
35 a 70

105

140Yzars

25%lots of' toles
25lm oriMqabltes.

assZyv ;QjSmad declinie
.1eal:

0 35 70 ios I 4OYeors,

THE DEPOPULATION SCARE

255

the cry of diminishing womanhood and im- exists, and the extent to which birth con-

pending race extinction !

trol has been carried. The population of

POVERTY AND POPULATION

the future will not be determined by the tendencies we have been discussing, but by

The fact is, however, that neither this our economic progress or retrogression. If

tendency nor the one concerning the reduc- the present tendency to slackness and ham-

tion of the birth rate during the War will pering of industry continues, our population

really have any deciding influence on our will very likely become stationary or begin

future population. Even before the War to diminish even before the time predicted

there was a considerable deficiency of men, by the statisticians, whether families are

and a certain proportion of those were un- further restricted or not. If, on the other

married, simply because of poverty which hand, we realize that we are going on the

caused emigration of some men and pre- wrong economic and eugenic tack, and

vented others from marrying. Whatever strive to increase our industrial efficiency,

may be said to the contrary, the Malthusian economic prosperity will increase, and we

doctrine has still to be reckoned with, and may be quite sure that our population will is as essential for the understanding of increase with it. At present we are all

social phenomena as Darwin claimed it to quarrelling over the distribution of an in-

be for the understanding of evolution. It sufficiency, instead of co-operating for the

was poverty, due to over-population, which production of a sufficiency. If and when we

caused the emigration and celibacy before see the error of our ways and turn our efforts

the War, and the War itself: it is poverty in the right direction, the spectre of impenddue to overpopulation which is responsible ing depopulation will vanish for at least for the amount of celibacy in men which now many decades.

THE EUGENICS SOCIETY
STUDY AND DISCUSSION MEETINGS
At 8.0 p.m. at the Rooms of the Linnean Society,
Burlington House, Piccadilly
TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 11th
Poor Law
E. J. LIDBETTER
TUESDAY, MARCH llth
Unemploymoat
JOHN HILTON W. A. APPLETON
TUESDAY, APRIL 8th
Delinquency
Dr. M. HAMBLIN SMITH
His Honour JUDGE MOORE
Eugenics Review, Vol. XXI, No. 4.

