DISCUSSION
MATERNITY INSURANCE
SOCIAL reformers are only slowly beginning to realise that theirfailures are due to an inversion of cause and effect and that " nature is stronger than nurture." The eugenist, on the other hand, while intent on elucidating and promulgating the omnipotence of selection, may sometimes forget that, given a deficient pre-natal and post-natal " nurture," such as under-feeding, underbreathing, poisoning, overstraining and an unsuitable education, the next generation cannot be saved by even the best of ascendants, from being less vigorous and less selective in its mating-if it survives at all until that time.
" Paving her path with babes and sucklings slain," Britain is showing an appalling and suicidal slackness in protecting hermost sacred treasure, motherhood.' The first, and most important stage of " maternity insurance'" has nothing to do with money or legislation, and it sets in when the future mother and father are yet in their teens, and even before then. As soon as the child asks the " dreaded" question-why "dreaded"' only the prudish or the prurient parent knows-it should be told the truth in a manner that satisfies its curiosity and at the same time lays the foundation for sex-reverence, for the knowledge that " if anything is sacred the human body is sacred."
The second stage of " insurance" is also prophylactic, and it is the community that will have to help the young women in it. Is it not incredible that most women should marry without knowing the most elementary precepts of hygiene, or how to nurse children ? The Mothers' Union and kindred institutions, it is true, have done excellent work in preparing young women for the status of motherhood; however, only by a united indi-vidual action on the part of the communities can we hope to do
our duty by the present generation and the next. It is interesting to note that in Ghent, since the institution of a school for training young women for their maternal duties, infant mortality has decreased from 35 per cent. to about 5 per cent.
Thirdly, a legislative measure is most urgently required to assist in insuring motherhood and the race against a danger that is one of the gravest problems the Eugenist has to deal with.
I For the relevancy of infant mortality to eugenics. see C. W. Saleeby,.
Parenthood and Race-Culture."

282 DISCUSSION
It is to be hoped that enlightened public opinion-and the idea is already growing in popularity-will soon support a law that the marriage of a person suffering from a venereal disease shall be illegal and shall be treated as a criminal offence.
We shall now endeavour, as far as space permits, to draw a sketch of " maternity insurance," in the usual acceptance of the -term-medical and monetary aid, in return for contributions to a private or a public fund, to mothers, for several weeks before and after child-birth. Most European governments have passed laws forbidding the employment of women within four to six weeks of child-birth (the Factory Act, I9OI, renders it punishable for an employer knowingly to employ a woman within four weeks of the birth of her child), but the question of compensation for wages unearned, owing to motherhood, is far from being solved. We believe this to be a matter of greater vital importance to the State than old age pensions of a doubtful efficacy. So -far, maternity insurance has had a purely private or local, not a -national character.
Without disparaging the various admirable schemes under ,consideration in this country we think the problem is nearer its practical solution on the continent. In Paris about 20,000 " working " women are insured in the Mutualite' Maternelle, with the result that the mortality of their infants is only 4 per cent. It may be argued that this is not surprising, as only provident, that is women of " civic worth," would become members. All the more reason for encouraging maternity insurance, since it is one of the few practicable methods for positive eugenics !1 A commission of the Italian Parliament has been at work for several years to study the problem of maternity insurance, and during the present session a Government Bill is pending for the establishment of a state cassa di maternita. Austria-Hungary, Germany and Switzerland have by various means, chiefly by a wellorganised system of local sick-funds (Ortskrankenkassen), and owing to an energetic propaganda by unions for the protection of mother'hood (Bundfiir Mutterschutz), taken the initial steps towards national insurance for women. In the latter country, where laws akin to our Factory Act of I9OI had already been passed in I877, we have had various practical achievements in the eugenic field, one of the most notable being that, three years ago, the municipal authorities of Zurich introduced free obstetrical treatment, and established a cantonal maternity hospital. This year the German maternalists2 have succeeded in founding a bank for maternity insurance in Karlsruhe in Baden. This bank, which has the financial support of various local authorities, is as yet in its experimental stage. Other German towns are prepared to
' The frequent objection to maternity insurance on the ground that it would increase the number of illegitimate births is fallacious, no woman would suffer the -discomfort and stigma on account of a small and temporary grant of money.
2 The foremost German expert is Dr. Alfons Fischer, Karlsruhe.

DISCUSSION

283

follow suit, and it is hoped that the German Government will subsidise these local funds later on. We are not entering the lists for breast-feeding when we mention that the municipal authorities in Halle, by granting lactation premiums (Stillpramicn) to mothers who feed their own babes have succeeded in reducing infant mortality from 20 per cent. to Io per cent. in one year.
If the development of the nation had proceeded on eugenic principles economic distress would hardly be as prevalent as it is to-day. Eugenic education will have a powerful influence on
-the economic conditions of the future,' but at the present
moment some immediate measure, such as a national maternity insurance system, is a necessity. Maternity insurance is a good weapon2-if the Eugenist is the knight-errant who wields it, i.e., admission to membership of a maternity fund must, unlike the practice prevailing abroad, depend on the satisfactory bill of health of the candidate.
The expediency of gradually establishing local funds all over the country, instead of accepting a purely government scheme, is evident. At a conference of delegates from the local committees, an executive committee might be formed to organise a uniform national system. The latter would consist of local funds -financed by
(a) Insurance premiums of, say, 2d. per week. This would preclude any idea of charity.
(b) Municipal grants. (c) Government grants (guarantee fund only). (d) Private donations. The administration would lie in the hands of the local Committees. The funds would be used to pay for obstetrical aid to members, and to compensate8 them for a loss in wages within six weeks of child-birth. The granting of lactation premiums would have to be preceded by what has been described above as the second stage of "' maternity insurance."
J. H. KOEPPERN.

URSBERG COLONY
URSBERG Colony in Bavaria is splendidly situated on the sandy soil of the fir-clad Bavarian Hills, and is reached by a branch railway running from Augsburg to Tanhausen, where the Colony omnibus meets all trains.
It was founded in 1884 by Dom. Ringeisen, and was started as a Colony for thirty mentally deficient, a suppressed Premons-
I E.g., a reduced infant mortality would mean a reduction of the difference
between female and male population, and the resulting increase of marriages would lessen the economic competition between the sexes.
5 In inferior stocks it might facilitate a " regression towards mediocrity." 8 The value of the policy would depend on the length of period of subscription (minimum one year).

284 DISCUSSION

tratensian Monastery being bought and adapted to this purpose From year to year it has increased, and now there is a Colony of nearly 2,000, ViZ.:

284 Idiots 695 Mentally Deficient 15I Epileptics I07 Deaf and Dumb

99 Cripples 125 Blind 64 Sick People

The Staff consists of:

405 Sisters of the Order of St.
Joseph 148 Postulants from T8-27 years
of age 63 Pupil Teachers from 14-i8

i6 Priests I2 Lay Brothers IO Voluntary Workers
The Doctor

years of age

The Patients are divided into three financial classes:

Class I. Paying 550 Marks (E27 Is.) per annum.

Class II. ,, 350 ,, (EI7 IOs.) , of

(EI2Class III. ,, 250 ,,

IOS.) , to

Except for dietary luxuries all patients are treated the same, all are supposed to provide their own clothes, and all are
given the work best adapted to them. There are ten large buildings well separated from one
another, each of two stories high, holding from I20-250 people, and each building has its own dining and sitting rooms and kitchens, and has a staircase at each end of the building. Besides
these large houses there are many outhouses, stables, farms, workshops, and school buildings; the land is well cultivated, and the yields of corn, fruit, and vegetables were:

i8o cwts. of swedes. Corn, which when ground yielded 5,646 cwts. of flour. 2,024 cwts. of clover and fodder. Vegetables to the value of £6oo. I,OOO,OOO bricks were made, and 32,000 tiles.
The farms consist of:

5I3 cattle 6o horses
6oo pigs
I67 sheep

3I goats
I,500 poultry
I03 beehives.

and i8o,ooo litres of milk are obtained a day from the farm cows. One picturesque hill-top is planted with trees and flowers,
seats are placed there, and it is used all the year round as a playground. The Colony has its own churchyard, which is well kept and full of blooms.

DISCUSSION

:285

The different physically and mentally deficient are housed in separate blocks, the sexes divided; there is an abundance of sunshine, the air is dry; the buildings are pleasant to look at and the patients well cared for, happy and healthy looking, and the mentally deficient are finely graded, which is a necessary matter, since if they are placed with those more capable than themselves they deteriorate by a process of discouragement, and, on the other hand, if placed with those less capable than themselves they fall to the lower level by an absence of stimulus.
With the exception of four or five school children a year who leave the Colony for their homes, and usually come back finally, the deficients remain in the Colony all their lives, safe from the misery and crime which would overtake them in the world: for you may teach the feeble-minded to be self-supporting, but without supervision you can never teach them to be selfcontrolled.
The feeble-minded are happiest in a Colony, working at productive labour with people of their own grade. They are easily managed under these conditions, need little supervision, and when once beyond the school age are nearly self-supporting.
The Colony is almost entirely self-contained, some extra milk, meat and flour only being bought. Both the wool and flax are home-raised and supply the material for the linen, flannel, carpets, rugs, etc., required for the establishment.
The Colonists make their own bricks and tiles, they have a quarry, and quarry their own stones and make their own cement and quickiime in their kiln, build their own houses, paint, repair and drain all their property, keep all their land in good cultivation and their roads in excellent repair; they run the post and the station omnibus, keep the village inn and maintain a Guest House at moderate prices for parents and guardians, who can stay there as long as they please, mixing freely with those they are interested in. They grow their own timber and have a saw mill; they bring their drinking water from a distance and have a pumping station and a reservoir. The whole place is lighted by electricity, which they generate, their engine being driven by water power. Besides the village Church they have several Chapels of their own; they have also a spacious entertainment hall in which are given weekly concerts, dances, etc. They have a splendid Instrumental Band and a good Choir, a large gymnasium and a small stream to swim in; a brewery and factory where they make beer and lemonade; a bakery where the master baker (who is one of the Sisters) makes daily 280 quartern loaves and 3,200 rolls; a laundry where the clothes for I,500 people can be washed, dried and ironed in two days; several smaller laundries; a hospital capable of holding 200 people, a disinfecting station and an X-Ray installation; a wind-mill, a slaughter house, a cold storage house, a sheep-shearing establishment, an agricultural school and a printing press.
5

286 DISCUSSION

The trades taught are:

Cabinet-making
Carpentry Joining
Wood-carving Wrought ironwork Engineering Key making
Plumbing Tin works
Brush and basket making
Chair caning Brick and tile making
Tallow and soap manufacturing
Agriculture and Horticultural work on the land
Saddle and Harness making and repairing

Shoe making and repairing Wool and Cotton weaving Brewing and baking, dairy and
laundry work, and farmwork Tailoring and dressmaking Millinery, and plain needle-
work Fine needlework and embroid-
ery
Knitting, crochet, and lace making
Bookbinding and Printing Straw pressing, plaiting and
making of hats. Carpet weaving
Mat making Blacksmith's work at a Forge

Teaching goes on in the various schools for the feeble-
minded, the epileptic, the deaf and dumb, the blind, and the cripples; often some of the well-educated epileptics who come to live at the Colony find occupation in these schools. There is only one physically and mentally fit man in the whole place, viz., the Engineer; all the masters of the other shops and works are either Sisters or a physically deficient or a deaf, dumb, blind or cripple, who has been thoroughly taught his trade in the neighbouring town of Augsburg or in the Colony itself and who is only too pleased to live in the Colony, where he is provided with board, lodging, clothes and pocket money, and leads what is practically a free village life without the distressing competition with able-bodied people. These physically deficient who have learned a trade are one of the features -of the place; they are happy, self-respecting and have a saving sense of independence and usefulness, since the Colony being a marvel of efficiency and cheapness, they are able entirely to relieve the rates of the cost of their keep.
In the Schools the hours are short and broken up with physical exercises, games and manual work, little more than
writing, arithmetic, drawing, and singing are taught. The teaching and supervision of both sexes are carried out
by the Sisters, and they may be seen carting coal, making bricks, digging the land, pickaxing the roads, brewing, baking, washing and making clothes. These physical labours have produced among these women an extremely fine physique.
Everywhere there is a sense of happiness, well-being, and liberty; there are no gates and no walls, as nobody wishes to run away. A point which largely accounts for the popularity of this

DISCUSSION

287

Institution is the facility which it affords in the way of trains, omnibus service and the guest house at moderate prices to parents and guardians, who can stay there as long as they please, mixing freely with those they are interested in. There are some 150 applications a week for admission to become inmates of the Colony, and between sixty and seventy are refused a month owing to lack of accommodation.
There are five daughter houses, in different parts of Bavaria; one at Karlshuld is practically a village with a boys' and girls' school and a large basket manufactory. Here cripples, deaf, dumb and blind may live in their own family and work at basket making.
About 04 per cent. of the entire population of Bavaria finds its way to Ursberg, but this does not unfortunately represent the total number of Deficients in that country, since some *OI per cent. of the whole population is refused admission owing to lack of accommodation: thus, taking I per cent. as the average per centage of Deficients in Bavaria only *o6 per cent. of all the Bavarian Deficients go to Ursberg. The number of Deficients in Bavaria has, so far, not decreased; this is doubtless attributable to the insufficiency of accommodation I have referred to, and to the large number of Deficients who consequently remain at large among the population and produce their still more deficient offspring in a larger proportion than the normal and less prolific part of the population. It is obvious that to meet this compound multiplication of abnormally prolific Deficients, who in proportional reproduction outnumber the normal births, it is necessary to segregate all Deficients for their whole lives.
Careful records are kept of all the members of the Colony from the time of their admission until their death, including notes on their family histories.
Ursberg is verily a State within a State and can boast every attribute of civilisation except an army, a navy, and a police force. May we assume that their civilisation is too advanced to need any of these three ? Though they use their printing press for an Annual Report and other purposes, they refuse to trouble their peace of mind and falsify their facts by the production of a daily paper. Surely this is the last touch of administrative ability.
ALICE VOWE JOHNSON,
IF.R.C.S.I., D.P.H.]

THE " MINORITY REPORT " AND EUGENICS

IN the " Discussion " in the October number of this REVIEW it is asserted that the Poor Law Reports, and especially the Minority, are indifferent to the question of Eugenics, and have " missed a great opportunity" of instilling Eugenic principles. " The aim of the Minority Report seems to be the endowment

:288 DISCUSSION of mediocrity." This seems to me unjust. It must be remembered that the Poor Law Commission had an administrative question to deal with, and the science of Eugenics is as yet scarcely sufficiently developed to provide an administrative scheme for the practical problem of poor relief. But the Minority scheme, carefully considered, reveals many tendencies which are eugenically favourable. " X. Y. Z.," the writer of the " Discussion," has totally overlooked the fact that the Minority Report fully accepts the finding of the Commission on the Feeble-Minded, which recommends increased powers for the detention of the feeble-minded. This would exclude from parentage a class which is most obviously and unhappily unfit for such responsibilities. Again, the Minority's remedy for unemployment involves a system of Labour Exchanges, which would facilitate the finding of work for the man who is able and fit to do it, and would serve as an automatic test of the incorrigible loafer or incapable, for whom detention colonies of a reformatory type are advised. Surely these measures are indirectly of the very highest eugenic importance. There is at present no real means of distinguishing between the unemployed and the unemployable, between those who are in distress through the fluctuations of the ,abour market and those who are so through their own fault. The result is that the unworthy are often helped to continue in a demoralising idleness, and have as many children as they like, while the poorest workman suffers severe privation, which undoubtedly deters the more intelligent and thoughtful from parenthood. When there is a means of sifting out the cases according to character, even the soft-hearted person who now gives to beggars in the street because they may be " genuine unemployed," will be assured that the man who really wants work will betake himself to the Labour Exchange, where either a job will be found for him or temporary maintenance provided. The man who won't take a job or won't work when he has got it, can then be " sorted out," so to speak, and segregated from a society in which he is a useless member.
Again, the whole idea of " relief under conditions," which has been so admirably worked out by the Minority Report, but so curiously overlooked by many readers, of whom "X. Y. Z." appears to be one, tends towards administration on eugenic lines. The present system of Poor Law relief, granted only when the poor person reaches the point of destitution, and granted mostly with no safeguard of conditions of healthy decent living, is about as anti-eugenic as can be conceived. The really self-respecting poor persons, honest and industrious, who from the point of view of eugenics are desirable parents, are deterred from applying for help. In the pathetic north country expression, " they'll pine rather than ask
for it," and their children, who might be so valuable an element in the community, perhaps die or suffer lasting injury from weak-

DISCUSSION

289

ness and privation. The worthless get their doles with no conditions as to behaviour or mode of life. The Minority scheme aims at the enforcement of a standard of life. It would en-
courage individual effort and individual responsibility by putting this standard of life before the people as something they must attain if they wish to retain freedom to control their own lives. Failure to attain the standard would be met with assistance to regain it, on condition the individual co-operates in his own re-
storation. Repeated and gross failure would be met with detention and segregation.
1 cannot see in this scheme any justification for " X.Y.Z.'s" contemptuous phrase, " the endowment of mediocrity." On the contrary, it seems to me that for the first time a workable scheme has been put forth to prevent both the waste and destruction caused by destitution, and the demoralisation caused by indiscriminate relief. It would make eugenic measures possible which now are impracticable, because it would introduce a method of sifting out the socially unfit, which the present disorganised scramble for profit, tempered by relief of destitution and indiscriminate charity, certainly does not provide.
B. L. H.

