THE EUGENICS REVIEW

VOL. XXXV, No. 2

JULY 1943

CONTENTS
Notes of the Quarter - - .

PA
31

The Significance of Recent Birth-Rate Figures - - 36
RICHARD M. TITMUSS

Incentives to Parenthood - - s - -o 39
MARY GOWING

Notes and Memoranda

---

- 42

Reviews of Books
BIRTH CONTROL

43

Periodicals .

....

45

Correspondence - . . . . . 47

The Eugenics Society is not responsible for statements made or opinons expresed by authors of articles, reviews and letters.
The EUGENICS REVIEW i8 regularly indexed in the International Index to Periodical Literature.
Published Quarterly.
London, England: Macmillan & Co. Ltd., St. Martin's Street, W.C.2. New York: The Macmillan Co.
Price: Three Shillin&s per issue and Twelve Shillin,s per annum, post free.
Issued free to Fellows and Members.

PERIODICALS

Character and Personality
March 1943. Vol. 11, No. 3.-Two articles of some interest to students of personality are: Hand-
uwriting Pressure: Its Measurement and Significance,
by G. R. Pascal, and Level of Aspiration as a Method of Studying Personality, by J. B. Rotter. In the former the author obtains considerable correlations between objective measurements of pressure on the pen and such traits as energeticness,
expressiveness and impulsiveness. Rotter shows
that aspiration level, as measured by self-estimates of performance at a simple motor test, tends to be lower in groups liable to strong inferiority feelings, such as students with deformities and certain types of criminals, than in normally adjusted persons.
Kurt Goldstein discusses Lewin's conception of rigidity of mental structure, disagreeing with his views as to its r6le in mental deficiency.
P. E. V.

out of the seminal fluid and their transfer to Ringer's solution did not appreciably affect their motility or damagethem in any other obvious way,"
and that their motility was well maintained in this medium at 38 deg. C., under certain gas phase conditions, up to periods of twelve hours.
The first series of experiments was designed to
study the oxygen consumption of sperms and this,
rather to the author's astonishment, was found to be negligible over a three-hour period although the sperms remained fully active throughout this time. These results were at variance with those obtained by Shettles, who measured the respiratory quotient of sperms in seminal fluid and reported figures for respiration seven times greater than those found by the author with sperms suspended in Ringer's. Dr. MacLeod therefore examined the oxygen con-
sumption of seminal fluid devoid of sperms and found that this was appreciable and of a nature
still unexplained.

Human Fertility

He then proceeded to examine the mechanism of glycolysis-the other main metabolic pathway

October 1942. Vol. 7, No. 5.-The relation between open to sperms-which he insists should be strictly

metabolism and motility of human spermatozoa.- defined " as in the splitting of a sugar into lactic

By John MacLeod, Ph.D.-In this stimulating acid." His preliminary experiments established

paper Dr. MacLeod reviews recent work, much of the facts that sperms in the presence of glucose

it done by himself and his fellow-workers at the produce lactic acid in large amounts, and that

medical college of Cornell University, on the while their motility is well maintained under

physiology of human sperms-more particularly anaerobic conditions it may be adversely affected

their metabolic behaviour in relation to their if oxygen or air is present. He next designed ex-

motility. As he points out, " until evidence is periments to determine whether glycolysis was

produced to the contrary we must assume that the main source of energy for motility and upon

the motile activity of these cells is closely linked what substrates spermatozoa might depend for

with their ability to reach and fertilise the ovum " their energy. It was found that when sperms were

and "it is therefore pertinent to investigate the suspended in glucose-free Ringer's at 38 deg. C.

source of the energy necessary for motility and to they produced little lactic acid and that within

determine the chemical mechanism in the cells three hours both glycolysis and motility had

which make this energy available." Before I939 ceased. Under anaerobic conditions, if glucose was

there had been very little quantitative investiga- added at the end of the first, second and third

tion of the metabolism of human sperms and the hour, glycolysis and motility recommenced and

results of much of what had been done were proceeded almost at the same rate as in the control.

vitiated by the fact that the authors had ignored If a similar series of experiments are carried out

bacterial growth and its metabolic products in the under aerobic conditions (95 per cent. oxygen),

semen during the period of the experiment- glycolysis and motility cannot be restored after

stating merely that it was negligible. In I939 Dr. the first hour-thus indicating that sperms cannot

MacLeod initiated investigations into the meta- long be deprived of glucose when oxygen is present.

bolism of human sperms and the enzyme systems Dr. MacLeod then used similar experiments to

responsible for maintaining their motile activity, determine what foodstuffs, other than glucose,

using the manometric method worked out by Otto could be utilised by human sperms as the essential

Warbug in 1928, by which it is possible to measure source of energy for motility. He tested a number

with great accuracy the metabolic activity of minute of carbohydrates and found that fructose, mannose,

amounts of living tissue. After careful considera- maltose and glycogen were all able to restore

tion Dr. MacLeod decided that manometric glycolysis and motility; while galactose, sucrose

measurements of sperm metabolism in either and lactose failed. As the author says, " the

seminal fluid or blood serum might be misleading ability of spermatozoa to use glycogen as a source

and that for various reasons the most satisfactory of energy for motility is of considerable interest

medium in which to suspend the sperm would be when viewed in the light of substrate availability

Ringer's solution. Preliminary trials showed that in the female genital tract." Substrates other than

" the centrifugation necessary to get the sperm carbohydrates were tried (e.g. various amino and

45

46 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

fatty acids) but none were found effective in main- Finally, the author discusses the relationship

taining the motile activity of human sperms.

between metabolism, degree of motility and

In another series of experiments the author fertilising capacity of sperm, and gives as his

determined: (I) How long motility is maintained conclusion that so far no correlation has been

at a body temperature in the absence of sugar, demonstrated between the degree of motility and"

and (2) at what stage recovery of motility can be the glycolytic rate. It seems that there is a minimal

induced by the addition of sugar (a) under glycolysis below which motility will fail but above

anaerobic and (b) under aerobic conditions. The which sperms may form lactic acid very much more

ability of spermatozoa to recover motility is con- rapidly without showing any increase in motility.

siderably longer lived under anaerobic (up to six In other words, certain sperms are wasteful of their

hours) than under aerobic conditions (between two source of energy and it is still uncertain whether

and three hours). He also established the fact that such sperms are more or less potentially fertile

substances such as cyanide and carbon monoxide, than those which are more economical. Inci-

which inhibit cellular respiration, have no depress- dentally Dr. MacLeod has come across samples of

ing effect on sperm motility, whereas glycolysis seminal fluid with a normal sperm count in which

inhibitors such as iodoacetic acid and sodium the sperms showed no sign of motility but, in spite

fluoride gradually reduce motility to nil within of this, were found to be producing lactic acid at a

about two hours; this still further supports the high rate, and this glycolysis could not be dis-

theory that glycolysis is the metabolic pathway by tinguished from that of normal motile cells. " It

-which human sperm derive energy for motility. seems probable that in such cases the link between

The author then discusses the r6le of oxygen in the metabolism and motility of sperm. From
the evidence already quoted, which demonstrates

the source of energy and the motility mechanism has been severed," but this abnormality needs further investigation before it can be understood.

an absence of respiration, and from the fact that

MARGARET C. N. JACKSON.

spectroscopic examination of masses of sperms

(treated with hyposulphite to bring any cytochrome present into the reduced state) has failed to show the presence of cytochrome, it might easily be

Mental Health in Later Maturity
(Supplement No.i68 to the Public Health Reports).

assumed that sperms cannot respire. However, if Measurement of Social Maturity Applied to Older

succinic acid is supplied to sperms instead of People.-By Edgar A. Doll.-That the increase in life

-glucose a vigorous and progressive oxygen con- expectancy during the last forty years should be

sumption occurs. Furthermore, the addition of accompanied by the preservation of social effective-

sodium malonate (a known succinic dehydrogenase ness in elderly people is of the utmost importance

inhibitor) inhibits succinate oxidation by sperma- in the problem of an ageing population. Otherwise,

tozoa-and, since succinate dehydrogenase has so with the burden of work and production falling

far never been chemically isolated from the cyto- upon the dwindling proportion of young and

-chrome complex, it appears that human sperms middle-aged, we are faced with the choice between

most contain this complex and be capable of national or individual survival.

oxidation in the presence of suitable substrates. Dr. Doll's study is made from two selected

The energy resulting from the oxidation of suc- samples, one based on I2 feeble-minded males over

*cinate is, however, incapable of supporting motility, the age of 50 who had been institutionalised for

and the activity of sperm in the presence of suc- 30 years, the other on a scattered selection of 13

-cinate fails rapidly if glucose is not also supplied. once physically and mentally normal male subjects

To account for the loss of motility which takes between the ages of 65 and 8o.

_place in high oxygen tensions the author suggests Previous studies by Dublin, Kaplan and Dayton

-that, in the presence of oxygen, sperms (like certain have shown that only 7 per cent of idiots and i6 per

facultative anaerobic bacteria) convert such oxygen cent of imbeciles survive beyond 50 years and that

as they absorb into hydrogen peroxide through the it is rare for the feeble-minded to live beyond 75

agency of a " yellow enzyme," and that it is the years. Using the Vineland Social Maturity Scale,

hydrogen peroxide so produced that has a toxic Doll found that his I2 feeble-minded subjects

and immobilising effect on the sperms. If this is showed no appreciable change after the age of 25,

so it means that sperms are lacking in catalase, or that there were also no appreciable changes in their

similar enzyme, to protect them against their own Binet mental ages and that any decline after the

-products of metabolism in the presence of oxygen. age of 50 was in degree rather than level of social

The author quotes various experiments in support activity. Of the i3 once-normal subjects, the

of this theory but states that there is no conclusive findings range from one who showed no loss at 70

-evidence that hydrogen peroxide is formed during from his social age score at 50 years to one whose

the course of sperm metabolism since it has not score had dropped from 22 at 50 to 14.I at 78 years.

been isolated chemically. However, the small The majority of the lower scores were associated

amounts necessary to depress motility are likely with physical handicaps and it is concluded that

to be broken up and lost rapidly in the presence of decline in social competence reflects waning vigour.

-so much cellular material.

K. H.

CORRESPONDE,NCE

47

Milbank Memorial Fund Quarterly
April 1943, Vol. 21, No. 2.-Life Tables for Social Classes in England.-Dr. Christopher Tietze gives an analysis of the class differences in mortality in England based on the Registrar-General's Decennial Supplement, 1931. Particular interest is attached to these findings in view of the fact that, as far as is known at present, the next census will not be taken until 1951. Expectation of life at birth is approximately 63 years for the professional group and for agricultural workers; 6o years for

employers and clerical workers and for skilled workers; 57 years for the intermediate class between skilled and unskilled workers, and less than 56 years for unskilled workers and for coal miners.
This journal also contains articles on the nutritional status of aircraft workers in Southern California, recent changes in income and food expenditure, and a study of food habits of tuberculous families in Harlem, and the variation in nursing service with family income.
K. H.

CORRESPONDENCE

Family Allowances
To the Editor, Eugenics Review
SIR,-The only State system of children's allowances which the Eugenics Society should support is mine-fourteen or more shillings a week to married couples for each child of the first two confinements, with nothing for subsequent offspring. It would raise the marriage rate and birth rate of the richer two-thirds of the population and yet help the overburdened parents of the poorest third about as much as would the Beveridge scheme, and it would be preferred by a big majority of the adults under forty.
If anything like the Beveridge scheme becomes law, the Eugenics Society should urge abortion and sterilization being made available to any parent desiring one or both of these.
B. DUNLOP, M.B. Binfleld, I3erks.
The Span of Life
To the Editor, Eugenics Review
SIR,-As bearing on the question of The Span of Life, which was discussed in Mr. Bramwell's interesting article in the April number of the EUGENICS REVIEW, the following may, perhaps, be worth noting: MEAN AGE AT DEATH OF HYMN-WRITERS, THE AGES BEING TAKEN FROM The English Hymnal:
37 writers of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries ... 6i *7 years
49 writers of the eighteenth century ... ... ... 68*I years
Io6 writers of- the nineteenth century ... ... ... 68 *6 years C. F. ARDEN-CLOSE.
Mayfield, 22 Christchurch Road, Winchester.

Deterrents to Parenthood
To the Editor, Eugenics Review
SIR,-I feel obliged to comment on some of the remarks made by one of your correspondents in the January issue.
First, as to the suggestion that the fall in the
birth rate of intelligent children is due to apathy
on the part of intelligent women. This may in part be true, but one certainly cannot generalize. In my experience and that of women friends, the fault would appear to be rather on the part of the men than the women. Most men tend to regard women as of inferior intelligence, and it may be for this reason that they also tend to treat those intelligent women whomn they do meet as if they had no sex instincts. I wonder how many of these intelligent but sexless women your correspondent has met. I have yet to meet one who does not hope to marry one day and have children.
One possible deterrent to the woman is the lack of available men. Naturally she wants to marry a man of equal intelligence if only to secure a happy relationship. Unfortunately, however, intelligent men seem to be elusive and many prefer to marry women of less intelligence than themselves. This obviously results in a preponderance of unmarried women among those of higher intelligence.
As to the intelligent woman being the cause of unhappy marriages, this is an extraordinary statement to make. Unhappiness occurs in all types of home, though perhaps there are more separations and divorces among the intelligent because they are better judges of their own limitations and have mOre opportunity, for economic reasons. I cannot give first-hand evidence of happy marriages between equally intelligent people, as none of my friends have yet been married long enough for me to judge, but the Curies are a classical example. I can imagine nothing more conducive to happiness

EUGENICS SOCIETY.

Past Presidents

Honorary Presidents:

SIR FRANCIS GALTFON-

I908-11

MAJOR LEONARD DAIRNNVIN I92S-43

SIRT JCAMEAS ElICIIO-N-BIMoWNE, -M.D., D.Sc., LL.D., F.R.S.
MR. MONTAGUE CRACIKANTHORIP1, K.C.
MAJOIR LEONARi) DAI-1NWIN, SC.D. SIIM BERNAIRD) MALLE-T, K.C.B. Siiz HIu.Nwiuvo ROLLE-STON. BT., G;.C.V.0., K.C.B., M.D., D.SC., LL.D.

I908-19I09 I909-I91I 191I-1928
1929-1932
1933-1935

President: *TIIE LORi) HORDER, G.C.V.O., 1M.D., F.R.C.P.

Chairman of Council: *B. S. BRANIMVELL, M.A., F.R.S.E.

Vice-Presidents:

SIR CHARLES G. DARWIN, K.B.E., M.C.,
MI.A., Sc.D., F.R.S.
*AIRS. E. M. HUBBACK, MI.A. JULIAN-HUXLEY, MI.A., D.Sc., F.R.S.

THE L61RD NEYNES, C.B., M.A. PROF. R. RUGGLES GATES, M.A., PH.D., D.Sc.,
L-L.D., F.R.S.

Honorary Treasurer:
*C. F. CHANCE, M.A

Honorary Librarian: * Miss E. CORRY.

Honorary Secretary: C. 1P. BLACKER, Al.C., M.A., M.D., F.R.C.P.

IENIMBERS OF COUNCIL.

*'ECIL BINNEY, B.A.

L. T. CADBURY, OB.E. A. 'M C(\RR-SAUN DERS, 'M.A.

DR. STELLA CHURCHILL, MI.R.C.S., L.R.C.P.,

T HE LADY DENMIAN, D.B.E.

[D.P.H.

R. AUSTIN FREE'MAN, 'M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P.

D. GRAHAMI HUTTON.

*HON. M\RS. GRANT DUFF.

*\N . T. T. G1UN. rF.R.HIST.S., F.S.G.

D. CARADOG TONES, MN.A.
R. LANGDON-DOWN, M.B.
*.-\UBREIY J. LEiNvIS, 'M.D., F.R.C.P.
E. AM. H1. LLOYD, B.A.
*R. AIARTIN.
MiIE.-. E. IPCTTON.
HON. JOHN STRUTT.
*R. 'M. TIT-MUSS.

* \Iciiber.' of the Ermere' ItCnto-lee.

