ABORTION IN SOVIET RUSSIA -

Has the Time come to Lelize it Elsewhere ?

By HENRY HARRIS, MID.

(An Address given to the Eugenics Society, December 20th, 1932.)

U P to the moment, Soviet Russia is came infected and 4 per cent. died. While

the only European State to legalize holding that abortion was an evil to be com-

abortion for other than purely medi- bated in every possible way, it concluded

cal reasons. A few States-notably Estonia that in the interests of the race and of the

and Czechoslovakia-have considered intro- health of women, repressive measures must

ducing new legislation on the matter, but at present be considered inexpedient. It

have not yet done so.

decreed, therefore, as follows:

Any woman in Russia, who is not more than three months pregnant, can demand an

I. Abortion may be performed free and unimpededly in Soviet hospitals, where

abortion as her indisputable right. If more than three months pregnant, it may be granted her for medical reasons or even eugenic, social, and economic reasons.
In Western Europe, the medical profession and others are becoming increasingly interested in the question of legalized abor-

the maximum of safety is secured; 2. Absolutely no one except a doctor
may perform the operation; 3. Midwives and " Sarah Gamps"
guilty of performing such an operation are deprived of their right to practise and are to be criminally prosecuted before a

tion, and it may be of interest to describe Peoples Court;

and analyze Soviet Russia's thirteen-yearold experiment. Having visited Russia

4. A doctor who procures an abortion for remuneration and as a private ' side-

recently and speaking some Russian, I ven- line ' is to be criminally prosecuted.

ture to do so under six heads: I. The Soviet Laws on Abortion. 2. The Procedure to be adopted by women desiring abortion. 3. The Technic used. 4. Statistics-such as are available.
5. The Soviet Attitude to Abortion. 6. Personal Impressions and Conclusions.

In 1926, a decree of the Peoples Commissariat for Public Health specified the period during which abortion might be performed, and forbade it after the third month of pregnancy unless special permission were obtained from the medical authorities.
In the various decrees which were promulgated and in the Criminal Code, provision is

LAW
Abortion was legalized in Soviet Russia in November 1920, by a decree of the Peoples Commissariat of Public Health and Justice.

made for the prosecution of iidwives, doctors and unskilled operators. In no crustances can a pregnant woman be punished for procuring her own abortion.
PROCEDURE

This decree pointed out: that the num- The candidate for abortion presents her-

ber of European women having recourse to self to the local birth-control or maternity

abortion was continuously growing; that centre where the fact of pregnancy is diag-

repressive measures had led only to secret, nosed. If she is less than three months

dirty, and unskilled abortions with their pregnant, she is referred to a lay committee

aftermath of infection and death; and that who control the gratis beds and who decide

as a result 50 per cent. of the women be- on her suitability for free treatment. If

'9

20 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

either she or her husband is insured, treat- minutes to be her sldard time for the

ment is free.

operation. The scraping was VIgorous, but

Where her health or economic positiou do none of the women semed to suffer any

not seem to justify an abortion; or in the considerable pai despite the lack of

case of a first pregnancy, an attempt is made ansesthetic. the aseptic and antiseptic

by the clinic doctors to dissuade her from the technic was simple, but probably quite ade-

operation. Where she is unattached toga quate.

man, has children already, is a worker, is An English gynecologist standing by was

earning a small wage, or is cramped for room of opinion that scraping is only useful up to

accommodation, she is considered to have an six weeks of pregnancy, after which an

adequate reason.

embryo forceps should be used to empty the

After the operation, she is referred back womb. After the sixth week, in his opinion,

to the clinic, where she is given contracep- it was like washing the inside of a bottle

tive advice and warned that abortion, even with a wire brush instead of a cloth swab;

under the best conditions, is not free from the products of conception were most prob-

harm. She is expected to take reasonable ably left in the womb and their subsequent

contraceptive precautions, and not less than expulsion was attended by risks of recurrent

six months must elapse before another abor- bleeding and infection. But apparently the

tion may be performed.

Russians were having no trouble in this

In Moscow the applicant presents herself respect, and their death rates and illness

to the birth control centre in the Institute rates, as given below, were extraordinanly

for Mother and Child. This institute, which low.

I visited, was founded in 1924, and contains About sixty abortions were being per-

innumerable clinics, research laboratories, formed daily at this clinic, and we were

statistical bureaux, and a popular museum. assured that the womb was rarely ruptured.

Here, too, is housed the State Institute for There had been, if I remember rightly, two

research into contraceptive methods.

or three cases in the year.

The museum is one of the most remarkable The patient gets up from bed on the

and most useful that I have seen. Admission second day, returns home on the fourth, and

is free to all. The walls are vividly splashed receives ten days' leave from work on full

with colourful diagrams, cartoons, and pay.

statistics, so that even the simple-minded

cannot fail to understand. Beautifully made STATISTICS

wax casts represent unabashedly the various I offer such statistics as are available.

stages and complications of labour.

They are not as adequate as I should like.

The Muscovian girl or woman, who spends They refer to (i) The total number of

an occasional hour here, can learn in little abortions performed yearly, and the num-

time all she can possibly wish to know about ber of abortions per ioo births and per I,ooo

her bodily structure and functions. A population; (2) The death rates and illness

museum like this-always available when rates following legalized abortion; (3) Such

the problems of life raise queries in her mind miscellaneous facts as (a) the ages of women

-must surely be a splendid antidote to undergoing abortion, (b) the month of preg-

ignorance and its consequences.

nancy during which abortion has been per-

formed, (c) the reasons given for demanding

TECHNIC

abortion; (4) Changes in the infant mor-

Simple scraping of the womb is invariably performed and an anesthetic is rarely used.

tality and maternal mortality rates that have occurred during the period of legalized

Glycerine or paste methods of inducing abor- abortion.

tion are not used.

i. The number of abortion performed

At a Moscow Abortorium which I visited, yearly in Moscow jumped from 5,500 in

the operator-a woman-considered five 1914 in a population of xY4 million to 89,ooo

ABORTION IN SOVIET RUSSIA

21

in 193 in a population of 3 million. are between 30 and 40, with three to four

While the population doubled itself, the children: in towns the majority are between

number of abortions creased sien-fold. 2o and 30, with one or two children. This is

An analysis of the figures by Genss sug- considered to indicate that in cities lack of

gested that the increase was mainly an dwelling accommodation is the main factor,

apparent oxie and due to the fact that abor- whereas in rural areas the chief reason is

tions were now performed nly and safely, too many children.

which previously had been performed It is estimated that in Moscow and Lenin-

secretly and dangerously. But-there was grad, in I929, only 3 2 per cent. of the total

also a smaller relative increase in abortions number were under 20 years of age.

due probably to more frequent pregnancies. 3(c) If we consider the reans that

(It is interesting to note that in Germany prompt women to demand an abordon, we

it is estimated that the number of abortions find that in 1927, 40-8 per cent. of cases

in I91I was roughly a quarter of a million were for medical reasons-the term being

(240,000); in 1923, a half a million used rather widely-and 59-2 per cent. for

(500,000); in 1924, more than three-quarters social reasons.

of a million (875,000); and in 1927, 4. The Infant mortality rate has fallen

I,ooo,ooo. Berlin has the highest death rate from 29 per cent. in I9II (pre-Soviet) to I6

from abortion in Europe, while Moscow has per cent. at the present time. About the

the lowest.)

maternal mortality rate I have not been able

For every Ioo births in Moscow, 10o2 to get figures, but there is little doubt that,

illicit abortions were performed in 1914; in along with the infant mortality rate, it has

1927 the ratio of abortons to births had fallen considerably in recent years.

jumped to 75 per loo births: in 1931 the ratio was 86 per loo births.

THE SOVIET ATTITUDE

There were in Moscow in 1931, per i,ooo For an explanation of the Soviet attitude

population, 29 5 births and 25 * 43 abortions; the total number of births being I03,250, of abortions 8g,ooo.

to abortion I am indebted chiefly to two men: Dr. Genss of the Institute for Mother and Child, Moscow, and Dr. Batkis of the

In Soviet Russia in the same year there Public Commissariat for Public Health,

were, per x,ooo population, 38-8 births and Moscow.

8 2 abortions.

As I understand it, Soviet Russia, in

2. The death rate following abortion is legalizing abortion, had two main aims:

given officially as i in 25,000. It is esti- i. To safeguard the health and happi-

mated that out of 175,000 abortions per- ness of mother and child.

formed in Moscow there were 9 deaths-i.e., 2. To improve the social status of

i in I9,000.

woman by giving her more control over

The llness rate following abortion is now her mode of living, and specifically-over

0- I per cent.-i.e., i in 1,000. Before her sex life.

legalization it was 19i9 per cent.; in 19211923, just after legalization, it was 4 75 per
cent.
3(a) With regard to the month of pregnancy during which abortion has been per-
formed: in 1926, 86 - 2 per cent. were performed in the second month, 12 per cent.

It was felt that abortion performed under modern surgical conditions was a minor evil -for to interrupt a physiological cycle is always an evil-but as yet a necessary one; whereas secret and dirty abortions were a major evil, and a totally unnecessary one.
While adopting what seemed to be the

in the third month, I *3 per cent. in the first only logical procedure, Soviet Russia

month, and only o - 5 per cent. after the decided to wage a continuous campaign

third month.

against abortion: by propaganda through

3(b) As for the ages of women under- films, museums, etc., by encouraging birth

going abortion: in rural areas the majority control and opening an institute for research

22 UGENICS REVIEW

in cotraceptive methods, and by improving and has wiped out the dreadful death rate

the social and econoc conditions of the and illness rate following secret and dirty

mother and providing her with aeches, abortions. Her second aim is too large a

welfare centres, etc.

subject for discson here.

Legalized abortion was to be a weapon Even the most superficial survey of the

against the dreadful consequences of illicit Russian thirteen-yea-old e

i

abortion; but birth control and social mea- legalized abortion impresses one with its

sures were to constitute a further weapon success and its logic.

against the need for abortion. Abortion was It is seventy-one years ago since our

to be a second line of reserve behind birth present abortion laws were promulgated in

control; under controlled conditions it the Offences against the Person Act of i86I.

seemed to be the logical adjuvant and corol- Since then we are being icreasingly com-

lary of a system of birth control that is not pelled to consider legalized abortion as well

yet Ioo per cent. certain.

as birth control and sterilization as possible

To Drs. Genss and Batkis, abortion and means of influencing the fitness and happi-

birth control are minor and subsidiary issues ness and quality of the race.

in the larger problem of improving the Birth control has already been accepted.

social status of woman; for Soviet Russia There seems to be a considerable body of

professes to take a special interest in the authoritative opinion in favour of legalizing

status of women, children, and racial mino- abortion, and I consider that the present

rities. This aspect of the problem is too attitude towards it is similar to that existing

large to be discussed here.

towards birth control fifteen years ago.

A third aspect of abortion-the eugenic- We may well ask: Has the time come to

is not being specially emphasized in Soviet legalize abortion?

Russia; yet eugenic considerations may be

accepted as valid reasons for permitting

abortion even after the third month of preg-

nancy.

N.B.-I am indebted for information and help

with official documents, etc., to Dr. Genss of the

PERSONAL IMPRESSIONS AND CONCLUSIONS
There seems to be no doubt that Soviet

Institute for Mother and Child, Moscow; Dr. Batkis of the Peoples Commissariat for Public Health, Moscow; Mr. G. Schmidt of the U.S.S.R. Embassy, London; and the Society for Cultural

Russia has succeeded amply in her first aim Fkelations, London.

Eugenics Review, VoeL XXV, No. 1.

