FOREWORD
THIS THIRD ISSUE of the Jubilee and final volume of the REVIEW contains as its main material an account of the activities of the Society, in so far as they have not already been recorded, and a history of the REVIEW. No one reading throughthefifty-ninevolumes of the REVIEW and the sixty Annual Reports of the Society could fail to be impressed by the wealth of interesting material which has been published in the REVIEW, often from the pens of most distinguished men-and women-and by the variety and vigour of the Society's activities over the years. Moreover, the Society, having become comparatively well-off at an early stage, has been able to offer financial assistance to many other organizations as well as to individuals. It helped financially, for instance, with launching the Annals of
Eugenics, which later changed its name to Annals of Human Genetics. Again, by reason of
possessing spacious premises at 69 Eccleston Square it has been able to offer accommodation to other bodies in their formative stages. Thus, spare offices at Eccleston Square have been occupied rent-free successively by the Population Investigation Committee, the Family Planning Association and the International Planned Parenthood Federation. The rapid development and current importance of these organizations makes it pleasant to recall this early assistance from the Eugenics Society.
In compiling the material for this number, one has again been led to wonder why, in the light of its record, the work of the Society has not been more widely appreciated. Even allowing for some over-enthusiasm in its early days and some later actions susceptible of misinterpretation, one can only conclude, proverbial sayings notwithstanding, that the importance of the Society would have been more widely recognized had it had a less evocative name-doubly evocative after the prostitution of the word "eugenic" by Nazi Germany. Be that as it may, the Society has a record of which it can be proud and a future full of promise.
A. S. P.

ER-L

141

