REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS.

71

family life of the pre-Revolution period into the family life of to-day.

For a long period after the establishment of the Napoleonic code, the

middle-class, organized into a compact network of officialdom, preserved

a high standard of rectitude, and maintained the traditions of rigid

parental authority. Circumstances, however, occurred which discredited

official rank to some extent, and an aristocracy of wealth arose in its

place, with a consequent lowering of moral standard. Divorce was re-

introduced, and family life deteriorated.

The Napoleonic code, which made an equal division of property

compulsory, gradually tended to reduce the size of families, and the

practice of neo-Malthusianism spread throughout the ranks.

Parental authority decreased as the place of the child in the family

rose in importance. The former spartan methods of training now made

way for a highly specialized and scientific system of rearing, which, though

excellent in many respects, rather tended to develop the mental and

physical side of the child at the expense of the moral.

In the industrial world, the woman wage-earner became a new factor

to be reckoned with, and the bad effects of married women's work upon

the husband, home, and children are traced in a very forcible and con-

vincing manner.

It is impossible in a short notice to give a fair idea of the scope of

this work. As an illuminating exposition of the laws of cause and effect

it may be recommended to all those interested in modern solutions of

social problems.

EDITH CORRY.

Leopold, LEWIS. Prestige: A Psychological Study of Social Estimates.

London. T. Fisher Unwin; 1913; price ios. 6d.; pp. 352.

THIS is a curious and unsatisfactory book, partly on account of the

nature of the subject and partly on account of the style, which is

often obscure and involved. The sentence summing up the outlines

of the argument is an example of difficult and uneasy English: "We

shall endeavour to prove the recipient of prestige, then its possessor,

and finally we shall strive, in the psychological situation of both,

to find that peculiar constantly recurring essential point which-setting

aside all coincidences-characterises prestige " (page 46). Again, the

constant and unnecessary use of italics is confusing to the eye and

mind : " For instance, the prestige spell of long past times that have

become up to date, of exiles who are expected home but live at a

distance, or of the Papacy, which is surrounded by religious sentiment

but shut off from the world in the Vatican, are classical instances "

"(PpraegsetiIg0e9).of

Even in its context, such a sentence, also in italics, intellectual career paralyses a good many possibilities

as of

proletarian self-consciousness" (page 230) is difficult of apprehension

by the ordinary man.

But apart from obscurities of style, prestige seems to be one of those

intangible creations of the human race which defy analysis, and even

350 pages of careful study, full of suggestive examples culled from

history and anthropology, do not bring us much nearer to a real under-

standing of the nature of prestige. Readers interested in the dark

places of human psychology and in the irrational values attached to

different actions and characteristics at different periods of time will find

much to stimulate their curiosity, but we put down the book with the

feeling that prestige has been successful in defying the efforts which

would reduce it to an affair of paper and ink and give concrete expres-

sion to its indefinable psychological effects.

C. D. W.

Parkinson, RIGHT REV. MONSIGNOR HENRY, D.D., Ph.D. A Primer of Social Science. London. P. S. King and Son; 1913; price 2s..;
pp. 276.
THIS little book was written at the suggestion of xmemberrs of the Catholic Social Guild. "It is intended for beginners, and aims at pre-

