PSYCHOLOGICAL SYNDROMES IN CENTRAL NERVOUS DISEASE
A Genetic Interpretation *
By AUBREY J. LEWIS, M.D., M.R.C.P.

HE investigation here briefly reported widely adduced, and of which Bostroem is

T is based on the study of syndromes perhaps the chief exponent, assumes in the

commonly regarded as endogenous or patient a specific predisposition to one of the

"functional," but here occurring in relation varieties of mental disorder, which is " re-

to organic changes in the central nervous leased " by the damage to the central nervous

system. The cases I have investigated in- system. There are subsidiary forms of this

clude cerebral tumour, arteriosclerosis, en- explanation-e.g. that the endogenous syn-

cephalitis lethargica, chorea, disseminated drome is a reaction to the changed conditions

sclerosis, G.P.I. (untreated or treated), produced by the tissue damage (whether

pernicious anemia, myxcedema, and septi- evidenced mainly in physical or mental

cemia. They showed, in characteristic form, form); but these too lean upon the

acute mania, self-reproachful depression, specificity of the patient's Anlage.

paranoid schizophrenia, severe obsessional Neither of the two main views, valid

disturbances and hysterical dissociation though they are, covers all the phenomena.

(the last so typical in one case, that an Evidence of specific predisposition prior to

eminent author has written a whole book the illness may be completely lacking, say, in

about it alone, solely from the point of view an encephalitic who has now a gross obses-

of the hysterical production of multiple per- sional syndrome: and, on the other hand, no

sonalities-he was unaware of the con- such disturbance of function, as, for example,

comitant organic illness). Various writers an acute mania presents, can at present be

have reported similar- cases in other gross accounted for etiologically in terms of

structural, toxic or nutritional diseases of the structural or humoral pathology. But the

central nervous system. In the explanation appropriateness and complementary nature

of such cases, two main views have been put of both views may be conceded, if their

forward:

incompleteness and assumptions are recog-

i. That the site and nature of the lesion, nized.

in the central nervous system or more widely distributed, have been responsible for the THE BEARING OF RESEARCH IN

phenomena, which are specific for this lesion, GENETICS

rather than for this individual. The hysteri- A view profitable for further study may be

cal phenomena that may follow carbon derived, I think, from genetic biology. The

monoxide poisoning, and the obsessional conception of rigid Mendelian characters,

symptoms following encephalitis lethargica transmitted by particular genes and either

have been accounted for thus. Specht first dominant or recessive, has been modified in

gave this view prominence; it has been the light of later research. I refer to such

developed especially in relation to lesions of studies as those on Gammarus, Ephaestia,

the basal ganglia since.

and of course, Drosophila. The notion of

2. The other explanation, which is more specific fixed predispositions to particular

mental disorders must be revised likewise.

* A paper read at the International Neurological Congress, held in London from July 29th to August 2nd.

It is now known in genetics that the fruit fly, on which our whole theory of the gene has

213

214 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

been based, has only a minority of con- environmental factors than those for the

stantly manifesting or " good " genes; in the special tendency in question. Moreover, this

majority a number of influences, quite apart is true, not only for morbid tendencies or for

from those producing mutations, determine individual tendencies in general, but also for

in what form, and at what stage of develop- those to be found in differing degrees of

ment, the gene-manifestation shall occur, if intensity in all human beings. It does not

at all. The genotypic milieu is itself signi- therefore exclude from genetic consideration

ficant in this direction, as is also the cyto- predispositions, such as the hysterical, that

plasm.

are in some degree present in all of us.

But more important than these for the

particular problem we are considering are the TECHNIQUE OF INVESTIGATION

environmental factors which can be demon- To investigate the environmental condi-

strated to affect the kind and the intensity of tions for the manifestation of inherent

manifestation. Temperature and nutrition characters in the human being is obviously a

have been most investigated in this regard. vast enterprise. But there are limited fields

Such findings concerning the gene have, of favourable for such inquiry and in which it

course, so far been shown only in a few may be of more immediate value. The con-

creatures remote from man, especially Droso- currence of an endogenous syndrome with

phila, but then our whole gene theory of a restricted somatic anomaly, especially one

heredity is based on such studies. Moreover, affecting the central nervous system, is just

the findings are in accordance with develop- such a special field. Whereas in psychiatry

mental physiology, by which their signi- generally the study of environmental deter-

ficance is amplified. There, many studies minants is enormously difficult because of the

have shown that it is upon successive variety of influences conceivably at work,

developmental reactions to the environmental here we have a special instance where at least

conditions that the manifestation of heredi- one of the possible determinants of manifes-

tarily laid-down structures and functions tation can be fixed.

depends. Constitution- is thus a product of Where, as in two of my cases, a severe

environment acting during development, not paraphrenic condition present for years in a

solely a hereditarily predetermined concrete myxcedematous woman clears up when she

bodying-forth of the genotype. The role of is given sufficient thyroid, and reappears

chemical and physical changes has been when she ceases to take her tablets, a precise

worked out in many instances; nutritional, statement can be made as to an environ-

thermal, toxic, and electrical influences have mental condition which when satisfied per-

been studied. And these environmental mits a disposition to become manifest. It is

factors can modify the effects of rate-deter- permissible here to speak as though a dis-

mining genes, too, as in the eye-colour of position were in this case certain, since

Gammarus.

nothing can be realized but what was hitherto

The importance of this for the psychoses is potential; thus even though the predisposi-

suggested. The changes going on in the rest tion had not been suggested by like disorders

of the organism are themselves additional in antecedents or collaterals, or by milder

conditions affecting the time and manner of manifestation as an anomaly of personality

manifestation of a particular hereditary in the patient, it must have been lying

tendency: the endocrines furnish a most available.

striking instance of this. In general it may So much study in the heredity of mental

be said that, for any given hereditary disorder has been directed at a " yes " or

tendency, certain conditions must be satis- " no" problem, as though the universally

fied before it can become- manifest: these present predispositions, which made the

conditions are partly environmental, and response to any particular environmental

partly within the organism, though in that change the same in all persons, could there-

case dependent on other genes and other fore be ignored or even denied existence,

PSYCHOLOGICAL SYNDROMES IN CENTRAL NERVOUS DISEASE 2I5

while the hereditary characters with strong than one would have expected. The mono-

intensity of manifestation-Penetranz as zygotic fellow-twins, for example, of two of

Timofeef calls it-were assumed to be my cases in this series-both encephalitics

independent of environmental influence. -showed no indications, either in the per-

I think that here one has a method of sonality or in the response to infections, of

investigation which is in a small way the such predispositions as had become manifest

counterpart of the twin method. If, in the in the affected twin in the form of, respec-

twin, one has hereditary equipment and tively, schizophrenia and severe obsessional

morbid manifestation controlled, with en- disorder. Nor have I found that the pre-

vironmental influence as the variable, here ceding personality has, in even a majority

one has the environmental determinant and of my cases, shown any of the familiar

the morbid manifestation as the known characteristics regarded as indicating an

features. Of course the environmental deter- incompletely manifest predisposition, though

minant, whether it be, say, an encephalitis or in the antecedents evidence of this was

an intoxication or an endocrine disturbance, forthcoming. There are others in whom such

may be only one of several possible deter- characteristics or actually a similar previous

minants, or the last of a series of such attack had occurred, so that apparently the

environmental conditions, essential during range of conditions necessary for mani-

development (or, later, in the more stable festation was wider than in the other group,

phase) if the morbid predisposition is to be or perhaps lay less directly in the somatic

exhibited. But it is the final and indispen- sphere.

sable one, and in it the interplay between a But it is only in the most tentative way

latent capacity on the one hand, and a direct that one can report impressions gained from

intervention and change of milieu on the small material. If such cases could be

other, can be examined.

collected and published systematically, as

This is the point at which very profitable disorders in twins now are, valuable data

study can be made as to the somatopsychic would accumulate. And the emphasis would

relations ;. one sees the realization of what properly lie on the conditions, single or serial,

has been hitherto only a functional poten- which were essential for the manifestation

tiality, its liberation by means of a noxa, of individual or universal predispositions. I

which can in some instances be applied and have not mentioned, for reasons of time, any

the result predicted with experimental certi- distinction between the intra- and extra-

tude. organismal environment, or the accompani-

ment of the endogenous syndrome by

A WORKING HYPOTHESIS

exogenous features, or the changes that are more than only cerebral, e.g. in nutritional

My own series of cases is necessarily small. disorders. I have left out these and other

I can therefore present no conclusions. relevant points, but they would not, I think,

Tentatively, it seems that the specificity of when considered in detail, be found to conflict

the environmental requirement can be greater with the general view I have put forward.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVII, No. 8

