PARENTAGE OF DEFECTIVES

By C. P. BLACKER, M.A., M.D., M.R.C.P.

W HAT would be the value of eugenic Thus, it was easy to calculate from the

sterilization if limited to mental papers by continental experts how many of

defectives, but applied to them in their oligophrenic propositi would not have

the most thorough-going way? Authorities been born if all the parents of the propositi

differ on the subject. A view commonly held who were also oligophrenic had been steril-

by persons with first-hand experience is that, ized a generation ago; but we had great

whereas mental defectiveness can be attri- difficulty in ascertaining from the papers how

buted to genetic rather than to environ- many of the oligophrenic propositi were

mental causes in the majority of cases, only in sufficiently low-grade to be classified in this

a small percentage-something in the neigh- country as mental defectives (and not as

bourhood of 5 per cent.-do these genetic retarded normals), and how many of these

causes take the form of certifiable defective- had parents of the same degree of mental

ness in one or both parents. JHence, it is backwardness. In this connection the Brock

argued, if a sterilization law, limited to Report says: " The fact that so many of the

mental defectives, but applied to them in parents are border-line cases explains, to a

the most thorough-going way, had been put great extent, the wide variation in the esti-

into effect a generation ago, so that all defec- mates given by various investigators of the

tives then in the country had been prevented proportion of parents who are mentally

from breeding, the incidence of mental defective. A slight modification of the

deficiency in this generation would have standards might result in a large increase in

been reduced by about 5 per cent. only. the number of persons regarded as mentally

Though the majority of the remaining 95 per defective among these border-line cases.

cent. of defectives would owe their defective- Clinically, there is no definite line separating

ness to hereditary causes, in general these mental defect from dullness; the one condi-

would not take the form of certifiable de- tion merges into the other."

fectiveness in their parents.

Two recently published investigations

Much attention was given to this subject upon children throw some light on this prob-

when the Society presented its evidence lem. The first was conducted by Dr. Frederick

before the Brock Committee. In reviewing Grundy in an area in East Suffolk; the

the continental literature, as we had been second by Dr. H. 0. Wildenskov in Denmark.

asked to do by Mr. Brock, we found that the Dr. Grundy has very kindly allowed me to

diversity of standards adopted by different see his original thesis, an abstract of which

authors in estimating mental deficiency made was published in the British Medical Journal

it difficult to interpret their findings in terms of June 30th, I934; the volume in which

of the criteria which are employed in this Dr. Wildenskov's investigation is described

country. This difficulty was particularly was reviewed by Dr. J. A. Fraser Roberts in

marked in connection with the term " oligo- the EUGENICS REVIEW of July I934 (p. I52).

phrenia," which, when used by German and From Dr. Grundy's thesis the following

Scandinavian writers, has a wider meaning figures are quoted: The population investi-

than the terms amentia or mental defective- gated comprised some 45,500 persons. The

ness employed here. That is to say, there are elementary schools contained 6,648 children,

classified as oligophrenic in Germany and I4-6 of the total population. Of these, 750

Denmark many persons who, in this country, were recorded as dull or defective on the

would not be regarded as defectives, but as teachers' lists, 550 children being over the

" retarded normals."

age of 8. This figure includes i65 children

263

264 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

who were ' mentally defective-i.e. I35 the 50 defectives in each of these two groups,

feeble-minded, 23 imbeciles and 7 idiots. he did not furnish the information necessary

Dr. Grundy obtained family histories of to correlate the degree of defectiveness exist-

I49 of these defectives, I5 of whom were ing between the defective propositi and their

illegitimate. These I49 defective propositi parents. He has, however, very kindly sent

had 9 defective sibs, so that family histories me this information in a private communica-

were available for all of I58 mental defectives. tion. He has ascertained how many of the

How many of these would not have been oligophrenes in groups A and B, whose

born if parenthood had been prevented in all intelligence quotient fell below the figure of

mentally defective persons of the preceding 75 (i.e. who could be counted as mentally

generation ?

defective in the English sense), had one or

Dr. Grundy draws an interesting distinc- both parents with a similar limitation of

tion between defectiveness in a social and intelligence. He writes as follows:

in an educational sense. " Rather more than half of the children," he writes in his article in the British Medical Journal, " who are certifiable as defectives for the purposes of the Education Acts, will not be defective in a social sense in adult life in a rural area. That is to say that there exists a wide disparity
between the standards used in the educational and social classifications of feeble-mindedness, and it is difficult to avoid the conclusion that the use of the single term ' feebleminded' in two distinct senses, both of which are legal and not scientific, is highly confusing in an enquiry of this sort." In examining his pedigrees, it became clear that,
of the 149 defective propositi and their 9 sibs, io had one or both parents defective in a social sense, and 38 in an educational sense. If, therefore, all persons defective in a social and educational sense had been prevented from breeding a generation ago, 48 out of the I58 defectives, or almost exactly 30 per cent., would not have been born.
Dr. H. 0. Wildenskov, who conducted the second investigation referred to above, is the medical superintendent of the Keller

" For the school material in group A,
I obtained the following results: in 20
school families, one or both parents were
mental defectives. They had a total of
i2o children; 3I were dead at the time of the research, 23 were normal or unknown,
ii were debile, 43 dullards,* and 5I,
including the 20 propositi, were mental
defectives. Had all mentally defectivepersons in Denmark been sterilized a generation ago,
20 (40 per cent.) of my school propositi would not have been born; and, in addition to these, another 3I mentally defective sibs of the propositi would not have been born. For the asylum material in group B, only one family had one or both (actually both) parents mentally defective. These had 7 children, of whom two were dead, one was debile, one a dullard, and three mental defectives. Thus in group B, only one of the 50 propositi, i.e. 2 per cent., would not have been born if all
persons mentally defective in our sense had been sterilized in Denmark a genera-
tion ago."

Institution for Mental Defectives, Brejning, In the EUGENICS REVIEW of October I933

Denmark. Briefly, his chief aim was to (page I84), I wrote a short memorandum

ascertain if the milder grades of defect were upon an investigation conducted by Dr. L. S.

more strongly hereditary than the severer Penrose upon IOO sub-cultural families, con-

grades. Two groups of 50 children were taining defectives who were inmates of the

studied; group A consisting of children in a Royal Institution, Colchester. Of these Ioo

special school, who suffered from a mild propositi who were defective in a " sub-

degree of defect, and group B of asylum cultural " sense, 28 (28 per cent.) had one or

children, whose defect was more serious. both parents certifiable as mentally defec-

Though Dr. Wildenskov presented in his paper a most thorough and detailed analysis of the family histories and backgrounds of

* The terms "debile" and "dullard" express mild
degrees of oligophrenia which do not amount to mental defectiveness as appraised in this country.

PARENTAGE OF DEFECTIVES

265

tive, and Dr. Penrose estimates that approxi- way, would have more appreciable eugenic

mately a quarter of the inmates of the Royal results than has been suggested by some

Institution, Colchester, come from sub- authorities.

cultural families. On the improbable assump- In conclusion, however, it must be clearly

tion, therefore, that none of the remaining recognized that the type of sterilization

defectives who fall outside the sub-cultural recommended by the Brock Committee is

group (three-quarters of the inmates of the strictly voluntary and that, to begin with,

Royal Institution) had a mentally defective at any rate, only a small proportion of de-

parent, the minimum reduction attainable by fectives for whom it might be regarded as

preventing the parenthood a generation ago of appropriate would apply to be sterilized. It

all certifiable defectives in the community would, therefore, be idle to expect appreci-

would be a quarter of 28 per cent., i.e. 7 per able results from legalizing a measure of

cent. But it must be remembered that the pro- voluntary sterilization limited to mental de-

portion of sub-cultural and other types of de- fectives. From the eugenic standpoint the

fectives in the Royal Institution at Colchester chief value of the recommendations of the

is much smaller than that which obtains on Brock Committee are that they advocate

an average in the general community-this for voluntary sterilization for the probable

the reason that lower grades of defectives carriers of mental defectiveness, i.e., for the

tend to find their way into institutions, and types of person who, in this country, would

are found there in larger numbers than in the be regarded as retarded normals and who,

general community.

in Denmark, would be regarded as debile

The conclusion which may tentatively be persons or dullards. In this connection the

drawn from the very careful investigations shocking family history quoted on page 87

above referred to is that, if the parents of of the Brock Report is interesting. In this

defectives are closely scrutinized, it will be family I7 children had been born, of whom

found that more than 5 per cent. are born of I2 were living. Of these I2 living children, 8

parents one or both of whom are mental de- were defective. But neither the father nor the

fectives; and that the principle of steriliza- mother of this family was defective. They were

tion, if limited to mental defectives, but carriers of defectiveness, that is retarded

applied to them in the most thorough-going normals.

New (3rd) edition completely revised and enlarged
PARENTHOOD:

DESIGN OR ACCIDENT?
A MANUAL OF BIRTH CONTROL
By MICHAEL FIELDING

BRITISH MEDICAL JOURNAL: Not only the most popular but the best presentation and exposition

of the subject,

LANCET: One of the most impartial and balanced discussions of the practical and technical aspects of

birth control.

MEDICAL TIMES: The very best treatise on the subject. It has our unqualified approval.

INTERNATIONAL MEDICAL GROUP: The best practical handbook that has yet appeared.

Pp. 208 with 8 illustrations.

29. paper 3s. 6d. cloth

WILLIAMS & NORGATE LTD., London, W.C.1

Eugenics Review, VoL XXVI, No. 4.

