ANALYSIS OF THE BROCK REPORT i

By MAJOR LEONARD DARWIN

V OLUNTARY eugenic sterilization has frequently been advocated in the pages of this REVIEW ; fire on this
subject having been opened by Havelock Ellis in our first volume about a quarter of a
century ago. Contemporaneously with this long and somewhat desultory discussion in England, the experiment was actually being
made in California, and no doubt the accounts of it reaching here from time to time helped gradually to rub off the crust of our con-
servatism, a crust not always to be despised.

In the same year Dr. Langdon-Down and Dr. Blacker were received at Westminster by the
Medical Committee of the House of Commons, with the subsequent result that, on July 2Ist, I93I, Major Church, M.P., introduced a Bill
limited to mental defectives under the tenminute rule. It was rejected (by I67 votes to 89), as was anticipated, but it was of great value in convincing Members of Parliament and the public that sterilization was a live
issue. This Bill was supported by no other
society besides our own.

THIS SOCIETY'S RECORD
By I926 matters had sufficiently advanced for the Society to declare its policy on this subject; for in the " Outline " then published it was stated that when liberty " is socially objectionable only because it would involve the risk of procreation, and when such liberty is permitted, sterilization" should be performed with the consent of all parties concerned (EUGENICS REVIEW, VOl. XVIII, p. 95). The next step, as far as our Society was concerned, was the drafting of a sterilization Bill and its appearance in our
REVIEW in October I928 (p. i66).
In order to make a more rapid and practical advance, a Committee of the Society was subsequently appointed, which at once proceeded to do much valuable work. What
came to be known as the " buff pamphlet " was published, in which the whole subject
was discussed, and of which in its various editions more than 20,000 copies have been distributed. It indicated the full programme of the Society, voluntary sterilization for
mental defectives, mental convalescents and sufferers from or carriers of physical disorders being advocated. Other pamphlets on the same topic were issued, including one by Mr. Cecil Binney on the legal aspects of sterilization. In I930 a Bill was drafted for the Society by a parliamentary draftsman, which was subsequently included in the buff pamphlet.

A UNANIMOUS REPORT
The next step in advance was the demand
on the part of a number of bodies, including the Central Association for Mental Welfare, for the appointment of a Royal Commission on the subject. Luckily, this was not exactly the course actually adopted, for such a Commission is, as I have heard an eminent civil servant remark, an excellent device for a government which wishes to shelve a disagreeable subject for some years. Instead, the Minister of Health, Sir Hilton Young, being desirous of making real progress,
appointed a Departmental Committee to consider the whole question. The members selected were obviously chosen with the object of obtaining valuable practical results; for the committee consisted of
persons of both sexes of very wide and varied experiences. And the results fully justify the selection made.
One of the most remarkable features of this report is that it is signed without dissent by every member of the committee. This result indicates great tact on the part of the chairman, and if it should come to be known as the Brock Report, that will be but a suitable tribute to his skill. Of course, such " complete harmony " does prove a full agreement on all the main issues; but there must have been, we cannot but suspect, many minor points on which it was felt that silence would

9

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

be more serviceable than disagreement. any time? This would be a valuable safe-

Those who are familiar with the history of guard both as to the conduct of the actual

reform in regard to poor law, divorce, etc., operation and as to the nature of the advice

will agree, I believe, that minority reports given beforehand as to its advisability. The

have often acted as most efficient impedi- article in our last issue by Dr. Tietze, on the

ments in the path of progress. The Com- Graz sterilization trial (p. 259), points to the

mittee is to be congratulated on the report possibility of quacks either making money by

as a whole, and on having set such a valuable sterilizing young men or at all events of

example in this respect.

unscrupulously advocating such a proceed-

ANOMALIES IN EXISTING LAW

ing. The seriousness of the operation on women, and the strength of their desire for

As to the legal questions involved, we parenthood, would make it unlikely that they

learn that " in practice it appears to be would be easily persuaded to consent. Young

almost universally accepted that'" the men might, however, well be tempted by a

eugenic sterilization of persons of normal person in search of a fee, with illicit sexual

mentality is illegal, though the matter has intercourse as a bait; and whether some

not been decided in court (p. 6). Neverthe- extra precaution should not be taken in the

less we are also told that " at present the case of minors, in order to save them from

well-to-do can and do get themselves the shame and sorrow of waking up to the

sterilized if they wish " (p. 43). In fact, the situation when it was too late, is well worthy

existing merely possible illegality is not a of consideration. Probably it would be

complete deterrent, and this is certainly sufficient if, as suggested inthe Report (p. 47),

objectionable both as indicating an apparent the consent of a parent or guardian had to be

injustice to the poor and as resulting in some obtained before the sterilization of a minor

dysgenic sterilization. But should we not would be authorized; for then it would be

here inquire whether, after the passing of a known that the secret was not confined to

sterilization Act on the lines indicated by the the operating surgeons, and the possibility

Report, a medical practitioner might not be of its becoming known elsewhere would

prosecuted for an unauthorized sterilization induce caution on the part of the patient.

and acquitted ? If this should occur it would make the provisions of such an Act useless THE NEED FOR DISCLOSURE

in so far as they rendered surgeons free from Another danger to be guarded against will

criminal and civil proceedings after perform- be that of the sterilized person marrying

ing an unauthorized sterilization. It is also without informing the spouse of his steriliza-

stated in the Report that eugenic sterilization tion. This possibility would be best dealt

should never " be performed without two with in a separate act concerning marriage,

medical recommendations " (p. 43); though in which it might be enacted that certain

if things go on as at present, there will some- certificates should be exchanged between

times only be one operator concerned. The the parties concerned before the ceremony.

Committee, who must have realized the Irretrievable damage might, however, be

situation, may have felt that to suggest the done by a sterilized man by merely obtaining

safeguards necessary to make their proposals the affections of a woman; because if she

legally watertight was not their affair. But only found out the fact of sterility after her

in any case this matter ought to be considered engagement, more or less serious trouble

in advance.

would generally be inevitable. No doubt as

STERILIZATION BY UNAUTHORIZED PERSONS

a rule " the procedure should be treated as
strictly confidential " (p. 45) ; but it might be worth considering whether, especially in

In the first place, would it not be advan- regard to normal unmarried males, the mem-

tageous to make it a crime for anyone not a bers of the medical profession should not

medical practitioner to sterilize anyone at regard it as part of their duty to point out

ANALYSIS OF THE BROCK REPORT

II

these dangers before operating and subsequently on certain occasions. In any case, the doctors concerned have to report the operation, and they should realize that they are acting not merely as doctors, but also in what is nearly a judicial capacity; for they will be administering what amounts to " a kind of case law" (p. 45).
A SAFEGUARD FOR PRACTITIONERS
It might seem illogical not also to make it a crime for a medical practitioner to perform a eugenic sterilization operation without permission; but it is to be hoped that this will not be considered to be necessary. If it lay with the operating surgeon to decide whether a sterilizing operation on a female should be regarded as eugenic or therapeutic, then to make eugenic sterilization only a criminal offence would be useless; for he would always be able to plead therapeutic necessity. If, on the other hand, the surgeon, when he regarded an operation which he was about to perform as being therapeutic, knew that he would subsequently run the risk of legal proceedings on the ground that he ought to have regarded it as being eugenic, the results might be very harmful. Doctors must be responsible for their recommendations, and if they " are reluctant to accept this responsibility, the whole system inevitably breaks down" (p. 45) and many necessary operations would not be performed. As soon as the door to authorized eugenic sterilization is opened, unauthorized sterilization will cease almost entirely. The medical profession must be trusted in this respect, and if any further disciplinary safeguards prove to be necessary, then their administration had better be left in the hands of the General Medical Council.
A PIONEER STUDY The Report contains a brief but excellent
summary of our existing knowledge in regard to the heredity of mental defect, on which, of course, the whole structure of their recommendations is built. I cannot, however, refrain from remarking that the Committee seem to me to be unjustly severe in the tone of their comments on the work of Dr. H. H.

Goddard. Pioneers are practically certain to make some mistakes, whilst after a lapse of twenty years comments can be made on any investigation with little apprehension that they will ultimately turn out to be blundering. There was at the date of its publication no English work at all comparable to Goddard's Feeblemindedness, and to indicate what was at all events possible in the way of systematic research was in itself an achievement of considerable value.
THE " CARRIER " PROBLEM
Before the publication of this Report, we all hoped that it would recommend the voluntary sterilization of mental defectives, whilst many of us feared that it would not open the door to the sterilization of those who are merely carriers of a mental or physical defect. I believe that my memory does not play me false when I recall Dr. Tredgold having said to me some years ago that sterilization would really be more useful in the case of high-grade mental defectives, because in their case it was impracticable to ensure sterility by segregation. Now highgrade defectives, who have relatives who are definitely defective, constitute the type most certain to be carriers of mental defect; and I think that Dr. Tredgold, as an eminent member of this Committee, may well congratulate himself on helping to open the door to their sterilization.
It will be as well, however, here to note that the word " carrier " is somewhat vague in its implication. In regard to certain physical defects, which are known to be dependent on the coming together of two recessive genes, the carrier is obviously he who carries one of them. But very few now believe that the inheritance of mental defect is as simple as this. It is more probable that several factors, some probably completely recessive, but others perhaps not so, contribute to produce mental defect. Assuming for the purpose of illustration that five loci are concerned, then there may exist a very large number of forms intermediate between the normal and the certifiable defective, and any one of this finely graded series might be classed as a carrier. Now a little considera-

I2 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

tion will indicate that in all cases, however an obligation is thrown on the State to see

few be the loci concerned, a presumed that the individual can freely exercise his

carrier may be perfectly normal. Hence the right when it has been thus established.

decision as to whether sterilization is to be permitted or not will really have to depend THE NEXT STEP

entirely on the estimated probability of the If, as we hope, an Act is passed legalizing

offspring or later descendants of the indi- voluntary sterilization on the lines recom-

vidual in question being defective; and this mended by the Brock Committee, that will

probability must, in its turn, depend on no doubt be an end to one chapter of the

statistical research. And if it should in conse- work of our Society; but it ought equally

quence come to be boldly and openly ad- certainly also to be the opening of a new

mitted that it is justifiable to act in such chapter. All that this reform will do will be

matters as sterilization on a mere probability, to open a now nearly closed door; and a

this will, in my opinion, in itself constitute door, though open, may remain unused. The

a great step in advance.

measure being on a voluntary basis, persua-

Though the Committee definitely recom- sion will be necessary to ensure beneficial

mend that sterilization should be permitted results, and we should, therefore, now inquire

where there is " reasonable ground for be- who should be the persuaders and who are to

lieving" that defects may be transmitted be persuaded.

(p. 4I), yet they seem to suggest as a possible In the first place, as regards certified

alternative that the criterion should be the mental defectives, it is their parents and

actual production of a defective child. The guardians who will have to be influenced in

objection to this latter proposal is that, be- order to gain their consent. Many of them

fore the defect in a child is noticed, several will belong to the social problem group and

other children may already have been born. many will, therefore, be both uneducated

Such a criterion would be most valuable as and stupid. The persuaders will need much

an alternative but certainly not as a substi- tact and patience. In dealing with carriers,

tute. many of whom will also be of low intelligence,

THE " RIGHT " TO BE STERILIZED

the difficulties to be encountered will be much the same. Turning to the defectives them-

It may be worth noting that it is held that selves, their consent will as a rule be easily

in the above-mentioned circumstances the obtainable, and it is indeed chiefly desirable

" parent should have the right to be steril- in order to prevent any possibility of violence

ized'" (p. 4I), it having been previously being used.

stated that " sterilization ought to be re- Then as to the persuaders, where are we to

garded as a right and not as a punishment " find them? Here will be the main difficulty.

(p. 40). Now this word " right " is one which Large numbers of persons have by now

is very convenient to use but very hard to acquired valuable knowledge concerning

define. One important authority has de- mental defect as members of local Mental

clared that a right possessed by one person Welfare Associations and as voluntary

always implies that an obligation is thrown workers in connection with hospitals and

on some other person or persons. No doubt asylums, and here will be the most valuable

the Committee hold that sterilization should recruiting ground. Members of local govern-

never be performed without a medical report. ing bodies must also be approached, whilst

But a personal opinion cannot possibly the success of the whole scheme will depend

overcome a right, and we may therefore more on the attitude of the medical profes-

conclude that the doctors are to regard sion than on anything else. Adequate

themselves as merely judging whether the medical facilities, including hospital beds,

right has been acquired, not whether they must also be made available. To set all these

themselves think the operation is advisable balls rolling in the right direction will indeed

or inadvisable. And we may also hold that be a big task.

ANALYSIS OF THE BROCK REPORT

In regard to these future efforts on the part of our Society, I cannot but hope that the results of the inquiry into the characteristics of the children of mental defectives, which was inaugurated by the Brock Committee, will prove to be of especial value. From it we have leamt that, whether the cause of defect be bad heredity or bad environment, or, as is most often the case, both operating together, of such' children of mentally defective parents as survive more than 40 per cent. " must be expected to exhibit some degree of
mental abnormality" (p. 2I), and nearly
one-third to be actually defective. Here is a
fact which ought to be brought to the notice of all those potential persuaders who care
little about eugenics; because it demonstrates the undeniable social benefits now to
be obtained by a diminution of parenthood amongst all who can be classed as defective.
Our Society ought in my opinion only to concern itself with such reforms as are likely
to produce definitely beneficial racial results; but when once we have decided to attack any problem, all the immediate social conse-
quences of our proposals should be carefully
studied. Now social infltience is never a onesided process; for, by social contact, the inferior drag down the superior as surely as the superior improve the inferior. This is
plain enough as regards what occurs in

everyday life amongst social equals, whilst in no circumstances can it be altogether denied. The social worker, to take an ex-
treme example, will certainly- elevate his own
character by his noble efforts, vet he will necessarily thus lose some opportunities for
his own improvement. Moreover, we must bear in mind the heavy financial cost of attending to the unfit, and the harmful
burden of taxation thus necessarily thrown on the more fit. From all this we clearly
see not only how great and immediate would
be the social benefits resulting from a reduction in the number of the mental defectives
in our ranks, but also that if procreation amongst mental defectives were to be reduced these improvements would continue to take place generation after generation for an
indefinite time in the future. Let us continue to search for the ultimate causes of mental defect in the hope, rather than in the expec-
tation, of soon discovering some new methods of stamping out this great evil at its source. In the existing state of our knowledge it is at all events clear that both those who
believe and those who are disbelievers in eugenics have ample reasons for pulling together in an endeavour to translate the recommendations of the Brock Report into
practice and thus to lessen the present " disastrous social consequences of ignoring defect" (p. 56).

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVI, No. 1

