THE VALUE OF UNHAPPINESS
By SIR CHARLES DARWIN, K.B.E., Sc.D., F.R.S.

HERE has recently been a correspon- education. It is only rather recently, under

dence in The Times Educational the influence of psychological theory-as

S,Supplement entitled " The Value of Lynn maintains, of a false reading of

Unhappiness." It was started on February Freudian doctrine-that it 'has come to be

8th by Dr. Ralph Lynn of Exeter,University held that these anxieties will inevitably

with the words: " The idea that school produce frustrations with all the complica-

children ought to be happy is comparatively tions of the psychoses so dear to the heart of

new, although probably most people nowa- the psychiatrist. He reasons that to take

days would accept it. However, a great deal this line is to give up the stimuli which are

of educational discussion to-day not only beneficial for the great majority, in order to

takes this for granted but also rests on a avoid the possible ill effects they may have

particular theory of what happiness is. The on a few of the weaker members.

theory holds that school children will be There were a considerable number of

made happy if they are freed from feelings letters answering this challenge. Though

of tension and anxiety."

each writer naturally took an individual

Lynn then goes on to question this point of view, they practically all assumed

doctrine. Tension and anxiety are bound to the fashionable opinion that Lynn was

arise sometimes in any competitive system of questioning. To a layman the most curious,

schooling, but here and now they arise and really rather dangerous, feature of these

especially over the iI-plus examination that letters is that the writers were all interested

determines which of the children are to go on to a quite predominating extent in the

into the grammar schools. It is therefore mental states of the pupils at the bottom of

argued by some people that anxiety, and the class; there was hardly a reference to the

therefore unhappiness, should be eliminated need for providing stimulus to the pupils

by abolishing this examination, and pushed near the top, who after all are much more

to its logical conclusion, this means abolishing important to the future of the country.

the grammar schools. If then the doctrine is This preoccupation with the weaker mem-

accepted that happiness in childhood is one bers is part of the present menacing trend of

of the main things in life, and if happiness political thought which insists on absolute

is only to be attained by eliminating all equality-not, be it noted, equality of

tension, we shall be forced to adopt a flat opportunity, which is almost the exact

uniform type of education, which will in opposite and which was fairly well achieved

consequence of necessity be at a low under the old system. As a cynic once put it,

intellectual level.

equality seems to be interpreted as meaning

Lynn points out that the principle that that no one is to work harder than the

happiness should be the main thing at school laziest, or to be wiser than the stupidest, or

is quite a new idea. In the eighteenth happier than the most miserable. For

century Dr. Johnson attributed his successful example one letter urged as an argument

mastery of Latin to the floggings he had against the marks system that in fact the

received, which do not seem to have made highest marks tended to go to the ablest boy,

him notably unhappy. Though in the and this was unfair because he often needed

nineteenth century the stick tended to be to put much less effort into his work than his

replaced by the competitive weekly mark- less gifted fellows. The inference would

list, it was taken for granted that this seem to be that the top boy ought to be

competition was an important part of ,penalized rather than rewarded, because

77
THIE EUGENICS REVIEW., July, 1957. 49, 2.

78 TEE EUGENICS REVIEW

he could not help doing better than his was used to being only rather mediocre at

'fellows.

games and was not made particularly

Other writers, indeed the majority, insisted unhappy by that. Indeed this matter of

that the most important thing in the school games makes a good parallel, for it is a

system is never to produce anxiety. Some stronger interest for many boys than is

attempted a distinction between unhealthy their work, and it may cause a boy just as

anxiety and healthy tension, but it is much anxiety to know whether he will get

obviously hard to draw this line, and the into the eleven, as whether he will pass the

letters give the impression that their writers II-plus examination. Even if it were

are so strongly 'concerned not to cause the desirable to avoid competition among school-

anxiety in their pupils that they will avoid boys, there are so many parts of the school

the danger of it by reducing the temperature life in which competition is inevitable, that

of the tension almost to zero. The corres- no great difference would be made by the

pondence closed on March 8th with a reply removal of one cause of it, and that one

from Dr. Lynn, which answered some of the cause mainly affecting the less important

specific points raised, but broadly speaking portions of the school population.

repeated his original views unchanged.

Is not the doctrine of the absolute

It is dangerous for one who has had no importance of happiness at school at least

practical experience in school-teaching to partly due to confused thinking? The

express opinions on this subject, but to me purpose of education is surely to fit people

it seems that Dr. Lynn has very much the for adult life, and is not the best way of

best of the argument.' It is all too easy to see doing this to submit them by gradual

a pupil being made unhappy by anxiety, and degrees to the germs of the conditions they

to regard the anxiety as a form of torture to will be meeting in later life, which will

be removed at any cost, but it is surely certainly often involve tensions and anxieties

sentimentally unrealistic. It must be recog- and stresses. We want of course to make

*nised that children are not always good, so people reasonably happy in later life, but it

that punishment is sometimes indispensable, is quite absurd to think that for this they

and the punishment will surely make them can be taught happiness at school in the way

unhappy-is not that its aim? When a boy they can be taught arithmetic. Indeed it

is persistently near the bottom of the class, might be argued that the effect is sometimes

it may be due either to stupidity or to quite the opposite, for I know certain

laziness. A discriminating schoolmaster schools which give many of their pupils the

will usually be able to distinguish which it feeling that no matter how they fare in later

is, and surely he is quite right to inflict life they will never have so wonderful a time

unhappiness on the lazy ones.

as they did at school. Surely it cannot be

My own school experience is now rather a regarded as a really good education to give

long time ago, but I doubt if the characteris- the belief that no matter what happens the

tics of the human boy have changed very adult future can never be so great an

much in the interval. It is true that there experience as the adolescent past.

was not the II-plus examination in those This is not the place for a general

days, but there was fierce competition for disquisition on what happiness consists in,

scholarships, and with the much smaller and no doubt there would be many different,

endowments of education, the winning of a even opposing, opinions about it. But for a

scholarship could play just as great a part in good many people it is not so much a

the determination of a whole life's career. In condition as a change of condition; their

my school there were certainly boys who were happiest times are when they compare the

persistently near the bottom of the class, but good present with the bad past, and

I cannot recall that it seemed to make them conversely their unhappiest times are when

particularly unhappy. They had never been they compare past good fortune with

much higher and were used to it, just as I present misfortune. If that is so, it should

THE VALUE OF UNHAPPINESS

79

alter the doctrine that the chief duty of a teacher is to make his charges happy. Their immediate happiness may be a good in itself, but it is no more than that, and he will give a greater contribution to the total
sum of human happiness by attending

chiefly, using whatever stimulus is needed, whether it is pleasant or the revetse, to fitting them for success in later life. It is such considerations as these that have made me agree warmly with the spirit of Dr. Lynn's letter.

