THE KIN OF GENIUS-(II)
A Study of the Families of Great Men
By W. T. J. GUN, F.R.Hist.S., F.S.G.

N the first article on this subject, pub- The remaining members of the Two Hun-

lished in the EUGENICS REvIEW for July, dred with only one D.N.B. relative should,

I928, an analysis was given of the rela- however, be considered at somewhat greater

tives of 200 representative British men and length; as in these cases the D.N.B. relative

women of the past 400 years, showing that either was a successor, or, if a predecessor,

as many as I37 of these had one or more was more remote.

relatives, within the degree of second cousin,

who themselves had separate memoirs in the Dictionary of National Biography (herein-

ONE DISTINGUISHED KINSMAN

after referred to as D.N.B.). On the as- The following have one brother or sister

sumption that in the cases of those with two in D.N.B.-Purcell, Reynolds, Romney,

or more such relatives, some general family Humphry Davy, Cecil Rhodes.

ability may be taken for granted, it is now PURCELL. The D.N.B. relative was a

proposed, ias suggested in the concluding younger brother Daniel, an organist and

paragraph of the previous article, to give composer. The father was " a gentleman of

some account of those of the Two Hundred the Chapel Royal," and must have had some

who can show only one such relative or none musical ability. A son and a grandson of

at all, with a view to ascertaining how far Henry Purcell were also organists.

general family ability can be shown in these REYNOLDS. His father and his paternal

cases. uncles were all scholarly men; a great-

Considerations of space make it desirable grandfather, Henry Baker (in D.N.B.), was

to refer chiefly to the immediate ancestry an eminent mathematician. One sister,

of the individuals in question, though in Mrs. Palmer, is in D.N.B. as an author;

some instances mention may be made of another, Frances, had some artistic talent.

other relatives.

ROMNEY. His father, a cabinet maker

The cases of those with one D.N.B. rela- with an extensive business, showed great

tive will be taken first, and it will be obvious mechanical ability. A brother, Peter (in

that where in those instances the D.N.B. D.N.B.), was an excellent artist, but died

relative is himself an immediate ancestor, early of intemperate habits.

further investigation is hardly needed. HUMPHRY DAVY. His paternal grand-

Examples are afforded by Addison, Charles father was a successful builder, the father an

Lyell, J. S. Mill, Brunel, Lord Roberts, and accomplished amateur wood carver. The

W. S. Gilbert, the father of each of whom is brother, John Davy, physiologist, is in

in D.N.B.-in at least two cases, Mill and D.N.B.

Brunel, being almost as notable as the son. CECIL RHODES. In the paternal line con-

Next we come to Rodney, Palmerston, Arch- siderable money-making power had already

bishop Tait and Florence Nightingale, who appeared, particularly in the great-grand-

had each a grandfather in D.N.B., and to father, Samuel Rhodes. The father was a

Cardinal Manning who had a maternal uncle man of very determined character, while on

in that work. It will be sufficient to state the mother's side Rhodes was related to two

here that in all these last five cases a good brothers, Edward and Robert Willson, both

deal of general ability among preceding rela- in D.N.B., the one an architect, the other

tives is discernible.

a bishop. His immediate D.N.B. relative

245

246 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

is his younger brother, Colonel Francis LORD LEIGHTON. His D.N.B. relative

Rhodes.

was his father's first cousin, Edward

I'Anson, an architect. The father and the

REMOTER RELATIVES

paternal grandfather were eminent physicians, the grandfather being specially distin-

The next group consists of those with one guished.

cousin in D.N.B.; they are Pepys, Locke, The next group has only two names:
Swift, James Watt, James Bruce, and Leigh- RICHARD ARKWRIGHT. His son, in

ton. PEPYS.

The diarist came of a yeoman

D.N.B., was an exceedingly able man of business. Arkwright himself was of humble

stock, which in his particular line had been origin, but the father seems to have been

rather going down in the world. From his a highly reputable citizen; and an uncle,

Pepys great-grandfather descended, how- who greatly helped the family, must have

ever, that Edward Montagu, Earl of Sandwich, so prominent in the early part of the

been a man well above the average of his station in life.

reign of Charles II, and to whom the diarist CHARLES DICKENS. His son, Sir Henry

himself owed so much.

Dickens, potentially in D.N.B. But other-

JOHN LOCKE. The D.N.B. relative, wise there is certainly a great absence of

though somewhat remote, is sufficiently dis- obvious ability in the novelist's family.

tinguished, Peter Lord King, Lord Chancellor,'first cousin once-removed of the philo-

The father, "Mr. Micawber," was notoriously ineffective. Of the more remote

sopher. Locke himself came, however, of ancestry nothing seems to be known.

very sound stock, both his grandfathers

were prosperous commercial men, and his

father, an attorney and land agent, was a WELL-KNOWN SUCCESSORS

man of marked ability in his callings.

The following group had nephews in

JONATHAN SWIFT. His immediate D.N.B:

D.N.B. relative, Dean Swift, could hardly JoHN KNox. The nephew of the same

be described as a man of any real note, name was a prominent Presbyterian mini-

and there is, in fact, little evidence of ability ster of his day, as also were two further

in Jonathan's near connections. On the side, John Knoxes, probably relatives, later in

however, of his paternal grandmother he was the sixteenth century. But of the Re-

related to John Dryden, and the two men former's own ancestry very little is known,

have a joint descent from the Copes, a family except that he sprang from thoroughly

of versatile talent in the sixteenth century. sound stock, as he himself used frequently

JAMES WATT. His paternal grandfather to remark.

was a professor of mathematics; an uncle LORD MANSFIELD. His D.N.B. relative was

made the first accurate survey of the Clyde; his nephew Lord Stormont, a diplomatist of

the father, a most accomplished and versa- some distinction. Springing as he did from

tile man, was provost of Greenock. A first the landed classes, Mansfield had, however,

cousin of Watt's mother, George Muirhead, singularly few relatives of any eminence.

is in D.N.B.

Though the connection is remote, it may be

JAMES BRUCE. The explorer's only near of interest to remark that David Hume was

D.N.B. relative is his first cousin, William a fourth cousin, and that their common

Gerard Hamilton. His maternal grand- ancestor, Sir Robert Carnegie, was himself

father, James Graham, though not in a man of note.

D.N.B., was a judge of the Scottish Court JOHN BRIGHT. His (potential) D.N.B.

of Admiralty; and somewhat more distant relative is his nephew, the present Lord

relatives of the name of Bruce were for Aberconway. Bright himself came of the

several generations highly distinguished very best Quaker stock; both his parents

Presbyterian ministers in Ulster.

are described as far above the average, and

THE KIN OF GENIUS

247

his brothers and sisters as " clever and father was a prosperous silk merchant at

original."

Antwerp; his father a highly cultivated

The remaining two with one D.N.B. rela- man. His daughter, Lady Stepney, had

tive are:

some artistic talent.

EDWARD COKE. The relative in question WILLIAM HARVEY. His father was a

is his grandson, Roger Coke, a writer on well-to-do yeoman; all his five brothers were

political economy. Coke's case is somewhat successful merchants. A nephew, Daniel

similar to that of the other great lawyer, Harvey, was Ambassador at Constantinople.

Mansfield; both came from the landed ADAM SMITH. The father, Judge Advo-

classes, and both had hardly any near rela- cate of Scotland and Controller of Customs,

tives of distinction.

was a man of marked ability. His mother's

JOHN FRANKLIN. His (potential) immediate relatives were mostly in the

D.N.B. relative is his great-nephew, the army, but her great-nephew and Adam's

recently deceased Lord Tennyson. In heir, David Douglas, became a Scotch Lord

Franklin's case there is distinct evidence of of Session.

ability in the immediate relatives. His EDWARD GIBBON. His paternal grand-

paternal grandmother, a woman of great father was an exceedingly able man of busi-

energy, with the assistance of her son, the ness, on whose side there was a connection

explorer's father, retrieved the family for- with Lord Chancellor Hardwicke. Both

tunes, which had fallen low. Of Sir John's the historian's paternal grandmother and

brothers, one became a judge, another was his mother belonged also to successful com-

a Fellow of the Royal Society.

mercial families.

The total number of those in the original GILBERT WHITE. The paternal line had

list with but one D.N.B. relative is 29. Of made money in commerce before turning to

those only in five cases is the evidence of the Church. On the mother's side the

ability among near relatives slight, namely, naturalist was related to Sir Edward Ford

those of Coke, Pepys, Swift, Mansfield, and (in D.N.B.), a man of great inventive skill.

Dickens.

Gilbert White's four brothers were all suc-

cessful in their callings, similar to the cases

OTHER INDICATIONS OF ABILITY We will now turn to the most interesting
division, the 63 out of the 200 who have no
ascertained D.N.B. relatives at all within the assigned degrees. Even among those there are, in several instances, obvious indications of ability among near relatives. It is proposed to take these cases first.
SEBASTIAN CABOT. He ought not really to be in this division at all, as his father, John Cabot, almost as great a navigator as himself, should certainly have had a separate memoir in D.N.B. Two of Sebastian's brothers also took part in his voyages.
ROBERT BLAKE. His paternal grandfather was a highly successful commercial

of Blake and Harvey. HENRY GRATTAN. His maternal grand-
father, Thomas Marlay, though not in D.N.B., was Lord Chief Justice of Ireland; while his paternal grandfather was Fellow of Trinity, Dublin, and several other members of the family achieved success in their professions.
JOHN FLAXMAN. Of yeoman stock, his father and a brother showed considerable talent as modellers, and a sister rather greater talent as a designer.
CHARLES LAMB. He may appear in this category owing to the abilities of his sister Mary, clouded as these were by periodical insanity. As in the very parallel case of Dickens, there is, however, nothing at all

man; his father, though enterprising, did less well as a money-maker. The Admiral's

known of the Lambs' ancestry to account for genius.

three brothers were all of note in their respective callings.

ROBERT BROWNING. His paternal grandfather, a bank official, and his maternal

ANTHONY VANDYKE. His paternal grand- grandfather, a shipowner, were alike able

248 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

men of affairs. A paternal uncle wrote The evidence for such is less in the remain-

minor historical works.

ing 46, though in a few instances marked

' GEORGE ELIOT.' She may be included distinction may be found in remoter rela-

in this category on account of her father, tives.

Robert Evans, a land agent, a man of quite Consideration will now be given to those

outstanding capacity in his calling.

46 cases, who will be taken in chronological

JoHN RUSKIN. His parents were cousins; order.

the father was a very successful wine mer- CARDINAL WOLSEY. His father was a

chant, whose business capacity was un- tradesman of undoubted standing, but other-

doubtedly inherited from his mother, Cathe- wise practically nothing is known of his

rine Tweedale, herself related to the Ross family connections.

family, from which sprang the Arctic WILLIAM TYNDALE. The origin of the

explorers. The immediate Ruskin family great translator of the Bible has never been

history is curiously like the Franklin.

satisfactorily cleared up, though there is

GEORGE MEREDITH. His paternal grand- little doubt that he was of gentle birth.

father, a tailor by trade, was an altogether MATTHEW PARKER. The father was a

remarkable man, with abilities far above his fairly successful commercial man, and so to

station in life. All his daughters, Mere- a greater extent were a brother and a half-

dith's aunts, were extremely good looking brother. The Archbishop's sons were des-

and married very well. The father was cribed as " hopeful young men," but noth-

wild and extravagant.

ing much seems to have matured.

Lewis CARROLL. His double great- EDMUND SPENSER. The father was a

grandfather, who was Bishop of Elphin, journeyman in the cloth trade, but perhaps

possessed a strong sense of humour. The a gentleman by birth. The connection with

father, an Archdeacon, was likewise a man the Spencers of Althorp has never been

of wit and humour; an uncle was a highly proved.

successful barrister. The descent of certain BEN JONSON. His father is described as

qualities is very evident in this case.

a minister of religion, and may have sprung

ARTHUR SULLIVAN. His father, an army from the Annandale Johnstones. The

bandmaster, had exceptional musical ability mother is said to have been a woman of

for his position. The mother, who was half vigorous character.

Italian, is stated to have sprung from an SHAKESPEARE. As is well known, his

artistic stock. A brother, Frederick, was father was a tradesman, fairly successful,

a man of very varied talents, which might while his mother came of superior stock

have come to full fruition had he lived socially. No real ability has ever been

longer.

traced among the relatives of the greatest of

W. E. H. LECKY. Of an Irish landed all the Two Hundred. (Greatest, that is to

family on the father's side, but the say, if he was really the author of the plays,

historian's abilities were almost certainly a matter on which varied opinions are held.)

derived from the side of his mother, a INIGO JONES. The son of a clothmaker in

Tallents. Several of Lecky's near relatives rather straitened circumstances. Nothing

of this family have been distinguished for else seems to be known of his relatives.

scholarship, though none have so far JOHN SELDEN. His father was a yeoman,

appeared in D.N.B.

who is stated to have possessed considerable

musical abilities.

FROM UNKNOWN SOURCES Of the 63 members of the Two Hundred
without near D.N.B. relatives, I7 have now been considered, and in their cases some immediate family ability clearly existed.

In all these early cases the difficulty of obtaining accurate genealogical information is very great with regard to those who did not belong to the landed classes.
JOHN PYM. He came of an old landed family, with, however, a commercial descent

THE KIN OF GENIUS

249

on the side of his mother, who was a grand- owners. The resemblance to Newton's case

daughter of Sir Richard Lambert, a Lord is very marked, and the same general obser-

Mayor of London. Otherwise there is little vations apply.

evidence of ability in the connection.

WILLIAM HOGARTH. He sprang from a

THOMAS HOBBES. His father is described race of Westmorland yeomen, the father

as a " choleric and ignorant cleric." An becoming a literary hack. An uncle,

uncle and a brother were, however, steady Thomas Hogart, was something of a dialect

and prosperous tradesmen.

poet.

IZAAK WALTON. The paternal grand- SAMUEL JOHNSON. There was a certain

father was a bailiff, the father a tradesman amount of ability on the maternal side, but

in good circumstances. A son (sub-memoir more eccentricity; one relative at least was

in D.N.B.) became a prebendary.

definitely a lunatic. The father, a book-

GEORGE Fox. The father was a fairly seller, was a man of considerable mental

prosperous weaver, the mother is stated to power, though unsuccessful in business.

have been " accomplished above her THOMAS GRAY. The paternal grand-

degree. "

father was a successful merchant; the

JOHN BUNYAN. His father was a tinker, father, a law scrivener, was brutal, but no

but seems to have been rather superior to fool. On the side of the mother, Dorothy

the generality of that calling. The paternal Antrobus, there was far more culture, one

grandfather had been a metal merchant, and of her brothers was a Fellow of Peterhouse,

a John Bunyan, probably an ancestor, is another a master at Eton.

found selling land in I542, evidently in a DAVID GARRICK. The paternal grand-

somewhat higher social position. Bunyan's father was a Huguenot refugee, the father

own mother, Margaret Bentley, is stated an army officer. The mother was daughter

" to have come of people who, though of a vicar choral, and it is probable that from

humble in station, were yet decent and her side came artistic ability.

worthy in their ways."

JAMES WOLFE. The paternal line had

ISAAC NEWTON. His father sprang from military connections for several generations,

a race of small landowners. There was a great-grand-uncle was conspicuous in the

probably more ability on the mother's side; siege of Limerick in I640. Edward Wolfe,

her brother, William Ayscough, a parson, the father, is described as a quiet, good-

was undoubtedly a man of culture. From humoured man, not brilliant, but thoroughly

him descended Newton's nearest D.N.B. reliable. The mother, who came of a

relative, James Hutton. It must be landed family, had a more determined

admitted, however, that next to nothing is character.

known to account for Sir Isaac's exceptional OLIVER GOLDSMITH. His immediate

genius.

relatives were nearly all Irish parsons,

EDMOND HALLIEY. His father was a suc- cultured but improvident and feckless.

cessful tradesman, as were other members Goldsmith very clearly shared these charac-

of the family, but there is no evidence of teristics.

great ability.

JAMES COOK. His paternal grandfather

HANDEL. The paternal grandfather was was probably a John Cook who was an Elder

a hard-working coppersmith, the maternal of the Church at Ednam in Roxburghshire.

a Lutheran pastor. The father was a promi- The father was a bailiff and subsequently

nent barber-surgeon. The stock was clearly a builder; he was certainly not illiterate, as

sound, but unlike the cases of Purcell and has so often been stated. All the great

Sullivan, and still more Orlando Gibbons, navigator's sons died young; one, who was

there is no record of other musical ability. at Merchant Taylors' is described in the

POPE. The paternal grandfather was a School History as " a youth remarkable

parson, the father a well-to-do tradesman; for his equanimity, modesty and perse-

the mother came of a family of small land- verance. "

250 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

WARREN HASTINGS. He came of an old a Spaniard and their son, Valentine Llanos,

family, connected with that of Martin attained some note as an artist.

Frobisher the navigator, a family which THOMAS CARLYLE. The paternal grand-

had, however, decidedly gone down in the father, a farmer, was fiery and irascible,

world. The father was unquestionably an but a great reader. The father, a builder,

unsuccessful man, but Macaulay greatly was a man of considerable ability in his own

exaggerated his deficiencies. Two second line. Of his mother Carlyle said, " She

cousins once removed, Admiral Sir Thomas came of the fairest descent, the pious, the

and Sir Charles Hastings, both in D.N.B., just and the wise."

renewed the lustr;e of the family name in RICHARD COBDEN. Both parents came of

later years.

good yeomen stock, the mother was superior

EDWARD JENNER. He sprang from an old to the father in force of character. The

landed family with many near relatives in paternal grandfather had been bailiff of

professions, cultured, but not specially dis- Midhurst.

tinguished.

DAVID LIVINGSTONE. His paternal grand-

ROBERT BURNS. Came of the soundest father, a Highlander, who could trace his

Scotch farming stock, his father, " though line back for several generations, used to

unlucky was a man of notable enlighten- say that he " had never heard of a member

ment." The family were on the up-grade; of his family who was a donkey." The

one branch subsequently became eminent father, a tea dealer, was a great reader and

contractors, while from another sprang later conversationalist, and the maternal grand-

Sir Alexander Burnes and James Burnes, father, David Hunter, a tailor, was a man

both in D.N.B.

of very similar type.

MUNGO PARK. The son of a well-to-do G. F. WATTS. The father and paternal

Scotch farmer. Little is otherwise known grandfather were both musical instrument

as to the attainments of the family.

makers; the former is described as " re-

JOHN CONSTABLE. His case is rather like that of Mungo Park, though their actual achievements differed so widely. The painter's father was a miller, a successful and energetic man.
J. M. W. TURNER. The father was a barber, industrious and intelligent. The mother, whose social position was somewhat superior, became insane.
MICHAEL FARADAY. His father was a blacksmith of farming descent, the mother a farmer's daughter. The family were essentially steady and respectable.
JOHN KEATS. The father was an ostler, but though the poet is always described as of very humble origin, this is hardly true of the mother's side. She was daughter of John Jennings, proprietor of the livery stable where her husband worked; both Jennings and his wife are described as much
above the average of their position; a son
became an officer in the marines. George

fined but ineffectual." JOHN TYNDALL. His father, who came
of a family of small Irish landowners, was a man unlucky in life, but of marked intellectual qualities.
RICHARD BURTON. A Burton great-uncle was Bishop of Killaloe and the father of an admiral of some note, from whom the present Lord Dunsany descends. The explorer's own father was a reckless and improvident man.
A. R. WALLACE. His paternal grandfather was an innkeeper; the father, a man of kindly disposition, was unsuccessful in life. The mother's grandfather had been Mayor of Hertford. A brother was a fairly successful engineer.
J. H. SPEKE. He sprang from old landed stock in almost every direction, but there is
no evidence of any special ability among his ancestry. The explorer's own qualities were, however, quite clearly those of the best type of country gentleman.

Keats, a brother of the poet, was successful HOLMAN HUNT. His father, a warehouse-

in commerce in America; a sister married man, is said to have had some taste in art

THE KIN OF GENIUS

25I

and literature. A son is now a prominent adduced, H. M. Stanley's case is, of course,

engineer.

peculiar.

JOHN MILLAIS. The father, of an old Jersey family, was noted for his good looks

THE ODDS-3 to 1 IN FAVOUR

and charming manners, and was a fair musi- The last 46, again, include nearly all

cian and artist. A half-brother on the those where distinction among near relatives

mother's side, Clement Hodgkinson, won may be regarded as lacking. The round

distinction as an explorer in Australia.
LORD WOLSELEY. Of a family, like that of Wolfe, with many military connections.

number of 50 might be made up by the addi-
tion of Edward Cofce, Pepys, Swift, and
Mansfield, already referred to. The fifty

A brother, Sir George, attained general's rank. A Wolseley great-grandmother
brought in a descent from two of the most

thus arrived at are roughly those of the Two Hundred who lack distinction among
near relatives, as against 15o among whom

intellectual families that Ireland has pro- such distinction is found in greater or less

duced, the Molyneux and the Usshers. Through the latter there is a relationship

degree. On this basis the chances in favour of distinction among near relatives of great

with Wellington, and it is interesting to men is found to be three to one.

note, that, as in the case of Dryden and Swift, the joint stock from which the two great generals were descended was notably

From the short descriptions that have been given of all the 50 cases in question, it will, however, be abundantly clear that

superior.
WILLIAM MORRIS. The father was a successful commercial man; on the mother's side there was musical ability and all-round culture.
HENRY IRVING. Of yeoman stock, with notable force of character on the mother's side. Two sons became well known actors, though it may perhaps be doubted if they would have come to the fore, but for their father's career.
H. M. STANLEY. This great explorer was undoubtedly a foundling, the only one among all the Two Hundred. In the circumstances it is probable that his powers of leadership were derived from the side of his unknown father.
This last division, 46 in number, includes nearly all those of the Two Hundred who sprang from the humblest walks of life. The most obvious instances are George Fox, Bunyan, James Cook, Robert Burns and Faraday, to whom Mungo Park, J. M. W. Turner, Keats, Carlyle, and Livingstone may perhaps be added. The only other

absence of actual distinction does not imply inferiority of stock. Nothing is more evident from a study of the families of great men, than the overwhelming number of cases of descent from obviously sound stock. Instances of anything that can possibly be called degeneracy are rare indeed, if not absolutely non-existent. The insanity of
Lamb's sister, of Turner's mother, and of
one or two relatives of Samuel Johnson are very isolated examples. Probably the worst showing in this respect is afforded by Byron's relatives, coupled, however, with a good deal of ability; certainly the poet's father was, so far as is known, the worst morally of any of the fathers of the Two
Hundred. Very few indeed of these fathers
can be shown to be actually below the average; those of Hobbes, Gray, Warren Hastings, Burton, and Meredith seem to have been rather reprehensible characters, and others no doubt were quite ordinary; but the general standard was unquestionably high. In several cases the father was palpably inferior to the paternal grandfather.

really striking case of this kind among the

whole Two Hundred is George Stephenson, GENERAL ABILITY THE RULE

who had two D.N.B. relatives, a son and a The evidence for the descent of specialized nephew. In practically every other instance talent is very scanty. Particularly among some degree of previous culture can be poets and painters, it is rarely possible to

252 THE EUGENICS REVIEW discern from whence their talents came. cessful professional men recurs again and
They were due no doubt to some exception- again. Moderate as opposed to great success ally fortunate combination of germ plasms, in commerce seems to be especially requisite. and it must be remembered that little or no Great wealth is apt to stifle the energies of record would as a rule remain of moderate the descendants of those who acquire it; the amateur skill among ancestors, in such rare exceptions are found among statesmen, directions as poetry or painting. All we can of whom Peel and Gladstone are the most safely say is that a sound stock, at any rate, striking examples. is necessary for the production of a genius. While there are a few cases where the
Much more evident than the descent of fallen fortunes of a family have been reany specialized talent is the advantage of a stored; and many more among those not mixed descent, not too exclusively aristo- analyzed in this article where the ancescratic, using that word in its ordinary signi- tors had already achieved much, the general fication, nor yet too exclusively the reverse. tendency may be summed up as follows: Among the cases that have been analyzed From ancestors who did small things well, in this article, a descent from moderately sprang descendants who did great things successful commercial or moderately suc- well.
Eugenics Review, Vol. XX, No. 4.

