REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS.
Kitehin, S. B., B.A., LL.B. (late Scholar of Trinity Hall, Cambridge; Advocate of the Supreme Court of South Africa; Member of the Provincial Council of the Cape of Good Hope; Editor of the Reports of the High Court of Griqualand, 1905-I0). A History of Divorce. London. Chapman and Hall; I9I2; price 7s. 6d. net;
pp. 293.
IT is remarkable that a work on divorce, issued from the press scarcely more than six months ago, should contain no reference whatever to the Royal Commission on Divorce. The Commission, it is true, did not make its report until near the close of the year, but the voluminous evidence which it had collected during the previous two or three years had been extensively published and widely commented upon. But it is still more remarkable that, although Mr. Kitchin does not refer to the work of the Commission, his book is as apt and as timely as if he had made the report of the Commission the basis of his labours. Although the book is righly entitled a " History of Divorce," it is, in fact, so forceful and able a brief for the advocates of the Majority Report, that no one who is interested in procuring the revision of our divorce laws upon the lines suggested by the Majority Report can very well afford to neglect it. But as an experienced counsel would not go into court without a careful study of the authorities upon which his brief is based, so in this case it might be well to have some original investigation to corroborate the authorities quoted.
Mr. Kitchin reviews the whole history of divorce from Mosaic times down to the establishment of the canon law, upon which our English system is founded, to prove his thesis that if marriages are based upon affection and are made by mutual consent, it is only right that when that affection no longer exists they should be dissolved by mutual consent. The early Roman lawv with respect to divorce was practically the same as that in force among the Hebrews, long prior to, and manv years after, the Christian dispensation. No publicity was given to divorce in either system, unless one or other of the spouses objected, or conflicting rights of property were involved, in which case a family council as a rule settled the dispute, and the aid of the courts was rarely invoked. The early Roman laws provided that a man might divorce his wife against her consent if she was guilty of duinking wine, going out without a veil, speaking to women of inferior rank in the street, or going to a place of public amusement without her husband's consent. By the time of Christ, Roman marriage had become a private partnership of a most intimate nature. As it was founded on affection and consent, the parties had the right to dissolve the partnership when the affection turned into aversion, either by consent or by one giving a formal notice to the other, exactly as was done in the case of anv other partnership. So far from divorce being considered dishonourable, all agreements between the parties forbidding, or " contracting out " of, the right of divorce were held to be void, as an infringement of the rule that both marriage and divorce oueht to be free. To compel an unwilling party to remain married was as unthinkable to the Romans as to compel an unwilling party to enter into marriage.
The freedom of divorce under the civil law was continued for many
centuries, longer than is popularly thought, and, contrary to the general belief, was supported by the early fathers of the Church, who not only approved mutual divorce but distinctly supported divorce in general, without the penalties which the Church now imposes upon the divorced.

REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS.

69

Justin Martyr, the earliest of the fathers, in an address to the Roman senate, commended a Christian wife who, taking advantage of the Roman law, divorced her husband because of his debaucheries, so that she might not partake of his crimes by living with him. Origen regarded adultery as only one of several offences which justified divorce. Chrysostom, in the fourth century, said that divorce was permitted by the divine law because it was better that a marriage should be dissolved than that the parties should, by being compelled to live together, when they hated each other, be induced to commit murder. Epiphanius allowed divorce on the ground of adultery or other crime, and said that, if either party married again, the Church absolved them from all blame, tolerated their weakness, and did not reject them either from the Church or from eternal life.
Mr. Kitchin recalls Lord Lyndhurst's speech in the House of Lords on the Divorce Bill of I857, when, referring to St. Augustine, who has generally been regarded as the pillar of the doctrine of the indissolubility of marriage, he said that St. Augustine had repeatedly asserted that adultery was an undoubted ground for divorce for either husband or wife, although that illustrious Saint of the fifth century could not make up his mind as to the exact meaning of adultery and whether it might not be extended to include " any unlawful desires or worldly views." Justinian attempted to abolish divorce by consent as well as other kinds of divorce, but Justin, his nephew and successor, in the sixth century restored divorce bv mutual consent, saying that the laws which his predecessor had enacted were " not applicable to our time," and he had therefore re-enacted " the present sacred law by which we lay down that, as formerly, marriage can be dissolved by mutual consent. For if mutual affection is the basis of marriage, it is right that when the parties have changed their minds they should be allowed to dissolve it by mutual consent." Although frequent attempts were made by the rulers to impose ecclesiastical authority upon domestic affairs, it was not until the beginning of the ninth century that Charlemagne succeeded in abolishing divorce altogether. And Mr. Kitchin reminds us that here in England divorce had been freely allowed to either party by the kings and the English Church until a much later period. By the Penitentials of Theodore, who was Archbishop of Canterbury, marriages were expressly declared to be dissoluble either by mutual consent or on the grounds of desertion, adultery, impotence, relationship, long absence, and captivity.
According to Mr. Kitchin, as the authority of the Emperors declined in Italy, a succession of strong Popes, who were monks and lawyers, issued decretals which came to have the authority of statutes and, when collected, formed the canon law. It declared marriage to be indissoluble and a sacrament in order that the ecclesiastical authorities might have exclusive temporal control over all marital affairs. But, notwithstanding its indissolubility, marriage was, in fact, frequently dissolved by dispensation, or in the ecclesiastical courts, upon various pretexts, chiefly upon the ground of affinity or consanguinity, or some happily discovered forbidden degree of relationship. Where dispensation had been obtained to marry within the prohibited degrees, it was a common incident, if the marriage turned out unhappily, to procure a declaration of the invalidity of the dispensation, provided the parties were able to afford the expense
of such a decree. Mr. Lea, in the Cambridge Mfodern History, quotes a medimval author as saying that " the most holy sacrament of marriage, owing to the remote consanguinity coming within the prohibited degrees,
was made a subject of derision to the laity by the venality with which marriages were made and unmade, to fill the pouches of the episcopal officials." Mr. Kitchin cites, as a typical case, that of the Earl of Bothwell, who, wishing to divorce his wife in order that he might marry

70 EUGENICS REVIEW.
Mary, Queen of Scots, obtained a decree on the ground that one of his ancestors had married into his wife's family nearly a century before. In that case a dispensation had actually been obtained allowing the marriage within the prohibited degree, but this fact was ignored by both parties and by the court at the trial.
The author's survey of divorce during the Reformation is extremely interesting and readable, and all the more so, perhaps, because it is written in a spirit of resentment against the intolerance and bigotry of the time. Although Luther gave expression to the feelings of more than half of Christendom by publicly burning the canon law at Wittenburg, his followers were unable to avoid compliance with it in the matter of divorce. They recognised that there were grounds in practice as grave, or even graver, than adultery and malicious desertion, but they adopted as a general remedy the canonistic separation from bed and board, which was unknown to the Romans. They apparently agreed that the canon law was anti-Christian and false law, that marriage was not a sacrament or a spiritual matter, but a civil contract, but they were unable to come to any agreement as to a basis for divorce. The majority professed to follow the Scriptures upon the subject, but, as in all matters of doctrine and dogma, they disputed over their individual interpretations of the
Scriptures. Luther and Melanchthon and others, when appealed to, advised Henry VIII. to practice polygamy rather than be divorced, as
divorce was not allowed by Scripture and was therefore a sin. On the other hand, Selden, Milton's great contemporary, who made deep researches into the Hebrew laws of divorce, said, " Of all actions of a man's life his marriage does least concern other people, yet of all actions of our life 'tis the most meddled with by other people." The often quoted words in Deuteronomy had been the subject of dispute at the time of Christ between two schools of lawyers. The one held that they meant that there must be some disgraceful or criminal act as a ground for divorce, the other that a man might divorce his wife for any cause whatever, such even as if she were unpleasing to him. Selden said Christ condemned both schools, referring marriage and divorce, like all other matters, to first principles, and above all to the principle of charity, which did not justify a husband divorcing his wife against her will, even where she had been guilty of disgraceful conduct. Grotius accepted Selden's view, and in his notes on St. Matthew says that Christ
had not laid down the necessity of a judicial inquiry into the causes of
divorce, and by the Hebrew and Roman laws of that time no such trial
was necessary. He had neither designed to abolish the existing laws nor to make any positive laws in their place, but merely to lay down precepts for the guidance of the conscience of the individual. Samuel
von Cocceji, the Chancellor of Frederick the Great, as early as 1740
stated in an authorised book that divorce by mutual consent as in the Roman law was in accordance with the law of Nature, and had been
nowhere forbidden by the Scriptures, which merely restricted the right of divorce, if they restricted it at all, where it was against the will of the other party. He accordingly allowed divorce either by consent or on such grounds as capital enmities, other grave crimes, and certain serious diseases. These grounds, he said, had been allowed by the Christian emperors of Rome, without any objection on the part of the fathers of the church, who would have been only too ready to express their dissent if such grounds had been contrary to the Scriptures.
Mr. Kitchin advocates a return to the doctrine of the Hebrew and the
Roman law and of the early Christians, and the abolition of all restraint upon the dissolution of marriage where both parties desire to have their nuptial contract dissolved. He is not disturbed by the objection that facile divorce laws would produce immorality. He contends that the

REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS.

71

history of the subject proves that such a result has never in the past followed. So far as the children of dissolved marriages are concerned, he claims that the State need have no apprehension, as the number who would be left to the public charge would be no greater than now follows in case of death of parents or illegitimacy.
R. NEWTON CRANE. Loeb, JACQUES. The Mechanistic Conception of Life. University of
Chicago Press; I912; (London, Cambridge University Press); 6s. net; pp. 227. UNDER this title Dr. Loeb has gathered into one volume ten essays and lectures, all of which have appeared in various publications within the last twenty years. They cover a wide range of subjects, and for the most part summarise recent work in these subjects. The connecting link between them is found in the fact that they all endeavour to explain biological processes on chemical and physical grounds. Three essays deal with the mechanism of fertilisation and consequently with that of heredity, and are thus of particular interest to eugenists. For heredity forms the basis of eugenics, and all those interested in the latter science must wish to follow the latest work on heredity. These essays may be recommended as giving a clear and concise account of the remarkable experiments with regard to artificial parthenogenesis which have attracted the attention of biologists within the last few years, and in which Dr. Loeb himself has taken a leading part.
A. M. CARR-SATUNDERS. Hubbard A. J. The Fate of Empires. London. Longmans, Green
and Co.; price 6s. 6d.; pp. 220. RECENTLY quite a number of books have appeared that aim at setting out the principles which govern the course of history. It has been the fashion lately to lay stress upon the importance of heredity and to attempt to account for the decay of civilisations by the disappearance of the better strains. Though we may be certain that heredity has something to do with the matter, most of these attempts appear to be somewhat immature in the present state of our knowledge. Mr. Hubbard's book, however, emphasises quite different factors. He has been much influenced by Mr. Benjamin Kidd, and the argument follows the lines familiar to those who have read " Social Evolution."
The argument, put briefly, is that at certain periods in history reason leads individuals to seek their own comfort by abolishing competition; in other words, Socialism makes its appearance. Reason again teaches men that it is not in their own interest to make provision for future generations; hence comes the fall in the birth-rate. Both these phenomena are much in evidence at the present day, and " the turning point in past civilisations has been marked, again and again, by the appearance of Socialism coincidently with a failure of the birthrate." Thus civilisation is once more on the decline. What is the cure? How can civilisation be made stable? According to Mr. Hubbard there can be no enduring civilisation that rests on reason alone or on instinct alone, or " any religion that serves their purposes." In China, nowever, we find an enduring civilisation that rests upon "the prepotence of the suprarational method over that of pure reason." That, of course, was Mr. Kidd's main argument.
The weakness of arguments of this kind are their extreme vagueness. What is Socialism? It might be fairly argued that it resembles far more closely certain institutions which are prominent in the early stages of human history rather than anything we can discqver during the decline of Roman and other civilisations. Then, again, it might be argued that the hope of civilisation rests more upon reason than upon anything else. What is required is a much fuller knowledge of many things-especiallv certain biological problems-before we can hope to attack with success

