GOMMONWEAMTH
By G. F. MOCLEARY, M.D., D.P.H.

BEGINNER in the study of popula-

See my children, resolute children,

tion would probably learn without By those swarms upon our rear we must

surprise that fertility had declined at never yield or falter,

more or less rapid rate in nearly all Euroan countries. He might be inclined to
iik it was perhaps in the natural order of

Ages back in ghostly millions frowning
there behind us urging, Pioneersl 0 Pioneers!"

gs that in countries so thickly populated Turning from -these rapt utterances to

me forces or other would sooner or later be prosaic facts, our beginner might be sur-

rking to prevent an excessive multiplican of the people. He might, indeed, be told
at it had been stated in writings of reputan that "population growth is a highly If-regulated phenomenon " ;* that when a pulation reaches a certain, undefined, denty biological factors come into play limiting s growth; and that this view was supported y the behamour of fruit flies reared in bottles.

prised to find that in the United States fertility has steadily fallen for over a century, so that the net reproduction rate is now below replacement rate; that in Australia and New Zealand a downward movement to the same level has been accomplished in sixty years; and that in Canada and South Africa, though complete statistics of racial fertility are lacking, there are good grounds for thinking that the reproduction of the British stock has

known cubic capacity. Fruit flies so reared fallen to the low level of Australia and New

em, when carefully counted, to increase in Zealand and is heading for the lower level of

umber according to a formula that can be the mother country. He might well conclude

~cquamntedpresented graphically by a curve in an
ymptotic condition at both ends. Such nsiderations might lead him to infer that,
density of populsation is a factor deterg population growth, fertility would be
latively high:.in. countries of relatively low ensity, im New Zealand, for example, where million aand a half people occupy a. country ger than Great Britain. And if he were

that these facts reveal problems even more
significant than those arsing from the declin-
ing fertility of the old and densely populated countries of Europe.
I shall make no attempt here to examine the position in the United States. It has been
ably discussed by Amenrcan writers, whose
work constitutes probably the most con-
siderable body of information on population
problems that has come out of any country.

with the works of Walt Whitman I shall deal only with the British Dominions,

ke mighi recall- the following lines

and begin with Australia and New Zealand.

"Have the elder races halted ?

Australia and New Zealand

Do they droop and end their lesson, In both countries the white settlers have

wearied over there, beyond the seas ?
We take up the task eternal, and the bur-

sprung almost-exdusively from the United Kingdom. Nowhere elbe does the Briton from

den.and the lesson,
Pioneers!. 0 Pioneers!

home feel so much at home. The British transplanted in the southern hemisphere

have made no basic difference in their ways

* Pearl, Raymond, "`Afurther Note on War and of living. Continental visitors to the Anti-

ropulation," Science, New Seres, Vol. LIII, p. 12I. podes note with some surprise that the

47

48 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Australian, or the New Zealander, though he wtnesses examined by the Comm Won

lives in a sunny climate and loves the open as follows

t

air, shows no desire to takle refreshment at' "i. An unwilingness to submit to t

an outdoor cafd as in Paris and other conti-

strain and worry of children;

nental cities, but stands up to drink his beer ii. A dislike of the interference wi

at a'bar-counter as if he were in London.

pleasure and comfort involved

White settlement in Australia dates from

child-bearng axnd child-rearing;

I788, and the white population is now about iii. A desire to avoid the actual physi

six and three-quarter millions. In the five

discomfort of gestation, parturitia

years I860-4 the Australian birth-rate was

and lactation; and

42 5 per I,000 total population. It declined iv. An increasing love of luxury and

to 35 per I,000 in I877, partly owing to the

social pleasures."*

cessation of the immigration of young married women. It remained about that level

The Commission found that the desire f

until i888, when a rapid descent began. In family limitation had previously been r

1903 the rate was 25 5 per I,000. In that strained partly by religious feeling and part

year the significance of the decline was dis- by ignorance of the methods by which th

cussed in a remarkable monograph* by the desire might be fulfilled ; and that the form

Government Statistician of New South Wales, had been weakened, and the latter remove

the late Sir Timothy Coghlan, who pointed by a huge increase in the distribution of con

out that the number of legitimate births per traceptive publications and appliances. The

I,000 married women under the age of 45 had pointed out that the decline in the New Sou

gone down from 328*8 in i888 to 235-3 in Wales birth-rate began with a sudden drop

I90I. From the persistent and regular I889, and that in the previous year a case

character of the fall he surmised that the the law courts had given wide publicity to t

minium had not been reached, and that a movement for contraception. In May I8

further decline might be expected; and he a Sydney bookseller was fined five guine

added:

for selling Mrs. Besant's Law of Populatio

" There appears nothing incongruous in a declining birth-rate in an old civilization, especially in one afflicted with the incubus of militarism; but the extension of the phenomenon to new countries, where

He appealed to the Ful Court of New Sout Wales, which in December i888 decided by majority of two to one, Chief Justice Darle dissenting, in his favour. Mr. Justice Wi deyer in his judgment said:

population is so much desired, is novel and "All prosecutions of this kind should

astonishing, and claims the deepest atten- regarded as mischievous, even. by thao

tion." who disapprove the opinions sought to b

Moved by Coghlan's warnings, the New South Wales Government in I903 appointed
a Royal Commission to inquire into the causes of the decine in the birth-rate in New South
Wales; and the Commission, reportmig in
I904, attributed the decline to the deliberate interference with the function of parenthood chiefly by contraception, but also, and to a

stifled, inasmuch as they only tend mo widely to diffuse the teaching objected to. To those, on the other hand, who desire i
promulgation, it must be a matter of con*
gratulation that this, like all attempted prosecutions of thinkers, will defeat its own object, and that truth, like a torch, 'th more it's shook the more it shines.'"

considerable extent, by abortion. They Extracts' from Mr. Justice Windeyer's

could not trace it to any well-defined econo- judgment were reprinted and scattered

mic cause, but stated that the reasons for broadcast over Australia and New Zealand,

restricting procreation given by most of the and had a wide circulation in Great Britain.

* The Decline in the Birth-rate in New South Wales. * Report of the Royal Commission on th Decline oJ
1903. the Birth-rate in New South Wales, 1904, p. 17.

I p6pULATION PROBLEMS IN THE BRITISH COMMONWEALTH 49

e Commission thought that the " remarkle coincidence between the promulgation
i888 of the views expressed in this judg-
nt and the sudden fall of the birth-rate in 3, could not be considered fortuitous." ll be remembered that the decline in the
glish birth-rate began shortly after the adlaugh-Besanit trial had given an enorus publicity to the birth-control move-
nt in this country. he Commission concluded their report th the following words:

" In whatever way the waning birth-
rate of New South Wales is viewed . . . it
is seen as a grave disorder, sapping the
vitals of a new people, dispelling its hopes,
blighting its prospects, and threatening its continuance. . . . It is the duty of the present generation of Australians to see to it that their patriotism is not impugned in
time to come; and that the loss of this fair
heritage of the British race, which, under existing conditions, the philosophy of history foretells, is not made attributable to them by those who may, in the days to
come, have to sacrifice their blood and
treasure in the vain hope of defending it."*

In I904, when the report of the Royal

mmission appeared, the Australian birth-

te was 26 per i,ooo. It rose slowly to 28*5

19I2. The rapid fall in fertility was then

umed, and in I934 the birth-rate reached

e record I936 it

low rose

figure,
to I7

for Australia, of i6 .39.
I, due to an increase in

e number of marriages following recovery

m economic depression. In I932-4 the net

production rate, as computed by Dr.

uczynski,t was o * 96, the replacement rate

mg I0.

In New Zealand fertility has taken a simicourse. The birth-rate fell rapidly from er 40 per i,ooo in I875-9 to 25 in i899, rose wly to 27 5 in I908, and fell almost con-
nuously to i6*2 in I935. It was i6 6 in p36. In 1936 the net reproduction rate was
elow replacement rate; it was computed by Ir. Kuczynski at o * 97. The rapid decline of fertility in Australia

* Report, p. 54.

pijskhbIaSsgtsmMihwalctmrCafraatcalocHitattnrfoohauiofaeeorhisnetneptohhoeoooueahnnauesirxsynroptagcneetsnanrupuuunglentddntbc,ntscneserrtfrlwdbusvknetnnthhbrnoreaeeoepneenheiauNeiiIetethohaelfHoie,oyrntsatgmatablbrmonanrrretcrerateuontiewrsceubhlhte,lfeistegeiayytirenmiognxouettkaelwpras'litlbmhnfundneytnhtnideiyiooeisosnoeonsioIeistaern.aossthodnnueaosfZnnmevrdnaowcoiu"tylptngfsweumrmtOcsiaewgrtigiinro.tlilIewiwtsecsbctsaedshieanteceon*hipviacpleosehrehhtehcsgolehoRMlnosleyewnelaatfst,aoiahoieiaeaaneamerrrowrimwshttf.irsneonnIcbdrapent.dnmAoobtusioansreoateCgfu,siddaehhfurfdoncenaifdgptmnstastroteemsofwIndvtaoetirArhaotonuieydbtiotftdtitoemcfneab.hatnetestgp-dshoxhnhrunfehlaEhlhratse.mgfnaatenofeaoerpedeaabtteirpetiineeelyuuLimfsihpsdPteorlernhdlvespgseosoorora.pqraicteaUletrneotstdeIedlhtuseswnitoauaeehctoneiuhwo,sonoxsuyinescuocd,dsioylpfpieHfirepoe,fraoocpsslicierorefgloneafevdfrMffnhralrbtiatteaapehluwlpirgroeuosianeeetoaeoSoerinihhhrndanurntdobarxssdmtcisliirdsewtmvngfaoesmtcgalometelsrspuonaspo;neeebetescentksraearritaglchorninaxcaaovPrvboerctyNtn.tuttncaynnt,dnno-pdgpheeo,iaeeauohigdi,myiiasentirfngootpbesaalnarrmgluilroswiiharion,eeahkrIDsdrinswcloe,ytngmlansiebettoch.inaattetednnodolrhsih.hnaulefnhihyurdnehwdoinmoslefastvegteinZomdswdnitrhfirooucw,irPstuiwiimOhudfe,isuri"anffuiaoioseernlfdhoenenxaieeapftetgsgtntcaniust"ooeicvtnclfnie.eddlersaho,hyhmtsrnufacmnfiacoootoepuaasennttsa,ae,lsataivladonrmvaMerhicnnvcttttthiusstihecilnnoudrseesrrndtaaaaechhIh.hnhenhsnniaenei,lt-,-dngey.e,s--"staeesy-esene-ereoegstdt staafeebrnrtoIodertnmsilftgeoAiimrudnnesiganttflthrfps.eeaerlmoneipounTalscmheettbeshepperarrmierenastlaeiitlrnnrtietlaveceniipmsorarloeohpmrboroelfowteebretmtlahiefrlamiretntsohyte.m6ahsorwee,ihyoTsioiihtotnnee,og-

t The Statist, December 25th, 1937.

* Parliamentary Debates, November 2gth. Io97.

50 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

be prevented from dying out. In New Zea- fertility of the two races that inhabit New

land, however, differences im racial fertility Zealand is now so great that without unex.

suggest questions of considerable interest. pected increases in immigration; or in the

At the first census of the whole population, reproduction of the European element, it

which was taken in I858, the people of seems possible that at some future time what

European oringi were enumerated at 59,000 the Maoris lost through inferior armament

and the Maoris at 56,ooo. As the Europeans may be regained through superior fertility.

increased the Maoris diminished, and it seemed that, as in some parts of Melanesia,

Canada

the natives, unable to survive contact with In New Zealand the differences m racial

Western civilization, would dwindle to fertility are chiefly of interest as affecting a

extinction.

distant, though perhaps not very remote,

But these gifted people are endowed with future. In Canada and South Africa they

high vitality, and, though there is much in give rise to problems that may press for solu-

the past that we must regret, they have been tion within the lifetime of the present genera.

treated with a consideration unfortunately tion. Both are countries of high fertility. In

rare in the history of white settlement among both the net reproduction rate is well above

native races. They are represented in the I -0. But there .are remarkable differences in

New Zealand legislature, and have produced the fertility of the settlers of European

citizens of whose achievements all New origin. In both countries the fertility of the

Zealanders are proud. They now show not British element is low, that of the non.

the slightest sign of moving towards extinc- British element is high, and in both the dif-

tion. For many years accurate particulars of ferences are wide.

their natality were-lacking; for it was not The first white settlers in Canada came

until I9I3 that Maori births became regis- from France, but since I763, when by the

trable, and for years many births escaped Treaty of Paris they were separated politi.

registration. From I932, however, the regis- cally from France, they have received very

tered number of births may be taken as few recruits from their mother country, and

reasonably accurate, although probably still between one and two million French Cana-

somewhat understating the actual number. dians have emigrated to the United States.

In the five years I932-6 the average annual British immigration, on the other hand, has

number of Maori births per I,OOO Maori been enormous. Yet between I87I and I93I

population was 416, their death-rate was the French Canadians increased by I70 per

i8 and the excess of births over deaths was cent. and the British by I55 per cent. In the

23-6 per I,OOO. The corresponding figures intercensal period I92I-3I, the French Cana-

per i,ooo of the European population were dians increased by I9-3 per cent. and the

i6-6, 8X3 and 8X3.

British by I0-5 per cent. The French and the

The crude death-rate of the European British now form 28 and 52 per cent. respec-

population, 8X75 in I936, is very low, owing tively of the total population. In the prov-

not only to the extraordinarily favourable ince of Quebec, where the French Canadians

conditions in which New Zealanders live but form 79 per cent. of the population, the

to the abnormal age composition of the popu- birth-rate in I935 was 24-6 per I,000, and the

lation. The mean expectation of life in New excess of births over deaths was I3-9 per

Zealand is sixty-eight years, and since I,000. In Ontario, where the majority of the

seventy years is about the utmost we may people are British, the corresponding rates in

reasonably hope to attain even by putting the same year were I7*2 and 7*3. In British

into practice all known means of preventing Columbia, which is peopled alnost entirely

premature death, it is clear that ,there is no by settlers of British origin, the birth-rate

prospect of preventing by further reductions wat I3-6 and the excess of births over death

in mortality alone the tendency of the white 4 3 per I,000.

population to diminish. The differential To what is this differential fertility to be

POrPULATION PROBLEMS IN THE BRITISH COMMONWEALTH

scribed-?7 M. Andr6 Siegfried, in his recent
book, Le Canada, gives a vivid account of the any ways in which the British and French adians differ in their outlook on life. The ritish Canadian seeks a career in the towns.
He is drawn towards an occupation that seems to promise advancement, wealth, influence. If he follows agriculture it is to make good; he uses the land as a means by which he may achieve success. In those respects he has much in common with his neighbours in the United States. !The French Canadian shows less liking for an urban life. He turns from the fervid pursuit of material success. He prefers the country. He farms
because he likes farming. He loves his land,
not as an instrument to enable him to make good, but as if it were part of himself. He
lives his life literally in accordance with one of the most profound of human utterances:
"II faut cultiver notre jardin." But all this is true to-day of the peasants
in the land from which the French Canadians
isprang, who for many years have been
remarkable for low fertility.> In the forty-

"The- first reason is that the Church takes a firm attitude against birth control, and its instructions, given through the confessional and enforced by rigorous penances, are generally followed.... Finally, I feel that the vitality of the French Canadian community is the, result of a certain attitude towards life and work, which is found nowhere else in America.
.... It takes the form of a moral discipline of the family, exerted under the direct influence of the Church. Thus it respects values which are considered out of date elsewhere, especially in the New World. It believes in hard work, com-
mends thrift and self-discipline, accepts the doctrine of large families as a Christian duty, and restrcts ambition to sensible proportions. Such thoughtful asceticism is the very negation of Amenrcaism.... The existence on the North American Continent of a distinct people, ethnically different from their surroundings, is a curious paradox. One wonders if it can possibly last."*

seven years I890-I936 there were no less than

sixteen years, including i935 and I936, in South Africa

which the number of deaths in France exceeded the number of births, in spite of a large immigration of foreigners of high fertility, chiefly Poles and Italians. It was in rural France that the balance of births and deaths, as measured by the difference between the crude birth-rate and death-rate, first turned in favour of death. As long ago

shaIrneSwoiutthhsiAxfrmiiclalitonwsoamnidllaiohnalwfhBiatentsuesttalenrds

a million other coloured rather more than five

people, a country times larger than

Great Britain. Of the settlers of European

origin 58 British.

per For

cent. over

are Dutch a hundred

and 34 per cent. years the Dutch

have had practically no recruits from over-

as the fourth decade of the nineteenth cen- seas, whereas British immigration, though

tury, the departments of Lot-et-Garonne and not numerous, has until recent years been

Eure, both rural departments, began to show fairly well maintained.

an annual excess of deaths over births, and in
the next decade they were joined by two other rural departments, Tam-et-Garonne
and Gers. In I935, of the ninety departments of Fraice, there were fifty-nine, chiefly rural departments, in which the deaths exceeded the births. It- is not because the French Canadians have sprung from French peasants that their fertility is high. We must seek the explanation elsewhere.

The fertility of the white people as a whole

is
as it

hicsiogmdhpu;uetttehodetbnhyeetMhrri.egpPhroolfldearuktci,tliiwtoaynsorfatt2eIh5ei.n5DtIu9Bt3uc3th,

efelretmielintty. arTeholaucgkhinagd,eiqtusaeteemsstatthisattictshoefrreapcrioa-l

duction level in

of the British Australia and

has fallen to New Zealand.

the

low

As in Canada, the British in South Africa

make for the towns. Johannesburg is the

It is not hard to find. I quote from M.
Siegfried's book:

* t

STiheegfrSioeudt,h.LeAfCraincaadna,Jo1u9r3n7a.l

1936.

of

Economics,

March

52 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

most powerful magnet. It is there that that reverberates throughout the whole

money may most quickly be made. In recent world. Though the industry has survived

years the city has developed with amazing various gloomy predictions, the mines are not

speed, and now contains one-eighth of South inexhaustible, and there are those who would

Africa's white population. The South African say that it has yet to be shown that South

Dutchman, like the French Canadian, is a Africa can survive as a white man's country,

countryman. He is rooted to the soil, from In this brief survey of fertility in the four

which he draws his strength. He differs from great Dominions of the British Common.

the Briton in his outlook on life, his way of wealth, I have made no attempt to enrich the

living, and his sense of the value of things, world with new facts or original opimions,

and it is there that the explanation of the and doubtless what I have said may appear

differential fertility of South Africa's white but an incursion into the realm of platitude,

races may most profitably be sought.

But platitudes may serve a useful purpose,

But in both races of white settlers fertility and my purpose will have been fulfilled if I

is declining. The net reproduction rate of the have shown that the Dominions present

white settlers fell from I*448 in I926 to population problems of high scientific in.

I-2I5 in I933.* And the great majority of terest, which merit all the attention that can

South Africa's inhabitants are not white be devoted to them.

settlers. Little is known of the fertility of the But for my part I am unable to regard the

coloured races, but they outnumber the white facts I have tried to summarize as constitut.

races so greatly that it is clear that the prob- ing nothing more than interesting research

lems of differential fertility in the Union are material. To me these facts seem fraught

not limited to differences between the British with momentous significance. Pondering on

and Dutch elements. The prosperity of the the rapid decline of British fertility all over

white population is bound up with the gold the world, one seems to feel the presence of

industry, which has for years enjoyed a boom an element of Greek tragedy-the presence of

* The South AJrican Journal of Economics, March
I93t

a mysterious force moving ceaselessly, relentlessly, to an unknown but tragic destiny,

Pubishers: DAVID NUTT, London - G. E. STECHERT & Co., New York - NICOLA ZANICHELL1 Bol a - F#LIX ALCAN, Paris

AKADEMISCHE VERLAGSGESELLSCHAFT m. b. H., Leipzig - RUIZ HERMANOS, Madrid - F. KiLIAmS NACHFOLGER, Budapest

SeCIEINTL Ii^"Iolo""198

6

6

F3.

ROUGEn&

CIE, Lausanne
d Year

-

F.

MACHADO

&

ClaI,NIPoErRtNoA-ITOHNEA

MARREUVZIEWN

OClOMPwAONUY,TUTIoDkySo.Y

E

C'IL"Q'N T TIA ~~~~~~~~

Publftished ever month (each number comntinsg zoo to 120 pageS)

Editors F. BOlTAZZ - Q. BRUNI - P. IQUUJg

IS TH OnLY REvIEW the contributors to which are really Interational.

S ta: Psdo Bon^e.

18 THE ONY REVIEW that has a really world-wide circulation.

IS THE ONLY REVIEW of synthesisandumficationof science, that dealsinitsarticleswiththenewest andmost fundamental problemsof all branchu

of knowledge: scientific philosophy, history of science, scientific teaching and advancement, mathematics, astronomy, eology, physics, chemistry

biological sciences, physiology, psychology, sociology, law, economics, bistory of religions, anthropology, linguistics: articles sometime constituting

real and properenquiries, such as those on the contributon given bv the different nations to the advancement of science; on determinism on the

most fundamental physical and chemical questions, and particularly on relativity, on the physics of the atom and of radiations; on italism

Selntla thus realization of

studies all the main problems an international organization

moiftetrheestpihniglotshoephiincteallleacntduaslciceinrtcilfeiscomfotvheemwehnotl.e

world,

and

represents

at

the

same

time

the

first

succesl

18 TBE ONLY REVIEW that among its contributors can boast of the most illustrious men of science in the whole world.

The artidles are publshed in the language of their authors, and every number has a lemnt o u the lonh t lation of the artcles th a not Fren&h T reiew is thus comletly aoeoulble to tho who know onFrnh (Wri forere copy to the General Secretary of Seieiia, Milan, sending sixpnc in one stmp ofyour cotry, merely to cowr paci and postage).

SUBSCRIPTION: O Shillng

Sutantal reductis grantdto tho who tek up mo than one Yeas io n
For nforaion apply to "s CE3TIA" ia A. De T , 12 - ilano (Ity)

Eugenis ReieWr, Vol. N,No.1

