EUGENICS IN AMERICA.
BY DR. H. H. LAUGHLIN.
My subject is "Eugenics in the United States," and I propose to describe the organization of the science and the practical application of eugenical principles in the United States.
In 1904 Dr. Charles B. Davenport planned and organized for the Camegie Institution of Washington, a station devoted to the study of experimental evolution. This is located at Coldspring Harbor, Long Island, on a beautiful site splendidly adapted to the purpose. It had no particular reference to the evolution of man, but its business was to study evolution in plants and animals. The work had not proceeded long, in fact only six years, before it became apparent that the principles of evolution which were being demonstrated in detail in the laboratory by work on plants and animals, particularly in the analysis of their pedigrees, had a parallel and fundamental application to man. It was thus in 1910, by the financial support of Mrs. E. H. Harriman, that Dr. Davenport planned and organized his second institution at Coldspring Harbor. It is called the Eugenics Record Office. This was established for the purpose of studying eugenics as a biological science.
We appreciate the fact that eugenics has many bearings. It is related to biology, psychology, physiology, anthropology, medicine, geology, geography, statistics, history and politics; indeed all of the biological, medical and sociological sciences have their very close eugenical bearings. The whole theme of the application of the principles of evolution to man has become so firmly set that eugenics has been organized, not only in England but also in America, into an independent science. During the first decade of its existence in the United States, it came very near to being swallowed up several times by different allied sciences and social efforts. Indeed, for a while it seemed as though the people in the United States who were interested in human evolution had confused sex hygiene with the broader aspect of human evolution which we now think of as the science cf eugenics. So it was often necessary to define this branch of leaming, and also to explain what eugenics is not.
The Eugenics Record Office was especially fortunate in its first Board of Scientific Directors. Dr. Alexander Graham Bell, the inventor of the telephone, had his primary scientific interests in human evolution. He invented the telephone when he was trying to teach the deaf to hear; the telephone was merely a bye-product. In studying deafness he was greatly interested in the question of hereditary deafness, and so for many years he was the leader in the United States of what later became the science of eugenics. Dr. Charles B. Davenport, the distinguished Director of the Station for Experimental Evolution, was the active agent in bringing together the men of science, and the

EUGENICS IN AMERICA.

29

essential moral and financial support, in the establishment of an organization which has proved successful in the researches which it has conducted.
I hope to be able to give some short account of what has been done in several of these different fields. I should like to call your special attention to several of these types of endeavour in particular.
The science of eugenics is especially fortunate in the United States in being connected with experimental evolution. It is possible that it might have been connected primarily with statistics, or with sociology, or with economics, or with psychology, or with any one of a dozen other different things which are related to it; but it actually grew out of first-hand studies in experimental evolution, which fact was its basic principle. Statistics and psychology have not been neglected whenever they throw light on the main problem; but primarily eugenics is looked upon in the United States as a biological science, the principal business of which is to determine the processes and laws of human heredity and the fortunes of family stocks and races.
One of its first tasks, then, was to investigate the manner of the inheritance of human traits. It became necessary to collect many pedigrees of human families and to analyse these in the light of the best existing knowledge. Up to the present time there have been studies made on more than one hundred and sixty-four different human traits-physical, physiological, mental and temperamental. Many of them have been demonstrated to follow definite rules of inheritance, and others are simply known to "run in families." These latter are still being attacked to find out more certainly their methods of inheritance.
Take, for instance, data on heredity, mate selection, differential fecundity, differential survival and differential migration-if you took these five factors and reduced the thing to a science it would be possible to predict, by a formula, what is happening to the human race, and, to the degree to which we could find facts about these five points, we could gauge what sort of stocks, families and national numbers we should have in time.
Mate selection is a particularly important factor. This is a field which, in the United States, presents great difficulty for scientific study. This is especially true when the scientific study seems to point the way toward practical application, because the ordinary way is to say that people simply fall in love, and that is all there is to mate selection. But we find that there are other reasons for falling in love besides simply the process of " falling." Education and manners and customs have agreat deal to do with it. We know that social position has something to do with it. Wealth also is a factor. Though people do not say that they fall in love with money, it is a factor that cannot be ignored. There is also the matter of education and culture. The racial prejudice that exists in a nation at any given time will be a- great factor in mate selection. If, through education or change in manners and customs of the particular people, a certain prejudice breaks down, then certainly the factors that govern mate selection will vary, and vary very greatly. Our statutory laws goveming marriage and divorce apply directly to mate selection, so whenever marriage laws are changed

30 EUJENICS REVIEW.
whenever education as to eugenical principles becomes an essential element in the life of the people, we expect that society will be consciously governing mate selection. Indeed, if this one eugenical factor can be controlled, the others, although equally important, when all are working without conscious social control, will doubtless be found to be subordinate in biological or eugenical import. But even if the best possible mate selection were made, it would not be of any value to the race unless we could control differential fecundity. Unless those matings that are most valuable biologically have a high fertility and those which are of less value to the race have a very low fertility, eugenics would not be a practical thing. You might make a science of it; but you could not make a practical application of it. The matter of differential fecundity is always important. See how low fecundity is scaring France almost to death.
If, from the upper levels of society, we could recruit the next generation, the race would make great progress indeed. One reason why I am particularly interested in the study of eugenics and biology in England is that I have to pay a compliment to the British people, and say that in regard to the study of plants and animals, the British people have done mcre than any other single nation to improve domestic plants and animals by thc process of intelligent selection. They have applied the principles of Galton and Darwin to domestic plants and animals. They have, indeed, applied the principleof differential fecundity and found that it works. If man is an animal and subject to the same biological laws that control and-rule the biological world represented in all plants and animals, this matter of differential fecundity will be one of the great factors in racial betterment.
The matter of the application of differential fecundity is extremely embarrassing at times. Why is it that a family when it begins to rise in the world will be very fertile, and have eight or ten children in a generation, and then, as soon as the family or branches of it become noted or rise in the social world, or rise in any phase of human activity, their fertility seems to drop? It is a fact; but why is it a fact? Look again at the position in France.
One thing that the latest census in the United States showed was that the people who live on the farms of the United States are about fifty per cent. of the whole population; but apparently in the last generation this fifty per cent. has recruited eighty-eight per cent. of the next generation. There is a great differential fecundity in this, and its eugenical import is very fundamental.
The matter of differential survival I will not go into further. Unless an individual survives to the reproductive period, so far as his eugenical value is concerned, he might as well never have been born.
The last point, differential migration, is a thing with which I was particularly engaged upon a special mission to Europe, first for the Commitee on Immigration and Naturalization of the House of Representatives, and, secondly, for the Department of Labor, which, in America, is responsible for administering our national immigration laws. I visited eleven countries and twenty-five different Americar Consulates, trying to find out something about the factors which control the emigration of certain groups and classes from Europe to America.

EUGENICS IN AMERICA.

31

The Eugenics Record Office is the first building to be erected and
devoted solely to the study of human evolution or race biology. It is located at Cold Spring Harbor on an eighty acre tract of land; we have hopes and are ambitious that at some time not the whole eighty acres, but several acres will be covered with buildings for eugenical research; so that all the land is held, and this building is the nucleus of theInstitution. It is three-quarters of a mile from the Station for Ex-
perimental Evolution, where there are several buildings. Together, the Station for Experimental Evolution and the Eugenics Record Office constitute the Department of Genetics of the Carnegie Institution of Washington. Dr. Charles B. Davenport is the Director of the Department which comprises these two subordinate institutions. About thirty persons are constantly at work. Every summer in the office and yard there is held, for six weeks, a Training School for Field Work''rs.
The science of eugenics is so new that when any funds are available
for special research, it is very difficult to find competent persons, who ha've biological training in the practical field of investigations, to undertake the collection of data, so that the Training School is a neces-
sity. During the last fourteen sessions, over two hundred and fifty
different students have gone through this particular mill. The grad-
uates of the School find employment in eugenical research, and oftentimes particular students, after preliminary study and field work as
assistants, become independent investigators. It is a sort of apprenticeship for investigators. The graduates often find employment in hospitals for the insane, in institutions for the feebleminded, in prisons, and oftentimes with universities, and as individual investigators for social organizations which are making surveys. They generallv carry the title of Field Worker, which implies that their job is to go into the home territories of persons and families which are being studied, to plot the family tree and see that it is authentic, and describe the different members of the particular family tree in reference to the trait under consideration. That is the principal use of these students. But making community surveys, with particular reference to the inventory of inborn qualities, is also a function of the field worker. The work of this corps of investigators gives us the hope that we shall ultimately secure a most valuable collection of first-hand data, which, in turn, will make possible the critical analysis of many eugenical problems of national importance.
Until 1918 this Institution was independent of the Carnegie organ-ization. In 1918 Mrs. Harriman gave this building, its equipment and all of the records which have been accumulating, together with a generous sum of money, to the Carnegie Institution of Washington, and it then became a department of the Institution. It has ever since been maintained, on its original site at Cold Spring Harbor, Long Island, by the Carnegie Institution of Washington.
Every science which deals with man in any wav attempts to make its own classification of mankind. If it is the anthropologist or the ethnologist who is making the classification, he, of course, bases his classification primarily upon traits and their combination. Eugenics, however, has a different purpose. Its classification must be based upon the ability of particular stocks to function as socially valuable unitsand to reproduce themselves in proportion with their race values.

32 EUGENICS REVIEW.
Let us consider the men of real genius, say the upper five thousand men in all history who have been most splendidly endowed by nature, and who succeeded in finding and using opportunities to achieve greatness. Take the twenty or thirty different fields of activity, and take off the top man and you will find the best eugenical products of humanity. I do not know how many men have been reared under eivilized conditions since the earliest Egyptian and Chaldean times, but if there are now fifteen hundred million people in the world, perhaps thirty billions have lived under civilized conditions. Then you see how rare these top men are. So we limit our geniuses to the, top five thousand people who have done something in the way of promoting the affairs of mankind in the greatest degree. This Society will be particularly interested in this list, because we find in the list one name closely associated with the Society, Sir Francis Galton.
The second group contains the persons who are called the "Who's Who" people. It may be that their frequency in all modem nations like England, France, America, and Germany would be one in six thousand.
Then we go down still further and include the great mass of people, the great nine-tenths of humanity. Then there is the submerged tenth, the socially inadequate persons who must be prevented from reproducing. If we try to classify them by types, we must call them the insane, the feebleminded, the paupers, the epileptic, the criminals, and so on. These people, and the family stocks that produce them most frequently, must be cut off and prevented from reproducing at all. I do not believe that humanity would ever make very much positive conscious eugenical progress if it simply prevented these individuals from reproducing. In order to prevent the reproduction of such individuals, we have to go up higher into the upper strata and find out what families are reproducing these degenerates. The remedy lies in drying up the source. It is the pedigree rather than the individual basis of selection that counts in racial fortunes.
If you do not believe in heredity, look at a clean-cut pedigree of Huntington's Chorea. It is a trait that does not skip a generation. If it once drops out, it never reappears. That, of course, is a characteristic of all "dominant" traits. We can always get the Mendelian expectation by analyzing such pedigrees. Their collection constitutes one type of work our field investigators are sent out to do. But the drawing of the chart is only a tenth part of the job. The first-hand field work is the real task. The family, whether good or bad, has to be found, and the field worker has to see that the pedigree is authentic and the description of its individual members accurate. The whole job of getting the interest and collaboration of the family, of using the neighbourhood information, and of getting official records are parts of the job of getting data from the original sources; the field worker has a difficult and important task in all modern eugenical research.
A typical family distribution of color-blindness is quite different from the family distribution of a dominant trait like cataract or a recessive one like albinism. It appears not to be difficult to fit the actual findings of human pedigrees with the mathematical aspects of Mendel's law.

EUGENICS IN AMERICA.

38

The best study we have of a chromosome count in man, is the work
of Dr. Theophilus S. Painter. It is easy enough to make a chromosome count in rabbits, because the gland can be got fresh and giveni proper treatment; but to get a healthy human sex-gland is rather difficult. In one of the institutions where they are sterilizing by castration. the human testes were secured. In drawings which are very clean-cut, each chromosome has an individualitv; perhaps some time we will give each of them a number, a letter or a name. It was earlier suspected by some histologists, who did not have very good material that the negro and the white man had different chromosome numbers. That is proved to be wrong. As far as the species is concerned, the chromo-
some number and appearance of white and black men are the same.
There are forty-eight chromosomes in the somatic cells in the female,
and forty-seven in the male. I think that that is clearly demonstrated. With regard to the chromosomes in human heredity, there are only
forty-eight chromosomes in the fertilized egg; consequently, when you
get back in your ancestral tree to sixty-four ancestor, somebody has to be left out. There are forty-eight chromosomes to sixty-four ancestors.
Take for instance, a human female. Her father's father and her
mother's mother each, on the average, contribute to her twelve chromosomes. Every time when you see a lady walking along you know that the chance of her father's father contributing nothing to her inheritance is one to four raised to the twenty--fourth power. Of course that is based upon the assumption that the traits are carried only in the chromosomes, and that there is no crossing over or other special phe-
nomena. If one boasts of direct descent from William the Conqueror, if you
go back fourteen or fifteen generations, the blood of William the
Conqueror is very remote. Every gencration has all the blood you have got; but of course it is differently distributed. Your father and mother had it all; your four grandparents had it all; your eight great-grandparents had it all. Of course your own blood gets much more dilute in each individual ancestor as we go back, because the chromosomes segregate and chance determines which ones
pass on and which are left out. It is not simply as though the blood were diluted with so much water but the situation is rather that of
the chance elimination of discrete chromosomes; so that if you trace only once to William the Conqueror, the chances are that you have
none of his blood. We have some of the finest stock in the world, we think, descended
from England, and we have received also some degenerate stock from the same nation. We should have sorted the human seed more carefully at the border.
I could show a pedigreee of four generations in the same almshouse at the same time:- the great-grandmother, the grandmother, the mother, the young girl, and a two weeks old baby. One of the evils of these almshouses is that they encourage the reproduction of degenerates instead of checking it. The girl goes to th? almshouse and becomes a mother. As soon as she is able to work, she goes away; and then later on she is likely to come back and have another baby. These almshouses in some respects are breeders of degeneracy instead Of

EUGENICS REVIEW.
being eugenical institutions, which a different policy might enable them to become.
I know a case of a man who had circular insanity. He had an attack about every two years and, as regularly, was sent to an insane asylum. He would get better after a few months and would go home to become the father of another child. All of the children were feebleminded. This happened several times. Finally, after the last attack, he went home and became the father of twins. Then he came back to the institution to stay for a few months. The authorities said,' "We are not going to let you go home any more unless you are sexually sterilized." He agreed, was sterilized and there were no more children of that type born in his family.
Dr. A. H. Estabrook of the Eugenics Record Office has traced some families in the valleys of Indiana. They are descended from English stock, most likely from people dumped by the British penal authorities in Virginia. They travelled across the country to make way for better immigrants, and came finally to Indiana, where they spread over the state. They are known as the American gipsies. There are many hundreds of them. I do not know why they call these people the Ishmaels, but they are very numerous. and we can imagine a significant connotation for the name. America is suffering very much from them, but is waking to its danger. We shall have to provide some practical plan for getting rid of the stock. Every nation has its own difficulties of that sort.
The Jukes of New York also are a famous degenerate American family. Dr. Dugdale, more than a generation ago, started to study them, and recently Dr. Estabrook has brought their pedigrees down to date. It was thought for a long time that the Jukes were the worst
family in existence, but dozens of similar families have been found. You can find them in all the states. I dare say that you can find them in all parts of England. If you dig down, you will find that their kinship is astounding. It is a big job to purge the race, but it is one of the principal practical tasks of eugenics.
We have not made much headway in pedigree analysis. It seems to be the task first for th; physician and the student of internal secretions, and then possibly some pedigree analysis may throw some additional light on the subject.
It is interesting and a moral relief to take up the matter of geniuses and to study their inheritance. Indeed, genius seems to be just as 'highly hereditary as degeneracy.
We have a law which says that we shall admit no feebleminded and no insane as immigrants. I cannot pass this without showing the difference between the two, and why the law works better in reference to the feebleminded than to the insane. The fact is that if an individual would-be immigrant is feebleminded, he has been so since birth. and generally, after a medical examination, he can be rejected at Ellis Island. The result is that the feebleminded immigrarts are kept down to an average incidence per 100,000 of only one-third that of the normal or native population. This incidence among immigrants should be zero, and the law said that it should be zero. If an insane person comes and is subjected to the usual examination by the immi--

EUGENICS IN AMERICA.

35

gration officer, the officer, no matter how skilful, cannot tell whether the man is going to break down or not, and so he cannot often spot the defect, if it exists. The result is that in order to make an eugenically
effective examination, it will be necessary to have the background of the would-be immigrant. It is necessary to make a biological and a
pedigree examination as well as a medical test. The United States and the Colonies of Great Britain, Canada,
Australia, New Zealand, and South Africa have a great'problem in
common. They are new countries which can absorb thousands of immigrants. The races of Southern Europe and Eastern. Europe and the Oriental races are crowding on the borders of -these so-called Colonies. But the word "Colony" should, of course, be restricted to
a group of people who go from a country to plant themselves in new regions and there build a new and better civilization of.the. parental
type. Unless the United States and the self-governing Colonies or
'Dominions of the British Empire can get together in some sort of concerted action to admit only emigrants who are of assimilable races and of good family-stocks-immigrants who will raise the physical, mental and moral standards and help to carry on the European and especially the British type of civilization, I am afraid that.in the long run not only the United States, but, even earlier than the United States, the self-governing Dominions of the British Empire will suffer greatly.
So emigration, as far as the practical aspect of eugepiics is con-
cemed, is of great importance to the United States. It is perhaps the greatest single problem we have now. If, in the next ten years, America can regulate immigration on a rigidly selective basis, .w.e shall, we feel confident, have taken a major step in assuring the perpetuity of the American Republic, and also of the white British colonie,, so that we wilh have reproduced in our countries, in larger degreee than exists in'Europe, a civilization of the type which has developed in Britain.

