BRITISH MEDICAL JOURNAL
Legality of Sterilization: A New Outlook*

IN THE COURSE of a recent address to the delivered a joint opinion on the Scottish law to

Medical Society of London, Lord Justice the Medical and Dental Defence Union of

Devlin showed that there is some judicial Scotland.

support for a more liberal view of the law For some time there has been little doubt that

relating to sterilization. The traditional view is sterilization is lawful when performed on a

that sterilization is forbidden by the law of consenting party for certain therapeutic reasons.

criminal assault and its statutory variants, Both English and Scottish counsel, in the opinions

though it may be justified if performed in order now received by the Defence Unions, go further

to save life or health. Lord Justice Devlin said than this. However, they confine their opinions

that sterilization, if done without consent upon a to considering the case where there is full and

normal person, would be a criminal assault of a valid consent to the operation by the patient

most wicked kind. He suggested, however, that concerned. They do not attempt to explore the

an assault should not be treated as criminal difficult and interesting questions surrounding

if done either: (i) to avert danger to life, or grave a purported consent given by a person of

and immediate danger to health; or (ii) with the unsound mind' or by an infant. (Consent by an

consent of the other party and for a purpose not infant under sixteen would almost certainly be

otherwise criminal. If it was thought that invalid: consent by an infant between sixteen

sterilization by consent should be prohibited and twenty-one may or may not be invalid,2

except for grave medical reasons, this should be but it would generally be inadvisable to rely

made a crime in itself and the law should not upon such consent in cases of this sort.) With

try to catch it as a form of assault (The Times, this limitation of scope in mind, it is possible to

November 4th).

summarize the pith of the English counsel's

As a statement of what the law ought to be, opinion as follows: An operation for sterilization

Lord Justice Devlin's remarks will receive a very is not unlawful whether it is performed on

large measure of support from the legal and therapeutic or eugenic grounds or for other

medical professions. It is problematic, however, reasons, provided there is full and valid consent

whether this view is consistent with the actual to the operation by the patient concerned. This

state of the law on the authorities as they now proposition, however, has no direct judicial

exist. authority to support it, because it has never been

New Opinions
The change in the wind of opinion over recent years has prompted the Medical Defence Union to seek fresh advice on the legality ofsterilization. Leading and junior counsel have advised the Medical Defence Union on ajoint opinion on the English law, and Scottish counsel have likewise

tested in the courts. The first case to come before a court would be in the nature of a test case and would establish a precedent of the utmost significance. Although confident that the courts would uphold the legality of a sterilizing operation performed on therapeutic or well-founded eugenic grounds, counsel are of opinion that the risk of an adverse finding

* We are grateful to the Editors of the British Medical increases as the reasons for the operation are

Journal for kind permission to reprint this article by medically less well-founded.

their Legal Correspondent, which appeared in the issue of that Journal dated November 19th, 1960.

The Scottish counsel summarize their opinion

33 THE EUGENICS REVIEW, April 1961, 53, 1.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of the position in Scottish law in these words:
We have formed the opinion that, if a sterilization were performed with the full consent of the patient by a responsible surgeon and if the reason for doing it was substantial and not obviously immoral by present-day standards, it is exceedingly improbable that the Court would hold the act to be criminal.
SUMMARY OF ENGLISH OPINION
Many earlier views of the law on sterilization expressed opinions formed by analogy from the law of abortion. The English counsel, however, eschewed such analogy and reasoned from first principles. The question facing them was whether an operation for sterilization was of itself a criminal act of such a quality that it was not rendered lawful by the consent of the patient upon whom it was performed.
Counsel first cleared one difficulty away by stating their view that all operations for sterilization fell into the same legal category notwithstanding any variety in technique:* in principle there was no distinction between an operation which involved breaking of the skin and one which did not.
Offences Against the Person Act, 1861
Apart from abortion, which was specifically forbidden by statute, a surgical operation could only be criminal in so far as it constituted either wounding, or the infliction of bodily harm, or an assault. What status had the patient's consent in the jurisprudential analysis of these crimes? Was it true that every surgical operation was prima facie lawful until shown otherwise, the operation only being a criminal offence if some extraneous criminal ingredient appeared in a particular case? Or was the converse proposition to be preferred-namely, that every surgical operation was primafacie unlawful, only ceasing to be an offence in any particular case if a "just cause" or "lawful excuse" appeared? These crimes were codified in the Offences Against the Person Act, 1861, from which the vital extracts were as follows:
SECTION 18: whosoever shall unlawfully and maliciously by any means whatsoever wound or cause any grievous bodily harm to any person ... with intent to....
* But see below under "Comment". The possibility of a reversal operation might be important.

SECTiON 20: whosoever shaU unlawfully and maliciously wound or inflict any grievous bodily
harm....
SECTION 47: ... assault occasioning actual bodily
harm....
In counsel's view no offence would be committed under Section 47 unless consent was absent, as Section 47 dealt with assault. They considered, however, the question whether the surgeon committed an offence against Sections 18 or 20 notwithstanding the consent of the patient to sterilization. The ingredient common to these sections was the infliction of bodily harm. Sections 18 and 20 both contained the qualification "unlawfully and maliciously," and Section 18 required that the infliction was made "with intent." "Maliciously" there meant the intention to do the particular kind of harm done. "Unlawfully" meant, in the words of Stephen J., "forbidden by some definite law"3-that is, not an act which was merely immoral. In general, no onus of proof rested on the accused. It might be said that, to show the act to be unlawful, either the prosecution must prove that the act by reason of the circumstances was "unlawful" or the prosecution must prove that the accused had no lawful excuse: which of these alternatives was the correct one depended on the question whether a surgical operation was or was not per se a criminal act.
What is a Crime?
To answer this question, counsel considered the basic question of what constituted a crime.
The basic rule of English law,j subject to very few exceptions was that nothing was a crime unless it was plainly forbidden by law. Analysis
of this principle was usually divided into analysis of the actus reus (forbidden act) and of the mens rea. The modern view of the actus was that, to determine whether it was reus, one must look at the surrounding circumstances (e.g. the allegation that A had killed B did not of itself aver an actus reus: the killing might be lawful execution). On this view, said counsel, the allegation of the cutting of skin by a knife did not of itself aver an actus reus. There was, however, a much older form of analysis which divided forbidden acts into those which were
t But not of Scottish law.

34

LEGALITY OF STERILIZATION: A NEW OUTLOOK

mala in se and those which were mala prohibita.4 Acts mala in se were "unlawful in themselves", while acts mala prohibita were merely forbidden. One could not give an effective consent to an act malum in se. If surgical operations were mala in se, consent was irrelevant, and the only question was whether there was lawful excuse for it. The malum in se test had been relied upon in modem times in R. v. Donovan,5 a case of indecent sadistic assault upon a consenting person. But this case could be distinguished as applying only to its own facts. In any case, a surgical operation would not fall within the category of malum in se as described in that case.
"Bodily Harm" Turning from the meaning of "unlawful,"
counsel considered the meaning of "bodily harm" in the sections referred to. They doubted whether a surgical operation properly performed could be said to cause "bodily harm," grievous or otherwise. Grievous bodily harm need not be permanent or dangerous, but it must be such as seriously to interfere with comfort or health.
In counsel's view, the actus of a surgical operation (except for the special case of abortion) was only reus if there was some ingredient additional to the circumstances of a bona-fide surgical operation-e.g. a personally criminal (in the sense of a morally reprehensible) motive on the part of the doctor so that the surrounding circumstances had a criminal colour. Hence a surgical operation (including a sterilizing operation) properly performed was by itself neither an act malum in se nor an actus reus. For the same reasons, a cosmetic operation was lawful, though not necessary for the life or health of the patient.
Importance of First Case There was no direct authority to support this
view, but counsel took encouragement from the views of Lord Evershed and Hodson L. J. in Bravery v. Bravery,6 a matrimonial case, in which they expressly dissociated themselves from the observations of Denning L. J. regarding the position of sterilization in the criminal law.*
Counsel's reasoning made no distinction

between eugenic sterilization and sterilization performed for other reasons such as personal convenience. However, it would be more difficult to argue the first test case on obviously unmeritorious facts.
SUMMARY OF SCOTTISH OPINION
Scottish counsel, in considering the Scottish law, gave as their opinion that the carrying out of sterilization upon a consenting patient by a qualified person was not per se a crime and would not necessarily be held to be a crime (even though the sterilization was not necessary for the preservation of life or health), so long as the circumstances surrounding the doctor's conduct and particularly the motive for which the treatment was carried out were not such as to be plainly offensive to the public conscience or contrary to the public interest. It was commonly agreed that, in general, sterilization without consent in all probability would be a crime and that sterilization with consent where necessary for the preservation of life or health in all
probability would not be a crime. t Accordingly,
counsel considered only the case where consent had been given, but the justification of necessity for life or health of the patient was absent.
Absence of Evil Intent In Scottish law, surgical operations per se
were not, in counsel's opinion, prima facie criminal acts, and in particular were not per se assaults. Whether in any particular case a surgical operation was an assault and therefore criminal depended entirely upon circumstances, one of the most important of which was the presence or absence of consent. It was essential in the Scottish law of assault that there should be some evil intent against, and some "attack" upon, the victim:' in the normal surgical operation these elements were clearly absent and there was thus no prima facie criminality which the practitioner need rebut by showing justification (or in English terms "lawful excuse").
It has been argued previously by Scottish lawyers that consent of the patient to sterilization would not itself render the operation legal. Such

* Both Denning and Hodson L.JJ. have now been

elevated to the House of Lords.

t The position is the same in English law.

THE EUGENCIS REVIEW

lawyers taking this view had relied upon H.M. In some cases there was a clear element of moral

Advocate v. Rutherford.8 This case decided that turpitude and damage to the public interest

consent of the victim was no defence to a charge (e.g. sterilization of a prostitute for the conveni-

of murder. In counsel's opinion this was not a ence of her trade). In cases of sterilization for the

proper analogy, as in Scottish law the taking of convenience of an ordinary person, it would be

human life was a crime in itself and consent difficult to aver damage to the public interest,

could not excuse it, but, in counsel's view, a and in eugenic sterilization even more difficult.

surgical operation was not of itself a crime, and

hence the question whether consent provided "justification" or "excuse" did- not arise.

COMMENT

Counsel also, like their English counterparts, The practical position in both the English and

rejected the analogy of abortion. Further, they Scottish law is that a surgical operation is

considered that the conduct in question in R. v. generally not a crime if performed with the

Donovan would not be held to constitute the consent of the patient. (Sometimes, as in cases

crime of assault in Scottish law (though it might of emergency, consent may be implied.) How-

be criminal because of the element of indecency). ever, the performance of some operations is

harmful to the public interest, and the State

Power to Discover New Crimes
So far, Scottish counsel were in agreement with the opinion given by English counsel, and also had so far covered much of the same ground, as the Scottish issue of assault included most of the criminal acts covered by Sections 18, 20 and 47 of the Offences Against the Person Act, 1861, an Act which did not apply in Scotland. Consideration of Scottish law, however,
had to go further, since there was no fixed calendar of crimes in Scotland. The Scottish Supreme Criminal Court had a general inherent power to discover and punish new crimes which

through the criminal law deprives any purported
consent to such operation of any validity in public law (though such consent would generally bar an action for damages at civil law.) The effect of such a provision on its own would be to
make the operation in question totally illegal. The State, however, mitigates this effect by say-
ing that, although the surgeon cannot rely on the patient's consent for immunity from criminal penalties, yet if he has that consent and there
are also circumstances in which the individual interest (in life or health) may legitimately override the public interest the operation is lawful.

was quite contrary to English legal thought. It

was thus difficult for a Scottish lawyer to assert An Undecided Question

with confidence that any particular conduct, The oracles of the Common Law and of

which might possibly be thought shocking to the Scottish Law have not yet disclosed whether the

public conscience, would not be held to be a operation of sterilization is considered in itself

crime. The difficulty was increased by the harmful to the public interest. But if it is con-

absence of any satisfactory definition of "crime" trary to the public interest there are undoubtedly

in Scottish law, beyond statements to the general circumstances in which that public interest takes

effect that the conduct in question must be second place and the operation can legally be

"anti-social" by current standards. In counsel's performed to avert danger to life or health.

opinion, however, the court would be most Both the opinions now obtained by the Defence

reluctant to declare a new crime, and would only Union support the view that according to

do so in regard to conduct which was clearly English and Scottish law the operation of

antisocial. In their view such an act would have sterilization is not of itself harmful to the public

to be one involving one or other of three interest and the patient's consent is sufficient

elements: (a) harm or hurt done to another warrant for the operation. However, it is con-

against that other's will; (b) a damage to the sidered that in Scottish law this must be read

public interest in a fairly direct sense; or (c) a subject to the proviso that any elements of

very clear element of moral turpitude. Where immorality attached to the operation would

the patient consented, "(a)" was not applicable. make it criminal.

36

LEGALITY OF STERILIZATION: A NEW OUTLOOK

The state- of the law on this subject is such that no one can say with certainty what it is.
Our courts will not answer questions put to
them on hypothetical facts. The rulings of Common Law and Scottish Law can only be discovered by test cases on operations actually
performed, and the state of the authorities is such that the courts have almost a free hand in deciding the law. The pitfalls are numerous and
any aspirant hero would be. well advised to take careful advice on the particular facts before
operating. It will suffice to give one example of the sort of difficulty involved.
In considering an offence against Section 18 of the Offences Against the Person Act, 1861
(unlawful and malicious wounding), English counsel say, briefly, that sterilization is no offence under that section because the judicial definitions of the vital ingredients of that offence show that they do not appear in this operation. Thus: (a) ."Unlawfully" means forbidden by some definite law, and there is no such definite prohibition of law relating to sterilization; (b) "Bodily harm" means serious interference with comfort or health, and sterilization does not inflict such harm; (c) "Maliciously" means only with intent to inffict the particular kind of harm done.
The prosecution might object as follows: As regards (b) and (c), depriving a person of a natural and normal ability must be an interfer-

ence with his health, and depriving' a man of the power of procreation is as much an interference with health as amputating a healthy limb. Such an argument might be met by using a technique of sterilization which allows reversal. As regards (a), unlawful does not mean forbidden by some definite criminal law: indeed, in the case cited,3 Stephen J. held an act to be unlawful because forbidden by matrimonial law. It is clear that, in some circumstances, sterilization of one spouse without the consent of the other may amount to cruelty and so be forbidden by matrimonial law." Hence, if an operation of sterilization is such that it would constitute matrimonial cruelty on the part of the patient, it may well be that the surgeon performing it commits' an offence against section 18 of the statute.
Whatever may be the law on sterilization, it is clearly 'most desirable that the courts or Parliament should now' declare it.
REFERENCES
1 Vide Williams, Glanville, The Sanctity ofLife and the Criminal Law. 1957. Faber. Pp.108-9.
2 Addision, P., Brit. Med. J., 1960, 1, 976. 3 R. v. Clarence, 1889. 22 QBD 23 at p. 40. 4 Blackstone's Commentaries. 1766. 2nd ed. Clarendon Press. Pp. 54-58. 5 1934. 2 K.B. 498. 6 Bravery v. Bravery 1954. 3 All E.R. 59. 7 Alison's Principles of the Criminal Law of Scotland. 1832. William Blackwood. Vol. I, p. 175. 8 1947. J.C. 1.

37

