BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE *
By SIR MACFARLANE BURNET, M.D., F.R.S.
Director of the Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Melbourne

SIR Macfarlane Burnet said in his open- the scientist's angle only, I am forgetting

ing remarks that, from the foundation much of what is most important. Neverthe-

of the British Association and its less, the practice of medicine is perhaps the

daughter societies, Association meetings had most direct of all the channels by which the

always served as pulpits from which the advance of knowledge is applied to human

public could be offered enlightenment on the benefit. It is very hard to define science, but

achievements of science, uplifted by promises for most purposes I prefer to believe that it

of its future benefits or chastened by its is the systematic exercise of human intelli-

wamings. On this occasion he had sought gence to find the most effective means of

for a subject with real human relevance. satisfying human needs and desires. Health

There had been a hundred years' war against and life are the basic needs of everyone, and

plague and pestilence that had ended in other scientists are justified occasionally in

their almost complete control; with polio wanting to know that medicine is making the

now preventable, there was now no major best practical use of the intellectual and

killing or crippling disease which human material weapons that science is providing.

effort could not reduce to insignificant What I am particularly concerned about,

proportions. But a human problem almost and what I think should be brought forward

greater than the one that had been eliminated on such an occasion as this, are the medical

had been raised-pressure of human over- problems that have not been dealt with

population in the under-developed areas of effectively or are arising now as a result of

the world. This was the most important the new conditions of our scientific civiliza-

political problem of to-day.

tion. It is inevitable that the major changes

His final choice of topic had been strongly that have resulted from the virtual elimina-

influenced by the fact that it was more than tion of infectious and nutritional disease

fifty years since a president of the Association should bring into the foreground a different

was a graduate of medicine. It had seemed set of medical problems. The most obvious

that this might be a suitable occasion for a change is a direct result of the increasing

biologist with a medical background to look average age of all civilized communities,

at some of the current problems of medicine. Sir Macfarlane continued:

with its special emphasis on diseases of old age, cancer being probably the most

Medicine as Biological Science

important. Closely related is the increasing importance of deaths in which genetic

Medicine is many things-it is an art, a factors play a predominant part. In a very

science, and an expression of human com- real sense the final objective of preventive

passion-it is an ancient and honourable medicine is that all deaths should result

profession, jealous of its status, its emolu- from the play of genetic factors only. With

ments, and its solidarity-and it is deeply every success in eliminating the environmental

conservative. When I look at medicine from causes of premature death we will see more

* The Presidential Address to the Dunedin Meeting
(I957) of the Australian and New Zealand Association
for the Advancement of Science. Reprinted from The Australian Journal of Science (January I957. Volume Ig, Number 3a) by kind permission of the Editor and Sir Macfarlane Burnet.

and more clearly the influence of genetic constitution on health and length of life.
That influence is in fact evident already in our hospitals and our institutions for the mentally abnormal. Insanity and feeble-

127 THE EUGEMiICS REVIEW, September 1957. 49, 3.

I28 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

mindedness in all their degrees and manifesta-
tions nearly all have a genetic component, and often this completely dominates the picture. Mental illness is a matter of supreme
importance but it is something that I am not competent to discuss. If we confine ourselves to the general hospitals we can cover a large proportion of serious illness under two heads, (a) cancer in all its forms, (b) premature degenerative disease, especially cardiovas-
cular.
Perhaps we can clarify some of the implications of medicine to-day by looking briefly, at four typical patients to be found in any general hospital in the Western world. The first perhaps is a man in his forties who has had a severe haemorrhage from a duodenal ulcer, the second a woman of like age in
hospital for a gall-bladder operation. The third is a man of fifty with a chronic cough and an X-ray shadow suspected of being a bronchial cancer, while the fourth is a man of sixty recovering from a heart attack (coronary thrombosis). Each of those patients presents two problems. The immediate task for the doctor is to bring the patient as quickly as possible back to the fullest level of health that circumstances will allow. Nowadays the treatment involved will be based very largely and rather directly on an attempt to remedy structural changes by surgery and functional change by appropriate drugs.
The second and far more difficult problem is to assess the factors responsible for the patient's illness. When we are dealing with cases like those I have mentioned, this side of medicine may not seem very important. The disease condition is clearly the end result
of circumstances acting over many years which nothing now can alter. It is simplest to forget the past and make the best shortterm compromise with fate that skill and knowledge can devise. But if we are looking at medicine as a facet of biological science or as an adjunct to the social effectiveness of the community, we must be interested primarily in the causes and prevention of ill health rather than in the individual and immediate treatment of the patient.
For disease conditions like the four common

forms we have mentioned, it is not easy to
see how prevention can even be thought of.
There is, however, one general approach that
I think every good physician consciously or
unconsciously employs. If he is to appreciate the patient as a complete human being and to understand the causes of his disability,
he must assess three aspects of the patient's
illness. These may be classed as environ-
mental, genetic and psychosomatic.
i. Environmental. In nearly every illness there is some recognizable impact of the physical environment that has played a part
in producing it. This aspect may be com-
pletely dominant, as when a mosquito injects
the virus of yellow fever or a man is smashed
in a motor accident, or it may be no more
than an indication that cold weather has accentuated the symptoms of a peptic ulcer. In general, the more completely the cause of
a disability can be related to the environment, the more readily is the condition prevented.
2. Genetic. There are very great inborn differences in human beings which are quite obviously highly relevant to the types of illness from which they will suffer. Differences in physical build and temperament are mainly determined by inheritance, and their relative significance in relation to disease is a matter of current study, particularly by those influenced by Sheldon's ectomorph, mesomorph, and endomorph classification. In many ways this is just a modern systematization of the old-fashioned doctor's insistence on the importance of his patient's " constitution " in determining his illnesses and his response to treatment.
3. Psychosomatic. The influence of the mind on bodily disease is inescapable-in America at least the concept has passed into current slang-" giving the boss ulcers." Selye's doctrine of stress has had a very wide influence on medicine, and psycho-social stress is a very real one. Equally important to the doctor is an appreciation of the impact of illness upon the patient's mental and emotional life.
Orthodox medicine is still concerned especially with environmental causes of ill health and with the application of anatomical and physiological principles to remedy it. It

BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE

I29

is in this general field that the major successes of both preventive and curative medicine have been achieved. Psychosomatic medicine is gradually overcoming the initial hostility that was perhaps mainly due to the over-enthusiasm -of its proponents, while genetics still remains little regarded.

no signs of diminishing. The relationship to excessive cigarette smoking has been fully established but does not seem to be the whole story. There may well be aspects yet to be elucidated, but the present position seems relatively clear and can be summarized as follows:

The Major Problems of To-day
In a lecture I gave at the Melbourne meeting of A.N.Z.A.A.S., I spoke about the future of preventive medicine, concentrating particularly on those diseases whose incidence was actively increasing at the present time. These were dental caries, cardiovascular disease, especially coronary occlusion, and two forms of malignant disease, leukaemia and cancer of the lung. All of these are under active study at the present time, and in regard to the three killing diseases the picture is becoming progressively clearer. All three seem to be related to significant changes in ways of life.
Coronary disease, the typical cause of death in our countries for men in the professional and executive classes between the ages of forty-five and seventy, is not so confidently ascribed to worry and stress as it was a few years ago. At the present time opinion seems to be steadily firming that coronary disease might be made much less common by a reduction in the food intake of saturated fats (animal fats and hydrogenated vegetable oils) and in the amount of cigarette smoking. Impressive evidence in both directions has emerged in the last three years. It is still conceivable that chronic emotional stress plays a part, and it seems likely that there is a genetic factor, if only in regard to the difference between males and females. If the current opinion is fully established, there is interesting scope for preventive work, but as the Lancet has recently pointed out, it is a very much more-difficult matter to change people's food habits than to persuade them to have their children immunized against an infectious disease.
Lung cancer shows a steady and continuing rise in all civilized countries. In Australia the rise for males has been about 7 per cent. per annum for the last thirty years and shows

There are two types of lung cancer which
can be differentiated histologically; one is rare and is found equally in males and
females. It does not appear to be signifi-
cantly influenced by environmental factors. It is the second histological type that has
increased so markedly in the last fifty years
and which is seven times as commonly seen
in men as in women. The incidence of this
type is sharply correlated with two environmental factors: (i) the intensity of cigarette smoking; (2) urban as against country life.
I do not know of any competent patho-
logist who denies the statistically established relation between the incidence of lung cancer
and smoking habits. The association with cigarette smoking is fully established and is supported by a great deal of confirmatory evidence, both from studies of the early changes in human lungs and from knowledge of the general behaviour of cancer-producing agents in mice.
The part played by city life is difficult to
assess because city dwellers on the average smoke more cigarettes than country dwellers. Some authorities, like Doll and Hill, are sceptical of the importance of smoky city air. Others, like Stocks and Campbell, present a strong case for the view that the total amount of smoke inhaled from any source is what
matters. Smoke is only important because of the carcinogens it contains-possibly 3-4 benzpyrene is the important one. Campbell and Stocks believe that if you calculate the total amounts of 3-4 benzpyrene inhaled during a lifetime in a typical smoky city like Liverpool and the amount taken in by smokers of different numbers of cigarettes per day, the conclusions fit quite well with their hypothesis. If this turns out to be the case, the significance of cigarette smoking will simply be that cigarette smoke contains a much higher concentration of carcinogen than even the most murky city air.

130 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

The means of prevention are in principle very simple: get rid of smoke from our cities and cigarette smoking from our social habits, and in 2o years deaths from carcinoma of the lung would fall to their irreducible minimum. I believe it is important that the residents of every industrial city should press hard for stringent control of air pollution by any type of incomplete combustion. In democracies any decision about cigarette smoking must be left to the individual. There are, however, straws in the wind. At the last meeting of the B.M.A. in-England a rule was -adopted against smoking during any of the scientific sessions. This was a gesture made by a majority of British doctors as a means of expressing by personal example their conviction that the gradual elimination of cigarette smoking is one of the major requirements in public health at the present time. In Sweden advertisement of cigarettes and tobacco has been prohibited.
Leukaemia deaths are also increasing, but here there is as yet no clear reason visible for the increase. Overdose of X-rays or other penetrating radiation is the only environmental factor that has been proved to be capable of inducing leukaemia. I know of nothing to suggest that the recent rise in leukaemia deaths is due to the increasing use of X-rays and the like, and the cause of the rise is still a mystery. But it does direct special attention on to the medical problems that are being created by the dawning of an atomic age.
Genetics in Medicine
In all of the conditions I have been mentioning there is an implicit recognition that genetic factors are concerned in one way or another and in varying degrees of intensity. The fact that two of the diseases are lung cancer and leukaemia is also a reminder of another angle at which genetics impinges on medicine. This is because the only general hypothesis of the nature of cancer which appears to be tenable at the present time is the somatic mutation theory. On this view the various types of malignant disease are the result of a series of mutations occurring

not in the reproductive cells but in the
somatic or body cells of various tissues. There are still serious difficulties in applying this theory to all aspects of cancer, but there is certainly no satisfactory alternative interpretation.
It is inevitable, therefore, that there must
be a strong genetic flavour in what I have to
say. Probably present conditions do not justify so much concentration on the genetic angle. I can sympathize with the point of view that there is so little we can do about
human inheritance that we might well forget about it and concentrate on environmental and psycho-social factors in medicine, but I do not think that attitude will remain tenable for long. The central theme of this address is that- genetic aspects of medicine must become progressively more and more important in the years to come.
There are three major reasons for this. The first concerns something we take for granted -the current pattern of family life. In the last two generations in Western countries the usual picture has been the family with two to four children, all of whom survive to adult life. From the human point of view that is a highly desirable state of affairs, but from the angle of the biologist interested in
long-term evolutionary trends it is something which will lead eventually to a quite intolerable position. The teaching of evolutionary theory in its modern form of population genetics is quite unequivocal. Evolutionary progress has only been possible because of the mutability of genetic mechanisms and the elimination by natural selection of those mutations which diminish the bearer's chance of survival. There is good evidence from breeders of every type of animal that quality can only be maintained by consistent culling of all substandard specimens.
Mutations are always occurring. It has been calculated that on the average each human being may have one mutant gene that was not present in either of his parents. More than 99 per cent of mutations are mildly or seriously deleterious and the whole history of life has been based on the ability of stringent selection for survival to sort out the tiny fraction of mutations that are

BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE---

131

beneficial for the species. If we eliminate by present population but by the quality of

medical care and social security most possi- those producing the majority of survivig-

bilities of natural selection, a steady slow children.

process of genetic deterioration with in- The third reason is that the application of

creasing numbers of cases of overt genetic various forms of ionizing radiation to human

disease is inevitable.

use is increasing at a positively frightening

An interesting example of how this process rate and can hardly fail to give rise to a whole

may become evident is to be seen in the new series of medical problems, most of

emergence in recent years of a condition of them at the genetic level.

great interest to the pathologist and geneti- At the present time we are all highly

cist-a disease with the clumsy name of conscious of the impact of nuclear energy on

agammaglobulinaemia. This in fact means a our world; from the biological and medical

congenital absence of a substance in the point ofview that impact is almost wholly evil.

blood which is needed to allow the develop- Ionizing radiation has a wide variety of ment of immunity against infection. Such damaging effects on living cells, but there is
children in the past always died early from only one significant effect-a disturbance of

acute infection or simple failure to thrive. To-day a combination of antibiotics, occasional blood transfusions, and unremitting care can keep such children relatively healthy. There is much to suggest that there
are other genetic anomalies of the same system with less drastic- but generally similar effects.

pattern in the genetic mechanism of chromosomes and genes. It is a random type of disturbance. A crude but useful analogy might be to think of what would happen to an automatic telephone exchange if a group of inexpert marksmen were firing casual bullets in its direction. The effect of any single hit would be unpredictable, but almost

The second reason for stressing the growing all hits would be damaging. Only by a

importance of human genetics perhaps repre- fantastically lucky chance can random

sents only a somewhat different way of interference with an elaborate mechanism

looking at the first: it is the existence of improve its functioning. In one very import-

differential fertility rates. All educationists ant point the analogy breaks down. If the

and psychologists know that intelligence damage produced in cells by radiation is not

tests show a negative correlation between the too severe, the descendants of those cells

I.Q. of children and the size of the family carry the same type of damage to their

they come from. Children from large genetic mechanism. It is inheritable damage.

families are on the average less intelligent Any cell can be damaged by penetrating

than those from small ones. Why this should radiation, the likelihood of damage being

be so is still a matter of controversy and dependent on the type and amount of radia-

many geneticists hesitate to adopt the tion received during the lifetime of the cell.

commonsense explanation that intelligence Serious damage which prevents any subse-

has a large genetic determinant and that quent multiplication of a cell has no medical

under present-day conditions intelligent par- significance. Lesser degrees of damage to

ents have fewer children than those of lower germ cells may also be of relatively minor

intelligence. This may have to remain " not human importance, if the damage is such

proven," but it seems to me that in the' that when fertilization occurs and develop-

civilizations we know there is little to suggest ment begins, the offspring is so distorted

that health, intelligence, and enterprise are that it does not survive to be born. It is

commonly correlated with family size. If when the damage is physically speaking very

one believes, as I do, that such qualities are slight so that the eventual progeny is faulty

highly influenced by genetic factors, then in just one facet that we find what we call

we must never forget that the characteristics genetic disease. Haemophilia-a disease in

of our successors will be determined essentially which repeated bleeding results from a weak-

not by the average genetic quality of our ness in the blood-clotting mechanism-is the

132 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

best known human example, but there are stimulus of radiation or mutagenic chemicals.

multitudes of others. I do not want to discuss Cells whose descendants grow more rapidly

any detail whatever of genetics but it is neces- flourish and may undergo- new mutations

sary to mention that most defects induced in which again are only successful if they lead

germ cells by irradiation will give rise to reces- further along the road to uncontrolled

sive effects which will only become evident growth, which is cancer. There are virtually

when fertilization of the ovum by a spermato- only two current interpretations of cancer,

zoon carrying the same recessive gene occurs. the somatic mutation theory, which I have

This is the basis for the well-known warning described, and the virus theory, which

that the effects of the atom bombs dropped ascribes cancer to infection with very low

on Japan may not all be evident till many grade viruses. I can find nothing in the

generations have elapsed. One other point recorded behaviour of natural or experi-

that must be stressed is that the results of mental cancer which is incompatible with

radiation are cumulative. There is just as the first hypothesis, and a great deal which

much likelihood of harm if one unit of radia- makes the virus theory, in my view at least,

tion is received each day for a year as if untenable.

365 units are received in a fraction of a On this view ionizing radiation should be a

second.

potent cause of cancer, and it is. The early

Not only the germ cells are subject to radiologists suffered much from cancer of the

mutation. Any living cell will be similarly skin; now, with better protection but with

modified by appropriate exposure to radia- much more powerful machines, they show a

tion. Any effect, however, will be dependent significantly increased incidence of leukaemia.

on how many descendants it has. Mutations X-rays have been used diagnostically and

sometimes occur in the course of development therapeutically for sixty years and more is

and involve only that proportion of the cells known about their effect than about any

in the grown organism which descend from other type of penetrating radiation. There

the cell in which the mutation occurred. have been two unfortunate results of unwise

These are called somatic mutations and are therapeutic use, the production of leukaemia

usually recognized when the mutation results in a small but significant proportion 'of

in the appearance of a colour difference over patients treated for a disease of the spine

portion of the skin-a so-called mosaic. But (ankylosing spondylitis) and of cancer of the

somatic mutation can occur in any cell at thyroid in children given X-radiation for

any time in the life of an organism. Always supposed enlargement of the thymus. Human

the same rule holds: somatic mutation is of experience with radioactive substances has

no significance unless the cell concerned has been more limited but the lethal potentiali-

many descendants. It follows that when a ties are even clearer. Long ago, when

mutation occurs in an organism that has luminous watch dials were painted with a

reached full development, it is only significant composition containing minute amounts of

if it is of such a character that cells carrying radium by girls who tipped their brushes

the mutation produce more descendants between their lips, there was a tragic sequel

than similar but unmutated cells.

of many cases of malignant disease of bone

The most likely interpretation of human
cancer is that it is a result of a series of somatic mutations, each of which removes or
diminishes one of the controls which keep the cells of the body in their form and order.. I am not going to attempt to give the evidence for this interpretation, but I think you can

amongst these workers. Of the modern
artificial radioactive elements, radiostrontium resembles radium in its capacity to lodge in bone and provoke sarcomatous
growth. Leukaemia has been the only chronic effect so, far recognized as due to irradiation
from the Hiroshima and Nagasaki bombs.

see the grim logic of the biological situation
in which random mutations are always

Protection against Ionizing Radiation

occurring, either spontaneously or under the In June last year the British Medical

BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE

I33

Research Council and the National Academy of Sciences of the United States both published authoritative reports on the dangers
of ionizing radiation. Both cover very much the same ground and both come to virtually identical conclusions, which I can try to summarize under four headings.
i. All ionizing radiation, whether from
X-rays, radioactive materials or any other source, is harmful and avoidable exposure should be kept to a minimum.
2. At the present time the most important source of ionizing radiation is the medical
use of X-rays; test atomic explosions are of
much less significance.
3. If atomic weapons are not used in major war, the effect of atomic radiation in the foreseeable future is not likely to haveobservable medical results on people generally.
4. Increasingly difficult problems will
arise in connection with the safe disposal of radioactive wastes from the industrial use of atomic energy.
Interest in the medical problems of atomic radiation has been responsible for a critical re-examination of the light-hearted use of X-rays in medicine and industry. As far as an outsider can judge, the risk attaching to brief diagnostic exposures not involving the reproductive organs is negligible, although the American committee recommends that in the interests of improving knowledge any X-ray exposures should be recorded in all patients' medical histories. Any type of X-ray involving the pelvic organs in children or adults within the reproductive period of life should be considered very critically and carried out only if it is absolutely essential for the proper treatment of the patient. Therapeutic use of X-rays should be limited to the treatment of established cancer.
It should be possible to reduce the hazards of medical uses of radiation to negligible proportions, and there is every reason to believe that in the factories concerned with the production of nuclear weapons in America and Britain, strict and effective precautions against more than tolerable health hazards are enforced. But the use of atomic energy has only begun. We can hope with some reason that we shall escape major atomic

wars, but unless history is meaningless, a rapid and continuing increase in the use of nuclear reactors in industry is inevitable.
With a rapidly increasing world population demanding a greatly raised living standard, it may soon become the only way to provide the energy required. Those interested in the
long-term prospects of civilization know very well that if the whole of the world adopted an American standard of living our reserves
of -oil and coal-our fossil fuels-might last less-than a century.
Accidents and human carelessness are unavoidable in industry. An illuminating hint of the shape of things to come can be drawn from two Australian episodes where highly lethal capsules containing the radioisotope Cobalt 6o were left lying about to be picked up by a workman, who suffered from a serious burn, and by a child, who fortunately was only allowed to play with it for a few minutes. Increasing use of nuclear energy cannot fail to be associated with a steadily increasing amount of short-term
and long-term biological damage.
But we must maintain a sense of proportion. I have already said that authoritative present-day opinion is. that at the genetic level the effect will be uridetectable by any but refined statistical methods for perhaps a century or more, even if a considerable absolute amount of genetic damage is being done. The reason, of course, is that every individual carries on an average about eight harmful recessive genes, the accumulation of many centuries of mutation. Muller calculates that it would take a major atomic war to produce an effect that would be easily
visible within a generation. Similarly, the immediate effect on individuals of an increased exposure to radiation would, on an overall scale, be relatively light. It is said that radiologists on the average die five years earlier than comparable professional colleagues, and their likelihood of contracting and dying from leukaemia is several times as high. That plus a moderate increase of other forms of cancer, probably in bone or other unusual sites, is probably the sort of change we could expect. On the short-term view it is punishment that the community can

I34. THE EUGENICS REVIEW

easily absorb. The toll of death and ill health in experimental animals and tissue cultures

from penetrating radiation apart from major will be needed to improve the background

war is bound to be much less than we accept against which the human problems must be

from road accidents to-day. The reason for studied. But I should like to stress that the

putting it in a different category is the human problems must be studied very much

cumulative character of genetic damage. as human problems-laboratory work on

With modern medicine to cushion the effects animals can only provide clues. This holds

of natural selection every deleterious muta- at both the levels of genetic change that we

tion sets going a process like a slowly spread- have been considering-somatic mutation in

ing disease, progressively weakening all relation to cancer, mutation in the reproduc-

generations to come.

tive cells in relation to genetic deterioration.

Perhaps history will decide that the most In regard to cancer, the immediate need is

important result of the discovery of atomic to sort out the various environmental stimuli

power is not its military or industrial import- to somatic mutation, particularly those other

ance but the attention it has drawn to the than ionizing radiation, and as far as practi-

importance of genetic processes for human cable protect sensitive tissues from them.

affairs. It is certain that we shall see an Fortunately the reproductive cells are well

increasing use of nuclear power as long as protected from anything but penetrating

civilization survives and raw materials are radiation. But other mutagens and carcino-

available. As scientists and medical men we gens can reach skin, air passages, intestinal

must be adamant that there shall be no tract and other parts of the body in direct

reduction in the present high standards of contact with the environment. I have

safety measures and that special precautions mentioned what is known of lung cancer and

.be taken against every conceivable catas- how this could be used as a means of prevent-

trophe that may involve a nuclear reactor. ing go per cent of it. There are hints that I do not think, however, that increasing some other types of cancer may be related to

exposure to radiation is genetically nearly controllable environmental factors, and

as important as the two related processes perhaps new opportunities for the prevention

that I bracketed with it, the elimination of of cancer may emerge in the future. Despite

selective survival as a: result of medical care great modem advances in cancer treatment,

and the influence of differential fertility. If the overall death rate from cancer has shown

we are ever to devise measures to counter the little change in recent years. As in every

medical and social effects of genetic deterioration it will be immaterial whether the mutations responsible were produced by irradiation to-day or by natural causes any time in the past thousand years. I believe we can already see in outline what the
necessary measures will be. Both the official

other phase of medicine, prevention is better than cure. At the present time the two most
needed activities are the development of a climate of opinion that will dissuade young people from starting to smoke cigarettes and careful control of all exposure to X-rays and other forms of ionizing radiation.

British and American reports agreed that In regard to genetic disease proper, the

at the present time the major need is more important task is to find ways of recognizing

knowledge of human genetics. We need to what is happening in human inheritance.

learn a great deal more about the laws of The most immediately promising approach is

human inheritance and particularly to find to make increasing use of the opportunities

ways by which the existence of harmful nature has provided in identical twins. I

recessives in a person's genetic make-up can have been very interested in this approach

be recognized. Closely related to this is the and for the last two years we have had a

elaboration of ways by which the somatic twin study in progress in Melbourne. Special

mutations which are steps along the road to attention has been paid to the problems of

cancer can be recognized. For both purposes identical twins whose medical histories are

a great deal more study of cellular behaviour not concordant as one of the best ways of

BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE

135

analyzing the respective parts of inheritance and environment in the production of disease. I do not anticipate any great
contribution from a single unit, but I believe that it is important to have twin study as part of the set-up of every medical school. Only by the accumulation of necessarily unconnected pieces of information (for every pair of identical twins is in one way or another unique) will we get the information needed about the genetic contribution to
disease. The more work going on, the more likely are the overall results to be significant.
The other reason for such work is its extreme
educational value. More than anything we need the balanced approach of the good doctor who can by a combination of knowledge and subconcious wisdom assess the relative importance of the environmental, genetic, and psycho-social factors that have produced the sick person in front of him; and always on the basis of incomplete knowledge make the wise decision that will be best for -his patient. I would hope that association with twin studies where as nowhere else we can sort out something of the relative importance of nature and nurture, will provide the best possible opportunity for such a broad education in medicine.
Human genetics may seem a thoroughly academic subject at the present time and

perhaps will always remain so. On the other hand, it holds the only answer to the progressive genetic deterioration that at the moment seems to be inescapable. Differential fertility.is probably the most potent factor in producing this deterioration but it is also the key to its eventual reversal.
If in a hundred years' time we have the
necessary knowledge it should not be impossible by appropriate incentives linked
to new social conventions and taboos to ensure that those carrying dangerous recessive characters had fewer children than those with sounder inheritance. That admittedly is impossible now, but social conventions have changed enormously in our lifetime and they will change even more in the next hundred years. If we are deliberately accepting a situation which will steadily deteriorate the genetic character of the species, if we insist on the family of two or three children who, thanks to modern preventive medicine will all survive to adult life, then the only possible solution is to provide a socially acceptable substitute for nature's ruthless elimination of the unfit. Many things may arise to make such a solution impossible, but I would still believe that to find the knowledge which may make it eventually realizable is the most important field of research that confronts us in medicine.

