MEDICINE AND EUGENICS* V

By JOHN A. RYLE, M.D., F.R.C.P.
Regius Professor of Physic, Cambridge University

T'.HE name which this lectureship com- of medicine be acceptable, then medicine

memorates and the distinguished may be considered as a sister science, with

records of its previous holders are, to executive functions, to the science of

the newly elect, a clear index of responsi- eugenics, which Galton defined as " the study

bility. It is, I take it, intended that the of agencies under social control that may

lecture should provide not so much an improve or impair the racial qualities of

*nnual reminder of Galton and his work- future generations either physically or men-

,*,r such can scarcely be needed-as an tally." We have been reminded more than

annual stimulus towards those objectives of once recently that the scope of eugenics

hich his prevision was the richest legacy to includes the study of environmental as well

tis Society. Now, although I have long been as heritable factors. The same is clearly true

member of the Society and for a much of medicine. I believe it would be fair to say,

Wager period interested in eugenics, my own however, that medicine in the past has paid

;optributions to that subject have, I regret too little attention to inheritance, and

say, been negligible. I must presume, eugenics too little attention to environment,

ever, that in the person of the physician and that both in the near future will have to

Committee recognize a student of man invite a more active public interest in the

his needs, and in the physician who is contributions both of nature and of nurture

a teacher one who must, both practically to the good and the bad in all our racial

ideally, desire to turn the thoughts of qualities.

whom he teaches to what may be styled

imate aims and methods " for the preser- Preventive Medicine

n of health and the prevention of disease Curative and palliative medicine, although

dividuals and communities.

we must continue to ply them with all the

e science of medicine and the science of earnestness and skill which our science and

eics are both applied sciences. Their humanity may command, must now and

are in many respects identical. In the henceforward be considered of secondary

of a conversation with a critical friend importance when examined in conjunction

recently asked what I considered the with preventive medicine. Of preventive

goal of medicine to be. As an active medicine it clearly remains for us to build a

physician concerned with diagnosis, more exalted and efficient structure. To its

eaching of signs and symptoms, and the earlier beginnings with sanitary laws, pure

g of individual lives, he suspected, water supplies, and the isolation of acute

ps, that I might reply " the curing of infectious disease notable additions have

when possible and the relief of suffer- been made. By a variety of methods tuber-

when cure is out of reach," or words to culosis and venereal disease, the two great idect. I replied in effect, " the preserva- infectious scourges, are coming perceptibly

of and the planning for the greatest and steadily under control. Factory Acts,

e health, happiness and efficiency for improved conditions of labour and housing

test possible number by prophylactic and health insurance-additional measures

,including eugenics and social re- bearing on environmental improvement-all

tion." If this definition of the goal lend their quota. Ante-natal care and child

Gulton Lecture delivered before the Eugenics os February i6th, 1938.

welfare are now making their contribution. None of these, however, excepting the last

9

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

two and these only in a limited and not us hope, will translate to social services and

always a far-seeing way, take cognizance of reconstruction some of the vast sums at

the basic human material to be encouraged present expended upon armaments, we may

and protected. None of them are concerned expect new gains in health and physique

essentially with the production of sound from nutritional reforms, including adequate

stock or with the problem of what should milk supplies; from healthier herds and the

be regarded as the optimum quality and pasteurization of milk; from further housing

quantity of man for given conditions of improvements; and from other comparable

environment, occupation and productivity. measures now brought within the purview

Of late we have been plied with propa- of state medicine. But there will still remain

ganda on behalf of a national health cam- a more fundamental lesson for statesmen,

paign, a movement largely concerned with for communities and for individuals-the

the improvement of physique by provision of lesson proclaiming the importance of pedi-

better opportunities for games and organized gree and pride of pedigree and the im-

drill, a movement with the undoubted merit portance of encouraging an optimum fertility

of contributing to the elevation of health rate.

standards but launched without a proper The contributions which eugenic planning

investigation of the limits of improvement might make to national life cannot much1

possible by these means in undernourished, longer be delayed or obscured. With th

ill-housed or overworked communities and preliminaries to such planning eugenists hav

in individuals of poor pedigree. There must long been concerned, but the doctors, with

be many thousands in this country whom this their multitudinous problems and embarrassJ

and kindred hygienic movements will scarcely ments, have, I fear, been too busy for the

touch, because defects of one type and most part to be bothered. Scientific and

another, both inherited and acquired, have humane planning for national health and

put them beyond the scope of the most efficiency are, or should be, in the hands of

skilled remedial exercise or games. I have the three great applied sciences-medicine,'

paused to wonder whether the results for the eugenics and sociology. The last two knowQ

nation might not be better if the same expen- their objectives more or less, but are stil.U

diture of money and time and energy to be emerging from the theoretical, academic'

devoted to instruction in health by physical stage of their development. The first, I

culture were diverted to instruction in health regret to say, is so taken up with urgent"

by family culture. It must have been dis- practical affairs that it has scarcely found

appointing to many here that, among all the time to consider what its true objectives are.

speeches and press commentaries which Between the three there is at present no true1

announced the launching of this campaign, co-operation. Whether for the collection of'

scarcely a word was said about the impor- essential information, for advice or for action,

tance to the community and the state of the doctor is, by reason of his direct contacts,

those foundations of health which only a in better circumstance than either the

healthy stock can furnish. I had myself eugenist or the sociologist. Individually,

hoped that a fuller appreciation of the however, he is harassed, and collectively hi&

potentialities of eugenics had by now profession lacks cohesion and a policy, lacks

penetrated to high places.

the necessary vision and organization for an

effective pooling and interpretation and

Medicine, Eugenics and Sociology

translation into action of the knowledge

Now it is clearly a function of the medical which it constantly accumulates. Nor has'

profession to advise the politicians in the medicine yet come to a proper realization oil

matter of planning for a healthier com- the influence which it might exert for the'

munity. Of this there is a growing recogni- common weal, whether by educational pro-

tion. In the next decade or two, if the grammes or direct and informed persuasionJ

politicians will keep us out of wars, and, let or conversion of those who govern us.

MEDICINE AND EUGENICS

II

Neglect of Eugenics by the Medical
Prfession
life has brought me in daily contact doctors of varied types, ages and modes activity, and with innumerable medical etS, but, although all of these are pere from an early stage of the practical of family histories in their diagnostic
prognostic assessments, it is rare to meet
g them a man with even the rudiments etics or more than a very superficial tin the prospect of race-betterment by c education or legislation. The possis of race-betterment by other methods social reorganization also receive too ya consideration at al stages of the 's career. membership of the Eugenics Society is xmately 650. Of this number only th are medical men. The proportion surely be much higher and the total rship greatly increased by an access dical members. Can large and effec-
policies ever come to birth at the
of the Eugenics Society without such ion ? Would not a programme to
the fuller co-operation of medicine be effective than any propaganda devoted akening interest in lay audiences ? such co-operation and the spread of
derived therefrom a really promising to large policy might surely then from a triple alliance between the reat applied sciences I have already between medicine, eugenics and
so I have asked myself whether it be possible so to infect such a large
erogeneous and conservative a body octors of this country with enthusiasm
betterment, both by improved t and nutrition and improved
, that such an effective alliance
{act, come into being. The full tion of the medical profession would tial as it would necessarily provide
tion bureau and, in part, the e of such an alliance.
asked myself this question I next the task of considering a pro-

gramme having this end in view. If here and there my hopes seem remote from realization and my remarks have the savour of idealism rather than practical politics, please do not condemn me too quickly. At heart I am a cautious person and my problems are approached as a rule, I believe, judicially. But there are times when I grow impatient with the lack of active idealism among those scientific and social and political workers whose concern is, or should be, the improvement of man's lot. There are too many ills which we know how to prevent but are not as yet preventing.
An Educational Programme
The preliminaries to our utopian programme must, I conclude, be educational. Compulsion and the proper pursuit and application of knowledge cannot be reconciled in the democratic state. Education must begin with the student, but must simultaneously, if in different form, be extended to the profession as a whole. In either case the education must be of a kind to produce educators, for the doctor of the future, as I envisage him, will far more than heretofore bring his benefits by instruction and precept. His name implies that he is a teacher and such he must become. From most diseases in which recovery is possible, recovery occurs spontaneously; some are only recoverable with the help of the doctor and the nurse; a few require the help of specific remedies or surgical intervention. Health, however, can be taught, although only a limited number of diseases can in the strict sense be cured. The medical man, while retaining his privileged position as comforter and -healer and in many emergencies as a saver of life and limb, must discover a greater privilege in teaching individuals, municipalities and governments that many forms of chronic disease, disability and mental and physical ill-health could be prevented, and that we have as clear an appreciation of how to prevent them as we have in the case of many acute infections now becoming rare in civilized communities. If the doctor, who is already accepted as a servant and, in some degree, as an instructor of the people, is

12 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

enabled in course of time to state authorita- physical standards; the orgins of m

tively that certain eugenic principles are not defect, and so forth. They had not

only sound but practicable, he will be given taught to direct their thoughts along

a hearing not only by his patients but also by channels. They could be so taught and

statesmen-a hearing which non-medical in fact, as we now know, learning to do

eugenists, often far better informed but The point which I wish to make is

lacking the doctor's personal contacts and that it is from the doctors, and not from

sphere of influence, have sought in vain. eugenists or sociologists, that both pri

The Eugenics Society, as is well known, was and public advice in these matters is apt

formerly called the Eugenics Education be and ideally should still be sought.

Society, but-its educational achievement was In our British type of polity, which in

limited, since only a small section of the com- recent past has shown itself quite un

munity, already anxious to be educated, to consider prohibition laws, we have ne

came forward for the purpose. Although the theless witnessed an amazing and ra

Society has greatly prospered and grown and diminution in alcoholism within one gen

has frequently stirred new interest in recent tion as a result of education, improved

years, even in the political field, I believe the conditions and minor legislation. For

criticism would still hold that, for all its good of the same reasons which compelled a

endeavours and high scientific standards, it trust of prohibition, it is evident that

is in the main a Society of the elect, and gains country would be unwilling to consider

influence slowly with the general public, the pulsory sterilization or compulsory ex

medical profession and the councils of state. tion for marriage certification, after a f

This need not give us cause for despondency, tolerated or possible in a dictator-ri

but only for revision of policy.

state. And yet I am convinced that

Now the public, in matters affecting the educational campaign in connexion with

health of themselves or their children, are problems and practice of eugenics and

accustomed to appeal to the family doctor. ported by the medical profession w

The family doctor, at present, is but rarely eventually be welcomed with enth-s--
prepared to give either spontaneous or in all classes, provided the ground

elicited advice in matters connected with properly prepared and policies wisely f

eugenic prognosis or with the size or spacing Never, perhaps, were the common pec

of families, and is seldom even asked to more anxious to be kept informed in res

examine and report upon the health of in- of the fundamental things affecting

tending partners in a marriage. He has not health or more ready to accept advice nwt

been educated to consider these things as scientific backing. It is a sad commen

important or coming within the natural on our system that they should have to

sphere of his activities. He could be so tent themselves so frequently with quack

taught.

doubtful literature, and the advertise

Legislators, in matters affecting the health hoardings. I have myself noticed, as o

of the community, are apt to approach dis- must have done, the increasing willin

tinguished men in the profession such as our on the part of men and women in all

President, the Presidents of the Royal and among student groups to discuss mat

Colleges, or the Secretary of the Medical generally shunned under an earlier and m

Research Council. Until recently these dis- cramped regime, an increasing desire to k,

tinguished men have not been prepared, not what is physiologically right in mat

always qualified, to advise in matters so affecting their married happiness and that

fundamental as sterilization of the unfit, its their offspring or their future responsibili

possible advantages and disadvantages; tax- as citizens. With a cautious and insufficien

ation relief for the encouragement of healthy instructed medical profession it often bef

parenthood; the significance of population that they must seek their answers in

fluctuations; the various causes of decline in of uncertain value or at the hands

MEDICINE AND EUGENICS

psychiatrists or other specialists, who may Let us assume also that the necessary infor-

and often do give valuable help, but too few mation in regard to negative eugenics-

of whom at present find time to correct their including measures of segregation, voluntary

-psychology or specialism with a true phy- sterilization and instructed contraception-

sicianly perspective. With removal of the could without great difficulty be distributed,

restrictions imposed by religious thought albeit without conveying extravagant ideas

and by the silence of Victorian parents there as to the rate of betterment likely to result

-s a general eagerness to be instructed in therefrom. Such measures, it is agreed, must

matters biological, an eagerness which de- be mainly directed against the propagation

mands healthy and informed satisfaction. of mental defect and a limited number of

rare physical abnormalities and heritable

The Individual Doctor

nervous and blood diseases. At this point

Before we proceed to consider our educa- the practising doctor will still be wondering

tional programme for the medical student where his duty and effectiveness begin, for

and the doctor, who in turn are to become the cases of haemophilia and Huntington's

the educators of the public and of the legis- chorea and such rarities seen by him in a

ators, we would do well to ask ourselves how lifetime could be counted on one hand, his

var the critical or hesitant doctor may be total of mental defectives in a year would not

justified in his doubts or misgivings about be very significant, and in any case adjudi-

'the prospects of any effective co-operation cation for these would involve consultative

on his part in a national eugenic programme. advice and action by a public body.

Our President pointed out quite recently how Ask him, however, to keep a record not

eiedicine has tended to strike further and only of his genetic rarities, of his mental

her at the root of things, turning its atten- defectives, epileptics, alcoholics, and manic

on by degrees from the individual patient depressives, but also of his very considerable

the control of infection at its source, or to body of physical defectives, the puny and

easures for increasing resistance to it; and ailing and undersized, and of the unhappy,

ence to other methods essentially pre- the unmarried and the childless and the

tive and latterly in particular to infant workless for these reasons, and of the frail

d pre-natal welfare. Now, as he has re- and nervous children traceable to known

nded us, we must needs go farther still, dysgenic marriages and homes. Ask him

g our actions even more radically. how often he has discussed with patients or

st of us here would endorse his contention parents the undesirability of marriage or of

t eugenics might become " the soundest children or of additional children in. the

d by far the most profitable form of pre- presence of certain types of heritable defect

tive medicine." So we believe, but can or in certain cases of consanguinity. Ask

* persuade the profession of the reliability him if he has considered the poor physical

our evidence and the efficacy of our and nervous histories of many of the near

edies ? In larger issues such as the control relatives of the insane. Ask him how often,

population and the social problem group when advised of an impending marriage in

must admit that we are still exploring and the family of any one of his patients, he has

g evidence. These are beyond the scope recommended the medical examination of

mediate individual or collective solution. the intending partners or discreet inquiry

for the moment we are rather concerned into family history. Ask him how often he

problems of domestic concern and so has been at pains to encourage a healthy

readily to be understood and handled. married couple, practising contraception for

t us assume that there is no longer any inadequate reasons, to improve their pros-

to detach medical opinion from the pects of health and happy life together and

ar idea of human stud-farms and com- to serve their race by bearing children, or the

sterilization, neither of which meas- timid with one healthy child to have another.

has been advocated by this Society. Ask him how often he has advised his poor

14 THE EUGENICS REVIEW
and anaemic and debilitated patients har- With recognition of these new functions the assed by too many or too weakly children to voluntary system would remain undisturbed. prevent and how to prevent or to space the the co-operative principle would have free, arrival of others. Ask him whether he has scope, and both the individual approach in openly discussed such actions with his the home or the consulting-room and statecolleagues or sought information in connexion aided organization could play their respecwith these problems at medical meetings or tive parts. We could also, I feel confident,* elsewhere. Then, I believe, but always with expect in due course the intelligent co-opera-i some notable exceptions, you will find that tion of existing health organizations, of the the eugenic conscience, through lack of press, of the accredited broadcast lecturer knowledge and encouragement, is scarcely and of the public. as yet awake in the profession, but also-for doctors are a willing and devoted, although The Medical Curriculum often a tired and troubled fraternity-that And now I pass to that vexed questionthe conscience would be very glad to be approached by no medical educationalist stirred and could long since have been stirred without a sigh-the medical student's curhad proper provision been made in the riculum. I need not remind you of the medical curriculum for such prophylactic trouble which this has given us and of the studies or had a proper interest been culti- numerous committees which have met to., vated by frequent planned discussion in the consider it in recent years. With a minimum; friendly circle of the local medical society. of six years necessary for qualification and t
The problem of time in a busy doctor's life syllabus already overloaded with subjec is a very real one, but as the individual prac- to a scarcely supportable degree it wo titioner is relieved by degrees, by means of seem folly to suggest the addition or ex public clinics and extending hospital services, pansion of yet another subject. With jealo of certain of his tasks, there is a real oppor- insistence the various sciences and special tunity for the development of new interests isms have put their several obstructionsL and fresh lines of activity in connexion with the way of curtailing the time allotted t many enduring physical and psychological their subjects, and new specialisms have tri problems of daily practice. In his occasions to find a footing. Fundamental though the for eugenic judgment a false sense of delicacy be, how shall we find more room fo or a needless sense of despair may often have instruction and examination in animal an been the deterrents, but a greater deterrent human genetics in the pre-clinical period o has been the lack of scientific backing which for a review of the principles and possibiliti an organized and educated professional of eugenics and of the other domestic o opinion might supply. Neither general prac- sociological contributions to preventive medi titioner nor consultant has yet appreciated cine in the clinical period of the student' how much greater his contribution to pre- career ? How can we secure a fuller recogni ventive medicine might be. Few things tion of the far larger preventive r6le whic would better serve to correct the loss of medicine could and should be playing? prestige which we have sometimes suffered In this regard, Lord Horder, our President as a profession, in one way and another, has again hinted wisely that room should whether fairly or unfairly, than an openly made in the curriculum by the omission o expressed willingness to serve the community less important studies. At present there in new ways and to teach the fundamental no systematic reference to or instruction principles of health and healthy breeding and the grammar of genetics after the first ye their supreme importance to the family and of study. Of what is taught then the great the race, a willingness also to consider a part is forgotten before the beginning of t concerted programme for the training of clinical period. Animal genetics might w students and doctors in their new role as replace more of the routine morphologi educators of the public in these principles. study in zoology. Reproduction, genetics

MEDICINE AND EUGENICS

15

growth and nutrition might surely command variability. In the clinical period bacteri-

some of the time allotted to the more special- ology for a time usurped too much of the

ized biochemistry and biophysics which now field, with the result that the seed has been

loom largely in the field of physiological studied to the neglect of the soil. In the

.tudy. Elaborating and refining the ancillary wards the " interesting case " has been em-

ciences we stand to-day in danger of for- ployed too much for teaching, and elabora-

betting Man in the education of students who tions of diagnostic method rather than

sill have to devote the greater part of their frequent references to the aetiology, natural

ives to his study. Scientific education is history and preventability of common dis-

oming analysis without synthesis. There eases have been the accepted custom of the

a real danger that extensions of the newer bedside talk.

issue-chemistry or retention of an excess of Briefly, I should like to see genetic prin-

'peal anatomy may serve to exclude some ciples given fuller consideration from the

Of those larger essentials of mammalian first year of biological study and continued

ructure and physiology which preserved in proper proportion and with appropriate

jbe human interest of earlier teaching.

illustrations until the final clinical year, and

It would be reasonable to replace some of the various other means and possibilities of

test-tube work-appropriate enough for prevention in medicine more frequently

non-medical physiologist-by broader, stressed at all stages. In the student mind

present less detailed, studies in nutri- " public health " savours too much of drain-

and endocrinology and human inheri- age systems and by-laws and is still too

, all of which find apt and frequent commonly regarded as something to be

tion in the clinical field and some relegated to the M.O.H. Ideally every doctor

ts of which can be successfully demon- should regard himself as an active partici-

d by animal experiment. Mendelian pator in the general preventive scheme, and,

iples, sex-linked abnormalities and other indeed, with eugenic and hygienic advice, a

mena can be explained with certain more generous intimacy with the public

diseases as well as with plants and mind and needs, and more frequent repre-

and there is no reason why the sentations to employers and the public

nstration should be entirely reserved authority, he could contribute to it far more

e student in the clinical period. Con- liberally than he does at present.

ional variations abound and should

sceptible of closer study. Their im- Post-graduate Instruction

ce in clinical medicine is everywhere Let us next consider how interest in human

ent. More than fifty years ago genetics could better be fostered in the pro-

than Hutchinson told us that " we neg- fession as a whole. Here it seems to me that

mwisely the study of those differences the Eugenics Society, by making new and

man and man of which, for the most wider contacts with the medical societies of

physiology takes no cognizance, but the country, might play a helpful and im-

may yet prove of much importance in portant part, even while we wait and plan

the processes of disease."* Might for larger developments. If these societies,

anatomy and physiology begin to or a proportion of them, could be persuaded

e frequent cognizance of these of the value of at least one lecture or dis-

between man and man " for the cussion a year on the various aspects of

Of medical students and their future positive and negative eugenics, and if an

? Some of the commonest mistakes offer of speakers could be made when none

e depend upon the prevailing lack could be provided locally, an awakening of

- ledge among doctors, both young and interest would soon follow. In any case,

what is best described as normal such a plan would be more likely to achieve

practical results than lectures to the laity.

-TI. Pedigree of Disease, London, I884.

In certain instances the medical societies

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

might think the occasion suitable to invite state and their own health and happin

lay persons to thir meetings, and thereby would be better served by a miniimum co

help to establish the principle of free inter- tribution of three children.

course and co-operative concern in matters In I934, under Dr. C. P. Blacker's edito

of obvious social and national importance. ship, a pioneer book was published entitle

The imputation of aloofness has not been The Chances of Morbid Inheritance. In

altogether undeserved by our profession. introduction to this book Sir Humplr

In considering the help which eugenic Rolleston wrote as follows:

organizations might give to the doctors, we must also have regard for the services which

" The accuracy with which medical men con give eugenic prognoses would be greatly enhan

the doctors might render in return. If a and the scope of preventive medicine much es*-

group of local societies undertook to pool tended by a more active interest on the part of,

the information accessible to their members
and relating to dysgenic agencies recognizable in daily practice, or to start a collec-

the medical profession as a whole-those in general practice who have the most ample opportunities, Medical Officers of Health, and consultants with a special knowledge of genetics..

tion of family histories in connexion with Much could be done by their co-operation in tl*

known heritable diseases and constitutional liabilities, information of value alike to human genetic science and to health propaganda could be steadily accumulated.

collection and analysis of information, and o of the chief objects which the Eugenics Socie has in presenting this book is to bring about
much-needed collaboration of the medi
profession."

Out-patient clinics at some of the larger

hospitals to be devoted to heritable disease, I suggest that this much-needed collabo

constitutional disorders and the provision of tion must also be sought in other ways.

eugenic prognosis and advice might also give keeping of pedigrees by doctors themselv

good service.

and, with their encouragement, by intelligen

Let us freely admit that physicians have families well known to them, and the forma

made many and valuable contributions to tion of groups and clinics, for studying wha

human genetics, particularly in connexion Jonathan Hutchinson called the pedigr

with the study of certain rare diseases like of disease, commend themselves as possib

haemophilia, angioneuroticcedema and colour- developments. While mental defect and

blindness. The waste of valuable human in- " carrier" problem will be investigated b

formation, nevertheless, remains one of the those endowed with special training, faciliti

tragedies of practice.

and aptitude-I have in mind such worke

Observational ability and historical apti- as Lewis, Lidbetter and Penrose in t

tude are frequent in the profession, and with country-it should be possible, for a medi

a more specific training could be applied to society, by means of a Pedigree Subcom

advantage. With no other apparatus than a mittee, to prosecute an investigation, sh

good system of recording and indexing the we say, of the familial incidence of th

observant family doctor could accumulate accepted allergic diseases, and of pepti

through the years important observations bearing upon many problems of constitu-

ulcer, goitre, neuroses. In

hyperpiesia and all such inquiries

the the

Eupssgyecnhi

tional defect and heritable disease.

Society could give valuable help in respect o

Let us also remember that medicine has the methods of recording, the preparation o

much to say on the dysgenic influences of war pedigrees, and the analysis of results.

and of present defects in our industrial or-

ganization, and should say it more often. Research

When the fear of war and economic crises There remains another pathway whereb

has receded it will become easier, but even progress must also be furthered-the path

more imperative, for us to advise many who way of particular research. Here I woul

have the necessary health and means but are advocate a strictly limited number of researc

at present declining parenthood that the chairs or readerships in human genetics. Th

MEDICINE AND EUGENICS

number at first should probably not exceed two or three in the whole country and the posts should be filled only if men of outstanding promise were forthcoming. A training in both medicine and genetic science should generally be considered necessary.
At Oxford and Cambridge generous schemes for the furtherance of medical research are now coming into being. In both places an appropriate atmosphere and the necessary contacts with the biological and clinical sciences and, through the hospitals and their follow-up departments, with the field of practice, are to be found, so that conditions
sh6uld be particularly favourable for the
establishment of research centres concerned with morbid inheritance in man. In my view it is essential that the academic and *applied biological sciences should find their opportunities in close geographical proximity. The growing recognition of this principle in the older haunts of learning seems to me one
Aof the most hopeful modern trends in scienti-
ific education and research. If human genetics ould find a footing in close association with
inimal genetics and the biological sciences
t the one hand, and with the clinical
~iences on the other, the prospects of new ~dvancement in all of these subjects would
iiearly be better assured than by any more lationalist policy. As a single example of a blem urgently inviting study the relative
tributions of inheritance and nutrition to
wth and stature may be cited. The applied sciences having a direct bear-
on human needs must, in the present tury, and with no undue delay, be given ery possible opportunity of development d service. Man has too long neglected the dy of his own problems of existence and
M Influence of the Society
...Dr. Blacker has recently drawn attention
the REVIEW to some of the eugenic blems needing research.* One paragraph 'his I should like to quote and amplify:
"I do not much reproach myself," he says, in
ieference to the Society, " that our membership
* October I937, p. I8i.

has increased but slowly. I believe that, largely through our activities, a eugenic conscience, stronger and more discriminating than ever before, exists in the country to-day. I believe, moreover, that our essential propaganda will be readily done for us by others if we can establish our contentions on scientifically solid grounds. Indeed, I doubt very much whether the " outward and visible" success of the Society will ever be commensurate with its real success. I would even go farther than this. Real eugenic results-the favourable influencing of the trend of births and the appropriate guidance of legislation-will not, I believe, be mainly attained through the publicly recognised agency of the Society; they will rather be achieved by other societies and organisations which our Society can
influence."
Of the other bodies with which the Eugenics Society could seek co-operation I would particularly emphasize (in addition to the medical societies) the Royal Colleges and the Universities, for through these the trends of education, whether pre-graduate or postgraduate, and the encouragement of research are in the main determined.
Ultimate Planning
Without a stirring of the eugenic conscience in medical students and doctors, I must repeat, we can scarcely hope to stir the eugenic conscience of the public effectively. It must still, however, be admitted that, with our present lack of co-ordination within the medical profession and our present reliance on local enthusiasm and sporadic individual efforts, progress in the various directions indicated must be slow. And so I cannot but ask myself whether we ought not to visualize in connexion with our special problems, and in fact with the whole problem of preventive medicine and the national health services, a more drastic reorganization and a bolder plan.
In industry and economics and in many other directions it has become customary to talk of " planning," but outside the Soviet Union we can nowhere perceive any largescale endeavour to carry such planning to its logical conclusion. In Russia alone (if we are to accept the evidence of the Webbs, of Sir Arthur Newsholme and Professor Sigerist) is medicine being planned with the wide

i8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

objects which we all in our hearts commend.
I make no comment on the general method or prospects of Sovietism, but in Russia
alone are the potentialities of an organized state medicine (with the emphasis always on prevention and embodying the principles of disinterested service and of full co-operation
between prevention and practice, research
and administration, doctor and patient)
coming to realization. With an end to unemployment; with a
gradual reduction in the hours of labour;
with equal payment of and opportunity for the sexes; with sixteen weeks' holiday on full pay for the expectant mother; with
consultative clinics for recent or intending parents; with a complete abolition of patent medicines and the evils connected
with their sale and advertisement; with a relationship between doctor and community
only possible where fee-getting is no longer necessary; with " five - year plans " for health administration in one district after another, and popular instruction in and campaigning for the reduction of epidemic disease; with early marriage made possible and prostitution a vanishing profession,
order is coming out of a chaos far worse than we have ever experienced in this country, and the achievements in only twenty years are, to say the least, remarkable. That there have been muddles and abuses, mistakes and failures, largely engendered by urgent situations and inexperience, we cannot doubt, but we would be ungenerous if we did not accept the simultaneous evidences of progress and some at least of the major lessons of this gigantic experiment.
In a recent epidemic emergency in this country the lack of co-ordination in our health services was a -cause for comment. This same lack of co-ordination is, I believe, everywhere retarding the effective handling of other insidious and far more dysgenic agencies. Ought we to require an outbreak of streptococcal or typhoid fever or agitation about an industrial disease to remind us of all that is haphazard in the present evolution of our national medicine ? There is growing evidence in the United States as well as in this country that our colleagues are not

universally satisfied with the existing order. In his contrast between the Soviet pro-
gramme and existing Western modes, Sigerist says:
the systems of protecting the peoples' health are in all capitalist countries compromise systems. Medical service is given to the popula tion by various agencies in various ways. Unde capitalism, state medicine, insurance medicine charity medicine, and private medicine exist sid by side. The fight against disease is not led b one general staff but by a multitude of staffs among which there is often very little co-opera tion. Even in countries that have establishe ministries of health, like England and France the ministries do by no means control all the health activities of their respective nations. It is obvious that such systems necessarily have all1 the deficiencies of a compromise."
It may be that our policy of gradualism and educational measures alone will lead us sufficiently fast towards the goal we visualize. It may be, on the other hand, that we shal[ have to learn our lesson from the U.S.S.R.,; and be grateful for the experience and mis takes of that regime, but in the meantime w have no excuse for postponing the bette education of the doctors and the public, an inviting the co-operation of both in our o "five-year plans " for human advancemen
A state medicine which does not embody
at any rate in its preventive code, many o the newer principles cannot with full succe encompass the control of infectious and dustrial disease, the nutrition and housi and health-education of the people, or in cate the conditions which make for a health fertility.
Conclusion
Let us now briefly summarize the reco mendations that have seemed to me imme ately desirable.
First, I conceive that there should co into existence a national council embod a triple alliance between medicine, eugeni and sociology, with representatives in ea instance of the academic and the appli sciences, and appropriate contacts with t ministries and research departments health, agriculture and labour. The functio
of this council would be the direction, in

MEDICINE AND EUGENICS

ig

advisory capacity, of education and research of agencies which impair the racial qualities

in human genetics and social reorganization, of future generations.

on the one hand, and, on the other, the Thirdly, with the help of existing organiza-

regular transmission to the legislative councils tions, eugenic and sociological, an endeavour

of the country of the information accumu- should be made to interest the doctors of the

lated, with suggestions for reforms based country, through their medical and scientific

thereon. In the preventive field such a societies, in the preventive and educational

council might stand in the same relationship role which they might themselves fulfil by

to the Government as the Medical Research instruction in domestic eugenics both posi-

Council stands at present in regard to all tive and negative. The preservation of

the problems of medical research and its health as a primary function, with the treat-

applications to practice.

ment of disease as a secondary function,

Secondly, as a part of a general reform in should become the new ideal.

medical education, modifications of the Fourthly, a limited number of research

cuniculum calculated to lay more stress chairs or readerships in human genetics, pre-

upon all preventive aspects should be visual- ferably to be held in universities where the

ized. The preservation of health by nutri- medical and biological services already

tional and other social reforms and by flourish side by side, should be established.

applications of human and animal genetic I hope it may seem to you that some of

studies to eugenic education and legislation these suggestions are practical and possible,

-hould receive fuller emphasis, both in the or at any rate that they are worthy of fuller

pre-clinical and clinical periods. In the consideration, and that with their fulfilment

linical, period physicians should recognize a results might in time be achieved which can

special duty in connexion with the teaching scarcely be hoped for with our present lack

of the prophylactic aspects of medicine. of a concerted policy or under any system of

"How could this have been prevented ?" dictatorial compulsion.

is a question which should occupy the In my own profession I believe that a host

thoughts of teachers and students far more of willing collaborators could be found, but

frequently than it does at present.

without the help and instruction and advice

I do not excuse my frequent references to of the many pioneers and research workers

nutrition, for we have increasing grounds for in human, animal and plant genetics and in

,believing that undernourished mothers can- the eugenic field, they would indeed be help-

not make first-class babies and that under- less. Between us, by the means outlined, we

nourished children do not grow to first-class could surely come to organize and invigorate

parents. Thus, although not inherited, sub- the eugenic crusade in a manner which would

normal diets come within Galton's category have gratified its founder.

EueisReview, Vol. X 0o.1.

