THE DEVELOPMENT AND USE OF ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION
By G. W. BARTHOLOMEW
University of Tasmania

T HE growing interest in the implications of the practice of artificial insemination, as evidenced by the rapidly accumula-
ting literature on the subject, has disclosed many of the problems which are inevitably associated with the increasingly widespread use of the technique. In order fully to understand these it is necessary to examine the practice from all aspects, and it is submitted that one task is to establish some sort of historical and statistical perspective or background against which the practice must be viewed.
This is neither the time nor the place to attempt a comprehensive history of the practice. The history of artificial insemination has yet to be written,' and the following summary is intended to do no more than to indicate that its history is rather more extensive and certainly more continuous than is sometimes suggested.
Early Experiments
Most writers refer to the legend that the first instance of the practice is to be found amongst the Arabs of the fourteenth century. The source of this legend, at least for the purposes of contemporary discussion, would appear to be a work published by Rohleder in I934,2 in which he refers to " an Arabic book," which appeared, he says about A.D. I332. Since no references are given further investigation of this legend does not appear to be possible.3 More recently an even earlier instance has been claimed, however, by Kardimon4 and Kleegman5 who refer to a discussion of the problem in the Talmudic literature, although in point of fact the problem to which they refer would appear to be that of " accidental " rather then " artificial " insemination.

As far as Europe was concerned artificial insemination was attempted experimentally on animals from time to time, the first successful case being that of Jacobi whose work was published in I765, and who succeeded in performing an artificial insemination using fish eggs.6 Shortly after, in I786, Spallanzani successfully performed an artificial insemination with dogs.7 It is interesting to note, in this connection, that Glover records Bonnet as writing to Spallanzani, at the time, in the following terms: 8
Je sais m6me si ce que vous venez de d6courir, n'aura pas quelque jour dans 1'esp6ce humaine des applications auxquelles nous ne songeons point et dont les suites ne seront pas leg6r6s.
Human Artificial Insemination
In point of fact the first application of the practice to the human species occurred within a very few years, being performed by John Hunter in about I790, although a report was not published until I799, and then not by Hunter himself but by his brotherin-law, Sir Everard Home.9 It is perhaps worth remarking that Roubaud did not accept Hunter's work as being of scientific value, on the ground that, " l'operation a ete faite par le mari et par consequent en dehors de tout controle scientifique."'0 The report of the insemination, as it appears in the Philosophical Transactions, does not in fact make it clear by whom it was actually carried out, but whether it was carried out by Hunter, the husband, or a third party, the fact remains that it was a case of successful artificial insemination and the first which appears in the literature."
Many writers would appear to regard the: next contribution to the subject as being that of Sims in i866.12 It would appear,

187 THE EUGENICS REVIEW, January 1958. 49, 4.,

i88 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

however, that this ignores the development
of the subject on the Continent, particularly in France. Thus, for example, Gigon claimed,
in an article written in I867, to have performed artificial inseminations since I846,13 whilst Girault, in the following year, reported
ten cases, the earliest of which dated back to I838.14 Another French contribution to
the subject which is earlier than that of Sims, is the work of Dehaut, whose book was published in i865.15
Davis16 refers to an article by Hamilton, published in I909, in which yet another claim to work earlier than that of Sims is put forward.17 H[amilton makes this claim on behalf of Bedford, whom, he alleged, recommended artificial insemination for many years before its use by Sims. As no references are given it is impossible to trace this claim further. Sims himself, however, refers to earlier work by Dr. Harley18 who apparently informed Sims that he had, "repeatedly performed the experiment of injecting the semen into the cavity of the uterus but with no result."
Sims himself recorded six cases of artificial insemination from only one of which pregnancy resulted, and even this failed to terminate successfully. In a review of his book the Medical Times and Gazette'9 greeted Sims's results with the pronouncement that '' this dabbling in that canal with a speculum and syringe" was not compatible with decency and self-respect, and with surprising vulgarity they referred to " this squirt begotten embryo." Sims, who was by any standards a great gynaecologist, was undoubtedly disturbed by the virulence of the criticism.20 In i868, in a paper read to the British Association, he replied to his critics saying,21
For myself I see no indelicacy or impropriety in taking mucus from the vagina and uterus for microscopic examination. It is no more indelicate, no more. impure than to investigate the character and properties of saliva, or bile, or
urine, or faeces.
Sitbsequently, however, he abandoned the
practice, and in the third edition of his book he, wrote,22
I have given up the practice altogether and do; not expect to return to it again; but as others

may feel disposed to try further experiments in this direction I shall here give them the advantage of my experience.
Within a few years, however, it would appear that the practice of artificial insemination had become, in France at any rate, accepted as a normal method for the treatment of sterility in those cases in which. no other remedy appeared effective. Courty, in the second edition of his work which was published in I872 wrote,23
Que si la difficulte d'arriver i 6tablir la direction rectiligne du canal ut6rin inspirait A quelqu'un de nos confreres la pens6e d'essayer la f6condation artificelle je vais lui indiquer le proc6d6 le meilleur pour conserver au sperme sa vitalit6 et aux spermatozoides leur mouvements propres, en meme temps que sauvegarder les lois de la pudeur et toutes les convenances.
In i88i Eustache stated,24
Quand tous les moyens ont 6choue il y aura lieu de songer a la f6condation artificielle. Cette intervention ultime ultima ratio n'est condamn'e ni par la morale ni par la religion; elle est justifi6e par le d6sir, l6gitime et essentiellement moral, d'avoir des enfants et aussi par un certain nombre des succ6s incontestables.
Finally in I884 de Sinety wrote,25
Enfin quand tous les moyens ont echoue, que le liquide spermatique du mari pr6sente toutes les conditions en apparence normales, on est en droit de pratiquer la fecondation artificielle, dans des cas determin6s, et lorsque les 6poux le desirent . . . Quoi qu'il en soit et malgre les quelques resultats positifs deja obtenus nous reservons la fecondation artificielle pour un tr6s petit nombre de sujets nous ne la considerons que comme l'ultima ratio du traitement de la sterilite.
It would seem reasonable to assume that these views do not represent merely theoretical opinions, but that behind them lies the actual practice of artificial insemination. That this is the case would appear to be supported by the fact that as early as I887 the question as to whether the artificial fecundation of women was permissible was put to the Sacred Congregation of the Holy Office. The reply was a non licere,26 but one may surely presume that a practice must have become fairly widespread before questions would be submitted to the Sacred Congregation. Unfortunately it does not appear possible to discover how widespread,

THE DEVELOPMENT AND USE OF ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION r89

for there are no published statistics, and it is therefore impossible to fill Eustache's " certain nombre des succes " or de Sin6ty's " resultats positifs " with any statistical content.
The idea, however, gained ground and in Russia, for example, it was extensively developed by Ivanov for veterinary purposes. He appears to have begun work about I890, although his monograph on the subject
was not published until I907.27 Since that
date progress in Russia, at least in the veterinary field, appears to have been very marked indeed.28
The First Hetrologous Insemination
To return to artificial human insemination, it appears that it is to the late nineteenth century that we must look for the first authenticated report of A.I.D.-for all previous discussion had been confined to A.I.H. The first hetrologous insemination (A.I.D.) is recorded by Hard as having been performed by Professor Pancoast in I884. Thus in I909 Hard wrote,29 " It is twentyfive years since Professor Pancoast . . . performed the first artificial insemination of a woman," and the report which follows leaves no doubt that the case was one of hetrologous insemination. It may be remarked that the publication of Hard's article gave rise to considerable discussion in the columns of the Medical World, most of the comment being unfavourable.
The Twentieth Century
Attempts to trace the development of the practice of artificial insemination after the turn of the century become a matter of some difficulty, and there are a large number of conflicting claims as to priorities. Thus Halbrecht30 claims that, after Sims, it was Doederlin who introduced artificial insemination into medical practice. Hiihner, writing in I93731 claims to have begun extensive use of the practice in I9I5, whilst Hamilton,32 writing in I909, claimed to have used artificial insemination for fifteen years, "without a single failure."
In our submission, however, since there is reasonable evidence of continuity of practice

going back over many years, the question of the existence of priorities in the twentieth century ceases, to: be a matter of great significance, consequently emphasis will now be laid on the statistical rather than the historical aspect of the problem.
The development of the practice would appear to have been relatively slow. In i924 Rohleder,33 in a survey; of the world's literature was able to find only I23 cases reported, whilst in I928 Engleman,34 in a further survey was only able to increase this figure to i85, of which sixty-five had been successful. There does not appear to have been any comprehensive survey of the statistics made since that date, and this is neither the time nor the place to attempt such a survey, even assuming we had. the facilities and the ability to do so. It may however be emphasised that the collection of statistics in this subject is a matter of considerable difficulty, for in many cases the references are very vague and do little more than indicate that the practice is more widespread than the published statistics suggest. Thus Greenhill, in his closing contribution to a symposium on the subject, as reported in the American Practitioner, stated,35
I have been doing artificial insemination for many years. I mentioned the fact that my first successful case took place in 1923.... I continued to do more artificial inseminations, and as time went on I performed more and more of them, but I never wrote a paper on this subject.
Artificial Insemination in the U.S.A.
It is against this background that one must attempt to assess the figures published by Seymour and Koerner in I94I to the effect that, in the United States by that date, 9,489 women had been successfully impregnated, and that 97 per cent of the pregnancies had terminated successfully.36 These figures were compiled on the basis of answers to a questionnaire on the subject. This had been sent to 30,000 doctors, of whom 7,643 replied, and of these 4,049 reported that they had carried out successful impregnations, I,I15 reported that they had been unsuccessful in obtaining any pregnancies, whilst 2,-478 reported that they never used the practice. Finally, it should be

Igo THE EUGENICS REVIEW

noted that of the women who had had at criticism, yet the fact that of the doctors

least one successful pregnancy as a result who replied to their questionnaire 4,049

of the insemination, many returned for reported that they had carried out 9,489

further inseminations, and of these I,357 successful impregnations remains unaffected.

had been successful in obtaining a further There is surely no reason to believe that the

pregnancy.

doctors were deliberately falsifying their

These figures, when compared with the returns,39 and if Seymour and Koerner's

number of cases reported in the medical investigation is not mathematically beyond

literature, are doubtless startling. Clearly reproach the fact surely remains that their

it is only reasonable to suppose that there results indicate that the practice is very

would in fact be a considerable discrepancy much more widespread than had been

between the two. The number of busy expected.

practitioners who would bother to write up Further evidence as to the extent of the

cases of artificial insemination unless there practice in the United States is the statement

were some aspect of a case which made it of made by Ploscowe to the effect that by I95I

more than usual interest must be relatively the number of children born as a result of

small. One would therefore expect that the artificial insemination had risen to 20,000.40

total number of inseminations undertaken, We have been unable to ascertain the basis

assuming the number to be obtainable, upon which this figure was reached, but if it

would be considerably higher than the has any basis at all-and there is no reason

number of cases recorded in the medical to think that it represents purely the

literature. Nevertheless the discrepancy product of imagination-it would seem

between the medical statistics and the reasonable to suppose that the prevalence of

figures obtained by Seymour and Koerner the practice is growing very fast in the

was much greater than many people had United States.

expected *and they have not passed This suggestion is certainly supported by

unchallenged.

the figures quoted by Lo Gatto.4' He quotes

They were subjected to criticism, usually a writer in the New York Post who, in I955,

described as " trenchant," by Drs. Tucker- estimated that the number of children con-

man and Cook, which was reported by ceived in the United States, by that date,

Folsome in the Journal of the American to be about 50,000. He also quotes Lang

Gynaecological Society.37 This criticism is who, writing in the same year, estimated the

quoted by Sullivan in his contribution to the annual increase in America to be between

conference held under the auspices of the i,ooo and I,200. It will be observed that if

Public Morality Council. He refers to it as the above figures for the total number of

an analysis of the figures by the American children conceived by artificial insemination

Gynaecological Society, and states, with are accepted, then the figure given by Lang

presumably unconscious humour, that their for the annual increase, must be too low.

conclusion was that " the figures of these two Thus if Seymour and Koerner's figures and

ladies did not stand analysis " and he adds, those of Ploscowe are accepted as relating to

"showing, in other words, that the extra- the years I94I and I95I respectively, then,

ordinary successes they claimed were admittedly, this gives an average annual

invalid."38

increase of about I,000 per year, but if the

It is submitted that this interpretation of figure given in the New York Post for I955

the criticism cannot be sustained, for the is correct, or even only fairly accurate, then

criticism applies not so much to the actual the average annual increase between I95I

figures obtained, but to the mathematical and I955 must be of the order of 6,ooo per

analysis to which they were subjected. It year.

seems clear that neither Seymour nor Koerner Clearly it is only reasonable to expect that

are mathematicians, and their handling of the rate of increase as well as the total figure

the figures is obviously open to mathematical is increasing, yet it is clear that the American

THE DEVELOPMENT AND USE OF ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION

figures are, at the moment, too incomplete and unsubstantiated to give more than a very general idea of the prevalence of the practice.
Artificial Insemination in Great Britain
Very much is true of the figures for Great Britain. The only reported series of cases that we have been able to trace is that of Barton et al,42 who reported, in a first series of thirty cases, in which homologous insemination was used, nine pregnancies of which four terminated successfully, and in a second series of fifteen cases in which hetrologous insemination was used, ten pregnancies of which eight terminated successfully. Dr. Margaret Jackson43 reported to the Archbishop's Commission, in a series of thirtyfour cases, seventeen pregnancies of which thirteen terminated successfully.
The statements made before the inquiry held under the auspices of the Public Morality Council, however, appear to indicate much higher figures than those given above. Dr. Mary Barton stated that over a period of five years about 300 children had been conceived as a result of artificial insemination and in answer to a question she stated that this figure related to hetrologous insemination, adding, " If I had been speaking of A.I.H. there would have been thousands of cases from which to quote."44 Again, in Lane-Roberts's book, to which Dr. Barton was a contributor, it is stated, " We have employed donated semen in several hundred cases."45
Social Implications
Two conclusions can be drawn, it is submitted, from a consideration of the above facts. First, that although the widespread use of artificial insemination is fairly recent,, the technique itself cannot be dismissed as merely another manifestation of the modem technological approach to life. It has a long and not undistinguished history. Second, the practice has to-day become sufficiently widespread for discussion of its implications to be more than a matter of academic interest.
In considering these problems however, not only the historical perspective, but also

the structure of contemporary society, into which the technique has to be fitted, must be carefully considered. It is not possible here to discuss the many and complex
problems which arise, particularly those
associated with the medical aspects of the problem, for if, as Guttmacher has stated, " there is more drivel and rot published about it [artificial insemination] than almost anything else in the whole gamut of medicine,"48 then it is clearly not for the unqualified even to attempt to enunciate the problems. There is, however, one point which it is necessary to emphasise strongly, namely the fact that artificial insemination is, medically, only an indicated procedure in a relatively small number of cases. Lack of appreciation of this point is responsible for most of the confusion which appears in the literature, much of which seems to be based on the assumption that almost any woman, under almost any circumstances could obtain insemination if she wished.
This is clearly not so. In the first place medical opinion is
unanimous that insemination would never be carried out by any reputable practitioner unless both husband and wife consented.
For practical purposes, therefore, we may, as Binney has suggested,47
disregard such melodramatic but impossible characters as the Machiavellian doctor who artificially inseminates a woman against her will, and the unscrupulous adventuress who has herself artificially inseminated in order to bring false charges against some man.
It is perfectly true that the melodramatic does on occasion occur, yet in a subject such as the present, in which we are searching for fundamental principles, it is surely advisable, initially at any rate, to confine our attention to situations which are reasonably likely to occur in practice.
Having, for the moment at any rate, disposed of the two types of cases mentioned above, the second point which needs emphasis is that insemination is clearly only an indicated procedure in those cases in which the marriage is established to be involuntarily childless. Again the medical literature is unanimous that there is no justification for resort to the procedure unless the

192 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

marriage falls into this category. In order to

Artificial insemination should be the last

establish a statistical perspective in this matter it may be pointed out that the authorities seem to be agreed that approxi-

resort in the treatment of infertility, indicated
only where there has been found an unremedial and absolute barrier to the function of reproduction in the male or female, or to the performance

mately I0 per cent of all marriages do fall of the act of copulation.

into this category. Different authorities vary slightly in their estimates of this figure, but it would appear generally to be agreed
that it is not lower than about 7 per cent, nor higher than I7 per cent.48
It should further be emphasised that even within this category it would appear that medical opinion only regards artificial insemination as an indicated procedure in a small percentage of cases. Opinion is divided however as to what the indications are and different authorities classify the indications in different ways, but in considering these it is submitted that it is well to bear in mind the opinion voiced by Meaker when he wrote :49

Guttmacher insists that insemination should never be " an assembly line kind of medical treatment " and adds, " Only a small percentage of patients who apply qualify for so radical a procedure."54
One final point should be emphasised. Artificial insemination is not simply another new technique the novelty of which attracts certain warped minds. It is not a mere fashion like face lifting. It is a serious attempt to deal with a very real problem, that of the childless marriage. As one learned writer has put it: 55
The involuntarily barren marriage continues, as it has done for ages, to present an important medical, economic and psychological problem.

In the great majority of cases of human The oft-quoted statement that from io per cent

infertility the cause of the defect is not some to I5 per cent of marriages in the United States

single abnormality but rather the summation or are involuntarily barren, whilst coldly accurate,

totality of several factors.... Seventy per cent does not sufficiently express the appalling degree

of the couples who apply for the relief of child- of marital insecurity and deep unhappiness

lessness show no single condition which would which lie submerged in the statistics.

account for their difficulty. They do show, without exception, a group of causative factors
of which each one lowers their fertility to some

The degree of marital instability which results from a childless marriage is well

extent and of which the sum total depresses illustrated by Lamson et al.56 They quote

that fertility below the threshold of conception. Durkheim57 who wrote that he found

However, it is worth emphasising, in this suicide was twice as common amongst child-

context, as Guttmacher has pointed out,60 less couples as amongst those with children.

that in two of the longest series that have They also quote various analyses of divorce

been written up, Schultz5l used insemination statistics which would appear to indicate

in only I02 cases out of 2,000 (i.e. approxi- that the divorce rate is nearly twice as great

mately 5 per cent), 52 whilst Shorohowa amongst childless couples as amongst those

resorted to the practice in fifty out of 586 with children.58 The greater instability of

cases (i.e. approximately 9 per cent). If childless marriages surely needs no further

this figure be combined with the figure for emphasis.

the number of childless marriages it would It is sometimes objected, however, that the

appear to follow that in under i per cent of problems of the childless marriage can be

all marriages could artificial insemination be remedied by adoption, without resorting to

an indicated procedure.

a procedure which many people undoubtedly

The inescapable conclusion, it is submitted, feel to be so repugnant that nothing could

is that there is no evidence to suggest that justify resort thereto. It would appear that

current medical practice supports this is essentially a male attitude. A woman's

unrestrained or indiscriminate use of the natural desire, it appears, is to bear a child,

technique, such as seems to be evisaged by not merely to raise one. This point was

some non-medical writers. The extent to .strongly emphasised by both Mary Barton

which resort to the practice is justified is and Joan Malleson in their contributions to

summarised by Siegler as follows:53

the conference held under the auspicesof the

THE DEVELOPMENT AND USE OF ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION

Public Morality Council. The former stated:59
There is no stronger urge in the developed woman, in my experience, than that of bearing children, to experience maternity, and to have a child of her own. Adoption, therefore, even if enough children could be provided to go round, would not meet the case.
She suggested that adoption would only be a satisfactory remedy in about 30 per cent of childless marriages.
Finally we may refer to the suggestion made by Kleegman60 to the effect that the practice should be referred to as therapeutic rather than artificial insemination. That is what, at least as far as current British medical practice would appear to be, it is. It is no more artificial than blood transfusion, plastic surgery or corneal transplantation. This view it may be mentioned appears to be implicit in the opinion of Mantegazza6l to the effect that if it is a sin to assist the uterus to conceive by artificial means then it must also be a sin to assist the digestion by pepsin.
It is respectfully submitted that in dis-
cussions concerning artificial insemination there are two issues which should be kept distinct. First, there are the problems arising from the present practice. Second, there are the problems relating to what the limits of the practice should be.
We have endeavoured to draw attention to what appear to be the limits of the present practice as voluntarily imposed by the medical profession. The discussion of the problems which arise from the present practice, limited as it would appear to be, is a matter not only of great interest, but also of some urgency, for, in the words of a leading article in the British Medical Journal,62
The medical practitioner desires to help his patients in every possible way, and evidence is not lacking that in a number of cases he can give substantial help by artificial insemination. It is neither just nor desirable that he should do so at such a risk as the recent discussions have disclosed. He has a right to statutory guidance and protection.
Quite apart from discussions of the problems arising from the present therapeutically limited practice of the technique there is the problem of what in fact the

limits of the practice ought to be, and how
to confine the practice within those limits,
whatever they may be. There are not wanting those who urge that artificial insemination should not be merely a thera-
peutic technique to be used in a limited number of cases, but should be actively
encouraged either for eugenic purposes as conceived by Julian Huxley63 or Brewer,64 for the purposes of sustaining a falling demographic curve, or for fulfilling the objects of the League of Bachelor Mothers.
A discussion of these issues is beyond the limits of this paper, and we would conclude by emphasising that artificial insemination is a scientific technique, and to it, and its' consequences, society must adjust itself. Like all techniques it raises many problems and difficulties. It is, of course, capable of abuse, it is equally capable of conferring many benefits. To seek legislation to make hetrologous insemination criminal, as recommended by the Archbishop's Commission is, in our opinion, to evade the issue. This is merely to turn one's back on the benefits that the technique is capable of conferring. Controlled the practice must be, and the problems that it raises must be squarely faced, but this cannot be done by unconditional prohibition of that-form of the practice which seems to be the one which, medically speaking, is the most successful.65
Jacobits has written that:66
Such human stud farming exposes society to the gravest dangers which can never be outweighed by the benefits that may accrue in individual cases.
Implicit in this' opinion seems to be the assumption that there is no alternative between uncontrolled insemination and absolute prohibition. It is submitted that the obvious dangers to society stem from the uncontrolled use of the practice, and that these can adequately be avoided by suitable control without depriving individuals of the undoubted benefits that ensue in those cases in which insemination is an indicated procedure.
It may well be that the revolution effected by the introduction of this technique will require a more searching reappraisal t of fundamental principles. The first step in any

I94 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

such re-thinking must be a consideration of the relationship between the technique and the existing structure of society, and it will only be after much discussion of all the problems from all points of view, medical, legal, social and psychological, that any
proposals for legislation can usefully be formulated. All that has been attempted here is briefly to indicate some of the factors relevant to the historical background and medical context of the technique and some
of the limits of its present practice.67
REFERENCES
i. The best account yet published is that contained in Glover, Artificial Insemination in Hutnan Beings. 1948. See also Marescal: Artificial Insemination: an Historical Review. 1932. El Siglo Medico, 90, 57.
2. Test-tube Babies. 1934. Panurge Press. This work carries as its sub-title " A History of the Artificial Insemination of Human Beings." See also Rohleder: Artificial Fecundation in Man. 1914. Urol. & Cutan. Rev. Tech. Supp., 335.
3. Since I have been unable to obtain a copy of Rohleder's book I have relied on Glover's comments thereon.
4. Artificial Insemination in the Talmud. I942. Hebrew Med. J., 2, I64.
5. Therapeutic Donor Insemination. I954. Fertil. & Steril., 5, ii.
6. His work was printed in Hannovershen Magazin, as quoted by Rohleder, op. cit., p. 3I.
7. Expe'riences pour servir a l'histoire de la gine'ration des animaux et des plantes. (I786). Geneva.
8. Op. cit at p. 3. 9. Account of the dissection of an hermaphrodite dog.
1'799. Phil. Trans., 18, I62. According to some writers, however, Hunter's work actually preceded that of Spallanzani. Io. Traite' de l'impuissance et de la sterilite chez l'homme et chez lafemme. 3rd ed., I876, p. 779. The remark does not seem to appear in the earlier editions of this work. ii. Koerner, Medico-Legal Considerations in Artificial Insemination. I948. La. L. R., 8, 484 at p. 487 refers to an earlier instance attributed to Eustachius. Bartolommeo Eustachi, after whom the Eustachian tube is named is probably best known for his Tabulae Anatomicae which he drew C. 1552 but which were not published until I714 by Lancisi. We have been unable to discover any reference to substantiate Koerner's claim. 12, Clinical Notes on Uterine Surgery. i866. 13. I867. Reforme Medicale, 37. 14. JRtude sur la generation artificielle dans l'espece humaine. i868. Abeille Medicale, 25, 409. I5. De la fdcondation artificielle dans l'espece humaine comme moyen de remedier d certaines causes de sterilite chez l'homme et chez la femme. i865. i6. Impotence, Sterility and Artificial Impregnation.
1923. p. 131.
I7. 1909. Med. World, 27. I8. Op. cit. at p. 365.

ig. The Cure of Barrenness. i866. Med. Times & Gazettej,1I48 and 493.
20. Quite apart from his work on artificial insemination Sims is probably best known as the inventor of the Sims speculum and for his work on the operation for vesico-vaginal fistula.
21. Illustrations of the Value of the Microscope in the Treatment of the Sterile Condition. I868. B.M.J., 2, 465 and 492.
22. At p. 365. 23. Traite pratique des maladies de l'uterus. 2nd ed.
I872. p. II64.
24. Manuel pratique des maladies des femmes. i88i.
p. 732. 25. Traite pratique de gynecologie. I884. p. 896. See
also Lutaud, Precis des maladies des femmes. I883. Gerard, Nouvelle causes de sterilite dans lesdeux sexes:
fdcondation artificielle comme moyen ultime de
traitement. i888, and Pajot, Des obstacles a la fecondation dans l'e'spece humaine. i886.
26. See Glover, op. cit. p. 63.
27. De la fecondation artificielle chez les mammiferes. 1907. Arkh. biologischeskikh nauk., 12, 377. See also Ivanov, Use of Artificial Insemination for Zootechnical Purposes in Russia. I922. J. Agric. SOC. 2441, and Artificial Insemination in Mammals: Scientific and Zootechnical Methods. 1930. Vet. Rec., 10, 25; Walton, Technique of Artificial Insemination, 1933, and Lambert and McKenzie. Artificial Insemination in Livestock Breeding. 1940, circ. 567., U.S. Dept. Agric.
28. Thus Moscovits, 1934. Int. Rev. Agric., 25, 105, quoting the figures of the Moscow Experimental Station up to 1932 gives the following figures asto the numbers of animals which had been inseminated; ewes, 3,000,000; COWS, 2,000,000; mares, 650,000; SOWS, 200,000. The use of the practice for veterinary purposes in Great Britain is controlled by the Agriculture (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, I937, S. I7 and the Artificial Insemination (Cattle) (England and Wales) Regulations, 1943 made thereunder, and the Agriculture (Artificial Insemination) Act, 1946.
29. Artificial Impregnation. I909. Med. World, 27, I63.
30. Artificial Insemination. I944. J. Obst. & Gynec. B. E., 526.
3I. Sexual Disorders. 1937. p. 45. 32. 1909. Med. World, 27. 33. Normale, Patologische und Kunstliche Befruchtung
beim Menschen. 1924. 204. 34. Sterilitat in Handbuch der Gynakologie (eds. Veit
and Stoekel) and Neuere Erfahrungen uber die BekAmpfung der Sterilitat. 1928. Klinische Wochenschrift, 7, 1563. 35. Artificial Insemination: Its Medico-Legal Implications. I947. Am. Pract., 1, 24I. 36. Artificial Insemination: Present Status in U.S. as shown by a Recent Survey. 1941. J.A.M.A., 116, 274737. Status of Artificial Insemination. I943. Am. J. Obst. & Gynec., 45, 91I5. 38. At p. 67. Report of Conference, Artificial Human Insemination was published in 1947. 39. It is however unfortunate that, as Guttmacher records (Physicians Credo for Artificial Insemination. 1942. West. J. Surg., 50, 357), Seymour will not allow inspection of the papers. 40. Sex and the Law. 1951. p. II3.

THE DEVELOPMENT AND USE OF ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION I95

41. Artificial Insemination: Legal Aspects. I955. Cath. Law., 1, 172.
42. Artificial Insemination. I945. B.M.J., 1, 40.
43. At p. '3; Report of the Commission, Artificial Human Insemination was published in I948 and reprinted in 1952.
44 op. cit., at p. 45.
45. Sterility and Impaired Fertility. I939. p. 34I.
46. Artificial Insemination in Sterility. I943. Proc. Interst. Postgrad. Med. Assoc., 56.
47. Legal and Social Implications of Artificial Insemination. I949. Eugenics Rev., 40.
48. The Royal Commission on Population for England and Wales (I949), gives the figure as being between 5 per cent and 8 per cent. As the learned editors of Postgraduate Obstetrics and Gynaecology 2nd ed. 1955, point out, however, this figure must be too low. The Registrar-General's returns for I939 show that of the 77,843 married women who died in that year 13,337 (i.e. I7 per cent)were childless. It is unlikely that this figure would be substantially reduced even when allowance has been made for voluntary childlessness. For the American figures see Pearl, The Natural History of Population, I939 and Lotka, Sterility in American Marriages. 1928. Proc. Nat. Acad. Med. Soc., 14, 99.
49. Gynecologic Aspects of Human Sterility. 1936. J.A.M.A., 107, I847.
5O. The Role of Artificial Insemination in the Treatment of Sterility. I942. J.A.M.A., 120, 442.
5i. Kunstliche Befruchtung: Ihre Stellung in
Gezamtrahmen der SterilitAts-behandlung. I941. Zentralbl. f. Gynak., 65, 988.
52. La fecondation artificielle dans l'6spece humaine. 1927. Gynec. et Obst., 15, 132. Folsome, op. cit., gives Shorohowa's figure as 88. This however was Shorohowa's estimate as to the total number of cases reported in the literature and not the number undertaken by Shorohowa himself.
53. Fertility in Women. 1945. p. 401. 54. I943. Bull. N.Y. Acad., Med., 19, 573.

55. Israeli: The Scope of Artificial Insemination in the Baxren Marriage. 194I. Am. J. Med. Sci., 202,
92.
56. Sociologic and Psychologic Aspects of Artificial Insemination. 1951. J.A.M.A., 145, I062.
57. Le Suicide. 1930.
58. The learned authors quote Cohen, Statistical Analysis of American Divorce (I932), whose figures were that 71 per cent of childless marriages end in divorce whilst only 8 per cent of those with children do. These figures were doubted by
Popenoe, Infertility and the Stability of Marriage. 1948 West. J. Surg., 56, 309. Lamson citesJaconsen (I950). Am. Soc. Rev., 15, 235, as being more reliable. His figures showed that of the 421,000 divorces and annullments granted in America in 1948 nearly three-fifths concerned childless marriages. He computed that the divorce rate for childless couples was I5-3 per thousand compared with 8-8 for couples with children. Lamson also quotes evidence to show that these figures are not unique for the U.S., see, van Zanten and van den Brink, Population Phenomena in Amsterdam Population. I938. J. Internat. Union. Sc. Invest. Pop. Prob., 2, 30 and Quesnel, Frequency of Divorce with Special Regard to the Number of Children. I938. Annex No. 6, Stat. Inst., Lund.
59. Op. cit., p. 42.
6o. Op. cit., p. i.T. 6i. Note sulla fecondazione artificele nella donna.
I887. Gazzetta degli ospedali e delle clinche, 8, 8I. 62. 1949. B.M.J. (May 3rd.) 63. The Uniqueness of Man, quoted by the report of
the Archbishop's Commission, p. 8. 64. Eutelegenesis. I935. Eugenics Rev., 27, 121. 65. The medical statistics would appear to indicate
that the percentage of successful inseminations is very much higher for A.I.D. than for A.I.H. See Lane-Roberts, op. cit. 66. Problems of Jewish Family Life. p. 14. 67. I gratefully acknowledge the help given to me by the Librarian of Royal Society of Medicine in granting me the facilities of the Society's Library whilst I was writing this article.

