DECLINE IN THE BIRTH-RATE AND THE " FECUNDABILITY "
OF WOMAN.
By PROFESSOR CORRADO GINI, President of the Italian Society of Genetics and Eugenics.
The question of population is now being given a prominent place in
the statistical and economic literature of England (1), where the matter is being investigated to the same extent as it was in France some few decades ago in view of the anticipated arrest in the increase of the population; although the predominant and, in my opinion, exaggerated pessimism of the English concerning the coming economic future of their country causes many of them to consider the phenomemon from a different point of view. And this is not surprising. France, as it was already observed long ago, only preceded the other European countries. on the parabola of demographic evolution, but even then in the organ-isms of the countries in which the process was at work more slowly, symptoms of a retarded increase of the population had appearedespecially in England-and were noted and studied, which symptoms. are to-day maturing. (2)
As was then the case in France, so now in England the great majority of students of the question incline towards the interpretation that the decline in the birth-rate and the resultant slower increase of the population are voluntary, and they refuse to recognise a subsidiary biological cause. Perhaps, as I suggested in a former paper (3), this
interpretation conceals a secret hopejince a thing which is voluntary
may still be remedied; man has always shown great reluctance to, admit that he is not the arbiter of the fate of his own species.
(1) See, particularly, the recent papers by BOWLEY in "Economic Journal," June, 1924; by BROWNLEE in "Lancet," November, 1924, and in this REVIEW, July, 1925; by BEVERIDGE in "Economica," March, 1925; the President G. UDNY YULE's inaugural address to the R. Stat. Society (18th November, 1924), and the discussion opened by T. H. C. STEVENSON at the following sitting. To this argument refers also a paper by M. GREENWOOD which will shortly appear in "Metron" (vol. V., No. 2). Lesrecent, but also full of interest are the two volumes published by theNATIONAL BIRTH-RATE COMMISSION, viz., "The declining BirthRate," 1917, and "Problems of Population and Parenthood," 1920, Chapman and Hall.
(2) May I be allowed to refer to my book "I fattori demografici dell'evoluzione delle nazioni" [The demographic factors of the evolution of nations], Torino, Bocca, 1912, pp. 93 and following.
(8) Cfr. "II diverso accrescimento delle classi sociali e la concentrazione della ricchezza" [The different increase of the social classes and the concentration of
wealth] in "Giornale degli Economisti, " January, 1909, para. X. The paper was presented to the 2nd Meeting of the "Associazione Italiana per il Pro-gresso delle Scienze" [Italian Association for the Progress of Science], Florence,
1908.

DECLINE IN THE BIRTH-RATE.
In,reality, however, for those who investigate the matter more
closely, the interpretation of a voluntary decline of the birth-rate does not in the least exclude the biologic explanation. There is no doubt that the limitation of procreation is achieved by free-will, but could it not also be possible that the will to delay marriage and to limit the progeny gains the upper hand as the result of a weakening of the reproductive iinstinct? (4). To raise a family, to surround oneself with children is, from the individualistic point of view, a bad bargain: this is affirmed by popular intuition and is also proved by accurate statistical
computation (Q). To rationalize reproduction, therefore, means
inevitably to reduce it to a minimum insufficient to maintain the species. Hence a reproduction sufficient to maintain or increase the population can be explained only by instinct taking the upper hand over reason. Now instinct can prevail more or less over reason, and result in a more or less rapid reproduction, not only under the influence of external conditions which are more or less under the control of reason, or under the influence of a greater or lesser steadfastness of our reasoning power, but also as a consequence of the greater or lesser development of the reproductive instinct or of instincts related to the latter.
Rather than to contrast voluntary and physiologic causes of the
decline of the birth-rate we should contrast internal and external factors.
The external factors can in their turn be divided into two groups according to whether they tend to call forth or to accentuate a
deliberate limitation of the birth-rate or whether they tend to determine a state of things in which the reduction of progeny occurs necessarily.
The first group of factors which could better be designated as
(4) Cfr. "Ii sesso dal punto di vista statistico" [Sex from a statistical point of view], Palermo, Sandron, 1908, pp. 457-462; "II diverso accrescimento etc." op. cit., loco cit.; "Le leggi di evoluzione delle popolazioni" [The laws of the evolution of populations] in "Economia," December, 1924, p. 286.
(5) I dealt incidentally with this argument in my work "Problemi di economia politica visti da uno statistico" [Problems of Political Economy as seen by a Statistician"] in "Annali dell' Universita Commerciale Bocconi, " 1924, vol. I. (cfr. paras 15 and following), and in my address on "Le relazioni dell' Eugenica con le altre scicnze biologiche e sociali" [The relation of Eugenics to the other biological and social sciences], held at the "Primo Congresso Italiano di Eugenetica Sociale" [First Italian Congress of Social Eugenics] (Milan, 20-23rd September, 1924) and published in the transactions of the said Congress, and in "Rivista mensile del Comune di Roma," April-September, 1924 (cfr. para 15), and more purposely in the communication "Sul controllo delle nascite" [On birth-control] to the "Sixth International Neo-Malthusian and Birth Control Conference" (New York, 25th-31st March, 1925), and published in "Difesa Sociale," March-April, 1925. Professor A. PINO BRANCA is making at the Statistical Institute of the R. University of Padua laborious researches on the cost and value of man, from which results the confirmation that the cost of man is by far higher than
his value which may be deduced from the present value of his futuire work. It is chiefly for not having taken into due account the value of the labours which the members of the family, and chiefly the mother, expend on the
bringing up of a man that the authors, who in the past dealt with this question, failed to grasp the importance of such a difference.

,260 EUGENICS RE VIEW.
voluntary, comprises the economic factor of a greater distribution of property, inasmuch as the birth of another child reduces the resources of the first ones, in a greater degree when the parents own a property, and also the greater cost of bringing up the children, while the available financial means remain stationary; here also enter the technical factors consisting in the acquaintance with improved methods of birth-control. In the second group of factors enter the restless modern economic life which often necessitates more frequent absences from home; the many and various satisfactions offered by progress which make the need of sexual satisfaction less insistent; the greater expenditure of nervous energy on the everyday occupations of life which render the aforesaid sexual satisfactions less desired; the greater
length of professional apprenticeship which delays the establishment
of a family. Collaterally with these external factors stand the internal or
biologic factors which can also be distinguished according as they affect directly either the reproductive apparatus or the psychic faculties. The first would consist in a lesser aptitude, due to organic or functional causes, of the reproductive apparatus to fulfil its functions; the second might consist in a greater capacity of our intellect to reason, or in a weakening of the instincts related to reproduction, namely, the sexual instinct, the wet-nursing instinct, parental affection, and also the religious instinct, inasmuch as the latter leads to believe, without reasoning, in the good of having a numerous progeny.
Of all the above external or internal factors the onlv one whose intervention may with probability be excluded in our days is that of a higher development of human intellectual faculties as compared with the intellectual faculties attained half a century or a century ago. On
the contrary it must be recognised that all the above enumerated external factors have either arisen or have accentuated their influence in this later period.
The majority of authors who investigate the causes of the decline
of the birth-rate observe that the intervention or the intensification of
such external factors is fully sufficient to explain the decline of the birth-rate which has been noticed from about 1870 down to our days,
and they therefore consider it useless to have recourse to hypothetical
and uncertain factors such as the biologic factors appear to them to be. Some add that it is impossible to attribute to physiological
factors the 20 to 30 per cent. diminution of the reproductive capacity of the population which has occurred in many European nations. They also say that by such considerations it would not be possible to account for radical differences existing between populations descending from one common stock as, for instance, between the French in their own country and the French in Canada (6 ).
However, neither of these two objections is convincing. The French in Canada descend from the lower, most prolific classes of the population, and, on the other hand, they did not, as
(6) Cfr. for example, BEVERIDGE in "The Fall of Fertility among European Races" in "Economica," March, 1925, p. 20, and in "Discussion on Dr. Stevenson' s Paper" in "Journ. of the R. Stat. Society, " Januarv, 1925, p. 84.

DECLINE IN THE BIRTH-RAT]E.

261'

nieither did other colonial populations, subject their womenfolk to that onesided and intensive selection based on personal beauty which, in their country of origin, and, generally speaking, in all the more advanced European countries, plays a considerable part and which, iii all probability, exercises an anti-selective influence on fecundity (7 ).
A rapid decline of the birth-rate does not preclude the physiologic factors, chiefly because the latter can only co-operate with the external ones whose influence nobody even thinks of denying, and also because, as it has been already remarked, instinct is hardly compatible with reason, so that as soon as the latter comes into play the former rapidly gives way in every respect (8). It is therefore only necessary to admit that the generative instinct has undergone, if only a slight attenuation, but sufficient to allow reason of taking the upper hand over it, in order to be able to explain the occurrence of a progressive decline of the birth-rate leading to even more marked results than those so far noted.
Furthermore, the argument from economy of thought, which must guide us in scientific constructions, fails, if we consider that there are many other phenomena, either contemporaneous or of the past, which cannot be explained by the intervention of exclusively external factors in causing a limitation of the birth-rate, while they agree with the hypothesis of biologic factors.
To Dr. Brownlee belongs the credit of having, as far back as in 19n8, called attention to these biologic factors (9), and of returning subsequently several times to this argument (10). He observed that epidemics and invasions of certain animals, e.g. of locusts and rats, evidently indicate that there occur in the diffusion of certain species rhythmical movements which, it is but natural to suppose, must also have their counterpart in the human species, and the existence of which, in fact, must be recognised in the migrations of peoples (e.g., from Scandinavia and from Arabia) which occurred at certain epochs and which then suddenly ceased. The demographic history of some ancient and modern peoples (Roman Empire, England, Spain, France) confirms the fact that periods of a rapid increase of the population alternated with periods of arrest or of a slower increase. In his opinion such alternations can be explained by a rhythmical course of the aptitude of generative cells to propagate themselves, i.e., that these cells accumulate energy which explodes at a given time to be
(7) Cfr. the above cited address on "Le relazioni dell'Eugenica con le altre scienze biologiche e sociali, " para 9.
(8) Cfr. also para. 15 of the said address, and the above cited communication ou "Birth Control, " p. 16 of the reprint.
(9) "Germinal Vitality. A study of the growth of Nations as an instance of a hitherto undescribed factor in Evolution," in "Proceedings of the R. Phil. Soc. of Glasgow," 1908.
(10) Finally in the paper "The present tendencies of population in Great Britain with respect to Quantity and Quality" in this REVIEW, July, 1925. See also, among BROWNLEE's more recent papers, those in "Lancet, " 1922, II., 223 ("Restriction of Birth in relation to National Weal"), and of 1924, 1st November ("On the question of Birth Control in some of its statistical aspects)." Particularly interesting are Brownlee's replies to the questions of the "National Birth-Rate Commission," reproduced in the volume "The declining Birth-Rate," pp. 149-165.

26 EUGENICS REVIEW.
followed by a period of exhaustion; this rhythmical movement is analogous to that which, according to Dr. Brownlee's statement, takes place in somatic cells, and determines, independen-tly of any external factor, an alternation in the individual development, of periods of rapid and of slowed-down growth. In support of this theory he points out that periods of greater numerical increase of population coincide with periods of the appearance of individuals eminent in the realms of thought and of action, a coincidence which suggests a biologic cause of both phenomena.
I do not think I shall wrong my eminent colleague, with whom, besides, as I shall show later, I incline to concur in his fundamental
point of view, in stating that his views are not shared by a large number of followers( 1i). Perhaps this is partially due to the somewhat mystic language in which he expresses his view, as for instance, when he speaks of the storage and then of the explosion of reproductive energy, as it is not clear to what concrete thing this corresponds; but it may also be due to the feeling that the periods of the more or less rapid increase which have occurred in the demographic history of all the peoples, are not accurately equivalent to the rapid decline observed for the last half century, not properly in the increase of the population
(neither in some States in the rapidity of the said increase), but in the number of births. All that we know in regard to the movement in the past of the populations from which have arisen the nations which now exhibit a crisis in their birth-rate, leads us to believe that their birth-rate (although presenting considerable fluctuations) always was high in the centuries gone by in comparison with its present day level, and that the more or less rapid increase of these populations essentially depended on their lower or higher death-rate on which, it is but natural to admit, external factors had a decisive influence(12). History shows us with certitude that n former times a decrease occurred in the birth-rate as rapid and as high as that which we have now observed for some decades, and namely, in the Greek Republics and in Rome (13); but that decrease marked the end of those nations, and not a slowing-down of the rhythm followed by a revival. All the indications which we possess concerning the French population (where the decline of the birth-rate was already being felt at the beginning of the last century, and which would cer' ainly decrease if fresh blood were not poured into it by immigration) lead us to think that in this case the movement is continuous and not periodic.
In my opinion, the analogy with individual development may be established, but only by the comparison of the actual phases of the evolution of the European nations, not with a period of slowing-down in the growth of the organism, but with the stage of maturity at its
(11) Among the persons interrogated by the "National Birth-Rate Commission" Dr. A. K. CHALMERS alone expressed ideas in harmony with Dr. Brownlee's theory. Cfr. "The declining Birth-Rate," pp. 336-349.
<12) The examination also of unpublished data on the movement of population which occurred during several centuries in some Italian towns confirms me in this point of view.
413) For an analysis of the demographic evolution of Greece and of Rome see '"I fattori demografici dell'evoluzione delle nazioni, " op. cit. pp. 48-62.

DECLINE IN THE BIRTH-RATE.

268

turning point towards senility when the reproductive activity 'of the cells of the organism is still sufficient to make good the losses, while it is already the prelude of the following stages in which the physiologic balance will be in the normal condition of passivity which characterises senile involution. I had the occasion of developing this line of thought contemporaneously with Brownlee, and independently of him, and I have taken it up again in various researches with some additions and applications(l4). May I be allowed to recall here the arguments which militate in favour of my point of view.
Indeed, it appears quite natural that there should be an analogy between the evolution of the somatic cells, in the development of individuals, and the evolution of generative cells in the development of nations, if we consider that both kinds of cells descend from a common mother-cell; the somatic cells and the generative cells differ essentially from each other in that the first, being more exposed to the influence of environment, are differentiated more rapidly, and in that, for this., reason also, they lose more rapidly the faculty of reproducing themselves. It is, however, very difficult not to believe that the generative cells also are subject to a similar, if much slower, differentiation which leads, through the lapse of generations, to a reduced aptitude, and finally to the inaptitude, of reproducing themselves at the same
rate as initially. Various facts collected in different branches of science would appear
to corroborate this view, such as, in the first place, the rapid reduction, and often the total extinction, of some species after extremely flourishing periods. Such a reduction is concomitant to a reduced variability of forms and, hence, to a lowered adaptability to environment. There are exceptions, it is true, or at least apparent exceptions of species in the evolution of which such a parabolic curve is not manifest, but the possibility is not excluded that even such exceptions may be explained in the future. Secondly comes the territorial distribution of human races which clearly shows how the now predominating races, namely, the white, yellow and black races, have, so to say, burst their bounds and have driven the more primitive races to the less hospitable regions of the earth. The extremely interesting study of the modern demography of these primitive races shows us that the latter are but senescent races standing in a state of clear demographic
(14) Cfr. "II sesso dal punto di vista statistico," op. cit., 1908, pp. 455-462; "II diverso accrescimento etc." above cited paper, 1909; "I fattori demografici dell'evoluzione delle nazioni," op. cit., 1912; "Contributi statistici ai problemi dell'Eugenica" [Statistical contributions to the problems of Eugenics3, in "'Rivista Italiana di Sociologia, " May-August, 1912, pp. 64-69 (Italian version, with addenda, of the paper "The contributions of Demography to Eugenics" presented to the "First Eugenics International Congress, " London, 1912, and published in the 2nd volume of the Proceedings of the Congress); "L' ammontare e la composizione della ricchezza delle nazioni"
(The amount and composition of the wealth of nations], Torino, Bocca, 1914,
pp. 425-431; "Fattori latenti delle guerre" [Latent factors of wars] in "Rivista Italiana di Sociologia, " January-February, 1915, reproduced in the book "Problemi sociologici della guerra" [Sociological problems of the war] Zanichelli, Bologna, 1921; "Le relazioni dell'Eugenica con le altre scienze etc," above cited address, 1924; "Le leggi di evoluzione delle popolazioni," above cited paper, 1924.

264 EUGENICS REVIEW.
passivity, or, at least, of instable demographic equilibrium which may be unsettled by the least incident, and which, in the absence of an' adequate revival, must lead to a numerical regression of their population. And their history teaches us that their retrogression in comparison to the now dominating races has occurred, and still frequently occurs, without the intervention of concomitant external factors. The same varieties, or families or stocks of the modern dominating races, when compared among themselves, exhibit numerous symptoms, at various stages of their evolution, of being endowed with a different; capacity of diffusion, although the capacity of diffusion of each of them is also subject, through time, to such variations that, speaking generally, it appears to be the weaker the longer the history of these families or stocks. One can also recognize, not only through space but also? through time,' a certain relationship between the rapidity of numerical increase and the individual qualities of the populations, although, how-' 'ever, the maximum of the first does not coincide with the optimum of the second, also on account of the entirely comprehensible influence of education and tradition(' 5). It is an illusion,, founded on the study of the recent past of the white and yellow races, to believe that the total population of the earth is progressing numerically: this, perhaps, is only true for the three aforesaid laces. Eskimos, Redskins, Polynesians, Australians, Maoris, Negritos appear, on the contrary, to be in a state of regression, or just to maintain their position on the downward curve thanks to the hygienic rules introduced bv the whites. Even the negroes, in some parts of their own territory, decrease in number(l 6). Thus, there would be nothing surprising if a similar fate, in a more or less remote future, were also in store for the white and yellow races, and there is nothing strange in that some of their present day stocks. which for a longer time have been on the ascending branch of theparabola, are already now in a state of numerical decadence. This appears the less strange since both pre-historic research and ancient history show us, as already stated higher up, indubitable example; ofsuch decadence and subsequent disappearance of nations. In many cases, besides, probably even in the majority of cases, the decadence and disappearance of a stock was masked by the fact that infiltrations. from younger and more vigorous races occurred and served to fill the blanks left by the older stock, so that a nation may have continued toexist under the same name and with the same cultural characteristics while a different blood ran in its veins(l7). Probablv some of the examples cited by Brownlee of rhythmical movements in the reproduction of populations may be referred to this masked substitution of some
(15) On this point see particularly, "II sesso dal punto di vista statistico," op. cit., pp. 461-462, and "Le leggi di evoluzione delle p polazioni," abovecited paper, p. 292.
(16) Cfr. H. ZIEMANN, "Beitrag zur Bevolkerungsfrage der farbigen Rassen" [Contributions to the population question of the coloured races], in "Metron," vol. III , No. 1.
(17) Cfr., particularly, "Fattori latenti delle guerre," above cited paper, para_ 6, and "Le leggi di evoluzione delle popolazioni," above cited paper, pp_ 294-295.

DECLINE IN THE BIRTH-RATrE.

265

stocks for others; some others, probably, to irregular variations (which will be dealt with immediately) in the average reproductive capacity of the families entering in the composition of the population. For, if from the consideration of complex populations we descend to the study of single family lines, we find that their evolution in the course of time follows the same rules, i.e. a period of rapid propagation is followed by a reduction and, frequently, by the disappearance of the name. At first it was believed that this was a characteristic proper to families of the nobility, but in studying the matter more closely it is seen that such is also the fate of middle-class, and perhaps also of peasant families, at least when from their original condition they rise to the upper classes('8). Thus, the evolution of populations appears to be the result of the evolution of individual family lines, in the same manner as the development and involution curve of an individual soma represents but the resultant of the reproductive capacity of the various groups of cells of which it is composed. The latter also begin by multiplying rapidly and then frequently die off, but their place is taken by other cells until the movement of renovation slows down and becomes insufficient for the maintenance of the organism. The greater or lesser reproductive capacity of the cell groups or of the family groups in the period of their maximum expansion determines transient periods of rapid or slow increase of the body or of the populations; these periods follow each other in an irregular rhythm, but they bear a profoundly different character from that of the evolution parabola described by the whole complex of the organisms or nations.
Besides all the above mentioned complex of facts and considerations which renders very probable a gradual attenuation of the faculty of the generative cells to reproduce themselves, there are some other facts which seem to prove more directly the physiological cause of the limitation of progeny at the present time. The more frequent barrenness of the upper classes, the not less frequent cases of still-births which occur in these classes, notwithstanding the greater ease of life and the better means they possess to combat this evil, the frequent impossibility amongst them for the mothers to nurse their children themselves, the much acuter pains of child-birth than in the lower classes, all these facts are as many indicators or manifestations of a lowered aptitude to reproduction. Besides, this lowered aptitude can also be explained. All we know on the causes of reproduction and on the effects of domestication of species leads us to believe that a sump-
(18) See, (besides the well-known researches of P. E. FAHLBECK in "Der Adel
Schwedens" [The Nobility of Sweden], Jena, Fischer, 1902, and my researches in "I fattori demografici dell' evoluzione dellc nazioni" and in "L' ammontare e la composizione della ricefiezza delle nazioni", H. LUNDBORG's paper " The History of a Swedish Farmer's Lineage as seen from a Race-Biological Stand-point, " Stockholm, 1921, and the paper of P. P. LUZZATTO FEGIZ on "I cognomi di S. Gimignano ' [The family names of S. Gimignano] shortly to be published in "Metron," vol. V., No. 2. For the theoretical considerations which gave reason to foresee an evolution of family lines, cfr., the above cited works "Contributi statistici ai problemi dell'Eugenica," pp. 68-69; "Le relazioni dell'Eugenica con le altre scienze etc," para. 7; "Le leggi di evoluzione delle popolazioni, " p. 287.

O"AW6 EUGENICS REVIEW.
tuous and easy life must weaken the reproductive power(l9 ). In this respect the external factors are concomitant to the internal factors.
I must admit that the greater part of, if not all, the aforesaid phenomena may also have, each one separately, other explanations; but these explanations, in their whole, would appear very complicated in comparison with the simple and singl explanation, namely that of a progressive diminution of the reproductive capacity of the generative cells. Thus, in widening the field of the phenomena examined, the argu ment derived from the economy of thought to which we alluded above,
turns precisely in favour of this sole explanation. We must not forget
that it is on this argument that we base some of our firmest convi tions, for instance, that the earth revolves round the sun, rather than that the sun with its other planets revolves round the earth. Buit we must also admit at the same time that we must have recourse to this argument, as to an ultimate arbiter, only after having tested all the other possible evidence.
In fact, the researches which I have been making for two years have given rise to the hope that other evidence can also be tested. Such evidence would provide the possibility of establishing a standard by which to measure the physiological aptitude of married couples to generate(20). The study of this standard through time would allow the dispute to be settled between those who affirm and those who deny the existence of a biologic concause of the present day decline of the birthrate. This question not only has a great importance for demography, for economics and for political sciences, but also it evidently presents a great interest for eugenics, since it is clear that the position taken up by the eugenist towards it will be quite different according to whether the scanty birth-rate of certain peoples and in certain classes may be regarded as purely the effect of free-will or whether it is on the contrary the manifestation of a reduced reproductive power and the prodrome of the decadence of individual qualities.
The method of measuring the physiological aptitude of a married couple to generate is based on an extremely simple principle.
Let us take a group of n couples of married people and suppose that all the wives are available for fecundation, and that all the couples have the same physiological aptitude to generate. Let us designate by
(19) Cfr. in regard to all this, "II sesso dal punto di vista statistico, " pp. 457-462, and "Le leggi di evoluzione delle popolazioni," pp. 286-287.
(20) In the following pages are summarized the methodological considerations and the principal results given in the two papers presented to "Istituto Veneto di Scienze Lettere ed Arti" [Venetian Institut of Sciences, Letters, and Arts], viz .: "Prime ricerche sulla 'fecondabilita' della donna" [First researches on the 'fecundability' of woman] (1st July, 1923), and "Nuove ricerche sulla 'fecondabilith' della donna" [New researches on the 'fecundability' of woman] (13th July, 1924). Cfr. "Atti" of the said Institute, vol. lxxxiii., 2nd part, pp. 315-344, and vol. lxxxiv, 2nd part, pp. 269-308. Summaries of the results were published in "Giornale di Biologia e Medicina sperimentale" [Journal of Biology and Experimental Medicine], August, 1924, and July, 1925. To these papers I refer the readers who mav want more detailed explanations either of the method or of the data to which the applications refer. The data concerning Amsterdam had not yet b2en published; they have been taken from the Statistical Year Book of that city.

DECLINE IN THE BIRTH-RATE.

267

p the probability that under such conditions one wife will conceive in a menstrual period or, as we would say, the fecundability of the wife. In order to give a concrete example, let us suppose that the number of
the couples considered is i-,k°° and that the fecundability of the wife is 1. In such a hypothesis we shall have:
In the first menstrual period:
1000. 1 =250 conceptions. In the 2nd menstrulal period:
(1000-250) 4=1000.1.(1 -)=188 In the 3rd menstrual period:
(1000-- 250-188) 4=1000.-4.(1 -1)2=141 In the 4th menstrual period:
(1000-- 250 -- 188 - 141) ; =1000 .4.(1 - 4); =105 In the 5th menstrual period:
(1000- 250-188-141- 105)-=1000.1.(1- 1)= 79
and so on.
The number of conceptions occurring in the successive menstrual periods after marriage would represent. in this hypothesis, a geometrical progression the ratio of which, in our example, would be 1-i,
or in general l-p, in other words it would be equal to the complement
to unity of the fecundability of the wives. The ratio of the conceptions in a menstrual period i to the number of conceptions in the preceding menstrual period i-I would, in this hypothesis, serve to measure (admitting that the number of observations is sufficiently large) the fecundability of the wives available for fecundation.
There are certain States and towns that supply the number of births according to the interval of time elapsed since the marriage, and this interval is for the first periods shown in months. Supposing, by way of a first approximation, that the months correspond to the menstrual periods, and that the number of births in a given month is proportional to the number of conceptions that occurred nine months before, the series of births in the successive months of marriage starting from the ninth should also represent a geometrical progression; or, in other words, the ratio of the number of births during the marriage in a given month starting from the tenth to the number of births in the preceding month should be constant(2 1 ).
In reality this does not occur, as shown by the following table in which are assembled data relating to some Australian States and Berlin which supply the indication in months of the interval of time between the marriage and the birth of the first child during the two first years of marriage. In this table the expression
-X X3 IOORg
VXI _X2,
indicates in per cents. the ratio of the number of births in the month x2 to the number of births that occurred in the preceding

(21) Really other hypotheses are implicitly included in this prevision. Their bearing is discussed in "Nuove ricerche etc," pp. 284-286. Some of these hypotheses will be considered in the following.

268 EUGENICS REVIEW.

month xl of mrarriage. For instance, in the aforesaid countries during the 9th month of marriage were born 33,546 first-born children, and during the loth the number was 28,270. The second number is 84.3 per cent. of the firAt.
TABLE I.

FRST.BORN CHILDREN BORN AFTER XI -X2 MONTHS OF MARRIAGE. (Australian Commonwealth 1917-1921; Western Australia 1899-1915; New
South Wales 1893-1905 and 1916; Berlin (KOnigsviertel) 1894-1895.)

For x -X2=

9-10 10-11 11-12 12-13 13-14 14-15 15-16 16-17

Number of firstbarn children 33,546 28,270 20,806 15,630 11,407 9,749 8,550 7,170,

{X2 -jX3
100R
vxt-X2

84*3 71*8 77-0 73 0 85-5 87.7 83-9 84X8

For xX -X2 =

17-18 18-19 19-20 20-21 21-22 22-23 23-24

Number of firstborn children 6,079 5,828 4,654 4,220 3,670 3,301 2,694

x2 -X3
IOOR I 87-7 87-4 90*7 87*0 86*9 81-6
Xl X2 J

The most outstanding fact is that the first ratio is higher than those immediately following it; this may be attributed to the circumstancethat the frequent virginity of the wife reduces the number of conceptions during the first month of marriage, and also to the circumstance that, according to the statement of gynaecologists, the custom of travelling during the honeymoon increases the percentage of failures of preg--
nancy at the initial stage. The following ratios, however, increase consistently, with the
exception of some fluctuations which may be plausibly attributed toF the small number of observations. This is evidently due to the artificiality of the hypothesis of an equal aptitude of all the couples to generate; in reality, this aptitude varies in every couple. In the first month, it is naturally the wives whose fecundability is greatest that conceive most frequently, and then, successively, a progressive selection takes place in respect to fecundability, so that it is to be expected that the women impregnated must show, on the average, a lower degree of fecundability the longer the interval elapsed between marriage and the birth of the first child.
The varying degree of fecundability of the wives does not, however, constitute an insuperable obstacle to measuring their mean fecundability. It may be, indeed, easily demonstrated that while, under such conditions, the ratio of the number of conceptions in a given menstrual period i to the number of conceptions in the preceding menstrual period i-1 cannot give the measure of the fecundability of the wives available for fecundation, it can nevertheless give the measure of fecundability of the women that conceived during themenstrual period i - 1; it is sufficient, to this end, to admit that the

DECLINE IN THE BIRTH-RATE.

269

fecundability of a woman does not vary materially from one menstrual period to the next(22). The ratios

X2 _X3'
lOOR C

Xx, X2,

in Table I. serve, therefore, to measure the mean fecundability of the

groups of wives who bore their first children in the 9th to 24th months

of their marriage.

In regard to the first children born after two years and over of

marriage, the demographic statistics classify them by intervals of one year and more. It will be easily understood, however, that the ratios between the numbers of children born in consecutive years or in groups
of consecutive years are functions of the ratios between the

numbers of births in consecutive months, and it will not be difficult to

calculate, with some approximation. these second ratios from the first(2 3). Thus we are in a position to measure the fecundability of the various categories of the primiparae who bear their first child at

various intervals after marriage. It is impossible, it is true, by this
method to calculate the fecundability of the wives who bore their first child in the first eight months of marriage, these children being, in all probability, the fruit of pre-nuptial conception. But their fecund-

ability can be estimated approximately by establishing somewhat wide limits and bearing in mind that in such cases the fecundability must
be higher than in the wives who conceive in marriage. The weighted average of thu mneasures of the fecundability obtained for the various

categories of married primiparae will give us the mean fecundability of

the married primiparae.
In the following table are given the results obtained for the Australian Commonwealth.
TABLE II.

FECUNDABILITY OF VARIOUS GROUPS OF PRIMIPARAE ACCORDING TO THE INTERVAL

ELAPSED SINCE MARRIAGE.

(Australian Commonwealth: 1908-1915 anid 1918-1921).

Interval elapsed since marriage.
0- 9 months 9-12 ,, 1- 2 years 2- 3 ,, 3- 4 ,, 47 7-10 ,, 10 years and m re

Out of 10,000 firstborn in marriage, were born in the correspond -
ing interval. 3315
2528 2522
751 346 ,,378 100
60

Measure of fecundabilitv (in per cents).
30-40 27 0 17-7 7-6
-5 4'0 3-0
2*5

10,000

22-2 25-5

The average fecundability of married primiparae stands thus, in

the Australian Commonwealth, between 26 and 22 per cent. This

(22) Cfr. for the demonstration "Prime ricerche etc," p. 326, and "Nuove ricerche," pp. 282-283.
(23) Cfr. for the manner of proceeding "Prime ricerche etc." pp. 327-333.

270 EUGENICS REVIEW.

result should be soniewhat lower (by about 10 per cent.) if we take into account the difference between the length of a month and the duration of the menstrual period, which in our first approximation we left un-

considered.

I now pass to the comparison betweeni different countries. I shall

exclude fromn calculation the first month of marriage owing to the per-

turbing influences mentioned above which, besides, have a consider-

ably different effect in each country. For the cities of Berlin and Dresdeni, the Kingdom of Saxony,

Western Australia, New South Wales, Victoria and Tasmania, for the

Australian Commonwealth conisidered as a whole, for New Zealand and

for 24 Italian communes we can calculate the mean fecundability of the

wives in the second month of marriage. As shown in the following

table it varies from 20 to 31 per cent., which limits tnay be considered

as narrow if we take into consideration that the number of observations
was for sev(cral countries very .mall.

TABLE III.

FECU'NDABILITY OF' 1)1411PAR1AE IN VARtIOUS STATIES AND ToWNS.

Years to Mlean fecuindability (in per cents.) of the

whieli the primiparae who coniceived in the

State or Town .

observationis 2nd montil 2nd to 8th 2nd to 14th

refer. of inirriag. month month

of marriage. of marriage.

Berlin (bKOlnigsxiertel) .. 1894 1895 20 ()0 24-4 20-5

Dresden .. .. .. 1891-1908 29_5

ASuasxtornayli(aKninCgo(oinoilirilioolfl)wealth.. .

1911-1914 1917-1921

203
278-

20- 6

19-2

WVestern Australia .. .. 1899-1915 26 6 227- 20-2

N. South W.alessW .

1893-1905k}1
1916 1921 f

-7 6(;

222*-2

199-7

Victoria .. .. .. 1898 1900 1

31.1 24-4

Tasmania.a .. .. 1905 1906

New Zealand

.. .. 1912-1921 227

Italy, 24 (oliiiniUcs

. 1920--1922 26-5

21-0

11-6

For six of these countries the statistical data allow us to determine

the meani fecundability of primiparae diring the period from the 2nd to the endl of the 8tlh month of marriage; here the data are a little more numerous, and the uniformity of results is greater as the fecundability only varies from 20.6 to 24.4 per cent.; five countries, finally, allow of determining the fecundability of primniparae during the period from

the 2nd to the end of the 14th month of marriage, and the regularity of the results, owing to more copious data, is still increased, the fecund-

ability varying betweeni the very narrow limits of 18.6 and 20.5 per cent. Most noteworthy is the fact that the fecundability of the primiparae who conceived in the early months of marriage is about identical in Germany, Italy, Australia, and New Zealand (countries in which the birth-rate is very dissimilar), and is also almost identil al in

the towns and in the whole States which greatly differ in the fecundity

of marriages.

This uniformity applies not only to the wives who have their first child in the early periods of marriage, but also to all the married primi-

parae takein as a whole.

DECLINE IN THE BIRTH-RATE.

271

To this end it must be borne in mind that the fecundability is identical if the distribution of the first born children according to the
interval of time elapsed after the first eight months of marriage remains
identical. Now, the table below shows that in Australia, in Amsterdam, and in Saxony this distribution shows only small differences which, in their turn, may be attributed to a great extent to variations
in the number of marriages that took place in the preceding years. Eliminating, for instance, the influence of this perturbing circumstance in the comparisons between Saxony and Australia (the two countries between which the diffcrences are larger), we find that the fecundability of the wives who bore their first child in the period from the 10th to the 12th month is 0.134 in Saxony and 0.166 in Australia, and the fecundability of the wives who bore their first child in the second
year of marriage is,0.089 in Saxony and 0.093 in Australia. An
explanation of these residual differences may, on the other hand, be found in the fact that in Saxony prenuptial conceptions are more frequent than in Australia, a circumstance which results in the elimination from the number of wives who will conceive at a subsequent period of a larger proportion of women with a very high degree of
fecundability.

TABLE IV.

1DISRIBUTrION O0F FIRST-BORN CHILDREN ACCORDING TO THlE, INTERVAL ELAPSED
SINCE MARRIAGE.

Interval elapsed since marriage.
9-12 months 1--5 years 5-10 years Over 10 years

Australian Common- TowII of Amster- Kingdomn of Saxony

wealth: 1908-1915 dam: 1910-19i3

1911 1914.

and and

1918 1921.

1916-1920.

378 352 318

571 592 618

42 48 52

9 8 12

Totals

1000 1000 1000

Another very noteworthy result arising from Table V. is the fact

that after the first month of marriage the fecundability is not found to

be different as the age of the wives advances. In other words, after

the first month of marriage, the ovule of the "fecundable" but not yet

fecundated woman appears, until the occurrence of the menopause,

to have the same probability of being fecundated. In the first month

of marriage, on the contrary, the fecundability is less in the wives of

a more advanced age, probably owing to the greater obstacle to fecunda-

tion offered by their frequent state of virginity.

TABLE V.

FECUNDABILITY OF PRIMIPARAE ACCORDING TO THEIR AGE (in per cents.) (Primiparae who conceive in the 2nd month of marriage).

Age
Up to 25 years: 25 years to 34 35 and over

Australian Commonwealth 1907-1914 28-0
29-4 28*0

New South Wales
1893-1898.
32-3 26-8 29*8

Averages

28 6 30*2

272 EUGENICS REVIEW.

Still more interesting, in regard to the question from which we
started in this paper, is the finding that the fecundability has not shown any systematic variation in the Kingdom of Saxony from the biennial period 1901-1902 to the biennial period 1911-1912, while the ratio
of the legitimate children to the general population or to married
women under 40 years old has diminished by l'/3. The results are not
noticeably modified by eliminating the influence of the variations in the number of marriages from one p3riod to another.

TABLE VI.

DISTRIBUTION OF FIRST-BORN CHILDREN ACCORDING TO THE INTERVAL ELAPSED
SINCE MARRIAGE.

(Kingdom of Saxony.)

Interval elapsed since

First children born in the biennial period.

marriage.

1901-1902

* 1911-1912

0-9 months

.. ..

498

517

9-12 ,,

.. ..

169

154

1-3 years .. .. ..

275

253

8-5 ,,

.. .. ..

84

46

5-10,,

.. .. ..

17

28

Over 10 years .. ..

6

6

Totals ..

999

999

This result may certainly appear to be opposed to the biological

interpretation of the decline of the birth-rate. But before coming to a

conclusion in this respect, it will be prudent to await the result of

researches which cover periods much longer than a decade. For it

might well be that the lowering of the physiological aptitude to pro-

create would not reveal itself immediately even if the decline of the

birth-rate may to a certain degree depend on the weakening of the

generative instinct; such a weakening of the latter might be a prodrome

which may be followed after the lapse of a more or less lengthy time

by the manifestation of a lower organic or functional aptitude of the

reproductive apparatus. Let us not forget, indeed, that the observed

decade represents in Saxony precisely the first period in which the

birth-rate, which still was 33 per cent., showed a conisiderable decrease

there.

At present a number of other researches are being made. Some of

them are directed to measure the fecundability of the Hebrews in several

towns of Italy at various periods of the last century. In Italy, as else-

where, the Hebrews have shown during the last century a rapid decline of

birthrate: in Padua, for instance, the average number of children born in

marriage, which was 4.7 in the period 1816 to 1825 sank to about 2.5

at the end of the century(2 4 ). It will be interesting to find whether a

diminution of the fe undability corresponds or not to this and

similar decreases which occurred in other towns of Italy. Other

researches concern families of the nobility and of sovereigns listed in

the Gotha Almanac. The data collected up to the present time in

(24) Cfr. my I aper "Alcune ricerche demografiche sugli Israeliti in Padova" [Some demographical researches on the Hebrews in Padua] read at the R. Academy of Sciences, Letters, and Arts of Padua ((11th June, 1916) and published in "Atti e Memorie" of the said Academy, vol. xxxii., part iv., pp.
467-485.

DECLINE IN THE BIRTH-RATE.

'273

regard to the families of crowned heads, to families belonging to the court circles in Germany, and to the ducal families of France, Belgium, England, Ireland, and Scotland(2 5) show in regard to conception from the 2nd to the end of the 14th month of marriage, a fecundability of the wives equal to 18.7 per cent., which coincides exactly with the results obtained for the various countries listed in Table III. I also hope to obtain, thanks to the courtesy of the General Direction of Statistics in France, the possibility of measuring the fecundability in some typical French departments exhibiting a high and a low birth-rate. There are departments in which, for many decades ,the birth -rate has b)een insufficient, and in which, therefore, a lowering of the fecundability may already be apparent. Evidently, if in these departments the fecundability were not found to be inferior to that in other departments or to that in other countries, those who, like Brownlee and myself, suppose the existence of a biological cause of the decline of the birth-rate should
have to revise their theories.
Before terminating, some observations appear useful on the bearing
of the method.
The method might theoretically also serve to measure the fecundability of groups of women who have already borne children. But in reality the available statistical material allows of applying it only to primiparae. It appears probable that during marriage, and after the birth of the first child, the fecundability of the woman decreases, either because of general infirmities contracted by the organism, or because
of defects lhaving occurred in meantime iin the reproductive apparatus, or
because ofthe natural exhaustion of the reproductive power. Certainly, the possibility cannot be denied a priori that the fecundability of primi parae remains constant through time, and that, on the contrary, the fecundability of the women wlho have already borne children decreases; but in reality, this appears difficult to admit while not excluding, but rather maintaining, the possibility that the fecundability of primiparae may vary less, inasmuch as one of the manifestatioiis of a weakening of the reproductive aptitude may be that of a more rapid exhaustion of this aptitude(26). It must also be noted that we started from the
(25) These data were obtained bv Professor F. SAVORGNAN wlho kindly communicated theimi to nme. They are taken from the same material which Savorgnan used for his papers on the fecunditv of the families of crowned heads and of the nobility which have already been or are shortly to be published in "Metron," vols. iii-iv-v.
(26) In my work "Indici di conceltrazione e di dipendenza" [Inidices of concenitration and of dependence] in "Biblioteca dell'Economista. Torino, Unione Tipografica-Editrice, 1910, pp. 140-146)1 demonstrated, by applying the indices of dependence to matrimionial fecundity, that in the majority of the coluntries
xamined (Berlin, France, Sweden, Denmark, Fintland; Norway forms an exception) fecund itY tends in the course of time to be more restricted to the -ounger ages, or, in other words, it tends to decrease more ral)idly as the :zge advances. In regard to Sweden the researches may extend over more than a century; they show that the decline is more rapid in periods of low than in periods of high biri h-rate. Such results are in agreement with those cbtained by BROWNLEE by Tait' s method for Scotland, England and Wales, and pub lished in the July number of this REVIEW. I consider, l:owever, the method of indices to be preferable to that of Tait seeing that with the latter the results are too muich influenced bv the birth-rates of married girls beween 15 and 19

274 E'UGENICS REVIEW.
hypothesis that all the women considered were available for fecundation, and that therefore they were not addicted to birth-control practice. This is certainly true in the great majority of cases in respect of
wives who have niot vet borne a child, but not for all. Let it be re-
maiked, however, that the number of wives who have recourse to
infallible birth-control practices has no influence on the calculation,
adffmitting that on the average their aptitude to generate is not different from that of the wives computed. For the end of measuring the fecunidability it is as if they did not exist. In this sense the measure of fecuindability imay be said to be independent from the greater or lesser diffusion of birth-control practices.
In reality, lhowevcr, and this may appear as the weak point of the method, the success of the birth-control practices is not infallible. And now, whiat influence may this fact have on the results yielded by the measure of fecundability? If the wives who are addicted to birthcontrol practices witlhout certainty of success had the same aptitude to generate as the othiers, this would result in slhowing a fecundability lower than the real oine. (In the otlher hand, it is probable that it is the wives havinig a lower aptitude to reproduction, in wlhom, precisely on this account, reason morc easily takes the upper lhand over instinct, whlo have recourse to contraceptive measures; the adoptioni of contraceptive practices w!ould tlhus tencd to show a measure of fecundability greater thani the actutal onie. These two circumstaiices tlhus tend to eliminate eacht othler, anid the resultant effect may be quite negligible.
This, certainly, is a point which must be considered attentively and cleared up if' possible by further researchl. If suich effects were negligible, tlhe ineasure of fecundability suggested by me would constitute, if I amii niot mlistakeni, an excellent measure of the physiological aptitude to generate of married couples, and would supply us with an eflicient metlhod of researchl to resolve the questioin we are investigating of the causes of the declining birthl-rate.
In any casc, it is certaini thlat the regular uniiformity of the results
so far obtaiimed ini regard to v-arious countries, inl regard to towns anld
eintire States, in regard to the same country at various epochs, and in regard to the various ages of thl womnen deserves all our attention and eaiinot fail to be higlhly suggestive.
CORRADO GINI.
Padnia, It. University, 10tlh August, 1925.
anlll betw :en 20 anid 24 years of age; these rates also are frequentlv uncertain
botlh owinr to the rest ricted unumber of miiarried girls within these age limits, aind owin, to the strong influence whichl may be exercised on their values by the frequency of pre-nuptial concept.ions. The Table on p. 211 of vol. I. (1907) of the ">tatistique interrnationale du Mouvement de la population" published by the 1F'rench General Direction of Statistics, shows that tlhe birth-rate for these groups of married girls varies fronm State to itate, evidently without anly strict relationship to the fecund ty of married
women belongiing to the other groups of age. It is scarcely necessary to add that the fact that fecundity tends to be restricted to the younger ages, does not by itself constitute an argument for excluding the possibility that the decline of the birth-rate bears t he character of a voluntary act; this fact, indeed, might also be expected to result from the volun ary limitation of progeny, inasmuch, -s the latter occurs less frequently in the first years of marriage.

